The “Photo Gap” that Delayed Discovery of Missiles Politics and Intelligence Max Holland The Kennedy administration harbored three great secrets in connection with the October 1962 Cuban missile crisis, not just two, as widely understood.
The most sensitive, of course, was the quid pro quo that ended the acute phase of the crisis.
In exchange for the prompt, very public, and veriﬁed withdrawal of Soviet missiles, President Kennedy publicly pledged not to invade Cuba and secretly committed to quietly dismantling Jupiter missile sites in Turkey in 1963.
Management of this ﬁrst secret was so masterful— involving public dissembling, private disinformation, and a plain lack of information—that the quid pro quo remained a lively, but unconﬁrmed, rumor for nearly three decades.
The second secret involved keeping a lid on Washington’s ongoing effort to subvert Fidel Castro’s regime.
Operation MONGOOSE, which was overseen by Attorney General Robert Kennedy, played a signiﬁcant role in fomenting the missile crisis.
Yet that covert effort was not part of the public discourse in 1962 and remained a secret in this country until the mid1970s.
Only after an unprecedented Senate probe into intelligence activities did enough information seep out to reveal that Castro’s fears of US military intervention were not wholly unfounded, however mistaken.
It was the administration’s third secret, however, that has proven the hardest to unpack.
The Kennedy administration “shot itself in the foot” when it limited U-2 surveillance for ﬁve crucial weeks in 1962, which is why it took the government a full month to spot offensive missiles in Cuba.
If proven, this “photo gap,” as it was dubbed by Republican critics, threatened to tarnish the image of “wonderfully coordinated and error-free ‘crisis management’” that the White House sought to project before and after October 1962.
The administration’s anxiety over whether cover stories about the gap might unravel even trumped, for a time, its concern over keeping secret the quid pro quo.
After all, an oral assurance with the Soviets concerning the Jupiters could always be denied, while proof of the photo gap existed in the government’s own ﬁles.
Largely because the administration labored mightily to obfuscate the issue, the photo gap remains under-appreciated to this day, notwithstanding the vast literature on the missile crisis.
Recently declassiﬁed documents ﬁnally permit history to be ﬁlled in 43 years after the crisis, and these same records alter the conventional story in at least one important respect.
John McCone, the director of central intelligence , and the CIA as a whole were deeply distrusted by key administration ofﬁcials in the weeks leading up to discovery of the missiles.
Moreover, the rampant uncertainty that prevailed within the Agency, itself, has been downplayed, if not forgotten, to the detriment of depicting the complexity of what actually occurred.
The literature on the crisis has painted a rosier-than-warranted picture of how human intelligence, assiduously collected in September, ﬁnally overcame selfimposed restrictions on U-2 overﬂights.
What actually happened was not a textbook case of how the system should work.
And although tension between the CIA and the administration abated after the crisis, it was not by very much.
Lingering sensitivity over the photo gap left a chill in the relationship between the DCI and the Kennedy brothers, a result that can only be labeled ironic, given McCone’s role in securing the critical photo coverage.
A New Leader at Langley Little more than a year after the Bay of Pigs ﬁasco, and for the ﬁrst time in its short history, the CIA was being led by a man who was widely viewed as being at direct odds with the administration he served—that is, if political afﬁliation or ideology counted for anything.
Liberals within the administration had been appalled by John McCone’s appointment in September 1961, and not only because he was the stereotype of the wealthy, conservative Republican businessmen who had overwhelmingly populated the Eisenhower administration.
As chairman of the Atomic Energy Commission, McCone had acquired a reputation as a “militant” anti-communist and “real alley ﬁghter,” and he promised to be diametrically opposed to the dominant ethos of the Kennedy administration.
Indeed, here was a California engineer-turnedtycoon who would likely have been a strong candidate for secretary of defense had Richard Nixon won the 1960 election.
Apart from being regarded with deep suspicion by Democrats because of his Republican ties, there was also the more speciﬁc concern that McCone’s stiff-necked anti-communism might distort the intelligence produced by a demoralized CIA, still reeling from the failed invasion of Cuba.
Opponents of McCone’s appointment had argued that he would be in a position to dominate intelligence in a city where information is often power.
Apprehension inside the CIA over the appointment matched the trepidation outside.
It was against this backdrop of doubt and distrust that an untested DCI faced his ﬁrst real crisis late in the summer of 1962.
The ﬁrst of two U-2 overﬂights of Cuba scheduled for August occurred on the ﬁfth—too early, by a matter of days, to capture any telling evidence about what would soon be an unprecedented Soviet military buildup on the island.
Reports from other sources, nonetheless, prompted McCone to raise the specter of offensive missiles being emplaced, during a Special Group Augmented meeting on 10 August.
McCone sounded the alarm again in Secretary of State Dean Rusk’s ofﬁce on 21 August, and while meeting with President Kennedy on 22 and 23 August.
The Soviet Union was “in the red [behind in terms of nuclear missiles] and knew it,” McCone reportedly averred, and thus Nikita Khrushchev was likely to try to redress that imbalance.
But the DCI did little to improve his persuasiveness, and much to enhance his Manichean reputation, when he promptly sugested staging a phony provocation against the United States base at Guantánamo so that Washington would have a pretext for overthrowing Castro.
McCone was thought to be “too hardline and suspicious,” as Under Secretary of State George Ball later put it, besides being too cavalier about the relationship between Cuba and the East-West faceoff in Berlin.
Following the 23 August meeting at the White House, McCone left for the West Coast, where the 60-year-old widower was to be married for the second time, before traveling to the French Riviera for his honeymoon.
President Kennedy’s advisers would later scorn the DCI for supposedly not warning the president before leaving, and/or for being absent during a critical period.
The ﬁrst claim was demonstrably false, but there probably was a marked difference between McCone’s dispatch of the so-called “honeymoon cables” in September and actually having him in town, dogedly pressing his views.
The ﬂight paths of the two missions ﬂown in August, both of which traversed the island.
On 29 August, the second scheduled overﬂight of the month ﬁnally occurred, after several delays due to bad weather.
The SAM proved to be an SA-2, the same missile that had caused Francis Gary Powers’s U-2 to plummet to earth in the USSR in 1960.
Soon, it appeared, the CIA would not be able to overﬂy Cuba with impunity.
After being briefed, McCone reportedly observed, “They’re not putting them in to protect the cane cutters.
The same missile had been sent previously to other Soviet client states in the Third World.
Consequently, the SA-2 deployment did not signal a foreign policy crisis in his eyes as much as it marked the onset of a domestic one.
With a midterm election fast approaching, internal political pressure to “do something” about Cuba was bound to mount and had to be managed.
Simultaneously, the president became greatly concerned about aerial reconnaissance of Cuba, and he was not satisﬁed until assured by the Joint Chiefs that ﬂights by the United States military would not be conducted in a provocative manner.
These precautions left the vexing issue of intrusive U-2 surveillance twice a month unaddressed, though not for long.
Disagreement over the U-2 The next scheduled U-2 mission, on 5 September, detected additional SAM sites.
Coincidentally, the “growing danger to the birds,” as acting DCI Carter described it in a cable to McCone, was underscored by two distant events.
On 30 August, an air force U-2 had violated Soviet airspace for nine minutes during an air-sampling reconnaissance mission; then, on 9 September, a U-2 manned by a Taiwan-based pilot was lost over mainland China.
These bookends to the ﬁrst September overﬂight of Cuba provided new ammunition to critics of intrusive U-2 surveillance.
One longstanding opponent was the State Department, which looked askance at U-2 missions over sovereign airspace.
At 10:00m., McGeorge Bundy, the national security adviser, made an out-of-channel request to James Reber, chairman of the Committee on Overhead Reconnaissance , the interagency committee charged with developing surveillance requirements for the U-2.
COMOR members found the third question so provocative that they wondered if they were really expected to comment on it.
But it genuinely represented resentments festering within the administration after the Bay of Pigs.
Reﬂecting the president’s own jaundiced view, Bundy and Rusk believed that the CIA and the Pentagon had put Kennedy in an unforgivable bind before and during the agency-designed invasion of Cuba in April 1961.
The two men, moreover, had been criticized severely for their own passivity at the time.
Bundy and Rusk were thus hyper-sensitive about protecting the president from anything that smacked of another trap, especially when high-ranking military and intelligence ofﬁcials were scarcely concealing their determination to force the president “to atone for his restraint” during the 1961 operation.
When Reber pleaded for more time to prepare his answers, a high-level meeting was scheduled for 5:45m. in Bundy’s White House ofﬁce.
In the meantime, shortly before 3:00m., the national security adviser rescinded approval of the remaining September overﬂight, presumably to demonstrate that he was dead serious.
The palpable tension between these two men almost overshadowed the substance of the meeting.
But the secretary of state worried that a U-2 incident would provoke two simultaneous uproars, one domestic and one foreign—the former arguing for an invasion and the latter condemning the United States worldwide.
Soviet propaganda had successfully managed “to turn U-2 into a kind of dirty word,” as one columnist later put it.
International opinion regarded the overﬂights as “illegal and immoral,” and even Washington’s staunchest allies found them unpalatable.
Rusk shrewdly argued that losing a U-2 over Cuba would compromise Washington’s unquestioned right to ﬂy it in international waters along Cuba’s periphery, and, given Cuba’s narrowness, maybe offshore ﬂights were sufﬁcient anyway.
COMOR experts said that that meant interior areas of Cuba were unlikely to be covered.
Only the 5 September mission, shown here, spent an extended amount of time in Cuban airspace.
The paths of the following four ﬂights effectively precluded coverage of western Cuba and interior areas.
Not only were they in the uncomfortable position of dealing directly with ofﬁcials who far outranked them, but, in place of McCone, the Agency was represented by Carter, who lacked the DCI’s fearlessness and stature.
Once administration ofﬁcials began drawing up ﬂight paths that avoided known SAM sites, the experts retreated.
The political decision to desist from intrusive or risky overﬂights and stretch out the missions would be doubly crippling because of an uncontrollable (yet foreseeable) factor, namely, the vagaries of Caribbean weather from September to November, when the region is beset by torrential rains and hurricanes.
Because approvals for overﬂights were hard to come by, the CIA made a habit of husbanding U-2 missions.
It was an operational practice to abort any mission if the weather was forecast to be more than 25 percent overcast.
Consequently, the 10 September decision not only limited the photographic “take” from every overﬂight, but had the unanticipated effect of drastically stretching out the mission schedule.
The result was a dysfunctional surveillance regime in a dynamic situation.
Yet Washington, by denying itself the “hard information that a constant aerial surveillance would have revealed,” as McCone later put it, did not establish the missiles’ presence near San Cristóbal until nearly a full month later—15 October.
Langley’s Unease Acting DCI Carter remonstrated on at least one occasion about the attenuation of U-2 surveillance.
Yet Carter proved incapable of reversing the decision, especially after a 19 September Special National Intelligence Estimate reafﬁrmed the conventional wisdom.
The presumption was that even if the Soviets dared to introduce SSMs, against all estimates, that would only occur after the SA-2 defense system was complete, which still appeared some weeks away.
Later, an Agency ofﬁcer reportedly observed, perhaps harshly, that the acting DCI was “standing in quicksand which was hardening into concrete,” but did not even realize it.
The moment when McCone learned about changes in the surveillance regime remains vague to this day.
Yet the abrupt alteration in the U-2 regime went unmentioned in the cables, and McCone did not realize the degree to which overﬂights had been attenuated until he returned to Washington on 24 September.
Still, he was sufﬁciently concerned about the administration’s lassitude to button-hole Bundy in late September while the national security adviser was in Europe for a NATO function.
Bundy was immovable, believing, as he did, that McCone was too ﬁxated on a single element of the geo-political strugle, the thermonuclear balance.
The national security adviser remained determined not to allow McCone to entrap President Kennedy into sanctioning overﬂights with impunity.
Any shootdown would become a casus belli for those who were itching to invade the island.
McCone met with President Kennedy and the attorney general privately on 26 September, shortly after returning to Washington but apparently was unable to reverse the administration’s “near-crippling caution,” as Richard Helms later termed it, until the approved overﬂight schedule had at least run its course.
Simultaneously, inﬂuential columnists like Walter Lippmann and James Reston, drawing from public testimony and/or private conversations with administration ofﬁcials, were characterizing the surveillance of Cuba as “elaborate” or “total” in their columns.
By early October, McCone was determined to remove the strictures on U-2 surveillance as a matter of principle, believing that the CIA had already been “remiss” in settling for much less than complete coverage.
Coincidentally, NPIC chief Arthur Lundahl had asked his staff to develop a visual representation of photo surveillance of Cuba since early September.
The map graphically depicted, at one glance, that large portions of Cuba had not been photographed since late August.
The DCI “nearly came out of his chair when he saw the map,” according to Lundahl.
Generally, the DCI and the attorney general were of like mind when it came to Cuba.
But McCone’s imputation of hesitancy on the administration’s part echoed what several Republicans, especially Senator Kenneth Keating , were asserting virtually every day in Congress, and the attorney general visibly bristled at the characterization.
McCone, presumably after pointing to Lundahl’s map, noted to the Special Group that there had been no coverage of the center of Cuba and more particularly, the entire western end of the Island for over a month, and all ﬂights since 5 September had been either peripheral or limited and therefore CIA did not know, nor could advise, whether an offensive capability was being created.
DCI objected strenuously to the limitations which had been placed on overﬂights and there arose a considerable discussion (with some heat) as to whether limitations had or had not been placed on CIA by the Special Group.
Now that the gaping hole in coverage was becoming obvious, no one was very keen to take responsibility for it.
The SGA as a body, of course, had not issued an edict in writing against intrusive overﬂights.
Rather, under duress from Rusk and Bundy—neither of whom was in attendance now— the CIA and COMOR had desisted from submitting such requests after being told, in effect, that such ﬂight paths, if proposed, would not be approved.
Indeed, the president could technically claim (and, on his behalf, Bundy later would) that he had approved every overﬂight request received since the SA-2s were discovered in late August.
Making Headway The 4 October meeting began nudging the surveillance regime in the direction that McCone was determined to move it.
Alexis Johnson, still managed to win agreement for a National Reconnaissance Ofﬁce report on an overall surveillance program for Cuba, to be presented at the next SGA meeting on 9 October.
That meant several more days lost while the NRO pondered whether there was a substitute for the U-2.
Nor was it clear that the White House would ultimately agree to remove the strictures on U-2 overﬂights, as became obvious on the next day, when McCone met with Bundy privately to discuss Cuba.
The White House still viewed the unprecedented buildup as a domestic, rather than foreign policy, crisis.
Separately from McCone’s effort to lift restrictions on principle, CIA ofﬁcers at the operational level were correlating new human intelligence reports about alleged missiles in Cuba.
One report dated 7 September, in particular, had grabbed the attention of Ted Shackley, chief of the CIA’s station in Miami, and ofﬁcers in Task Force W, the MONGOOSE component at CIA headquarters.
In secret writing, the agent had conveyed information about a mountainous area near San Cristóbal, approximately 60 miles west of Havana, where “very secret and important work,” believed to involve missiles, was in progress.
Besides providing coordinates for a speciﬁc area, what made this agent’s report intriguing was that it coincided with two refugee reports that described large missiles last seen heading west from Havana.
Under normal circumstances, Task Force W ofﬁcers would have simply funneled the human intelligence up to COMOR, where a new requirement could be fashioned.
But since 10 September, enormous uncertainty, and even a kind of defensiveness, had developed within the CIA over U-2 ﬂights— so much so, that Sam Halpern, Task Force W’s executive ofﬁcer, believed it advisable to avoid having only the CIA’s ﬁngerprints on the intelligence.
He worried about it being discounted as the product of a politicized, overly agressive, or simply unreliable Agency.
John Wright, head of the MONGOOSE component at the Defense Intelligence Agency , was invited to a brieﬁng in Task Force W’s war room.
Based on the coordinates provided by the MONGOOSE agent, CIA ofﬁcers in Task Force W had marked off a trapezoid-shaped area on a map, and they asked Wright to push a request for U-2 surveillance up his chain of command.
The maneuver “got us out of the line of ﬁre and let DIA take the lead” during “days of ﬁghting” in early October about an overﬂight, recalled Halpern.
Wright and the very junior DIA would forever be credited with having astutely assembled the crucial intelligence.
By this time, the last two missions authorized on 11 September had ﬂown—on 5 and 7 October— without ﬁnding any evidence of offensive missiles.
McCone came to the meeting armed with a quick paper, prepared by the Ofﬁce of National Estimates, on the consequences of a presidential declaration stating that the Soviet buildup necessitated invasive reconnaissance of Cuba.
The DCI had also taken the precaution of inviting along an air force colonel who could testify about the vulnerability of a U-2 during an intrusive sweep of Cuba.
The SA-2 sites were fully equipped by now, but from the American perspective they were still not functioning as an integrated SAM system.
During the SGA meeting, no one single-mindedly maintained that the 10 September restrictions had to be lifted to allow photo coverage of a suspected surface-to-surface missile site.
On the basis of DIA’s urgent recommendation, the COMOR had simply put the San Cristóbal area at the top of its target list if overﬂights of western Cuba were approved.
Ultimately, the SGA’s recommendation to the president (which he approved promptly) eased the restrictions on overﬂights but by the most incremental margin imaginable.
If this initial mission “did not provoke an SA-2 reaction,” additional in-and-out ﬂights over western Cuba would be proposed, until a full mosaic of that region was obtained.
The track of the mission approved on 9 October was plotted to include coverage of the San Cristóbal trapezoid.
The ﬁlm was rushed to Suitland, Maryland, for processing and arrived at NPIC on the morning of 15 October.
It was a “moment of splendor” for the U-2, its cameras and ﬁlm, and the photo-interpreters, as Sherman Kent later put it, if not the CIA’s ﬁnest hour of the Cold War.
The president issued blanket authority for unrestricted U-2 overﬂights on 16 October, and the missile crisis commenced in earnest.
Ultimately, the performance of the Intelligence Community has to be judged a success, albeit by a narrow margin.
The fact that the SSMs were detected and reported before any of them were perceived as operational was vital to the resolution that followed.
Washington had precious days to deliberate, and then orchestrate a reaction short of an instant military attack.
And once having seized the initiative via a quarantine, the Kennedy administration never lost it.
Khrushchev, meanwhile, was denied the fait accompli he had tried to achieve by deception and was forced to improvise in a situation for which he had not planned sufﬁciently, if at all.
This “system worked” view has been endorsed by every participant in the crisis who has written a memoir, as well as by most scholars of the crisis.
And it may well be that, given the intangibles of human behavior, the most one can ever expect is a kind of doged performance by an intelligence service that somehow manages, in the end, to prevent a strategic surprise.
Yet some students of the missile crisis have gone too far, raising a counterfactual argument to claim that the CIA’s misestimates were the most signiﬁcant shortcoming, and that the photo gap, in essence, did not even matter.
This is probably not the most appropriate counterfactual argument to pose, given that the missiles were found none too soon.
If some combination of the administration’s caution, more active Soviet radars, mechanical problems with the aircraft or cameras, or inclement weather had delayed discovery by as little as a week to 10 days, then the ﬁrst sighting would have correlated with a judgment that some SSMs were already capable of being launched, with who knows what consequences for ExComm’s deliberations.
It was the administration’s restraint in the face of a blatant Soviet deception/provocation that won allied and world opinion over to the United States position very quickly.
That restraint might have been even more sorely tested than it was if some missiles, when discovered, were simultaneously deemed operational.
Then, too, the looming mid-term election helped deﬁne what the administration saw as its window of opportunity for a negotiated settlement.
Appreciably shortening the amount of time left before the 6 November voting sugests that the missile crisis might have played out very differently.
Assuming that President Kennedy’s determination to avoid an armed conﬂict remained ﬁxed, he might have had to settle the crisis on less advantageous terms, such as an explicit exchange of Soviet offensive weapons in Cuba for the Jupiter missiles in Turkey.
What actually happened, of course, matters more than what might have been.
Yet by that measure, too, the photo gap was more signiﬁcant than the consistently wrong estimates.
The failure to anticipate Khrushchev’s gamble, to be sure, was a serious mistake that warranted ex post facto study.
As one scholar of the analytical process has perceptively written, it really should not have mattered “what intelligence ‘thought’” about the likelihood of missiles being introduced into Cuba.
Political Cover-up It is indisputable, in any event, that the photo gap far exceeded the misestimates as a genuine political problem for the administration.
Although no one inside the executive branch had been exactly complacent, President Kennedy faced the uncomfortable prospect of explaining why his administration had degraded the only intelligence-gathering tool that was indispensable until it was almost too late.
The photo gap also left the president vulnerable to charges, reasonable or otherwise, that he had been taken in by the Soviets’ elaborate deception, to a point where the administration had even tried to foist a false sense of security onto the country.
Well before a settlement of the crisis, ExComm members discussed how to create the widespread impression in public that the administration had been as vigilant as advertised, and that the missiles had been discovered at the earliest reasonable moment.
Deﬂecting congressional curiosity, not to mention skeptics in the media, promised to be a very delicate problem.
On 5 September, acting DCI Carter had informed senators on the Foreign Relations and Armed Services Committees that the CIA was in no way “assuming” that SSMs would not be implanted in Cuba.
On 17 September, before the same committees, Rusk gave similar assurances about the administration’s vigilance and the quality of intelligence being gathered. “ we do have very ﬁrm information indeed, and of a most reliable sort,” the secretary of state testiﬁed, seven days after he had helped to attenuate that reliable coverage.
As it turned out, propagating the notion that the missiles had been discovered at the earliest reasonable opportunity received an ironic assist from Kenneth Keating, the president’s congressional nemesis.
The media’s subsequent ﬁxation over Keating’s supposedly superior intelligence tended to obfuscate the genuine issue in the weeks leading up to 14 October.
The photo gap, in other words, was obscured by a controversy— Keating’s ostensible “scoop”— that was truly a red herring.
The last aspect of the photo gap that merits comment is the effect the secret had on the all-important relationship between the nation’s chief intelligence ofﬁcer and the president— actually, both Kennedys, in this case.
McCone’s prescience did not win him admission into the president’s innermost circle of advisers.
The DCI became mightily resented, not only for having been right—which he was not inclined to let anyone forget for a moment—but also for being privy to an embarrassing truth.
Ultimately, McCone’s loyalty and ambition (like others, he fancied himself a successor to Rusk) were such that the DCI went along with the ﬁction, in congressional testimony and elsewhere, that the missiles had been found as early as reasonably possible.
The Kennedys now distrusted their DCI more than ever, as revealed by their private conversation on 4 March regarding a Marquis Childs column on the photo gap.
Although the column did not actually contradict the administration’s public position, the mere fact that someone other than the White House was obviously putting out a version of what happened, and thus keeping the issue alive, incensed the Kennedys.
According to Robert Kennedy, Childs was claiming that the CIA was putting out information against the administration, trying to make itself look good.
In Conclusion Apart from clarifying key dynamics on the eve of the missile crisis, the photo gap is interesting because it speaks to issues of moment today, not the least of which is the difﬁculty of being the nation’s chief intelligence ofﬁcer and the qualities that make for an effective one.
Telling the president and his top advisers what they prefer not to believe, or advocating a risk they want to avoid, is not a job for the faint of heart.
The run-up to the missile crisis may not represent the model behavior Hughes had in mind, but, decades later, the government seems as far removed as ever from his prescription.
Judging from such episodes as policymakers’ failure to act against alQa’ida in the 1990s and the misappropriation of ﬂawed estimates about Iraq in 2002, at critical junctures United States policymakers still receive and absorb the intelligence they prefer rather than need.
The recent establishment of a director of national intelligence, in and of itself, is not likely to ameliorate this problem.
Republicans coined the term “photo gap” after the infamous (and non-existent) “missile gap,” which Democrats had exploited to good effect in 1960.
Explanations for and/or dismissals of the photo gap are as varied and voluminous as the literature on the missile crisis itself.
A thorough historiography would be instructive, but is beyond the scope of this article.
Ofﬁcial document compilations and a history separately released by the CIA began to build an authoritative record in the 1990s.
McCone had also served as Truman’s under secretary of the Air Force during 1950–51.
Roger Hilsman Oral History, 14 August 1970, John F Kennedy Library , 15.
John McCone Oral History, 19 August 1970, Lyndon B Johnson Library , 7.
Two overﬂights of Cuba per month—each of which traversed the island from west to east and back—had become the norm in the spring of 1962.
The Special Group was a National Security Council subcommittee that oversaw all covert actions; the SGA dealt solely with Cuba.
Edwin Guthman and Jeffrey Shulman, eds., Robert Kennedy In His Own Words , 15.
The Soviet plan did call for the SA-2s to be ready before offensive missiles were operational, although for the sole purpose of defending them against an air attack.
Anatoli Gribkov and William Smith, Operation ANADYR , 16, 28, 40, 51– 52.
Inhibitions placed on the distribution of intelligence provide a telling measure of how the crisis was initially perceived.
Distribution of raw intelligence was normal until 12 October, when it was restricted to United States Intelligence Board members.
McCone’s August proposal about staging an incident at Guantánamo reﬂected the “invasion-minded mentalities” prevalent in intelligence and military circles.
Carter had gone into the meeting not only intent on reinstating the second September overﬂight, but also hoping to add a third extended mission before the end of the month.
President Kennedy always insisted that the CIA complete the schedule of approved missions before requesting new overﬂights.
Robert Breitweiser, the Air Force’s chief of intelligence, wondered if a pilot-less “Fireﬂy drone” might substitute for the U-2.
Someone around the table immediately sugested that “Remember the Drone” would not be as gripping a battle cry as “Remember the Maine” had been in 1898.
On 20 September, Carter asked for a reconsideration of the 10 September decision, but Rusk easily deﬂected Carter’s effort.
Measuring the electronic reaction to reconnaissance of Cuba was one of the National Security Agency’s top priorities following the discovery of the SA-2s.
On 15 September, NSA collected the ﬁrst signals from a SPOON REST target acquisition radar, an advanced kind associated with the SA-2.
When not tied into an integrated command-and-control system, however, one SA-2 was practically incapable of shooting down a high-speed target acquired on its own radar.
Gribkov, Soviet commanders were not allowed to activate the system earlier because the SAMs had been emplaced to defend against an air attack against the missiles, not reconnaissance aircraft.
As late as December 1962, the DCI remained perplexed about exactly what had happened during his absence.
No minutes of the 26 September meeting are extant, but this may have been when McCone made a “strong representation to President Kennedy to remove some of the restraints on operations over Cuba,” according to Richard Helms.
McCone also had an unrecorded conversation with the president on 8 October, and may have pressed his case then.
The Cuban buildup “is a conﬁguration of defensive capability,” Rusk conﬁdently said during a rare, nationally televised interview on 29 September.
Rusk intensely disliked both columnists, so their private source was almost certainly Bundy, acting on President Kennedy’s instructions.
The White House and State Department were critical of the CIA’s apparent inability to collect high-value human intelligence on Cuba and its corresponding dependence on technical means such as the U-2.
DIA’s request informed memos submitted to the COMOR, USIB, and NRO in early October.
The 7 October peripheral overﬂight skirted what would turn out to be the SSM complexes in central Cuba, but photo-interpreters were unable to detect any sites, presumably because of the oblique coverage.
McCone was apparently loath to make missions or ﬂight paths contingent on human intelligence reports, since he was deadset on lifting restrictions on principle.
The logic behind the SGA’s recommendation may have been perceived differently by others.
These were identiﬁed, in order, as known and suspected SAM sites; coastal cruise missile installations; and, third, SSM sightings that required conﬁrmation or denial.
Because the administration was anxious to preserve “plausible deniability” in case of an incident, responsibility for the U-2 mission was shifted from the CIA to the Strategic Air Command.
A cover story involving a regular air force pilot was deemed marginally more credible and signiﬁed how dread of another U-2 incident was still greater than any concern about new reports of SSMs.
George termed the Intelligence Community’s performance a “nearfailure” of the “ﬁrst magnitude” in Deterrence, 473.
See also Gil Merom, “The 1962 Cuban Intelligence Estimate,” Intelligence and National Security 14, no.
The pre-14 October intelligence product was “deﬁcient due to operational, as much as analytical, reasons,” according to Merom.
The ﬁve days of deliberations in the interim were vital in helping the president achieve his preference for a limited objective,e., the removal of offensive weapons rather than an invasion of Cuba.
The president was prepared to authorize the so-called “Cordier ploy,” if direct negotiations failed to produce a settlement.
This scheme envisioned a public quid pro quo ostensibly proposed by the UN secretary general.
At the same time, the inﬂuence of National Intelligence Estimates can be overrated.
Policymakers tend to embrace estimates that “validate their own certainties,” as one leading scholar has noted.
James Burnham, “Intelligence on Cuba,” National Review, 20 November 1962.
Typically, one of the ﬁrst questions Russell shrewdly asked McCone when congressional leaders were ﬁnally briefed about the SSMs on 22 October was whether the SAMs were operational.
Another red herring was the speculation in the media (and rumor on Capitol Hill) that the administration allegedly knew before Keating but withheld the information so as to maximize the electoral gain from a showdown with Moscow.
Finally, the misestimates, which became public knowledge almost immediately, also drew attention away from the nearfailure to collect intelligence.
A measure of this fact was that McCone was deliberately kept in the dark about the secret quid pro quo, despite openly advocating a public trade of the Jupiter missiles during ExComm meetings.
McCone’s exclusion here, however, may have had more to do with the DCI’s relationship with Dwight Eisenhower and other Republicans.
Since Kennedy intended to disinform the former president about the true parameters of the settlement , telling McCone the truth was impossible.
In addition, McCone’s continued hard line on Cuba and some bruising clashes with Defense Secretary McNamara over the Soviet withdrawal caused some teeth-gnashing within an administration trying hard to get the subject of Cuba off the front pages in early 1963.
If photos had been taken earlier than mid-October, McCone testiﬁed, they probably would not have been sufﬁciently deﬁnitive.
Marquis Childs, “Blank Spot in Cuban Picture,” Washington Post, 4 March 1963.
Later in the day, and after a conversation between the president and McGeorge Bundy, McCone discussed the photo gap with the president, who said the photo gap was being used to drive a wedge into the administration, one that would pit the CIA against the State and Defense Departments.
He dedicates this article to the late Sam Halpern, a longtime CIA ofﬁcer whom he interviewed for this study.
The views, opinions and ﬁndings of the author expressed in this article should not be construed as asserting or implying United States government endorsement of its factual statements and interpretations or representing the ofﬁcial positions of any component of the United States government.
