And ""Blinks"" Over Ukraine Thomas Friedman continues to be the most dimwitted foreign policy commentator in United States media.
Today he claims that Putin ""blinked"" on Ukraine by not invading it, something the Russian Federation never had any interest to do.
But worse than such misreading of current foreign affairs events is Friedman's basic misreading of history.
In 1959/60 the United States planned and in 1961 proceeded to to install nuclear armed ballistic intermediate range missiles in Italy and Turkey.
These ""Jupiter"" missiles could have reached Moscow within minutes and would have given the United States a decapitating first strike capability against the Soviet Union.
In April 1961 a CIA trained and supported force of exiles invaded Cuba.
They were defeated and thrown out of Cuba but the incident intensified Cuban desire for protection by the Soviet Union.
Moscow initiated further talks with Cuba and an agreement was found to counter the United States missile threat in Europe by installing comparable missiles on Cuba.
It also demanded that the United States refrained from any further invasions of Cuba.
With the Jupiter installations in Turkey and Italy the United States had gained an advantage.
But the Soviet Union countered and in the end the United States pulled back.
The United States sold out the interests of its allies Turkey and Italy while the Soviets delivered security assurances for their allies in Havanna.
The Crimea and the attached seas with hundreds of billions worth of hydrocarbon reserves are now part of Russia.
The Ukraine will continue to depend on Russia for its energy needs and general economic exchange.
It will let the new Ukraine government hang as it grapples with its the coming energy crisis.
Medium to long term Russia will get its will in Ukraine and there is no way for the United States, apart from nuking Moscow, to change that perspective.
That Friedman finds it necessary to create such a new myth can only be explained by the need to cover up the ongoing United States retreat over Ukraine.
Joe Biden's son is on the board of the Ukraine Oil & Gas Company, and US-IL has installed a dual-citizen Israeli Oiligarch as Ukrainian President, who intends to keep his dual-citizen Israeli Prime Minister, and together they are engaged in wholesale slaughter in Donetsk, with mercenary forces trained, armed and funded by the US, and led by a United States commander.
Fukuyama called it the 'End of Civilization', didn't he, and the PNAC said, ""America needs a New Pearl Harbor"". 2000 was obvious to the World as a Globalist-Military coup takeover, after Clinton's failed 'Third Way' NeoLiberal policies.
Obama is Gorbechev, just an odd parallel to the Soviet Union's own collapse, but collapse America shall.
In the wreck of the Soviet Union, and my direct involvement in Afghanistan, one thing led to another, bada bing, and I found myself sitting in a Starbucks in Seattle with two Russian businessmen I never met, over a bottle of Russian vodka, with all the Yuppies Gen-X'rs making sneering expressions.
Not the kind you chop up BMWs for resale parts, the kind you break ships with.
The kind you sail the last of the Soviet military fleet to Bangladesh with, anchor on the beach, and with giant saws, break the ships into manageable pieces, the way Brazilian leaf-cutter ants raze a corn field.
So long story short, the deal went through, my partners and I got a little taste, and a year or so later I got a Xmas card from my partner, from his Russian friends, telling me that the Soviet nuclear sub fleet had been successfully broken and sold off to Germany, irradiated reactor shielding and all.
You are stuck in the 'Deep Throat' era with your Kennedy-Cuba analysis, but we're a Million Miles down the Super Highway today.
TomV | May 28 2014 10:59 utc | 2 These juvenile taunts are all part of the United States strategy.
From the very beginning they have been baiting Putin/Russia, hoping to draw Russia towards direct intervention in Ukraine so that the long-prepared ""Putin is the new Hitler"" campaign can be ramped up world-wide, and more of their overpriced war toys sold to terrified governments in Europe.
I imagine many drawers full of such demonizing articles, caricatures and talking points are still waiting for the right moment to be deployed.
Russia being too smart to fall into the obvious trap , the narrative ""Putin blinked"" is just another ploy to put domestic pressure on Putin.
Such details as the humiliating treatment of the Russian journalists, the absurd sanctions, etc., are all part of the ongoing and escalating provocation, to which Friedman now contributes his mite.
If Putin invades Eastern Ukraine, that is the start to the longed-for wider new war; but as long as he doesn't, he will be mocked and taunted relentlessly, in an attempt to shame and weaken him in the eyes of his supporters.
So while I agree that Friedman is stupid and contemptible, this particular piece of propaganda is not evidence of his stupidity; it ties in too well with neocon objectives.
B, thanks for helping to weaken the hoary old myth that Kennedy ""won"" the Cuban missile crisis.
Seamus Padraig | May 28 2014 12:03 utc | 4 Fidel showed his true colors when he embraced the Soviet Union in his dispute with America.
Although, for some of it, he can be excused, but he can't be excused for partnering with the Soviet Union.
By doing so, he damned any other possible revolution, bloody or not, in Central and South America.
He became the perfect scapegoat example for any liberation movement from a PR standpoint.
No sympathy could ever, or will ever be granted by Americans because they'll always remember that Castro was willing to nuke them in the ""blink"" of an eye.
The only conclusion one can draw as to why it's not, is Fidel and his Marxist experiment in Cuba is a useful idiot.
Catcher In The Lie | May 28 2014 12:04 utc | 5 Posted by: TomV | May 28, 2014 6:59:33 AM | 2 Yeah yeah yeah, but he's still dimwitted.
The Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Russian Federation Ministry of Foreign Affairs sent a note to Ukraine, which draws the attention of the Ukrainian side to the fact that the Russian side has received insistent appeals from individuals and organizations in the conflict zone in eastern Ukraine, where as a result of military actions there are numerous human casualties and victims, asking for urgent humanitarian assistance, especially medical supplies and medicines.
Russian stressed that it is ready to provide the population in these regions with the required assistance, and proposed to the Ukrainian side to promptly take the necessary measures to ensure the immediate delivery of Russian humanitarian aid to the affected regions.
Specific routes and transport conditions of such humanitarian assistance, according to the note, could be agreed in due course through the appropriate Russian and Ukrainian authorities.
In the 80s he did a book on the Middle East on the bais of his conversations with taxi drivers while doing a gig as reprter for the NYT, which no doubt is what got him the gig with the billionaire's daughter.
He and Dvid Brooks, also of the same tribe, are what make the Times the great institution that it is today for the thinking men and women who read one book a month.
It is the neocons who, in the last analysis are crude, unsophisticated and, yes, stupid.
United States foreign policy is dominated by empty heads without any strategic sense.
Everything that the United States has done, during the Ukrainian crisis, might as well have been calculated to serve China's interests.
China, historically, has always lived under the shadow of invasion from the west, Central Asia.
The various ""stans"" formerly Soviet Republics, will be squeezed into the SCO and United States bases squeezed out of them.
The new Sino Russian alliance will stretch from the Ukrainian border to the Pacific.
Look at what they are doing in Libya, with a 1000 marines hovering off shore waiting to help the latest coup there-which will inevitably lead, in months or years, to a neo-Ghadaffi restoration.
Bad publicity, headaches for decades to come, a job for Joe Biden's feckless child and, on the other hand, unanimous nationalist revulsion in Russia, as well as the consolidation of Iran, Russia, the former Soviet states and China into an unbreakable alliance.
Despite all, they do have a pretty similar life expectancy to the United States at a whole less cost, and a very similar literacy rate.
Actually, they are top of life expectancy in the Carribean, better than the Bahamas, whilst United States supported Haiti is bottom.
The goal of the game is not to win, but to lose by letting the other win, going off the cliff.
For the United States and the Kiev regime, though they say they want to keep the unity of Ukraine, they want the Russian invasion and/or partition of Ukraine.
For Russia, though they appears to want to invade and partition Ukraine, they really want to preserve the unity of Ukraine.
Russia knows that unified Ukraine will never leave the Orbit of Russia.
But, the problem is they had many fake victories already, and doesn't seem to be satisfied, yet.
Crimea is now part of Russia, NATO membership for Ukraine is off the table for good, and Ukraine's new president clearly understands that good relations with Moscow are essential, just as Putin wanted.
As most of their dealings are kept from the public, this fault-line where power is shared uneasily and in a chaotic fashion, is invisible.
But now that the coal miners have taken to the streets to demand an end to the Kiev ""punishment"" operations, it is way more difficult to spin this.
However, they will find a way to do it while continuing to loose readership and credibility.
This is a game changer because the West can't whitewash the repression of ""terrorists"" miners.
Europe is uninterested in more sanctions against Russia and is likely interested in facilitating an end to a civil war at its doorstep.
Thus far, Putin has not taken the bait in spite of the goading so the empire is very mad.
There seems to be an intensification of the Kiev offensive while Poroshenko admitted to a closing window of time for this belligerent operation to produce the desired effect.
And ""Blinks"" Over UkraineIt also demanded that the United States refrained from any further invasions of Cuba.
Allen Dulles, head of the CIA, board member of United Fruit, and the main force behind the Bay of Pigs invasion, would certainly have been surprised to hear of any CIA assistance for Castro.
Although Castro was able to overthrow Batista and crime overlord Meyer Lansky, who together under the benevolent eyes of American business jointly ruled Cuba, there's no reason to blame Castro or Marx or the Soviet Union if today's vastly more powerful, wealthier, more sophisticated, United States protected international crime organizations take over Cuba again.
Lansky, by the way, although considered the most powerful international crime boss of his day, head of the ""Jewish Mafia,"" with close connections to the CIA would no doubt envy the wealth and power of Sheldon Adelson who, if your prediction comes true, will be instrumental in making Cuba Vegas.
Wikipedia:""Cuba ranks high in metrics of health and education, with a high Human Development Index of 0.780 as of 2013.
And just think, it all came about because ten guys went into the sierra to change things.
Ken Nari | May 28 2014 14:33 utc | 22 This worry about ""who blinked"" is irrelevant to those being murdered by the west's bandera nazi terrorists.
However, everything will be lost quickly once civil war intensifies and the partition of Ukraine sets in.
So they may be trying to simply put a heck of a lot of pressure on Kiev to come up with a government that kind of respects sort of Russian interests in this.
As they, you know, look to cut the deals with the European Union and other things.
They only offered hostile rhetoric, more sanctions, and unconditional support for the Kiev regime's terror campaign against the Russian speaking population.
Everything depend on whether the unity of Ukraine will be preserved, and it's not decided, yet.
The next is to apply meaningful pressure on the interim government to do what it has thus far refused to do—establish a government of national unity.
He also stressed that Poroshenko can easily do and there is no doubt that the army in this case will return to the barracks.
The following report includes some of the latest of that, along with background reporting that I have put together from other sources, including links to videos of the actual historical events.
The principle claim is that Russia was actually intransigent about Ukraine having to choose between the EU and the customs union.
I have read I think here and elsewhere that Barosso was the one who gave the ultimatum.
Might seem like an oddly teeny hobby horse to be riding right now but I find the guy kind of sinister and I think what he's saying needs to be challenged.
If anyone can point me to the sources to debunk the claim I'd appreciate it.
Never seen that claim so boldly made either Of course I know that most of the readers here are unsympathetic to that view and I agree.
But any detailed thoughts on debunking this specific meme since, he actually baldly states it would be welcome.
Grim Deadman | May 28 2014 16:06 utc | 34 Thomas Friedman is what is known as a useful idiot.
All he's really good for much like our esteemed present Secretary of State is to marry a rich woman.
Massinissa | May 28 2014 16:28 utc | 37 @31 Im not even sure why you bother watching that fake left nonsense, honestly.
Think Berezovsky, Khodorklepto, Guzinsky, etc, etc. instead of them sitting in the corner like good little boys.
That's why Freedman (Guardian, NYT, WSJ, Independent, etc, etc hate Putin.
He snatched the Russian resources candy as they were about to gobble it down in front of their drunk.
Thrasyboulos | May 28 2014 16:40 utc | 39 Fran @18 Gitmo was part of the permanent prize seized by the USA during the 1898 American-Spanish War, where the United States Empire also gained the Philippines and subsequently slaughtered about a million as the natives wanted REAL independence not subordination to another colonial master.
That’s the big thing that changed, and it surprised elites in the European Union as well as elites in Ukraine, and certainly we are now just coming to terms with it.
The traditional Ukrainian foreign policy has been precisely to balance between east and west, to go west as far as you can, then when that doesn’t work out, go back east, and then when that doesn’t work out, go back west.
Every Ukrainian president down to Yanukovych, in fact, has done that in one form or another.
The reason that that is no longer possible is that Russia is no longer a state.
And the reason why we had the revolution that we had from November to March of last year and this year is that Russia became an exclusive alternative.
Antonov, based near Kiev, also designed and manufactures a medium-size transport plane, the AN70, a series of gliders like the AN15, a regional jet , and a series of advanced jet engines.
It also designed, manufactured and today still services Russia's main intercontinental ballistic missile, the deadly SS18.
Frank | May 28 2014 17:16 utc | 43 Frank @42 The Saker has already provided a response to this article.
The Ukraine, just like Russia, has inherited a lot of top-quality Soviet technologies.
These technologies were, in fact, so good, that both the Ukraine and Russia could literally ""coast"" for almost 20 years on that technological basis without really developing any truly new systems.
A good example of that is the SS-18 missile which is still one of the most powerful ones on the planet.
But it's design is really late 1950s early 1960s technology and it runs on liquid fuel.
And yet the Russian Ministry of Defense recently wanted to purchase more of these missile.
Yonatan | May 28 2014 17:31 utc | 44 @40 Oddlots Well, I can direct you to a couple of different blogs , but the problem is that the passage is so abstract that on the topic it discusses there can be an infinite number of takes.
Apart from the obvious absurdity that it is an exclusive alternative, the question boils down to ""What is Modern Russia?"", and that's where the fun begins because nobody really knows.
The possible answers range from kleptocracy to empire and from gas station to last European nation state.
All of those mentioned and those inbetween are certainly subject to criticism of various degrees of constructiveness, but none but for the most absurd ones can be refuted entirely.
So depending on whom you read you can get different takes on your second question.
Syria and Ukraine will remain the perfect ways for the United States to exert pressure on Europe, now that the European population are overwhelmingly against the Transatlantic trade negociations.
Mina | May 28 2014 18:22 utc | 47 @ Fran #18-Fran, Guantanamo Naval Base was a concession the United States acquired from Cuba long before Castro's revolution and overthrow of Batista.
Gaianne | May 28 2014 18:49 utc | 48 AFTER the 1993 attack and a crystal clear letter sent to the NYT explaining the motive which said in part: OUR DEMANDS ARE: 1 Stop all military, economical, and political aid to Israel.
REPORTER: Mr Bin Ladin, you've declared a jihad against the United States.
We declared jihad against the United States government, because the United States government is unjust, criminal and tyrannical.
And we believe the United States is directly responsible for those who were killed in Palestine, Lebanon and Iraq.
This United States government abandoned even humanitarian feelings by these hideous crimes.
It transgressed all bounds and behaved in a way not witnessed before by any power or any imperialist power in the world.
Terrorists, he wrote in 1998, ""have no specific ideological program or demands.
Then, after the 9/11 attacks, Friedman had the audacity to continue to lie.
Friedman claimed, ""the fact is that bin Laden never focused on this issue.
He only started talking about ""Palestine"" after September 11, when he sensed that he might be losing the support of the Arab street. "" and "" Osama bin Laden never mentioned the Palestinian cause as motivating his actions until he felt he was losing support in the Arab world.
Tom Murphy | May 28 2014 19:00 utc | 49 A winners/losers who-blinked-first paradigm is not particularly illuminating in this case.
The U.S, military, for example, had developed a first-strike policy which was predicated on the total destruction of both the Soviet Union and China and if any shooting broke out over Cuba there was a high probability that this policy would have been put in action.
Members of the Joint Chiefs were advocating a first strike even in the absence of any flash point.
The severity of the Missile Crisis forced the civilian leaders of United States and USSR to back away from winner/loser paradigms.
JFK didn:t lose the Jupiter missiles it was a gesture to Krushchev to help rein in the hawks on the USSR side.
In that context, we could say that everyone on the planet were the winners.
Talk of winners/losers and who blinked first is sandbox stuff, and reveals the emotional maturity of children.
It is shocking that so many high up the food chain in United States national security establishment and its associated courtiers presume this blunted maturity.
Sure, the United States as a WHOLE may suffer but if people retardly think that United States PTB don't have the American peons subjugated/brainwashed to such an extant that this shit can't continue on for AT LEAST another 20 years and until the fruits of their ""investments"" in chaos pay off they're effing stupid/brainwashed themselves.
There is NOTHING on the United States PTB landscape/horizon that threatens their position right now.
Jesus Christ, every one seems to read those reports/studies of the United States being a non-democratic/war criminal/rogue state yet they STILL think they're dealing with a nation that can right itself, a nation where the populace has the means by which the can actually change things.
Especially as the election laws are even more egregiously rewritten to further entrench the elite war criminal class.
So what if they suffer ""setbacks"", the United States elite have ALL THE TIME AND COMPLIANT CANNON FODDER that they could possible hope for near, middle and long term to wait it out and turn events their way once again.
Please point me to the data of the United States war criminal elite abiding by ANY SENSE of decency/humanity/morality over the last 4 decades.
Really, I'd love to see the evidence that supports contentions that the United States war criminal elite are worried about moral hangups vis a vis the maintenance of their stations because I really don't see it at all.
They are brilliantly insane and there is NO ONE stating otherwise here.
There is, thus, ZERO reason for any of us to think that the worst is behind us, that the United States war crimes are going to ebb, that the needless slaughters will subside because if anything they will only increase if the United States PTB do actually begin to feel threatened.
Look to how little the United States PTB care for their own citizens and then you'll see that there is not a moral hangup standing in their way.
These and other no-brainers are what should give the people of the world pause before proclaiming the premature end of the American empire.
JSorrentine | May 28 2014 19:24 utc | 51 b's essay on how the myth of the Cuban missile crisis continues to poison United States thinking is also discussed in an essay by Alistair Crooke that is posted by the Leverett's at goingtotehran The fact is that the United States promised to not invade Cuba and promised to remove those Jupiter missiles in Turkey in order to defuse that crisis.
Alastair argues that United States leaders continue to believe the myth and as a result keep on using it as a precedence that prevents them from engaging in give and take negotiations.
And sigh beyond better informed I'm sure your cat is also cuter Honestly I don''t know the background on Putin's taming of the oligarchs.
Oddlots | May 28 2014 20:24 utc | 53 The American and Russian leaders in the 1962 were sane, bucked the establishment, and had control of their governments.
Vladimir Putin hasn’t won anything as the civil war engulfs Eastern Ukraine.
If the Eastern Provinces nationalize the Oligarchs’ holdings, as promised, the Fascist National Security Organizations in Kiev will get all the arms and mercenaries they want paid for by Western Plutocrats intent on wiping out socialism.
If Vladimir Putin sends in Russian troops, NATO troops will counter invade the Western Ukraine.
If he does nothing, ultra-nationalists will overthrow his government and send in the troops to protect fellow Russians from western vandals.
The only way to prevent a nuclear holocaust is to neuter the neoliberal/neoconservative cabal that is starting the wars across the globe and negotiate a peaceful settlement to the Ukraine Crisis.
VietnamVet | May 28 2014 20:41 utc | 54 @ 53 Correct...""obamaism"" and its press agents at the new York times have been trying to goad Russia into invading Ukraine for months, to justify a NATO presence there.
Russia for its part has resisted this while declaring any unilateral NATO encroachment in Ukraine would lead to , um , something unpleasant and they must believe Russia because they haven't deployed so much a 1 NATO helicopter so far.
The only way to ""neuter"" The neolib/neocon regime which is starting wars and wrecking economies and environments across the globe, is for the working class to overthrow them.
Short of a working class revolution Monopoly capitalism will continue to rot the planet like the malignant dick mouth and brain cancer that it is, until it collapses of its own dead weight and or were are all dead.
Marc | May 28 2014 20:55 utc | 55 @VietnamVet #53: I think that time is on Russia's side.
If Russia sent in troops, it would have to maintain control of the territory in which its troops were present, so in that case, Russia would have to deal with an insurgency.
Kyiv, including Poroshenko, seems to be laboring under the delusion that it can destroy the insurgency.
As I think you've stated yourself, Russia will not tolerate having a virulently anti-Russian regime in Kiev controlling all of what is presently known as the Ukraine.
Only if such a regime remains in place, with a ""unified"" Ukraine, does Russia lose.
Also, NATO troops are not going to enter any part of Ukraine as combatants, no matter what Russia does.
Demian | May 28 2014 21:05 utc | 56 @ 50 I get the urgency of your feeling in that post, and its true they can make it a lot worse before they cant, and they might glass the planet before that happens BUT, unless they get their claws into Eurasia they are, in the long run, most definitely finished.
They are trying to brow beat Germany and its satellites into paying more for the upkeep of the war machine, NATO and that's not going very far very fast, or rather, if the German public pays more it will demand more in return and that's already being seen.
Germany is not a natural ally of the United States and wont remain one except here and there out of convenience, for another 70 years.
Long before we get to be some kind of end-of-the-world showdown between the United States and the powers of Eurasia, United States capitalists are going to bail.
They are in it for the candy and they will kiss the ass of whoever holds the keys to the candy store.
The United States is an evil empire and at present it seems invincible but time is not on its side.
In fact the American people , as they always have, hold the keys to the future in their hands.
The conflict between financialized American capital and the American working class is sharpening and will continue to.
The American people have not yet decapitated financialized American capital, but not because they are stupid.
The American people are less stupid than they are completely depoliticized and therefore apathetic.
Take away their social security and watch how fast they become re-politicized.
When political conflict finally hits the US, its global imperial designs will evaporate.
Marc | May 28 2014 21:23 utc | 57 In his graduation speech at West Point today, Obama said this: This leads to my second point: For the foreseeable future, the most direct threat to America at home and abroad remains terrorism.
But a strategy that involves invading every country that harbors terrorist networks is naïve and unsustainable.
I believe we must shift our counterterrorism strategy -drawing on the successes and shortcomings of our experience in Iraq and Afghanistan -to more effectively partner with countries where terrorist networks seek a foothold.
As frustrating as it is, there are no easy answers, no military solution that can eliminate the terrible suffering anytime soon.
As President, I made a decision that we should not put American troops into the middle of this increasingly sectarian war, and I believe that is the right decision.
But that does not mean we shouldn’t help the Syrian people stand up against a dictator who bombs and starves his own people.
And in helping those who fight for the right of all Syrians to choose their own future, we are also pushing back against the growing number of extremists who find safe haven in the chaos.
They created the insurgents by their provocative actions and they want to keep it maintained.
Also I think that Ultra-nationalist and anti-Russian regime in a unified Ukraine will be short-lived.
PuppetMaster | May 28 2014 21:36 utc | 59 @PuppetMaster #58: Yes, I am aware of the hypothesis that the Kyiv fascists want to split up the Ukraine so that the remaining western part is unreservedly Russia-hating.
My difficulty here is that I can't understand a Ukie nationalist as a rational actor in any sense of the term.
So it is not really possible for me to figure out what the intentions of the junta, which now includes Poroshenko, might be, outside of what their American masters tell them to do.
In that intercepted telephone conversation in which Timoshenko called for the nuking of Russians, she also expressed regret that the Crimea was freed and reunited with its motherland.
That makes me think that many Ukie nationalists want to keep all the territory that the legal fiction commonly referred to as the Ukraine now has.
Thus, my intuition is that the reason that the fascists are pursuing their ""anti-terrorist"" operation is simply because they want to kill Russians and because they believe that the sheer ""essence"" of the Ukie people is enough to overcome the anti-fascist resistance , not because they want to create a rump Banderistan that they would find it easier to control.
Demian | May 28 2014 22:00 utc | 60 Thomas Friedman's IQ, ethical levels, education, etc. are irrelevant.
He is doing his job well, or else he wouldn't be doing it for so many years.
He may be writing it even though he disagrees with it, on any of the categories above.
His writings resemble those of old Soviet editorials in Pravda and Izvestia.
Igor Najfeld | May 28 2014 22:34 utc | 61 As a follow up to the recent posts, I agree that the Western Ukraine run Kiev government wants civil war and partition.
I bet they even admit it among themselves; but, to their patrons they spout freedom, liberty, democracy, and unity.
The “known unknown” is whether the ethnic Russians have the will, skill, armament and training to effectively combat the goons and mercenaries thrown at them.
Hezbollah could, but, I still think that is a special case born and bred through occupation and war for decades on the Israeli border.
I do not think the Eastern Ukrainians can throw the westerners and mercenaries out quickly or easily.
Any people defending their homes, especially Russians, will fight to the bloody end.
I think it will be a forever war that sooner or later will draw their fellow Russians into the conflict.
In addition, I think that if Russia invades Eastern Ukraine, NATO will counter invade the Western Ukraine.
This would all be avoided if there was any sanity left in the West and a negotiated settlement was reached.
VietnamVet | May 28 2014 22:38 utc | 62 Friedman is a fantasist, a carnival barker calling his readers forever to sample the delicious fruits of predatory capitalism in this gee-whiz super-techno United States dominated flat world of ours.
The column that he published today, the one that argued that Putin blinked because Putin got pretty much everything wrong in Ukraine.
Voters cannot support the European Union when it is relaunching the Cold War.
Now, in order to entice UKIP voters to turn out for the Conservatives, Cameron is promising Britain an in-or-out referendum on EU membership in 2017.
Mike Maloney | May 28 2014 22:50 utc | 63 @VietnamVet #61: if Russia invades Eastern Ukraine, NATO will counter invade the Western Ukraine.
Thanks to the last 12 years of superb political and military leadership, what forces the United States once had were squandered in Iraq and Afghanistan.
Today’s wheeled Army constabulary forces along with Army and Marine light infantry are incapable of challenging Russian ground forces anywhere in Central or Eastern Europe without risking certain annihilation.
Demian | May 28 2014 22:59 utc | 64 Posted by: Demian | May 28, 2014 6:00:52 PM | 59 Not everyone has to be a rational actor.
However when mixed together, in spite of chaotic appearances, the whole may form a discernible form and direction.
And someone's unintended consequences could be somebody else's intended and expected consequences.
We don't know who is aware of and agree to the plan, and if there is really a plan.
They say they want to conquer and pacify the volatile eastern provinces.
To do that, you have to secure as much political support you can get and mobilize an overwhelming force.
However they took care of it by completely alienating the Russian speaking population and destroying the Ukrainian army and the police.
The most probable result is a stalemate, and a stalemate means the partition of Ukraine.
PuppetMaster | May 28 2014 23:09 utc | 65 I think one outcome that is certain, regardless of whether Ukraine is cracked, which seems more and more likely due to the indiscriminate attacks on Donbass civilians, is the expansion of NATO into the former Warsaw Pact countries of Poland, the Baltics, Slovakia, Bulgaria, etc.
With Afghanistan winding down, we can expect a sizable United States service bootprint all around Ukraine.
Mike Maloney | May 28 2014 23:24 utc | 66 @PuppetMaster #64: Yes, it is quite possible that USG wants the Ukraine to break apart, so that it can use that as a pretext for splitting ties between the EU and Russia.
Therefore, few Uki nationalists want the Ukraine to be reduced to those regions in which a virulent Russophobia can be expected to continually fester.
Also, let us not lose sight of the fact that the original USG plan was to grab all of the Ukraine, including the Crimea and Sevastopol.
Since the original plan was to get all of the Ukraine, it is to be expected that some Western planners are still attached to the idea of getting all of the Ukraine, sans the Crimea.
But evidence in favor of your position is that Poroshenko says that he wants to get the Crimea back.
That ridiculous position can be seen as nothing but a thuggish refusal to negotiate with Moscow.
Demian | May 28 2014 23:37 utc | 67 @Mike Maloney #65: The possibility of WWIII won't be far away.
Likewise, Crimea was taken without firing a shot and the Georgian counter attack was short lived.
You could say that both America and Russia have experienced defeat against a supposedly less capable foe in Vietnam and Afghanistan/Iraq respectively.
Any advantage that Russia may have for a battle in its own back yard is neutered by assistance to America by Western Ukraine, Poland and the Baltics.
Finland could sit on the fence until it is clear who the winner would be.
The asymmetric advantage for Russia is to deploy before the West can do anything about it.
If he said at West point that the hammer is not the only tool expect the opposite.
Sun Tzu | May 28 2014 23:49 utc | 69 I think that Putin's actions are more a wink than a blink.
His promise to protect the Russian citizens of E Ukraine was a hollow pledge that the hundreds of dead and wounded illustrates clearly.
The People's uprising in the east is what he truly fears not the machinations of the Anglo/Zionists which he can effectively counter.
The real threat to Putin's Russia is the idea that regular citizens can organize and overthrow the Oligarchs in not only Ukraine but in Russia as well, this can not be allowed.
Wayoutwest | May 28 2014 23:50 utc | 70 Posted by: Demian | May 28, 2014 7:37:41 PM | 66 I am not so sure about that.
Besides, getting Ukraine as a whole for ""democracy, Europe, economic prosperity or whatever"" could be a bait to get people onboard who would otherwise wouldn't.
PuppetMaster | May 28 2014 23:54 utc | 71 The west needs conflict in the Ukraine, just like they do in Afghanistan.
Notice the troops of the west's head flunky, the USA, wont be leaving Afghanistan now.
Without some kind of conflict, it is difficult to keep the home population enthralled with their slavery.
Without ""hotspots"" on ""the enemy's"" borders, it's a lot more difficult to send the west's terrorists.
The repellant mafia sod already has that, his military is basically a western merc force.
PoroUSheado's ""request"" is essentially a western slight of hand to involve the USA directly and overtly in the Ukraine terror ops.
Future national leader called for the conclusion, with Washington's new security Treaty.
The Russians and Chinese, and those they are allied with, know what's going on.
To bring things to a ""head"", the west's population control requires it, to keep the dupes noticing how buttsore they are.
Their strategy is essentially how to bring down ""nazi Germany"" without causing massive war.
They know not all the western oligarchs are hell bent on a ""masada"" scenario of all or nothing for world dominance, that there are western oligarchs who realize there are ways to keep their position, more or less, through compromise, rather than conquest or crude domination.
They offer a face saving ""out"" to those oligarchs needing justification and support to counter the ""full spectrum dominance"" wing of the western fascist plutocracy.
Many of these western oligarchs are into maintaining their local fiefdoms and realize that the sort of conflicts the NWO freaks will need to maintain dominance are not sustainable in the long run.
These people are just as greedy, but they are not masada complex fanatical about it.
It is these the Russians, Chinese and allies are working on influencing.
This is the approach of people who have experience war personally and realize that violence is not an answer to problems, but an exacerbation of those problems.
My chiming in with VietnamVet on the WWIII thing was more in terms of a generalized ""existential threat,"" which is critically important for United States policymakers since Al Qaeda is more and more seen as an ally of the West by a significant segment of the voting public on both the Left and Right.
Mike Maloney | May 28 2014 23:55 utc | 73 errata: You could say that both America and Russia have experienced defeat against a supposedly less capable foe in Vietnam and Afghanistan respectively.
I only linked to it because it seems to be the source of the myth that is apparently circulated in some circles that Mutually Assured Destruction no longer applies.
The United States military defeats China and dictates the surrender terms.
ASB requires that the United States be able to take the war to the mainland with the goal of defeating China, which quite likely would require striking first.
PuppetMaster | May 29 2014 0:18 utc | 77 Demian@63 The military knows the conditions of its troops and the United States volunteer army is way too small to fight a conventional war with the Russian Federation.
Still, units of the 173rd Airborne Brigade, which I served a year with in Vietnam, have already been moved to Poland and the Baltic States to serve as tripwires.
There are reports that there will be NATO military exercises held in Ukraine this summer.
There is no way, if Russia invades Eastern Ukraine, that the Brigade wouldn’t be moved into Western Ukraine to stop Russia from invading even farther.
But, in no way are they able by themselves to halt an Army of Battle Tanks; maybe, if NATO won air superiority, or the tanks stopped before the tripwire.
If not, tactical nuclear weapons would be used by the side in danger of being overrun.
We are sitting on the sidelines watching two nuclear powers play a game of chicken.
Granted, the Russia Federation is being dragged into this very very reluctantly.
Until now no nuclear nation has got into a shooting war with another nuclear power because there is no way it would not escalate to a nuclear war.
The crazies who brought us Austerity and Privatization along with Iraq, Libya, Yemen, Uganda and Syria want to give it a try in order to destabilize Russia and loot it again.
The Goa'uld are parasites from the planet P3X-888, integrated within a host, most of the time a human.
The resulting creatures are a powerful race bent on galactic conquest and domination, largely without pity, compassion or remorse.
He was a member of the Palmach in the war that established the state of Israel.
About 5 years ago I had an opportunity to ask him if he ever apologized for the Nakba or ever made any attempt to apologize to those Palestinians he drove into exile.
Since then I have not taken him seriously -he is an unrepentant Zionist and whatever he might say on other matters just don't matter.
Afternoon was the city, now their howitzers pound “Semenovka”, quite a while, 2 hours by now.
Fete | May 29 2014 2:53 utc | 84 Probably something of an analysis should be made of the trajectory of this oddball breed of billionaire, that is to say, the Chocolate Gore Factory's proprietor, the newly minted Ukrainian president, Poroshenko.
We arrive at the grim limits of our degenerate civilization, in a condition which is personified by the billionaire president.
Here is something new, an entity that has heretofore shrunk from the light.
Those who have, in former times. produced the global snuff film, , now make so bold as to front and represent, and issue executive commands as heads of state. for cities to be put under siege, for populations to be bombed and shelled.
Billionaire hands are seen orchestrating the burning alive of protesters, as well as the strangling and torturing to death of those who survived the flames.
Poroshenko must feel awfully lucky, bulletproof, and invulnerable, to tempt the Russians; for after all, who is to say that they won't hang him, after they bag him, and try him for his crimes against the Ukrainian people.
Copeland | May 29 2014 3:13 utc | 85 @ToivoS #82: Thanks for that; I had no idea.
I never took Etzioni seriously either, including his ""socio-economics"", so it's nice to know that my instinct was correct.
Russia is approaching this geopolitically, so it calculates how much blood needs to be spilled to justify an intervention. , so you have to weigh how many lives are likely to be lost if you intervene compared to if you do nothing.
In fact the doctor is a Ukrainian, and in light of subsequent events probably he was cooperating knowingly with the United States and with stories planted in the corporate media all along.
Just saying, that in this big brother world we live in its so very hard to make an informed decision.
Poroshenko is a ""galtian ubermensch"" in that he came by his fortune the way 99.9% of them have.
Poroshenko also represents the fraud of western capitalism -""democracy"" fulfilling its own brutal logic.
Billionaire-Presidents not only make sense under the present Monopoly Capitalist regime they are the only kind of President which makes sense.
Marc | May 29 2014 4:28 utc | 88 Our troll friend, Cotton A Lie, really pushes his fake reality far past anything believable.
The United States waged war on social reform in Latin America and the Caribbean viciously attacking people who lived into the 1960s it is no exaggeration to say, like medieval serfs.
And the United States did this long before Castro ever sent a diplomatic note to the Soviet Union, and is still doing it long after the Soviet Union has ceased to exist.
The Navy had dropped the missile six or seven years earlier in favor of the Polaris, and the Air Force hated the damned thing.
It was liquid fueled and only medium range, and by 1962 was obsolete and scheduled to be discarded anyway.
Bill H | May 29 2014 5:50 utc | 91 Posted by: PuppetMaster | May 28, 2014 5:36:02 PM | 58 Posted by: Demian | May 28, 2014 6:00:52 PM | 59 You both make good points and likely we'll never know.
But it doesn't matter to Kremlin planners whether this is a deliberate effort to split Ukraine or just fascists in love with the power of brute force to get done whatever their perfect final solution is.
Russia needs patience and 'non-official' assistance to the federalists/separatists, in pursuit of what I think is inevitable, a neutral, very federalist Ukraine.
If it were 2020 or 2025 and not 2014 Russia might just say 'screw it' and directly intervene.
That's not very far away, so patience will be the word for a little while longer.
A video reportedly filmed near the attacked facility has appeared on YouTube.
There are conflicting reports on casualties and the outcome of the attack, which took place on the territory of an Air Force academy.
Earlier, at least one Ukrainian soldier was reported to be seriously injured.
According to RT’s Paula Slier, one anti-government protester was killed in the gunfight and there have been several injures on both sides.
All of the 80 Ukrainian soldiers holed up at the base surrendered, reported RIA Novosti.
The servicemen were escorted out of the building as the other side applauded.
Self-defense commander Gennady Tsepkalo also confirmed to journalists that all troops have surrendered.
It had earlier been reported that only ten troops surrendered and others barricaded themselves inside the base, with some of the soldiers saying that their captain had orbidden them from surrendering.
These events come as Kiev has intensified military operations in eastern Ukraine.
BM-21 launch vehicle “Grad” are being used,” Donbas-based Ostrov agency says.
Anti-government protesters in Slavyansk have downed a Ukrainian forces helicopter in the south-east of Slavyansk, Donetsk region, eastern Ukraine, a local witness told Itar-Tass.
Still allowed missiles and fired from helicopters, and for the residential sector.
