All these collections will go in due course to the Kennedy Library in Boston.
Hackman, who between them conducted more than sixty interviews, and to many others.
At Houghton Mifflin, Richard McAdoo watched the book stretch out in time and length with exemplary patience, and Helena Bentz Dorrance prepared the manuscript for the printer with exemplary thoroughness. | must also thank Luise Erdmann for reading the proofs and Julia Stair for an excellent index.
Once again | rejoice to express my unlimited gratitude to Gretchen Stewart and to Mary Chiffriller for the devoted and meticulous care they expended on typing several drafts of the manuscript, collating texts, checking references, getting the manuscript to the publisher and meanwhile keeping a busy office in a semblance of order.
Above all, | thank Alexandra Emmet Schlesinger, who not only read the manuscript with fastidious and unerring eye but suffered and sustained the author during the throes of composition; and | thank our children still at home, Robert Emmet Kennedy Schlesinger and Peter Cushing Allan, for putting up with it all.
For young Americans, Robert Kennedy’s older brother, John Fitzgerald Kennedy, is now a historical figure, a leader who belongs to the ages.
The causes with which he is identified—the Cold War, the missile crisis, Vietham—seem to the young almost as remote as the Spanish-American War was to my generation.
But Robert Francis Kennedy has a contemporary feel about him, a sense of enduring identification with the woes and injustices of today’s world.
His causes—the growing disparities of income and opportunity in the United States, racial justice, the redemption of the dispossessed and humiliated—are with us every hour.
Robert Kennedy represents certain unfulfilled possibilities—possibilities that we know in our hearts must be fulfilled if we are ever as a nation to redeem the promise of American life.
Yet they had very different personalities, and this too may in part explain the divergence in the way people think about them.
As | have suggested in this book, John Kennedy was a realist brilliantly disguised as a romantic, Robert a romantic stubbornly disguised as a realist.
A striking thing about Robert Kennedy, and one reason for his continuing relevance, was his capacity for growth.
He was the smallest of the four boys, the gentlest and shyest, the least articulate and the least coordinated, the most dutiful.
His father was absent during much of his childhood and when home was sometimes impatient with him.
Determined to win his father’s respect and love, he began to harden his personality.
The inner sensitivity remained, but a protective covering now formed over it.
It was in this mood that he went to work for the infamous Joe McCarthy’s Senate committee on investigations—a brief undertaking, soon terminated, with RFK returning to the committee as counsel for the Democratic minority and author of the minority report condemning McCarthy’s investigation of the army.
RFK made his political debut as manager of JFK’s victorious campaign for the Senate from Massachusetts in 1952.
The two brothers, separated by nearly nine years, had hardly had time to get to Know each other.
For all their personality differences, they now formed an intimate working partnership.
Under his older brother’s influence, Robert began to lose his intolerance and rigidity.
He grew more relaxed and rueful, acquired more ironic views of life and himself, developed a wry, self-mocking humor and in time displayed a personal charm against which editors warned their reporters.
Drafted to run his brother’s campaign for the presidency in 1960, Robert was tireless, intimidating and effective.
Once elected, John persuaded a reluctant Robert to become attorney general.
He strove especially to bring the autocratic J Edgar Hoover and his long untouchable Federal Bureau of Investigation under control.
Hoover was then a national idol, and his obsession was the pursuit of Communists.
RFK, whose 1960 book The Enemy Within dealt not with Communism but with organized crime, thought this nonsense.
The fact that his brother was president gave him more leverage than most attorneys general, and he forced Hoover against his will to divert budget and agents into two new fields—organized crime and racial justice.
The spread across the South of violent resistance to court orders made civil rights legislation by 1963 both a political possibility and, in the view of the Kennedys, a moral necessity.
Opponents charged that Martin Luther King, Jr., the black civil rights leader, was controlled by Communist agents.
The attorney general acceded to Hoover's request that King’s telephone be wiretapped, confident that this would disprove the allegations.
Meanwhile he called for legislation, introduced in 1963 and passed in 1964, outlawing discrimination, whether based on race, color, religion, national origin or sex, in public accommodations, employment, voting and education.
His brother assigned Robert tasks considerably beyond the Department ofjustice.
He especially valued Robert’s ability to ask the tough questions and get to the heart of difficult problems.
After the Bay of Pigs fiasco, he brought the attorney general increasingly into foreign affairs.
In 1961-62 Robert spurred on the Central Intelligence Agency to undertake Operation Mongoose, a foolish and ineffectual pinprick program of covert action—infiltration, arms drops, sabotage —against the Castro regime; it was not RFK’s finest hour.
There is no hard evidence, however, that he was aware, except as past history, of the CIA efforts, originating in the Eisenhower administration, to assassinate Fidel Castro.
If he was, as some claim, obsessed with the goal of overthrowing the Castro regime, Castro himself provided the perfect pretext when he accepted Soviet nuclear missiles in the summer of 1962.
But during the missile crisis in October, RFK led the opposition to a military solution.
He negotiated a deal by which, if the Russians removed their missiles from Cuba, the Americans would in due course remove their missiles from Turkey.
He had repressed his inner self since childhood, first to prove himself to his father, then to help his brother.
At last Robert Kennedy was free to become a voice and leader in his own right.
As senator, he welcomed the reforms of Lyndon Johnson’s Great Society but found himself in growing disagreement over foreign policy, and finally, as the Vietnam War swallowed the Great Society, over domestic policy as well.
The press often refused to accept such disagreement on its merits, presenting it instead as a political maneuver by which ruthless Bobby Kennedy was out to reclaim the White House.
His oldest daughter, Kathleen Kennedy Townsend, recalls his returning from the South as the Kennedy family was sitting down for dinner at Hickory Hill.
The children are covered with sores and their tummies stick out because they have no food.
Always challenging, probing, testing, he sought new ways to empower people, to foster community self-development and self-reliance, to work out new structures by which people could sustain dignity and hope and devise workable means of helping themselves.
He criticized United States intervention in the Dominican Republic in 1965 and concluded that Johnson had abandoned the reform aims of JFK’s Alliance for Progress.
As American involvement in Vietnam deepened, Kennedy called for bombing pauses and negotiation.
When escalation continued, he evoked the “horror” of the war in urgent speeches.
His critique of the Vietnam War pointed toward a challenge to Johnson’s renomination in 1968.
But Kennedy hung back, still fearing misconstruction of his motives, and antiwar Democrats rallied around Senator Eugene McCarthy of Minnesota.
After McCarthy’s success in the New Hampshire primary, Kennedy belatedly entered the contest.
Johnson withdrew soon afterward, and Vice President Hubert Humphrey became the administration candidate.
RFK had a wry wit and a satiric sense of the absurdities of politics and life.
At the same time, Kennedy was embarked on a desperately serious mission.
Existing conditions in the United States, he said in speech after speech, were “not acceptable,” and we diminished ourselves as a moral community when we accepted them.
Many saw him as a divisive figure, but he saw himself, especially after the assassination in April of Martin Luther King, Jr., as engaged in a mission of reconciliation, seeking to bridge the great schisms in American society— between white and nonwhite, between rich and poor, between age and youth, between order and dissent, between the past and the future.
Recapitulating his message after he won the California primary, he took the shortcut through the kitchen of the Hotel Ambassador in Los Angeles.
The power of the Johnson administration and much of the party establishment was behind Humphrey.
Still, the dynamism was behind Kennedy, and he might well have swept the convention.
If nominated, he would most probably have beaten the Republican candidate, Richard M Nixon.
A Robert Kennedy presidency would have brought a quick end to American involvement in the Vietnam War.
Those thousands of Americans—and many thousands more Vietnamese and Cambodians—who were killed from 1969 to 1973 would have been at home with their families.
A Robert Kennedy presidency would have consolidated and extended the achievements of John Kennedy’s New Frontier and Lyndon Johnson's Great Society.
The liberal tide of the 1960s was still running strong enough in 1969 to affect Nixon’s domestic policies.
The Environmental Protection Act, the Occupational Safety and Health Act, the Comprehensive Employment and Training Act with its CETA employment program were all enacted under Nixon.
The confidence that both black and white working-class Americans had in Robert Kennedy would have created the possibility of progress toward racial reconciliation.
His appeal to the young might have mitigated some of the under-thirty excesses of the time.
And of course the election of Robert Kennedy would have delivered the republic from Watergate, with its attendant subversion of the Constitution and destruction of faith in government.
He was at the same time a tough and experienced politician who understood the uses of power and government.
And he was a compelling speaker with unusual capacity to inform, move and inspire the electorate and to rally popular support for his programs.
His blunt challenge to the complacencies of American society made many uncomfortable; but his insistence that any individual who “stands up for an ideal, or acts to improve the lot of others, or strikes out against injustice” can make a difference plucked a moral nerve, especially among the young.
RFK, as David M Shriobman points out, was one of only five men in American political history to be known by his initials.
The others—Theodore Roosevelt, Franklin Delano Roosevelt, John Fitzgerald Kennedy, Lyndon Baines Johnson —were all presidents.
Foreword ROBERT KENNEDY died on June 6, 1968, at the age of forty-two — a decade ago as | write today.
He lived through a time of unusual turbulence in American history; and he responded to that turbulence more directly and sensitively than any other political leader of the era.
He was equipped with certitudes of family and faith—certitudes that sustained him till his death.
History changed him, and, had time permitted, he might have changed history.
His relationship to his age makes him, | believe, a “representative man” in Emerson’s phrase—one who embodies the consciousness of an epoch, who perceives things in fresh lights and new connections, who exhibits unsuspected possibilities of purpose and action to his contemporaries.
He never had the chance to fulfill his own possibilities, which is why his memory haunts so many of us now.
Because he wanted to get things done, because he was often impatient and combative, because he felt simply and cared deeply, he made his share of mistakes, and enemies.
He was a romantic and an idealist, and he was also prudent, expedient, demanding and ambitious.
Yet the insights he brought to politics—insights earned in a labor of selfeducation that only death could stop—led him to see power not as an end in itself but as the means of redeeming the powerless.
Any historian who has written about the 1930s as well as the 1960s must recognize a terrible monotony in our national problems.
The conditions of misery and inequity that troubled Franklin Roosevelt and the New Dealers troubled the Kennedys twenty years later—after an interval during which, while misery and inequity persisted, people in power were untroubled.
Robert Kennedy’s message of commitment to the desolate and the disinherited is rarely sounded in the 1970s.
The time will surely come again when the richest nation on earth will overcome its indifference to the degradation of its citizens.
When that time returns, Robert Kennedy’s journey will, | believe, be seen to have exemplary value.
Any book about Robert Kennedy is inextricably bound up with John Kennedy and his Presidency.
This work treats the Kennedy administration primarily as Robert Kennedy took part in events or as his papers cast particular light on them.
On occasion | have added information that | did not know when | wrote A Thousand Days or that seemed inappropriate for publication in 1965. | have also taken the opportunity for a new look at some of the more controversial issues of the Kennedy years.
The passage of time, the knowledge of consequences, the illumination of hindsight, the rise of new preoccupations—all give problems of the past new form and perplexity.
While there would be little point, for example, in going through once again the day-by-day development of the Cuban missile crisis, there would appear considerable point in assessing latter-day interpretations of that crisis—or of the Indochina War, the civil rights struggle, the Central Intelligence Agency, the Federal Bureau of Investigation.
In this sense, Robert Kennedy and His Times is a sort of sequel to A Thousand Days—though the earlier work was a personal memoir and this one is a biography.
It draws heavily on the personal papers of Robert Kennedy, made available to me through the generosity of Ethel Skakel Kennedy and of the Kennedy family.
Robert Kennedy was a direct and candid man, often brusque in manner and opinion.
His instinct was to cloak idealism in throwaway phrases and laconic jokes.
His deflationary, self-mocking, sometimes grim wit was employed often as a means of relieving tension in the midst of crisis.
The serious reader will be able to set Robert Kennedy’s words in the totality of his life. | am sure that he would have been entirely content to stand on the record. | must add that the Kennedy family made no attempt to influence my use of the papers and that the interpretations and judgments are exclusively my own.
Some readers may wonder about the extensive use made in these pages of oral history—i.e., of transcribed interviews conducted with participants after the fact.
We all know that interviews can be no better than a person’s memory and that little is more treacherous than that.
Yet historians have rarely hesitated to draw on written reminiscences, which are no less self-promoting; nor have they hesitated, in order to impart immediacy to narrative, to quote conversations as recalled in diaries, letters and memoirs, when the content of the conversation is plausibly supported by context or other evidence. | have extended this tolerance to oral history and employed the literary convention with the same critical caution, | hope, illustrious predecessors have applied to written documents.
The recollected material cannot pretend to the exactitude of, say, the White House tapes of the Nixon years.
It is necessary to declare an interest. | was a great admirer and devoted friend of Robert Kennedy’s.
Association with him over the last decade of his life was one of the joys of my own life.
It was not only that he deepened one’s understanding of America, of its problems and possibilities, but that he was the occasion of such good and happy times.
No one could be more fun than Robert Kennedy; no one more appealing, with those impulses of irony, bravado, gentleness and vulnerability so curiously intermingled in his vivid personality; no one in our politics, as | deeply believed, held out more promise for the future. | thought him the most creative man in American public life when he was killed. | am well aware that not everyone did.
P Taylor used in his life of Lord Beaverbrook, if it is necessary for a biographer of Robert Kennedy to regard him as evil, then | am not qualified to be his biographer.
In any case, the story of his life tells a great deal about the American ordeal in the middle decades of the twentieth century. | have tried to tell that story as accurately as | can, strengthened by the conviction that the last thing Robert Kennedy would have wished was hagiography.
He valued bluntness, precision and truth. | have not hesitated to portray him in his frailty as well as in his valor. | can imagine no better way to serve his memory.
What he had in the way of weakness was an essential part of his strength.
For he was truly a perceiver of the terror of life, and he manned himself nobly to face it.
In the last of twenty-two cars lay a coffin, covered by an American flag.
A diversity of people filled the cars ahead—politicians and writers, government officials and entertainers, diplomats and trade unionists, astronauts and agitators, social workers and athletes, society figures and stenographers.
They talked in somber tones, they rejoiced in the happier past, they despaired of the future, they stared out of the window.
Or, desperately,WE HAVE LOST OUR LAST HOPE, Or, Starkly,PRAY FOR US, BopBy.
As the train crossed rivers on its journey south, boats, clustered by the bridges, sounded their whistles.
On a river before Newark, New Jersey, three men on a fireboat saluted; the boat bore the name John F Kennedy.
The train slowed to a crawl with thousands—perhaps a million in all—crowding the way.
At Elizabeth, New Jersey, a northbound express, rounding a curve at high speed, plowed into mourners overflowing onto the tracks, killing a man and a woman.
As the train moved south through the Pennsylvania countryside, one occasionally saw a man or woman, far from any visible town, standing gravely and alone, enveloped in private grief.
In Baltimore a great silent mass of people, mostly black, had waited for hours.
Shortly after nine o’clock the train reached Washington in the glimmering dark.
The Family ROBERT FRANCIS KENNEDY was born in Brookline, Massachusetts, on November 20, 1925, the seventh child of Rose Fitzgerald and Joseph Patrick Kennedy.
His great-grandparents had come from Ireland some three quarters of a century before.
The legacy they brought to Boston was but mildly diluted in the next two generations.
They had lost their national independence, their personal dignity, their land, even their language, to intruders from across the sea.
They countered fate by talk, incessant and extravagant; by irony and self-mockery; by fantasy and by drink.
They evaded fate, as oppressed people do, by donning masks to deceive the oppressors.
Some came to believe the blarney act they put on to bemuse the English.
The struggle for Catholic emancipation had initiated the Irish in the arts of political organization well before they began to leave for the United States.
It was a tribal politics, dominated by expectations of unswerving loyalty and vindictive against what was often too eagerly seen as defection or betrayal.
Most important in securing life, along with the family, was the church.
Jansenism pervaded the Irish church, encouraging clerical tendencies toward censoriousness and bigotry.
But the priests remained with the people, and faith was the ultimate consolation in a hopeless world.
Catholicism absorbed and vindicated the Irish experience—the suffering, the bloodshed, the fatalism.
It explained that man was weak and life more than a little absurd, unless redeemed by the grace of God mediated through the church.
The culture Robert Kennedy’s great-grandparents transported to Boston was filled with this conviction of the bloodiness of life.
The sense of disorder, tragedy and evil was not unlike that of the Puritans, three centuries earlier.
But what the Puritans had placed on the isolated soul in the quest for salvation the Irish assigned to the family and the church.
By the time the Fitzgeralds and Kennedys arrived, the descendants of the Puritans were turning away from Calvin and Jonathan Edwards to embrace the inevitability of progress and the perfectibility of man.
The Irish newcomers were set apart by their awareness of historic failure and human sinfulness and by their faith in the redemptive magic of family and church.
They were set apart by their addiction to the scathing comedy that relieved the gloom of life.
They were set apart by their lack of power, money, education and self-esteem— and by the complacent contempt in which the Yankees held them.
Robert Kennedy’s grandfathers— Patrick Joseph Kennedy, born in Boston in 1858; John Francis Fitzgerald in 1863—prospered in the new land.
Kennedy was a quiet man, a saloonkeeper and ward boss, wielding influence softly, indifferent to publicity and to noise.
The two men were together in the state senate in the early 1890s and did not like each other then or later.
Rose, the oldest of Honey Fitz’s six children, was born on July aa, 1890.
She grew up in a great Dorchester house, with mansard roof and stained-glass windows.
Her father took her on vacations to Old Orchard Beach in Maine and to Palm Beach in Florida and in 1911 gave her a spectacular comingout party.
By this time rich Irish Catholics were creating a social world of their own, paralleling the rich Yankee Protestant society that excluded them.
Rose Fitzgerald, a bright and pretty girl, found life in this world enjoyable and fulfilling.
She learned French and German in Europe and spoke them fluently for the rest of her life.
Where the Fitzgeralds believed in duplicating the institutions of Yankee society, the Kennedys believed in infiltrating them.
Young Kennedy went with the Yankee boys to the Boston Latin School and then on to Harvard College.
Here he made a moderate mark—a rather considerable mark for an Irish Catholic—and graduated in 1912.
In the meantime, Rose Fitzgerald and Joseph Kennedy had fallen in love.
John F Fitzgerald thought it a most unsuitable match and tried through domestic admonition and foreign travel to steer his daughter in other directions.
A fortnight later Joseph Kennedy moved his bride into a house in Yankee Brookline.
Instead of becoming a contractor in the Irish style, he chose banking, a Protestant preserve.
Here he met Franklin D Roosevelt, then assistant secretary of the Navy.
After the war, Kennedy joined the Yankee investment banking house of Hayden, Stone & Company and began his bold career in the stock market.
Kennedy was a loner who operated with a small staff and an astute instinct.
He used to say, “Only a fool holds out for the top dollar”—a piece of wisdom that enabled him to escape the Wall Street crash relatively unscathed.
By 1926, he was a millionaire and far more successful than his Yankee contemporaries.
Still they denied him the acceptance he sought for himself and his family.
Patrick’s Day dinner of the Clover Club, Kennedy observed that the Boston Irish “suffered under the handicap of not possessing family tradition adequate to win the respect and confidence of the Puritan neighbors.
Undoubtedly lack of opportunity which had nothing to do with racial or religious background but were just Boston had something to do with it—But both my parents felt very strongly about the discrimination so you'll have to take the matter up with them.
But he would very likely have left in 1926 even if he had been elected president of the Somerset Club.
He could be endlessly charming when he wished but could also be—and often was—blunt and brusque to the point of rudeness.
Perhaps, with his commitment to the Americanization of the Irish, he reacted against the stage-Irishman stereotype, all gregariousness and blarney, as embodied, for example, in his irrepressible father-in-law; at any rate, he had no trouble being as frosty as the frostiest Yankee.
He had little regard for businessmen per se and few close friends in the business world, beyond a circle of cronies who stayed with him through the years.
His daughter Eunice said, “He always trusted experience as the greatest creator of character.
One summer in Washington, while his family was in Hyannis Port, Kennedy played symphonies so incessantly that the cronies with whom he was sharing his house complained.
His children did not inherit his love of serious music any more than they inherited their mother’s aptitude for foreign languages.
This was, in any case—far more than money—the Irish American road to power.
IV In 1928, Kennedy had been too deeply engaged in business to do more than vote for the first Irish Catholic to run for the Presidency as the candidate of a major party.
Henry Morgenthau, Franklin D Roosevelt’s conservation commissioner, brought the two men together again.
Kennedy hardly knew Smith personally, but may have felt he knew Smith’s Irish American generation too well.
For whatever reason—partly because Louis Howe, Roosevelt’s possessive and populist-minded adviser, disliked Wall Street speculators in general and Kennedy in particular—the post went to William H Woodin, and, when Woodin retired in a few months because of ill health, to Morgenthau.
But Roosevelt had an exact sense both of Kennedy’s ability and of his intractability.
Kennedy in the Treasury, for example, would have been a constant problem for a President with a penchant for experiment.
At the same time, Kennedy knew all the tricks of the trade and was evidently ambitious to establish himself as a public servant.
But word that a notorious speculator was scheduled to police Wall Street provoked a minor New Deal revolt.
Roy Howard ran an editorial in the Scripps-Howard papers calling the proposal “a slap in the face” to Roosevelt’s most loyal supporters.
Moley, who was present, asked whether there was anything in Kennedy’s business career that could hurt the President.
Harold Ickes, the Secretary of the Interior, sourly recounted the meeting in which Roosevelt told the cabinet.
The SEC was a complex and demanding assignment, requiring enormous knowledge, toughness and Skill.
Over the next fifteen months he did a first-class job in establishing a vigilant and effective regulatory agency.
In September 1935 Kennedy, having restored the capital market and secured the adoption of new trading rules, resigned.
V In England Winston Churchill invited them to luncheon at Chartwell, his country house in Kent.
England and the United States, he said, should build a navy strong enough to police the world; this was the way to counter Nazism.
Churchill asked whether Eleanor Roosevelt was an exhibitionist using her husband’s high office to court publicity for herself.
But Kennedy’s second son, John, who had just entered the London School of Economics, was seriously ill with hepatitis.
Of course you must not think of being at all hampered by this engagement.
Kennedy found the business attack on government planning especially mindless.
Louis Post-Dispatch described the mood in his book They Hate Roosevelt.
He is made to doubt secretly that he represents the American system in its most perfect expression.
Being unable—and certainly unwilling—to analyze with coolness the cause of his anxiety, he seeks relief in vituperation and hatred.
Vi Kennedy had his forty-eighth birthday two months before the 1936 election.
This proud, profane, imperious, frank, indiscreet, scheming, relentless, sensitive, vital man had had spectacular success in business and government.
He owned houses in Bronxville, Hyannis Port and, after 1934, in Palm Beach.
He had left far in his wake the Yankees who had patronized him at Harvard and on State Street.
Still he had not quite achieved the goal he had long since set himself.
When a Boston newspaper described him as an Irishman, he exclaimed, “I was born here.
He did not resent being Irish but the condescending Yankee theory of what being Irish involved.
His character was formed by his Irish cultural inheritance— the pessimism, the romantic defiance, the political instinct, the irony, the sexual chauvinism, the Catholicism, the sense that the world was a mess and not likely to improve very much—though he fused these traits with a strictly American passion for competition, achievement and victory.
Still, powerful as this passion was, it was conditioned by the Irish tradition; above all by his supreme belief in the family—in his family.
LeMoyne Billings, John Kennedy’s Choate roommate and an intimate of the household after 1934, could not remember visiting the Kennedys when Mr Kennedy was not there.
He was twenty-one years old in 1936, a sophomore at Harvard after spending 1933-34 with Harold Laski at the London School of Economics.
Joe was robust and, for all his gentleness with the younger children, hot-tempered.
When James MacGregor Burns asked Jack whether anything had really bothered him as a child, he could think only of his big brother.
Rosemary, 18 in 1936, who her parents now realized was mentally retarded; Kathleen, 16, gay and pretty; Eunice, 15, and Patricia, 12, still tomboys.
His houses were designed not to impress his guests but to cherish his children.
In Hyannis Port the Kennedys had an open, rambling, white Cape Cod house separated by eel grass from a fringe of beach along Nantucket Sound.
The Palm Beach house was a white stucco 1920s villa overlooking the ocean.
The Bronxville house, to which they had moved from Riverdale in 1929, was a large brick Georgian mansion on six acres of ground.
All were notable for their large, comfortable rooms, their soace and sunlight and flowers, their ample lawns easily converted into touch football fields and staging areas for pets.
Joseph Kennedy expended all the power, conscious and unconscious, of a demanding personality on pressing his children, especially the boys, to develop their potentialities to the full, on driving them beyond themselves.
Vil The athletic code was accompanied by equally incessant pressure for intellectual development.
Everyone knows about mealtime at the Kennedys, where Joseph Kennedy liked to preside over a family seminar.
Their father sometimes took the other side in order to sharpen the discussion.
However, if an outsider, such as myself would ask the Ambassador a question ... he would just answer it curtly as though he didn’t want to be bothered with your questions.
Excerpts from letters to John convey the flavor; | strongly urge you to pay a little more attention to penmanship.
It is very difficult to make up fundamentals that you have neglected when you were very young and that is why | am always urging you to do the best you can.
Don’t let me lose confidence in you again, because it will be pretty nearly an impossible task to restore it—l am sure it will be a loss to you and a distinct loss to me.
The mere trying to do a good job is not enough—real honestto-goodness effort is what | expect.
His commanding presence awed their young friends, most of whom their father ignored but a few of whom, like Billings and Spalding, were received into the bosom of the family and became auxiliary brothers.
Even they thought Mr Kennedy remote, a little humorless and infinitely intimidating.
She was a remarkably handsome, controlled, organized, and impervious woman.
She was also a cultivated woman, better read and in some ways more worldly than her husband.
Her father had instilled in her an enthusiasm for history; she kept up her languages; all her life she remained a student, dedicated to self-improvement.
She adored balls and trips to Paris, while Joseph Kennedy, as she later said, considered parties a waste of time, where he would either be solicited for tips on the stock market or be required to argue about the New Deal.
Her husband’s conventional religious faith paled next to her serene and inexhaustible piety.
The result was predictable in a family culturally bound to regard girls as less important than boys.
The boys went in the main to secular institutions; the girls first to convents and then to Catholic colleges.
Robert, always the overachiever, was the most religious among the sons.
As a small child in Bronxville, he aspired to be an altar boy and could be heard practicing his Latin in his room.
She was as articulate as he on the virtues of winning, as given to didactic questions at the dinner table, though hers went more to history and theology than to current affairs, as stern in her discipline, as unrelenting in her determination to make the children meet high standards.
As | said before, the Kennedy boys worked hard and were usually at the top of their classes in Boston, and | am sure the first question most people ask about you is, “Are you smart like your father?”—not to mention that | graduated from good old Dorchester High School with honors myself—so please get on your horse.&4 | think in the future it might be well to review history and current events with him so that he may remember facts in that way.
You might ask him questions like who the President of France is; what holidays are national holidays or church holidays, or both; the name of the Queen of England, etc.
The reason | am sometimes reluctant about extra goodies for the children is that | read once that youngsters should get used to a few disappointments or jolts when they are young.
They thus build up an immunity against them, so that when they encounter life’s vicissitudes when they are older, they are not too shocked and they can take them with a smile.
The desire to please parents forces children to some degree into roles set for them from above.
Such a process can create doubts about worth and identity and lead to overcompensation or to despair.
American life is littered with the wrecks of men and women who cared too much about pleasing their parents.
The mystery is why the parental demands did not crush the Kennedy children.
Yet Randolph Churchill and Franklin D Roosevelt, Jr., youths of ability and ambition, never fulfilled their potentialities.
The Kennedy sons, for whatever reason, pursued their capacities to the uttermost limits.
When someone asked Franklin D Roosevelt, Jr, what Joseph Kennedy was like as a father, he replied, no doubt out of some indecipherable mixture of memories, “From everything | saw he was a great father.
He was walking to his father’s house for dinner when Caroline, his daughter, came off the porch crying to him.
Nothing that will happen during your Presidency will be as important as how Caroline turns out.
If pressure created problems for the children, love gave the children strength to meet those problems.
It was a love that put “Daddy’s look” and his eternal emphasis on competition in context.
His whole effort, in one aspect, was to make his children independent of him.
A highly opinionated man, Joseph Kennedy did not require his children to adopt his opinions.
Kennedy regarded Laski as “a nut and a crank. | disagreed with everything he wrote.
But | never taught the boys to disapprove of some one just because | didn’t accept his ideas.
In the 1920s he had consulted his friend Hearst about setting up a trust fund for each child.
Hearst warned him not to make them independent; when they got older they would leave him and go off with their money.
Joseph Kennedy’s “fierce sense of family” (Morton Downey’s phrase) was perhaps the key to the mystery.
And the family provided a protection against inordinate parental demands in part, it may be surmised, because it was an Irish Catholic family.
In a Protestant family, where Salvation was an individual responsibility, competition threw each child back on himself and parental demands could become an individual burden.
In an Irish Catholic family, where salvation was culturally mediated through institutions, the destructive effect of competition, the suffocating effect of love, could be tempered by corporate solidity and mutual reinforcement.
Of course, lest one appear to endorse theories of parental determinism, it is necessary to add that the character of the children themselves—their spirit, vitality, toughness, irreverence—had something to do with their capacity to survive.
Apprehensions of inferiority were no doubt intensified when it became apparent that he would be a good deal shorter than his tall older brothers; even, in time, than his petted younger brother.
When at home, Joseph Kennedy was on occasion impatient and rough with him.
They also inspired him to strive to the utmost to win his father’s approval and love.
Once Billings commented to Joseph Kennedy on Bobby’s exceptional generosity with possessions.
Dave, Frank, and Tommie went with me and we liked it very much. | wish you were with me.
Beatty the lion trainer wasn’t there this year. | liked the horses jumping over the fire the best. | will probably see you this week. | hope so.
Love, Bobby Dear Mr President, | liked the stamps you sent me very much and the liule book is very useful. | am just starting my collection and it would be great fun to see yours which mother says you have had for a long time. lam going to frame your letter and | am going to keep it always in my room.
Daddy, mother, and all my brothers and sisters want to be remembered to you.
At times he is aS good as any boy in the tent group, but at other times he is quite diffident.
He was the gentlest and shyest in the roaring family, the least articulate orally and the least coordinated physically, the most conscientious and the most dutiful.
Once when Bobby was four, rushing to be on time for dinner, he careened into a heavy glass door and gashed his head.
Through the grace of Cod, he has not lost the sight of his eye and will probably come out of it all right but it was a very narrow escape.
Slow in swimming, he threw himself off a yawl into Nantucket Sound as if determined to learn all at once or to drown.
Early in 1937, Joseph Kennedy returned to Washington as chairman of the Maritime Commission.
Roosevelt had other reasons, besides his desire for a strong executive in a tough job, to want Kennedy in the administration.
Knowing how cordially most Harvard graduates detested Franklin D Roosevelt, '04, the President must particularly have appreciated Kennedy’s loyalty in telling Harvard '12, at the twenty-fifth class reunion in 1937, that big government “is not foisted on us by politicians.
If businessmen were disturbed by sitdown strikes and “bloody warfare at the factory gates,” Kennedy said they should realize they were “reaping the whirlwind of a quarter century mishandling of labor relations.
Still he remained, in an administration under mounting business attack, a precious symbol.
As Kennedy was a Roosevelt ambassador to the business community, so he was a Roosevelt ambassador to the Catholic Church.
In the early thirties he had tried to keep Father Coughlin, the radio priest from Detroit, on the New Deal reservation.
When Cardinal Pacelli visited the United States in 1936, Kennedy arranged a luncheon for him with Roosevelt at Hyde Park and later had him to a family tea at Bronxville.
Kennedy did mention Leo XIII’s encyclical “The Condition of the Working Classes” in /’m for Roosevelt.
But he had no particular contact with those Catholic New Dealers, like Father John A Ryan, who labored in the spirit of De Rerum Novarum.
Roosevelt liked Kennedy, liked Rose Kennedy even more and was touched by Kennedy’s preoccupation with his family.
James A Farley, it is true, claimed that Roosevelt “never liked” Kennedy.
But Farley, who felt snubbed by the Roosevelts, may have concluded that Roosevelt was socially opposed to all Irish Catholics.
In fact, the Kennedys, unlike the Farleys, came often to the White House, and, what was more unusual, Roosevelt went on occasion to Kennedy’s house along the Potomac, which he would never have done had he not counted on a good time.
Morgenthau and Harold Ickes also noted with satisfaction Roosevelt’s complaints that he always had to hold Joe Kennedy’s hand.
But Roosevelt spent a great deal of time holding Morgenthau’s and Ickes’s hands too.
His remark about Kennedy was among other things a warning, evidently too subtle, to them. “| always think of the Roosevelts with great affection, as they all were very gracious to us as a family,” Rose Kennedy wrote in a personal memorandum circa 1940.
A family that had no tolerance for selfpity could not but admire FDR’s refusal to admit pain.
There must have been times when the braces seemed insupportable, and his limbs ached, but still he would keep smiling.
The only indication of suffering was in the stronger determination of that jaw. | recall the Review of the Fleet.
Amidst horns blowing and special police, we arrived at the pier which he slowly traversed amidst shouting applauding audiences still smiling and beaming.
At the Securities and Exchange Commission he had struck up unexpected friendships with two young New Deal lawyers— James M Landis of the Harvard Law School, who was a fellow commissioner, and William O Douglas of the Yale Law School, whom he had brought down to head a study of corporate reorganization.
After getting Roosevelt to appoint Landis his successor as chairman in 1935, Kennedy had got him to appoint Douglas to the SEC in 1936.
Landis, scheduled to return to Cambridge in September 1937 as dean of the Harvard Law School, resolved to stay in the job long enough to keep the more radical Douglas, who had been named dean of the Yale Law School, from becoming the next chairman.
Two hours before the last train to New Haven, Kennedy told Douglas to expect a call from the White House; he had just left FDR, Kennedy said, and everything was back on the track.
They were outsiders too—one a missionary’s son, born in Japan; the other, a kid from the wrong side of the tracks in Yakima, Washington.
On the issues that now divided them, Douglas’s position was probably, on the merits, less acceptable to Kennedy.
Yet, as Kennedy had been loyal to Landis in 1935, so he was determined to be loyal to Douglas in 1937.
He remained close to the able and taciturn Landis, but something especially delighted him about Douglas, with whom he shared a bluntness of speech, a skepticism about motives and an expansive scorn for the eastern establishment.
Douglas had been five years old when his father died; and Kennedy, though only ten years his senior, filled a vacancy in his life.
Declaring himself “thoroughly dissatisfied” with Daniel C Roper, the Secretary of Commerce, Roosevelt said that this was the spot for Kennedy.
But Robert W Bingham, the ambassador to England, was in poor health, and the Kennedys, Rose too, set their hearts on London.
As the ship prepared to sail, Robert launched a handmade parachute through the porthole in his stateroom.
Felix Frankfurter wrote the new ambassador that his Massachusetts predecessors at the Court of St.
James’s, John Adams and Charles Francis Adams, had used their sons as personal assistants.
Encouraged by such weighty Yankee precedent, Joseph Kennedy put Joe Jr. on the embassy staff; John too, when he was in London on holiday.
Joe went to Czechoslovakia during the Munich crisis and to Spain in the last months of the Civil War, John to Czechoslovakia at the time of the German invasion in March 1939.
The smaller boys went to Gibbs, a day school where Robert, now thirteen, did well in mathematics, poorly in Latin, which he finally dropped, and the best he could in cricket and rugby.
He also discharged occasional diplomatic tasks, such as laying a foundation stone at a newsboys’ club.
Fortunately Joe’s accident didn’t amount to much, but it was necessary to have six stitches taken in his elbow, but while it kept him off the skis for three days, he Skated in the meantime.
Moritz,” Rose Kennedy wrote Franklin Roosevelt, “and we thought of all the interesting and stimulating experiences which we had enjoyed during 1938...made possible through the honor which you had conferred upon Joe.
When he appointed Kennedy, Roosevelt seems not to have talked to him at length about Hitler.
The President doubtless supposed that Kennedy would give the same generally loyal support in foreign policy he had given the New Deal at home.
He was sure that Kennedy, as a good Irishman, would be ethnically immune to the blandishments of the Chamberlain government.
And it was probably the case that Kennedy himself had no clear ideas about foreign affairs when he set forth for London.
As a businessman, he believed that prosperity required a peaceful world.
And, contrary to Roosevelt’s expectations, Kennedy and Neville Chamberlain hit it off famously.
His dread of war was leading him to a general view of America’s role in the world—a view he advocated honestly and stubbornly at the cost of his political career and held for the rest of his life.
On Trafalgar Day in October 1938, a month after Chamberlain returned from Munich, Kennedy spoke again, this time eluding Hull’s blue pencil by presenting his view as only “a pet theory of my own,” not a policy of his government.
There is simply no sense, common or otherwise, in letting these differences grow into unrelenting antagonisms.
But he “has drunk the draught which makes the eagle cease to flap and induces it to lie down with the lion.
At times, he was also sure that America would ultimately be dragged in.
Harold Ickes fed Roosevelt gossip about Kennedy’s association with the Cliveden set, his disloyalty to the President, his own presidential ambitions.
But Roosevelt, who was receiving ardently pro-allied messages from Bullitt in Paris, evidently saw value in hearing something different from London.
Joe Jr. had sailed on the Mauretania; John was about to fly on the Clipper.
His judgment is pathetic and | am afraid of his influence on F.D.R. because they think alike on many things.
Exercising his paternal preference for secular education, Joseph Kennedy had enrolled him at St.
Paul’s turned out not to be all that secular; and its unremitting Episcopalianism was too much for Rose.
His worst grades were in history and Christian doctrine .24 Where his father had bombarded Joe and John with counsel and reprimand, he was now across the Atlantic and, perhaps, less interested.
The letters of admonition came from Rose Kennedy, who was particularly concerned that Robert read more books.
In the spring of 1940, the associate headmaster, thanking the ambassador for his contribution to the fund for a new gymnasium, added that Bobby was getting along better.
His mother hoped for social graces and wanted to send him to dancing school in Providence.
In May 1941, Teddy was deposited at the Priory, though he was much younger than most of the students.
He remembers complaining to his older brother that the bigger boys were picking on him.
Vi The first year of the European war was a lonely time for Joseph Kennedy—lonely and bitter.
He spilled over to Robert Murphy, the counselor of the Paris embassy, about “his bad health, his discontent over returning to London, his belief that everything he could do there could just as well be done by a $50-a-month clerk, that he wanted to quit but didn’t see how he gracefully could before the elections.
The British may even have considered declaring Kennedy persona non grata.
My sympathies are completely with the Allies, but they must not run away with my judgment of what can happen to the United States.
Vil In May 1940 the Nazi armies swept into the Low Countries and France.
The English will fight to the end but | just don’t think they can stand up to the bombing indefinitely.
What will happen then is probably a dictated peace with Hitler probably getting the British Navy, and we will find ourselves in a terrible mess.
He does not seem to be interested particularly in reading or sailing or his stamps.
It is funny that he should have them this time of year, the same as Joe.
We once thought it was from eating corn, but these days we do not have any corn.
After all, the lives and fortunes of their compatriots were being destroyed by Hitler.
Angry at being left out when Roosevelt and Churchill negotiated the exchange of overage American destroyers for British bases in the Western Hemisphere, Kennedy wired Hull that he did not enjoy being a dummy and threatened resignation.
Knowing Kennedy’s influence among businessmen and Catholics and the weight his London experience would give his criticisms of the administration’s foreign policy, Roosevelt reckoned he would cause less trouble in England than in America.
Kennedy—“primed,” said General Lee, “for a vindictive and vigorous assault upon Roosevelt”—was determined to get back before the election.
In October, Kennedy (or so he later told his friend Krock) phoned Sumner Welles, the under secretary, to complain that he had been ignored for three months.
Roosevelt invited the Kennedys to spend the night at the White House, and Rose Kennedy met her husband at the airport to escort him to Washington.
Senator Byrnes and his wife were there along with Marguerite LeHand, the President’s secretary.
He used them that night to denounce the humiliations inflicted on him by the State Department.
Roosevelt was sympathetic, obliged by denouncing the Department himself and by the end of the evening had talkied Kennedy around to making a radio speech advocating his reelection.
For all Kennedy’s inner misgivings about its theme, his speech was accounted one of the most effective in the campaign.
The day after Roosevelt won his third term Kennedy called at the White House and submitted his resignation.
Kennedy was unwilling to take an irrevocable anti-Roosevelt, anti-Britain line.
This complicated his life when the lend-lease bill came up early in 1941.
In a radio speech he simultaneously disclaimed the bill and advocated further aid to England.
He criticized the bill “in its present form” on constitutional grounds because it involved the surrender of too much power by Congress to the Presidency, but went on to insist that he trusted this President, hated Nazism, supported aid to Great Britain short of war, was not an isolationist and even would favor the bill if Congress passed it.,422 Years later Robert claimed that his father “tipped the balance in favor of LendLease” within the committee.
By the spring of 1941 he had decided to give up the Bronxville house and settle in Palm Beach, maintaining his summer residence in Hyannis Port.
Frank Waldrop, editor of the isolationist Washington Times-Herald, recalls Kennedy pointing at breaks in the sea wall and saying he wasn’t going to fix the goddamn thing.
The whole world was falling apart, so why should he bother with a goddamn house in Palm Beach.
To all this he added a new theme—an attack on the idea of a military crusade for democracy.
It would not last even if we were able to present [other nations] with the most up-to-date constitutional system.
In our very attempt at this colossal crusade we would end in failure and disgrace abroad, in disillusionment and bankruptcy at home.
The United States must not overestimate its power to decide the destiny of other nations.
We cannot, my fellow Americans, divert the tides of the mighty revolution now sweeping Asia and Europe.
They were not of our making and they will not be subject to our control, no matter how courageously or exhaustingly we strive to subject them.
Let us forswear ringing phrases, Kennedy said, and concentrate on the struggle for justice in our own society.
In another few days at Notre Dame, Kennedy, observing darkly that “there is much in our Western civilization that does not deserve to survive” (he specified monopolistic capitalism and racketeering unionism), went on to say that the presidential proclamation deserved the “unlimited loyalty” of all Americans.
After the Nazi invasion of Russia on June 82, Hoover asked Kennedy to join with him, Alfred M Landon, Robert M Hutchins and others in a new manifesto against intervention.
American entry into the war was “far more likely to destroy democracy in this country” than to establish democracy in Europe and Asia.
He intended to go to law school, his father wrote James Landis from London, “although he thought he would go to Yale, principally because he feels it would be better not to be constandy in direct competition with his brother, and | rather sympathize with him in that point of view.
The bit about setting up a world order was hardly in the paternal line.
But his father cared less what his son had written in his book than that he had written a book at all, and a successful one at that.
Still, whatever their hope that America could avoid involvement, the Kennedys were strong advocates of preparedness.
His father sought the assistance of Captain Alan Kirk, who had been his naval attaché in London and was now director of the Office of Naval Intelligence; and Kirk somehow contrived to spirit John Kennedy past the Navy’s stringent physical standards.
When the Japanese struck on December 7, the oldest Kennedy sons were both in naval training.
The War PEARL HARBOR found Robert Kennedy, just turned sixteen, in his third year at Portsmouth Priory.
The school, only a few miles from the naval base at Newport, responded quickly to the tremors of war.
A fortnight after the Japanese attack, Robert went to Palm Beach for Christmas.
You owe it to 5 yourself as well as to me to make the most of your advantages.
Remember, too, that it is a reflection on my brains as the boys in the family are supposed to get their intellect from their mother, and certainly | do not expect my own little pet to let me down.
Joseph Kennedy, worried that his third son was not learning enough to get into Harvard, decided to shift Robert in the autumn of 1942 to Milton Academy in Massachusetts.
A new boy entering an upper form of a boarding school does not have an easy time at best.
For a shy Irish Catholic boy, who had already attended six schools in ten years and was now plunged into what a Milton friend described with precision as “a consummate WASP school,” 4 it could have been an ordeal.
Robert lived in Forbes House, never complained and worked doggedly on his studies.
One classmate, Samuel Adams, said later he had never met anyone his own age so well informed on international politics.
Asked me to have him signed on so that nobody would know who he was and would have to work just as hard as any fisherman.
His ma objected and had her way saying, “Two of our boys are at the front now.
He is very punctual and very neat in the way he keeps his clothes about the room.
He doesn’t object to riding on the Elevated railway with common people, rather likes it.
His letters home were sometimes assertions in a small way of his own identity.
After the Cocoanut Grove fire killed nearly five hundred people in Boston on a Saturday night in November 1942, Robert noted that if Boston College had beaten Holy Cross in football in the afternoon, the B.C. team would have celebrated at the nightclub on the fatal evening.
To another sixteen year-old kid this Gung-ho attitude seemed a little weird.
Milton had a girls’ school; and, while there was no coeducation, there was social contact.
The year before he had had a consuming crush on Ann Appleton but had never dared speak to her at all.
He showed absolute determination; he decided to do something, he just gave it everything he had.
He didn’t care whether people noticed he was doing it, or kidded him because he was doing it.
He joined in bull sessions, but “he didn’t participate too much when the conversation involved dirty jokes and that sort of thing.
Eunice suggested that | have Father Keller come and speak ... so | am working on that.
Wendell Willkie addressed the school, and Robert persuaded his father to follow.
But in these years he formed his first strong friendship outside the family.
He was Phineas at Devon Academy in A Separate Peace,“the best athlete in the school,” who “possessed an extra vigor, a heightened confidence in himself, a serene capacity for affection which saved him.
What he had was a set of handicaps and a fantastic determination to overcome them.
Because he had problems of his own, because he was “an underdog in sports, with studies and girls and as a Catholic,” he was sensitive to the problems of others and went directly to their assistance however personally inconvenient it might be to himself or those with him.
If a Sunday mass was short an altar boy, for example, he volunteered at once, though older and larger than the rest.
Hackett admired Kennedy’s readiness to do the things one knew one should do oneself but flinched from doing because they violated the iron conventions of adolescence.
So Robert Kennedy’s years at Milton passed tranquilly, at least as tranquilly as could be with the violent sounds of war in the background, V-mail letters from brothers overseas, a burning desire to get into uniform oneself.
Bobby also deserves a good pat on the back for the way he has adapted himself generally.
Entering a group which has been together for several years is not easy, but Bobby has done it successfully, participating generously in school activities and winning himself warm friends.
He also recalled his sense of humor, “delightful” if sometimes “pretty caustic,” his concern for “those who were less fortunate than he was” and his piety.
It is not altogether clear why the President, who brought so many inveterate opponents into the defense establishment, did not use a man of Kennedy’s tested administrative ability.
Very likely, as James Roosevelt later surmised, Roosevelt himself had lost confidence in Kennedy’s judgment during the London experience.
The President added that unfortunately Joe Kennedy told everything he knew to Arthur Krock and Frank Kent, both columnists notoriously unsympathetic to the administration.
Wallace observed dryly that other high officials leaked to Krock and Kent, and Senator Lister Hill of Alabama suggested that Kennedy be put in charge of the problems of small business.
He wanted to warn Roosevelt not to disregard the conservative Democrats.
In addition—or so Casey came to believe—Kennedy had a precautionary eye on the future.
Once elected to the Senate, an Irish Democrat with Casey’s ability and broad appeal would very likely stay there indefinitely.
Since in those days the Yankees had a lien on the other Senate seat, this would place a considerable impediment in the political future of Joseph P Kennedy, Jr.
John F Fitzgerald, who had nearly beaten Cabot Lodge’s grandfather for the Senate a quarter century before, was only seventy-nine and delighted at the prospect of a last hurrah.
The crumpled cartoon lay at his feet like a withered leaf blown by a wintry wind.
Kennedy was surely under no illusion that his father-inlaw could beat Casey.
But no doubt the thought passed through his mind that Honey Fitz’s more fervent supporters might move on to Lodge in the general election.
His parents waited eagerly for his letters, duplicated them and sent them on to the other children.
On good nights it’s beautiful—the water is amazingly phosphorescent— flying fishes which shine like lights are zooming around and you usually get two or three porpoises who lodge right under the bow and no matter how fast the boat goes keep just about six inches ahead.... | was interested in what you said about MacArthur's popularity.
There is no doubt that as men start to come back that “DougOut-Doug” will soread— and | think would probably kill him off.
You can’t estimate risks, some cooks are in more danger out here than a lot of flyers.
In August, the Japanese destroyer rammed John Kennedy’s PT-109 in Blackett Strait west of New Georgia, plunging Kennedy and his crew into the waters of Ferguson Passage, now suddenly aflame with burning gasoline.
With calm bravery he led most of the crew to refuge on a tiny island, towing one man through the water by gripping the end of the lifejacket belt in his teeth.
On the bright side of an otherwise completely black time was the way that everyone stood up to it.
Previous to that | had become somewhat cynical about the American as a fighting man. | had seen too much bellyaching and laying off.
But with the chips down— that all faded away. | can now believe—which | never would have before—the stories of Bataan and Wake.
He had been somewhat shocked by a bomb that had landed near the boat about two weeks before.
He never really got over it; he always seemed to have the feeling that something was going to happen to him.
He never said anything about being put ashore—he didn’t want to go—but the next time we came down the line | was going to let him work on the base force.
When | read that we will fight the Japs for years if necessary and will sacrifice hundreds of thousands if we must—lI always like to check from where he is talking— it’s seldom out here.
People get too used to talking about billions of dollars and millions of soldiers that thousands of dead sounds like a drop in the bucket.
But if those thousands want to live as much as the ten | saw —they should measure their words with great, great care.
In the meantime, Kathleen Kennedy, now twenty-three, had gone to London in June to work in a Red Cross canteen.
She was witty and enchanting, “full of charm and love of life and uncertainty,” Susan Mary Patten wrote, and, as an English friend put it, with the transcendent quality of making life gay when things were desperate.
Joseph Jr. had been chafing in the United States while his younger brother was becoming a hero in the Pacific.
Here he distinguished himself in dangerous winter missions over the Bay of Biscay.
For a guy who never could find Gardiners Rock, Florida seems like a hell of a distance.
In the spring his father went to Washington to see about getting Robert into Navy V-12 training.
In regard to Bobby, he said something about wanting to get in the boats. | don’t think he should.
By the time he’s ready to get out here the usefulness of the boats will be done, | think.
X think he should go into that V-12 and stay there for a good long time.
When he has at least a year of college he'll be more effective and he will be better able to handle a job.
It's just that the fun goes out of war in a fairly short time and | don’t think Bobby is ready yet to come out.
In October 1943, six weeks before his eighteenth birthday, Robert enlisted in the Naval Reserve as apprentice seaman, released from active duty until the following March when (after some behind-the-scenes intervention by his father) he was scheduled to enter the V-12 training unit at Harvard.
His photograph appeared in the newspapers—“Kennedy’s Third Son in Navy”—with Robert a pensive and exceedingly youthful seventeen and his proud father standing by his side.
The sight of you up there, just as a boy, was really moving particularly as a close examination showed that you had my checked London coat on.
In that picture you looked as if you were going to step outside the room, grab your gun, and knock off several of the houseboys before lunch.
After reading Dad’s letter, | gathered that the cold vicious look in your eyes was due to the thought of that big blocking back from Groton.
In March 1944 Robert reported for active duty at the V-12 headquarters at Harvard.
Previous to that time | don't think any real strides had been made. | don't think I’d be thinking too much about what’s going to happen three, four, five, or six months from today.
After all, you’ve got your life ahead of you and heaven knows it’s going to require all the brains anyone has to work out a satisfactory existence, and the only way to do that is to be well prepared, so stick in there and work as hard as you possibly can.
Kennedy I’m the toughest Irishman that lives which makes me the toughest man that lives,”92 Vi The spring of 1944 brought a new threat to the integrity of the family.
Chief among the prewar friends whom Kathleen Saw again in London was William John Robert Hartington, the eldest son of the Duke of Devonshire, a descendant of Cavendishes and Cecils, now an officer in the Coldstream Guards.
But the Devonshires were as ineradicably Anglican as the Kennedys were invincibly Catholic.
The Duke of Devonshire was a leading Freemason, and the Cavendish family had played a notorious role, at least in the Irish view, as British viceroys in Ireland.
When Honey Fitz had taken his daughter Rose to Dublin long ago, he had shown her the spot in Dublin where Irish revolutionaries had assassinated Billy Hartington’s grandunde.
The apostolic delegate in London was brought in, Cardinal Spellman, even the Vatican.
Kathleen could be married within the church to a non-Catholic only if Hartington agreed to have the children raised as Catholics, and this the son of the Duke of Devonshire could not do.
His attitude seemed to be that if they loved each other a lot, then marry outside the church.
If this is the love of her life, and she will not be happy with anyone else, then she will probably be unhappy the rest of her life for not having done it. | think that Billy should make some kind of concession on the girls, for it wouldn’t affect his family line.
He on the other hand thinks it would be difficult to have half the family one thing, and the rest the other.
She was quite worried as to what Mother would think of the wholebusiness.
Her mother was much distressed by the prospect of her daughter marrying outside the church.
You will be interested to know that as Mother and | walked down the street last Saturday she said that of all the children, and she made no exceptions whatsoever, She felt that basically your judgment was the soundest.
Now none of this means that | am attempting to tell you how you should handle your life.
You are the one that has to live it and it is along one and also quite a difficult one, but as | have said to you before you are “tops” with me and you always will be.
Cardinal O’Connell had died, and they had been having masses, processions and parades.
Jean Kennedy was in a convent; and her father, concerned that the nuns would upset her by condemning Kathleen's decision, came to see her, explaining that this was her sister’s conscientious choice and that the main thing was to keep on loving her.Z2 “I see now that I’ve lost one of my daughters to England,” Joseph Kennedy wrote Beaverbrook later.
He added that young Joe had just volunteered for an extra month’s duty, which would give him forty missions.
But when the first of July came, young Joe, his second tour safely over, volunteered to fly an experimental Navy plane designed to strike German flying bomb sites on the French coast.
It was the most terrible moment of his father’s life, the annihilation of the hope and dream of nearly thirty years.
A few weeks later, Harry S Truman, the Democratic candidate for Vice President, came to Boston.
With one brother killed and another nearly killed, with one sister married outside the faith and the country and then her husband killed, the global war had ravaged the family itself.
In the meantime, another sister retired from the family; it had become sadly clear that Rosemary, falling farther and farther behind, would live more tranquilly with the nuns in a Wisconsin convent.
Robert Kennedy in his nineteenth year was receiving abrupt instruction in the incertitudes of life.
It has been written that he objected to Kathleen’s marriage;® but this finds no corroboration in evidence or memory.
His father, summoning the children, told them they must be brave; that was what their brother would want from them.
Instead he walked for a long time on the beach in front of our house,”82 No one knows how Robert Kennedy, in his solitary life, dealt with the inner turmoil incited by these events.
A rollicking lot, they bridled under the ambassador’s strict one-cocktail-before-dinner rule and took to foraging in the kitchen liquor closet after the cooks had departed.
One of their wives recalled Robert, “a scrawny little guy in a white Sailor suit ... very upset that we were sneaking booze in the kitchen.
He was afraid his father might catch us and he knew his father’s wrath.
Lewiston turned out to be far away—from family, from friends, from the war, even from the faith; for the local church held mass for its French Canadian constituency in French, a language that continued to elude him.
Finally he located an English-speaking church; he wrote his parents that by the end of the week his soul should be “as white as snow.
There will be a cry that the only way to solve all these problems is to let the Government do it, and that will be the beginning of some form of socialism in this country.
Of course, it was never his plan—he wouldn't know enough to have a plan.
It was conceived by a Jew named Bernstein, who is now Assistant Secretary of the Treasury.
This morning1Lread of the discussion about three votes for Russia , and one can begin to see plenty of disputes for the future.
His pessimism about the war so sadly verified, Joseph Kennedy looked on the postwar world with unremitting apprehension.
He could not share Beaverbrook’s hope about postwar collaboration with the Soviet Union; the Russians would play the game, Kennedy thought, only so long as it was going their way.
Without telling his family, Robert went to Washington and asked the Secretary of the Navy, James V Forrestal, to release him from officers’ training and assign him to the ship as a seaman.
On February 1, 1946, Robert Francis Kennedy, Apprentice Seaman, Class V-12, United States Naval Reserve, having passed satisfactorily courses in elementary and advanced seamanship, damage control and engineering, piloting and celestial navigation, left the Naval Reserve Officers’ Training Corps program to join the new boat on its shakedown cruise.
He is leaving ... at his own request so that he may acquire sea experience.
It is recommended that when possible he be given a Quartermaster rating because of his intense interest in navigation.
Most of the crew was from the south and had spent even less time in the Navy than he had.
The war had hardly brushed him, but it had altered things nevertheless.
With young Joe dead and John confirmed by war in attitudes of detachment and independence, Joseph Kennedy was paying more attention than ever before to his third son.
The transformations and griefs of war intensified a process of change that had begun much earlier.
The sweetness and defenselessness of the small boy had gone underground.
The code of the Kennedys discouraged undue emotion, unless disguised as humor.
Unlike John, who imperturbably went his casual and cool way, Bobby felt an overpowering need to please his father; to demonstrate his sense of family, always more sustained than John’s; to demonstrate that, like his father, he was not soft but tough.
Emotionalism remained, both as concern and as vulnerability, expressed in moodiness, taciturnity ora certain brusque harshness, expressed too in persisting sympathy for other underdogs.
He was learning not to expose himself too much, not to seem to care too much.
There was perhaps something very Irish about it all—the loyalty to family, the irony and self-mockery, the mingling of romantic defiance with a deep sadness; something very Irish American too, for the Irish legacy in its Kennedy form had to accommodate itself to the puritan ethic, the belief in discipline, work and achievement.
Being an Irish American, Henry James might have said, was a complex fate.
Apart from Summers on the Cape and four winters at Harvard, John Kennedy had not lived in the state for nearly twenty years.
His residence during the campaign was Boston's famous political hotel, the Bellevue, across the street from Bulfinch's State House.
But the Eleventh District, which wandered from East Boston and the North End into Charlestown, Somerville and Cambridge, was rich in Fitzgerald and Kennedy memories.
Robert spent a day during a naval leave accompanying John on his rounds.
One picture of the two brothers together will show that we’re all in this for Jack.
When Robert arrived, Fay knew he was present, he later wrote, “only because | could see him.
Off they went to the movies, Fay trying to make conversation, Robert Kennedy responding with a terse yes or no.
When the stage show began, a comedian reduced Fay to helpless laughter. “1 looked over to make sure he was enjoying this as much as | was.
Joseph Kennedy had set up headquarters at the Ritz Hotel, where he telephoned politicians of his own age, briefed the press and dispensed Campaign funds.
Honey Fitz, a still sprightly eighty-three, and other venerable politicos crowded John Kennedy’s rooms at the Bellevue, filling the air with cigar smoke and ancient tales about forgotten elections.
John Kennedy summoned his contemporaries —schoolmates like Billings, Navy pals like Fay, young Irish veterans like his campaign manager Mark Dalton.
Jean Kennedy brought along her Manhattanville roommate, a spirited girl from Greenwich, Connecticut, named Ethel Skakel.
Grandpa, he said, “felt very strongly about , and he felt very close to my brother.
But | think that his effectiveness, in some of these areas, was not overwhelming.
He had some important introductions and contacts which were significant.
But the appeal that John Kennedy had was to an entirely different group.
For both brothers it was an initiation into politics; also, in a sense, into their Irish legacy.
Though traditional Boston politicians left them skeptical or exasperated , the young Kennedys relished the stories and characters of the past.
David Powers, whose friendship with John Kennedy began in this campaign, said, “It took Jack three months before he found out that Mother Galvin wasn’t a woman”—Mother Galvin so called because of the maternal solicitude he displayed for the interests of his constituents.
With the primary out of the way, Robert joined Lem Billings on a trip to Latin America.
They began at Rio de Janeiro, where Robert appalled his friend by insisting on plunging into the treacherous surf of Copacabana Beach in the pitch dark of midnight.
They went on to Montevideo and Buenos Aires, to Chile and Peru, ending in Panama and Mexico.
Apart from Robert’s athletic excesses, it was, somewhat to Billings’s dismay, an exceedingly seemly trip.
Robert was determined to win the $2000 prize offered by Joseph Kennedy to all his children who did not drink or smoke till their twenty-first birthday.
When they went to bars, he ordered Coca-Colas and demanded to move on as speedily as possible to dinner.
Graying veterans of Anzio and Okinawa mingled with boys fresh from secondary school.
He had received academic credit for his work in V12 and, now almost twenty-one, was entering his junior year.
His marks had been mediocre, except for a B in International Law in the winter term of 1945-46.
He was prompdy put on probation, from which he was relieved in the spring of 1947.
Mcllwain, Roscoe Pound, Payson S Wild, William Yandell Elliott, Rupert Emerson, Bruce Hopper.
No one can remember a professor who particularly interested him; no professor can particularly remember him.
Wild, who had known his brothers well, had no impression of Robert at all.
A string of C’s was broken only by D’s in Anglo-American Law and in the Principles of Economics.
Like his older brothers, he was elected to the Spee Club, but he got mad when another Irish Catholic was blackballed, and never went to the club again.
Knowles added that he was looked on as “kind of a nasty, brutal, humorless little fellow when he got going”; and that was no doubt how many classmates regarded him.
Benedict Center where Father Leonard Feeney inveighed against the infidel.
Feeney expounded a rigid version of the doctrine extra ecclesiam nulla salus—no salvation outside the church—and anathematized Harvard as “a pest-hole” of atheists and Jews.
All this vastly irritated Robert Kennedy, who put up an argument, angrily abandoned the center and shocked his mother by denouncing Father Feeney at the Kennedy dinner table.
Feeney’s suspension by Cardinal Cushing in 1949 and his excommunication by the Vatican in 1953 no doubt gave Rose Kennedy retrospective comfort.
Over the Christmas holiday of 1945-46 Jean had brought Ethel Skakel along on a Skiing expedition at Mont Tremblant in Canada.
Robert liked Ethel and, after the 1946 congressional campaign, invited her occasionally to Cambridge.
In his senior year, when Robert invited Pat Skakel to Palm Beach, Ethel managed an invitation for herself from Jean.
Perhaps this seemed the most direct way to prove to his family, and to himself, that he was approaching paternal standards of toughness.
An early football friend was Kenneth O’Donnell of Worcester, Massachusetts, whose father was football coach at Holy Cross and whose older brother was captain of the 1946 Harvard team.
Veterans from across the country were Rocking to Harvard under the GI bill.
He arrived on the field an hour early every afternoon and stayed an hour late.
If you were blocking Bobby, you’d knock him down, but he’d be up again going after the play.
A few days later he broke his leg in practice but characteristically told no one and kept on trying to play till he collapsed on the field, showing once again, as his brother John had said, either a lot of guts or no sense at all, depending on how you looked at it.
But the sympathetic coach sent him in for his letter during the closing moments of the game with Yale.
His leg was still in an enormous cast, and he somehow got mixed up in the final scrimmage but emerged unscathed.
His father had won a Harvard letter , but neither of his older brothers had done so.
They were all two, three, four, sometimes five years older than he was.
They didn’t want to pay any attention to him; they didn’t think he was that good a football player, and they thought he was just a rich kid who was hanging around.
They weren’t in the usual social stream at all; they were tough and rough... all big and bulky and very unsophisticated”; very different, Eunice thought, from John’s friends, so smooth and assured and adept with girls and parties.
But, if his college years were spent with athletes, they were not altogether consumed by athletics. “1 used to talk and argue a lot, mostly about sports and politics,” he said later.
Joseph Kennedy in the years after the war lived according to quiet routine at the Cape or in Palm Beach, plugged into the world of affairs by the omnipresent telephone.
While there is no evidence of great activity, that was certainly his preference.
Arthur Krock wrote in 1952 that Douglas was always Kennedy’s first choice for the Presidency.
Douglas remembers Kennedy saying to him at Palm Beach in the late 1940s, “I must be nuts.
He saw communism in the forties as he had seen Nazism in the thirties—as a detestable system but not asa mortal threat to American security.
The Soviet Union no doubt had an ideological hope for the worldwide victory of communism, but in practice, he said, Communist ambitions would be subordinate to Russian national interests.
The United States, as Joseph Kennedy saw it, had the choice of two foreign policies.
The idea of “pressing steadily and persistently to establish liberal democracy throughout the world” attracted supporters who were “ardent, sincere, active and optimistic.
Kennedy’s recommendation was to “permit Communism to have its trial outside the Soviet Union if that shall be the fate or will of certain people.
He added that we were now told that the Marshall Plan—“the grandiose subsidization of the world”—would bring about European recovery in a few years and thereby halt the rising tide of communism.
But Europe’s real difficulties, he said, were not physical but moral—especially the historic selfishness of European capitalism in declining to share its gains with the workers.
Nor could he see that the United States had any great stake in the balance of power in Europe.
We cannot base our foreign policy on the thesis that the United States cannot tolerate the attainment by any nation of a predominant position in Europe.
If we do this, we Shall either have to fill the vacuum ourselves or fight war after war to prevent some other nation from achieving that paramount position.
This, however, is what we are asked to do when we are urged to make defensive and offensive alliances with the sixteen or more nations to whom we contemplate extending aid.
No nation that has sought to assume that burden has been able to stand the strain.
And in disclaiming the idea that the United States had no stake in the European balance, he was rejecting an ancient theme in American foreign policy.
He visualized “the Western Hemisphere as a self-sufficient economic unit” under North American protection.
The pursuit of hemisphere selfsufficiency, he believed, would be far less costly than the world war to which global meddling would eventually lead.
Congressman John F Kennedy strongly backed both the Truman Doctrine and the Marshall Plan.
The disagreement between his father and his brother may have been one explanation of Robert Kennedy’s remark that he began thinking about issues when he went to college.
These were certainly among the questions vigorously debated when the know-it-alls gathered in the evening at the Varsity Club.
Of the Varsity Club group O’Donnell had the most lively interest in politics.
On an early visit, Robert outlined an argument and provoked his father into vehement rejoinder.
Once the two boys joked at dinner about finishing last in a sailing race.
His father regarded him with increasing hope but still evidently with a certain dubiety.
He arranged for the Boston Post to accredit his son as a correspondent and for Cardinal Spellman and James M Landis to supply letters of introduction.
When his father discovered that Beaverbrook was crossing on the same boat, he enjoined Robert to go and speak to him.
This perhaps was one of the last things Robert, diffident as ever, wished to do; but, as his mother said later, he knew that his father would be disappointed if he didn’t do it, so he did it.
Attacked Chamberlain’s policies riot the reason Churchill did but because they did not go far enough.
Dad believed War between Germany and Russia would bring on a Universal War.
Beaverbrook believes we are living in potentially the most happy of times, because it is the most exciting of times.
Happiness comes only from the facing and the attempting of answers for problems.
The Victorian age could not achieve happiness except thru the pursuit of women.
He is clever, has good character, energy, a clear understanding, and fine philosophy.
Poor children have a terrible existence with flies crawling in eyes & nose & it seems to bother them not one iota.
He met a young Jew from Tel Aviv who gave him letters to leaders of Haganah, the Jewish defense organization, and then a representative of the Arab League who “became most vehement & said he doubted very much if the people to whom | have the letters would still be alive when | arrived.
On March 26, Good Friday, they flew to Lydda airport and traveled to Tel Aviv by armored car, with Haganah escort, along roads menaced by Arab guerrillas.
In Tel Aviv, soldiers took them to Haganah headquarters for an examination of their credentials.
After release, “went for a walk, but picked up by the police & as large crowd gathered were blindfolded & put in car & again taken to headquarters to be interrogated by Security Police.
They wanted to push on to Jerusalem but it was difficult until a British major who had heard of Ambassador Kennedy offered them a ride in an armored car.
Remembering his assignment for the Boston Post, Robert talked to everyone he could find—to Haganah soldiers who held the British responsible for everything; to a British soldier who had been there for two years and was sympathetic toward the Jews.
He talked to members of Irgun, the resistance organization that had recently dynamited a British train and the King David Hotel.
It was through her that | really began to see the intense tragedy & horribleness of it all.
She was 6th generation & has four brothers in the Haganah starting at 13 years of age.
Before the youngest was finally taken her mother used to make him behave by threatening him the Haganah wouldn’t take him unless he behaved.
Told one story of a girl who carried on with the British police until finally the Stern Gang caught up with her and shaved her head.
When her brother returned from the front and saw her, he shot and killed her.
We had a very good time as she laughed a great deal but— He visited a kibbutz through the kindness of a Jew who, forty years before, had made speeches in Boston for Honey Fitz.
A letter arrived in Beirut from his mother bringing news of Ethel Skakel's prowess on the tennis court.
A Jewish provisional government proclaimed the republic of Israel, and the Arab League soon launched an attack on the new state.
The Boston Post ran four articles from its “Special Writer” in the Middle East on June 3-6.
The author, after commenting on the ambiguity of the Balfour Declaration, gave objective statements of the Arab and Jewish viewpoints.
The Jews in Palestine, he wrote, “have become an immensely proud and determined people.
He gave a lyrical account of his kibbutz visit, omitting the reservations expressed in his diary.
Our government first decided that justice was on the Jewish side in their desire for a homeland, and then it reversed its decision temporarily.
Because of this action | believe we have burdened ourselves with a great responsibility in our own eyes and in the eyes of the world.
We fail to live up to that responsibility if we knowingly support the British government who behind the skirts of their official position attempt to crush a cause with which they are not in accord.
If the American people knew the facts, | am certain a more honest and forthright policy would be substituted for the benefit of all.
The final piece dismissed the notion, then prevalent, that a Jewish state might go Communist.
He recalled how Robert Emmet met the accusation that he was in league with Napoleon by saying he had not fought one foreign oppressor in order to replace him by another.
He had seen Jews and Arabs working side by side in the fields and orange groves outside Tel Aviv; perhaps these would make a greater contribution than those who carried guns.
If a Jewish state were formed, it might be the “only stabilizing factor” in the Middle East.
In any case, peace-loving nations could not stand by and watch people kill each other.
His father, with his dread of American meddling, conceivably winced a little at this last proposition.
The pieces showed a maturity, cogency and, from time to time, literary finish creditable for a football player of twenty-two hardly out of college.
Vi From the Middle East the wayfarers went on to Istanbul, Athens and Rome, where they arrived on April 15, three days before the election of 1948.
The crowd, Robert reported, sang “The Internationale” again and again but the speech did not appear to arouse uncontrollable enthusiasm.
Christian Democratic planes, no doubt subsidized by the CIA, circled overhead dropping leaflets.
Kathleen Hartington had flown from London in a private plane fora weekend in the south of France; the plane crashed in fog near Lyons; the ravishing girl was dead.
It was one more appalling blow for the Kennedy family, already sorely tried by the hand of God.
Joseph Kennedy, who was in Paris, brought his beloved daughter's body back to England.
She was, Forbes said, “the best and brightest-eyed of all Kennedys ... upon whose gravestone at Chatsworth is most truthfully written ‘Joy she gave,’""22 Robert Kennedy, unable because of jaundice to attend Kathleen’s funeral, went to London immediately thereafter. “1 never saw Dad here in England,” he wrote his sister Patricia, “but everyone said he looked terrible. | talked to him on the phone 8c he was no laughs to use an old expression.
People around the area where war has passed through so many times take it all rather objectively which is hard for me to understand.
They went thru all the motions of how Billy was killed & how he fell etc. which was a little much for me.
The farm house he was killed attacking & into which he threw his grenade now houses a couple of little children & parents with the man having difficulty keeping his pants up.
The people all tell their stories of the war as if they just came out of a wild western movie.
They entered Germany by way of Aachen, not far from the convent that Rose Kennedy had attended forty years before.
Passed blocks and blocks where only the shells of houses were left standing.
They went to Cologne, where tourists were forbidden to go into the cathedral, “but as | looked like a workman dressed as | was | went through inside.
He was also critical of the American occupation. 17 &18 year olds Sc bitter displaced nationals Sc Jews because they could speak German were placed in prominent positions where justice was anything but imparted.
If you were in a concentration camp you automatically received without investigation an administrative post with the result that people who had been placed in the camps because they were sex perverts or such became mayors.
The intrigues, plots, and counterplots make even a visitor feel that he is part of something unreal.
Everybody in Embassy wants to go to war with their comprehension of results built not on history but on own rather idealistic beliefs.
Many here believe we want war now as we have A Bomb and Russia is not yet back on her feet.
Many also evidently believe we are imperialistic ranging from the extreme that we actually want to take over the territory till that we want to impose such business ties on the countries that we are supposedly helping that they will virtually be our colony.
Many think we are using Marshall Plan because we have to have an export market.
Military Men Sc Civs always shooting mouths off that United States is best in everything alienates them, particularly when they refuse to take criticism on own country.
Belief infused by the fact we are supporting these countries & have a right to say what we wish.
In Vienna as in Frankfurt he heard much complaint from the American military about the wartime and postwar agreements with the Soviet Union.
Czechoslovakia— this was four months after the death of Jan Masaryk and a month after the resignation of President Benes—was depressing.
He had applied for a visa in London; but, after being assured there would be no problem, he was stalled, and no visa ever arrived.
Someone told him later that the Hungarians feared he might be carrying secret messages from Cardinal Spellman to Cardinal Mindszenty.
Instead the travelers went back to London and then back again to West Germany, where the great airlift, by which the western allies hoped to circumvent the Soviet blockade of ground traffic into West Berlin, was now, in mid-July, two and a half weeks old.
Planes were taking off and landing every three or four minutes at the Frankfurt airport.
The travelers journeyed on to meet a couple of Kennedy sisters in Copenhagen.
He did not evidently share his father’s view that the United States should stop minding other people’s business.
On the other hand, he was appalled at the talk of war and was not, at least in the field, an ideological crusader.
At the end of the year the Hungarian government arrested Mindszenty and put him on trial.
We can look back over the last four or five years and see the colossal mistakes that we have made.
All eyes will now be turned our way to see if will be betrayed, or if resistance to evil can expect support.
There has been some mention of business school ... | think the idea of me at business school has more comical than serious aspects.
As usual, nothing came easy, but, as usual, will was hardened by difficulty.
He did not talk much in the classroom but listened carefully and applied himself diligently.
The Korean War had begun; the Cold War was growing colder; and Robert Kennedy shared enthusiastically in the conservative revulsion of the time against the diplomacy of Franklin Roosevelt.
If the United States had gone to Yalta knowing the real problems and “the correct philosophy,” it would not have been too late to rectify earlier errors.
But “we were there seeking solutions to the wrong problems and we were there with a bankrupt philosophy.
It had not been in our interest, he wrote, to beg for Russia’s entry into the Pacific war.
As for the agreement on liberated Europe, this was a clear violation of the basic tenets of International Law.
With a stroke of the pen we made forever farcial the principles for which we had repeatedly told the world we were fighting.
This was the philosophy that he and his lieutenants, Hopkins, Harriman, Winant, etc. kept as their guiding star throughout the entire war—a philosophy that reached its epitomy at Yalta, and a philosophy that spelled death and disaster for the world.”The United States had failed to place itself on the right side morally, “and it will be to our everlasting dishonor.
It was written, of course, long before later fashions in revisionism condemned Roosevelt as an imperialist who ignored legitimate Soviet security concerns and proposed to dominate eastern Europe in the interests of expanding American capitalism.
Though written after Alger Hiss’s conviction for perjury and after Senator Joseph McCarthy’s discovery that Communists had been running United States foreign policy, it attributed the errors of Yalta to bad judgment, not to sinister intent.
Vill Robert Kennedy came into his own at Charlottesville in the extracurricular life—especially when in his last year he became president of the somewhat moribund Student Legal Forum, an institution set up to bring outside speakers to the Law School.
Drawing on his father’s stock of friends, he produced in rapid succession James M Landis, William O Douglas, Arthur Krock and Joe McCarthy.
Thurman Arnold and Ralph Bunche came too, as well as Congressman John F Kennedy and, on December 12, 1950, Joseph P Kennedy himself.
The elder Kennedy spoke six months after the Truman administration had brought the United States into the Korean War and three weeks after MacArthur’s insistence on invading North Korea had provoked massive Chinese intervention.
In Kennedy’s view the Korean debacle vindicated every apprehension he had felt about postwar American policy.
It won no dependable friends; it scattered military power over the globe; it thrust us into battlefields impossibly removed from our sources of supply.
It may be that Europe for a decade or a generation or more will turn Communistic.
Communism still has to prove itself to its people as a government that will achieve for them a better way of living.
The more people that it will have to govern, the more necessary it becomes for those who govern to justify themselves to those being governed.
The more people that are under its yoke, the greater are the possibilities of revolt.
Moreover, it seems certain that Communism spread over Europe will not rest content with being governed by a handful of men in the Kremlin.
French or Italian Communists will soon develop splinter organizations that will destroy the singleness that today characterizes Russian Communism.
The debate, however, was speedily derailed, once Senator Robert A Taft entered it, into an argument, with merit of its own, over the President’s constitutional power to commit troops abroad.
Kennedy’s substantive propositions—especially his opposition to American armies on the Asian mainland and his conviction that communism would not be a monolith to the end of time —were ignored.
His contention that the United States should not commit itself to the defense of untenable positions also deserved more attentive hearing.
Unfortunately he defined tenable as penuriously as the globalists defined it extravagantly.
Western Europe, even South Korea, were not in fact beyond the reach of American military power.
His critics, fixing on the excesses in his argument, found it easy to dismiss him as an incorrigible appeaser repeating in 1950 his folly of 1940.
If Joseph Kennedy at the Student Legal Forum was a national event, Ralph Bunche caused considerably more excitement locally.
Remembering Charlottesville’s agitation over the black tackle on the Harvard football team, Robert Kennedy must have anticipated trouble.
Kennedy decided to ask the student government to call for an integrated audience.
Then the Southern boys began to say, “I’ve got to go home to Alabama later—I can’t sign it.
He had a lack of understanding of the problems these people faced; to him it seemed illogical to support something but be unwilling to sign for it.
It may have failed there, but the Student Legal Forum adopted it, and a ringing statement went to the university president under Kennedy’s signature.
In the past, the university had evaded the state law by posting one section of the hall for blacks and then letting people sit where they pleased.
When Dillard proposed this as the way out, Kennedy rejected the compromise; he felt the principle was bad and had to be confronted.
He carried the case to the Law School’s governing body, the Board of Visitors, where, according to Davison, “the madder he got, the worse he got at talking.
Finally, Professors Gregory and Dillard, impressed by his concern, accompanied the Law School dean to see the university president, Colgate Darden.
Darden, who came from an old Virginia family and had been governor of the state, was personally opposed to this form of segregation.
Bunche found an integrated audience, one third black, and was visibly affected.
In any case he had struck a blow for decency and, after some instruction in the limitations of rage, had learned the efficacy of law.
His best course was Constitutional Law, where he was marked 3. out of 4.00, followed by Labor Law ; his average for all courses was 2.54.
The impression among the faculty was that he had not worked hard academically because native ability enabled him to do sufficiently well with a minimum of effort.
If he had not distinguished himself, he had shown that he could handle the material.
He called on her at Manhattanville College; she visited him at Charlottesville; and by 1949 they were enthusiastically in love.
Ethel, born in Chicago on April 11, 1928, was two and a half years younger.
George Skakel, a self-made millionaire, had built a small company into the Great Lakes Carbon Corporation and now sold his petroleum coke around the world.
A Dutch Protestant, he had married Ann Brannack, an Irish Catholic, fat, warm-hearted, eccentric and fervently religious.
The Skakels moved east in the mid-thirties, into a stupendous brick mansion in the midst of a large estate outside Greenwich, Connecticut.
The Skakel family, like the Kennedy family, was athletic, boisterous, competitive and filled with the will to win.
The Kennedys had absorbed enough of the Boston ethos to have a certain reserve, discipline and frugality as well as a large measure of civic and intellectual aspiration.
The Skakels, more in the style of Chicago and Fairfield County, did not conceal their wealth or restrain their children.
The two oldest boys were always swinging from trees, shooting air rifles from bedroom windows, driving cars into the pond.
The Skakels, in so far as they cared about public affairs, were conservative Republicans.
She was bright and responsive, not, at this point, much of a reader but indefatigably curious.
Her gregariousness, teasing humor and endless vitality made her the jolliest of companions.
Ethel’s sudden conviction that instead of marrying she should become a nun.
Most of his ushers were football players, so big that they could hardly get down the aisle side by side.
The young couple—Robert was twenty-four, Ethel, twenty-two —escaped to Hawaii for their honeymoon and settled, in the autumn, in Charlottesville for Robert’s last year at law school.
She was a flop at cooking and sewing, detested cleaning and spent money carelessly.
In fundamental ways she was a superb wife, at least in the old sense of being her husband’s helpmate.
For Ethel Kennedy, reared as she was and believing as she did, ministering to her husband was not self-sacrifice or self-betrayal but selffulfillment.
It did not result in any manifest repression of an irrepressible personality.
Her inextinguishable gaiety lightened his times of moodiness and pessimism.
She awakened his sympathy and his humor and brought him out emotionally.
Ethel gave him unquestioning confidence, unquenchable admiration, unstinted love.
In another year Joseph Patrick Kennedy Ill was born; early in 1954 Robert Francis Kennedy, Jr.; in 1955 David Anthony Kennedy; in 1956 Mary Courtney Kennedy.
In September 1951, before he went to work, the Boston Post sent him to cover the conference in San Francisco where fifty nations had gathered to conclude a peace treaty with Japan.
But, with “communism rampant throughout the world,” the United States had to act warily.
Still, if we adopt the policy of intervention, a strong temptation is presented to those in power to picture all opposition forces as communistic in order to gain American aid, remain in control and incidentally save their own lives.
The United States if it wishes to keep its friends in Asia cannot afford to be duped.
This was an early formulation of the problem that harassed American policy for the next generation.
He learned more about Asian nationalism when Congressman John F Kennedy invited him and their sister Patricia to come along on a trip from Israel to Japan in early October.
In Israel an old friend, Congressman Franklin D Roosevelt, Jr., received all the attention.
One Arab with whom they talked suggested United States join itself with the liberal elements of the countries of Asia Sc prepare for the nationalistic revolutions that are sweeping over the land.
FDR, Jr. & rest of State Dept, that was present said this impossible to do as United States not that kind of nation.
Nehru had them to dinner but gazed, bored, at the ceiling as if he did not know why he was thus wasting his time.
On October 19 they were in Saigon, where the French were fighting Ho Chi Minh and his Viet Minh.
General de Lattre de Tassigny assured them the French army could not be beaten, adding that, if the west lost the Mekong Delta, it would lose Asia.
They met Bao Dai, the former emperor of Annam whom the French had installed as token chief of state.
To check the southern drive of Communism makes sense but not only through reliance on the force of arms.
The task is rather to build strong native non-Communist sentiment within these areas and rely on that as a spearhead of defense rather than upon the legions of General de Lattre, brilliant though he may be, and to do this apart from and in defiance of innately nationalistic aims spells foredoomed failure.
In their view, the more a nation did for its have-nots the better, so long as its foreign policy was not made in Moscow.
At the end of the decade John Kennedy said, “We don’t even discuss any more because we’re just so far apart, there’s just no point in it.
The Internal Security Division was engaged in investigations of Soviet agents, real and fancied.
After a short time Kennedy transferred to the Criminal Division, where his first important assignment was to help present before a Brooklyn grand jury a case against two former Truman officials charged with corruption.
Challenging the popular Republican senator Henry Cabot Lodge, Jr., was hardly a project without risk.
Franklin D Roosevelt, Jr, campaigned in Jewish areas where John Kennedy, because of his father’s reputation, was supposed to be weak.
Robert worked eighteen hours a day, losing a dozen pounds in the process.
Perhaps, in addition, he felt that a tough exterior was the only means by which a novice could hope to keep the campaign under control.
A local pol, celebrated for singing “Danny Boy” from a sound truck, was incredulous to discover that Robert Kennedy had never heard of him.
Dever sent word to keep that “young kid” out of his office, saying that hereafter he would deal only with the ambassador.
As for the Democratic nominee, Adlai Stevenson of Illinois, “he has made a sensational start,” Kennedy wrote Beaverbrook.
John understood, too, the supreme importance in politics of a partner on whom he could count absolutely, for loyalty and for results.
Along with the difference in age there remained differences in temperament and outlook.
Seeking the paternal approval for which he had longed as a small boy, he somberly took on the obligations from which his older brother had casually disengaged himself.
John had got along better with his father, Robert with his mother; and the result was not unexpectedly paradoxical.
The head of the family was equally impressed by Robert’s work in the campaign.
In 1960 he denied to John Seigenthaler of the Nashville Tennessean that he had ever said this.
The gentle self was never extinguished, and the tension between Robert Kennedy’s soul and his persona took the form of dialectic rather than war.
Friendships—Hackett, O’Donnell, Billings —nourished the self; marriage nourished it even more.
The inner tension, instead of stultifying, eventually enlarged and enhanced sensibility and character.
It took long years, a family of his own, experience with life, experience with death, to reintegrate the elements of personality loosened by the shock, in so many respects the salutary shock, of his upbringing.
Robert and Ethel, with Kenneth O’Donnell and Lawrence O’Brien and their wives, joined the new senator in Hyannis Port for the family celebration.
John Kennedy was the only Democrat running statewide in Massachusetts to have survived the Eisenhower sweep.
Early in December 1952 Joseph Kennedy telephoned to Senator Joseph McCarthy, Republican, of Wisconsin, whom Eisenhower's victory had made chairman of the Permanent Subcommittee on Investigations of the Senate Government Operations Committee.
He claimed to have met John Kennedy fleetingly in the Solomon Islands in 1943;2 and in the late 1940s, after he slipped into the Washington scene as senator in 1947, he had come to know other members of the family.
He took Pat and Jean out amiably in the evening and spoke for Robert's forum in Charlottesville.
Eunice liked him, as did Sargent Shriver, who was the ambassador's staff assistant and whom Eunice married in May 1953.
Joseph Kennedy liked him most of all and invited him from time to time to Hyannis Port.
He was a black Irishman, lowbrow and roughneck, with a certain animal vitality, coarse charm, broad humor and amusing impudence.
Something about him, perhaps this instinctive insolence toward the establishment, may have reminded Joseph Kennedy agreeably of his own youth.
In the 1940s he was a man of marked personality without known political principles.
Writing in 1947 about “The Senate’s Remarkable Upstart,” in the Saturday Evening Post, Jack Alexander noted that McCarthy was studying Russian.
The crusade against Communists, which he launched inadvertently at Wheeling, West Virginia, in February 1950, quickly became the vehicle for his freefloating destructiveness.
McCarthy explored the frustrations of limited war with cunning and skill.
A natural demagogue, he had rare ability to implant suspicions, to confuse issues and, when challenged, to change subjects.
None of it worried the ambassador, even though on occasion he himself criticized the practice of smearing all leftists as Communists.
He understood perfectly that the adoration McCarthy aroused in one section of his constituents was matched by the loathing of another section, less numerous but more influential and one whose approval meant a good deal to him.
He told his bright new senatorial assistant Theodore Sorensen that he hoped Bobby would not take the job.
According to Cohn, McCarthy feared that Robert Kennedy’s appointment might be taken as a payoff for his father’s help in McCarthy’s Campaigns.
One day Cohn found McCarthy sitting irritably in his office listening to Joseph Kennedy’s voice crackling over the telephone.
McCarthy and Cohn set noisily to work to unearth subversives in the State Department and the Voice of America.
Kennedy, assisted by LaVern Duffy, a young investigator, undertook a more prosaic inquiry into the trade carried on by American allies with Communist China.
Duffy later recalled his first sight of Robert Kennedy—sleeves rolled past the elbows, collar open, necktie pulled loose, and, “most remarkable” of all, his white, woolen athletic sweat socks.
These last, Duffy said, he invariably wore until Ethel or someone persuaded him that they did not go with business suits.
Kennedy and Duffy pored over the Lloyds of London shipping index, British parliamentary debates and reports from the Maritime Commission and the Central Intelligence Agency.
In a couple of months they were able to demonstrate that, since the outbreak of the Korean War, 75 percent of all ships carrying goods to mainland China had sailed under western flags—most of this while Chinese troops were shooting at Americans in Korea.
Kennedy also discovered that some of the shippers were simultaneously collecting large sums from the United States government for delivering defense materials to western Europe.
The British role in the China trade appeared particularly reprehensible.
He said, typically, that he could not “appreciate” the English position.
He finished with compliments to “Comrade Attlee,” the British Prime Minister, and offered the Senate a photograph of Attlee reviewing the International Brigade in Madrid, his hand raised, McCarthy asserted, in the Communist salute.
Kennedy’s statistics also showed a large Greek role in the China trade.
This infuriated the State Department, which in more circumspect fashion had been trying to persuade allied carriers to abandon the China trade and regarded McCarthy’s action as a flagrant violation of the separation of powers.
Fearing a brawl, Vice President Richard M Nixon arranged a summit meeting between McCarthy and John Foster Dulles, the Secretary of State.
Robert Kennedy was at McCarthy’s side when he announced the Greek arrangement.
The Boston Post reported him “alarmed and shocked at the manner in which the McCarthy haters hopped all over the deal....‘| don’t know,’ said Kennedy.
The Post added, “Kennedy, contrary to general belief, apparently, has not taken part in any of the McCarthy committee’s probes into subversives in the State Department, the Voice of America, and other government agencies.
What he has done is work on ways to shut off strategic materials of war to countries in the Russian zone, including North Korea.
On April 2 his salary was increased from $4952.20 to $5334.57 “This raise,” Flanagan informed him, “is given in recognition of the very excellent job you have been doing in connection with our investigation into East-West trade.
John Leddy, the acting deputy assistant secretary of state for economic affairs, set forth the complexities.
England had interests in Hong Kong and Malaya that would be damaged by a cutoff of trade with mainland China.
Japan had been shipping seaweed to China and receiving iron ore in return.
American efforts to force allies to stop trading with China might use up diplomatic bargaining power needed for more vital purposes.
Of 81 million tons of shipping available to the entire world, non-Communist nations control 78 million tons.
We can do it by simply telling our allies that they will not get one American dollar while any of their flag ships are plying this immoral, dishonest, indecent trade.
The next day, when testimony made it clear that the Defense Department tended to agree with McCarthy, Senator Stuart Symington of Missouri, a Democratic member of the committee, proposed that the chairman ask Eisenhower what the American policy was.
It inquired whether State or Defense was speaking for the President, whether the White House thought it a breach of security to disclose the volume of strategic materials shipped to China and whether the government would refuse contracts to allied shipping firms trading with Communist China.
McCarthy had retired for a moment to the Bethesda Naval Hospital, where the letter went for his signature.
The document was respectful in tone, and Congress had every claim to the information sought.
But the request exasperated a White House staff already sorely tried by McCarthy.
As so often, the executive branch began talking about national security and the need to protect secret information.
The information was no secret from the Chinese Communists, who were after all the recipients of the strategic materials.
At no point did the report hint, in the McCarthy manner, that traitors were making American policy.
While he had been tediously analyzing commercial statistics, McCarthy and Roy Cohn had been loudly hunting Communists in the American government.
Though he paused now and again to bellow about the “blood trade” with China, he had juicier fish to fry at home.
McCarthy had been right in making him chief counsel, since this was McCarthy’s style too.
The twenty-seven-year-old Kennedy was no doubt irritated from the start by the fact that he had been passed over in favor of a man eighteen months younger.
As Cohn proceeded to cater to McCarthy’s hit-and-run inquisitorial instincts, personal dislike was compounded by genuine concern.
Cohn attached to the committee staff as “chief consultant” a young man named G David Schine who had qualified himself as an expert by writing a hair-brained tract called “Definition of Communism,” copies of which had been placed next to the Gideon Bible in hotels owned by Schine’s father.
After pursuing subversives in the Voice of America in February and March 1953, Cohn and Schine left fora magical mystery tour of western Europe, where they careened through embassy libraries, plucked offending books from the shelves and terrorized hapless employees.
Later he commented, “Cohn and Schine took him up the mountain and showed him all those wonderful things.
Most of the investigations were instituted on the basis of some preconceived notion by the chief counsel or his staff members and not on the basis of any information that had been developed.
Cohn and Schine claimed they knew from the outset what was wrong; and they were not going to allow the facts to interfere.
Therefore no real soade work that might have destroyed some of their pet theories was ever undertaken. | thought Senator McCarthy made a mistake in allowing the Committee to operate in such a fashion, told him so and resigned.
Thus ended, after six months, Robert Kennedy’s partnership with Joe McCarthy.
By May 1953 he had sufficiently distanced himself so that McCarthy introduced him to the Senate as the minority counsel; and in July, after he completed the only solid report ever issued by the committee, he got out.
In later years he bore criticism over the McCarthy relationship stoically.
He rarely tried to explain, partly because this was not his way, but also because he had initially shared McCarthy’s concern.
McCarthy was an affable fellow who put on a tremendous show of beastliness and somehow did not expect his victims to take it personally.
Once, at a Kennedy dinner, someone asked William McCormick Blair, Jr., Adlai Stevenson’s personal aide in 1952 and now his law partner, his view of McCarthy.
When Robert Lovett, the former Secretary of Defense, had observed to Robert’s father, “That’s pretty tough company he’s travelling with,” the ambassador replied, “Put your mind to rest about that.
He was learning in particular that patriotic declarations did not make due process of law superfluous and that he owed a debt to his own inner standards.
His father, who had been a member of the Commission on Reorganization of the Executive Branch, headed by Herbert Hoover in 1947-49, was now a member of a second Hoover commission appointed by Eisenhower.
In August 1953 young Kennedy joined the staff as his father’s assistant.
In the twenty years since he had opposed Hoover’s reelection, Joseph Kennedy had come to have inordinate admiration for the old man.
Hoover, who had his eightieth birthday the month young Kennedy came aboard, presided over the commission in a fairly arbitrary way.
Thus when Clarence Brown, a conservative Republican congressman from Ohio, proposed a task force on military procurement, Hoover flatly turned the proposal down.
Hoover had replied by telling Brown that, if these disputes continued, he might resign.
Lawrence O’Brien recalled Kennedy touch football one afternoon in a Georgetown park.
Finally Ted squared off fora fight with one of the larger among the enemy.
Robert, though he gave away about thirty pounds, pushed his younger brother aside.
Robert was a “really very cross, unhappy, angry young man,” Billings remembered, always telling people off and getting into fights.
This letter, he wrote me crisply, ought to “clarify the record sufficiently for you to make the necessary public apology.”42 | replied in like spirit.
V In July 1953 the three Democratic members of the Investigations subcommittee—Symington, Jackson and John L McClellan of Arkansas—had walked out when the Republican majority voted to give McCarthy sole control over the hiring and firing of committee staff.
Then in January 1954, having forced McCarthy to relinquish control over appointments, the Democrats ended their boycott.
As part of the settlement, they received the authority to appoint a minority counsel.
A few days later J William Fulbright of Arkansas was the single senator to vote against his hectoring demand for a larger appropriation than ever.
Not only was McCarthyism losing its emotional base, but McCarthy himself, in his increasingly erratic course, had become embroiled with a formidable antagonist, the United States Army.
In the fall of 1953 he had launched a sensational, if unproductive, search for Communists and spies in a Signal Corps installation at Fort Monmouth, New Jersey.
In the meantime, G David Schine had been threatened by the draft; and Roy Cohn showed quite singular zeal, first in demanding an Army commission or a soft job in the CIA for his sidekick, and then, after Schine was drafted, in getting him treatment and privileges never before accorded buck privates.
An Army document later recorded forty-four specific instances of improper pressure.
In a high point he told one much decorated general he was not fit to wear his uniform.
The Army, at last tormented beyond endurance, retaliated in March 1954 by releasing a chronological record of Cohn’s interventions on behalf of Schine.
McCarthy, seeing things were going badly, excused himself, leaving the questioning to Cohn.
Moss about her statement that a black man named Robert Hall had left a copy of the Daily Worker in her house, insinuating that Hall was a Communist organizer.
A newspaperman informed Robert Kennedy that the Communist Hall was white.
COHN. | was not talking about a union organizer, Bob. | was talking about a Communist organizer who at that time, according to the public record, was in charge of subscriptions for the Daily Worker in the District of Columbia area.
Cohn, retreating, said that perhaps this was something the committee should “get some more exact information on.” “| think so too,” said Kennedy.
At the end of her testimony, he told her he thought she was telling the truth , and added that if the Signal Corps did not take her back, he would get her a job himself.
Symington said he would check with the Federal Bureau of Investigation.
According to Cohn, not an unbiased source, Kennedy “stormed in and demanded” the Moss dossier.
The assistant to the director, Louis Nichols, told him that no outsider could See FBI files.
Joseph Welch, a softspoken and elaborately ironic Boston lawyer, represented the Army.
A fascinated television audience, amounting at times to 20 million people, watched the hearings.
If they looked hard, they could see Robert Kennedy, sitting quietly behind the Democratic senators and passing them occasional notes as the witnesses testified.
On June 11, Jackson was interrogating McCarthy about an antiCommunist plan proposed by G David Schine.
Bobby Kennedy’s job was to write out pertinent questions for the Democratic senators to ask at the hearing.
They picked at point after point in Dave’s plan, finding something hilarious in each.
And every time Kennedy handed him something, Senator Jackson would go into fits of laughter. | became angrier and angrier.
Cohn told reporters he had accused Kennedy of “having a personal hatred” for the McCarthy side.
Two men separated them, and Kennedy, with a small, contemptuous smile, turned away.
In visible distress Kennedy went to the Capitol in search of his brother, finally finding him in the Senate cloakroom.
Nor can he excuse the irresponsibility attaching to too many of his charges.
The national audience, well trained by TV westerns to distinguish between white hats and black hats, had little trouble deciding to which category McCarthy belonged.
After thirtyfive days of the grating voice, the sarcastic condescension, the weird giggle, the irrelevant interruption (“point of order, Mr Chairman, point of order”) and the unsupported accusation, McCarthy had wrought his own downfall.
On July 30, Ralph Flanders of Vermont submitted a resolution of censure against McCarthy.
At the end of August a committee under the chairmanship of Arthur Watkins of Utah, and including such respected conservatives as John Stennis of Mississippi and Sam Ervin of North Carolina, began hearings.
John Kennedy prepared a speech in support of censure, but he made his case on exceedingly narrow grounds.
His judgment, he said, involved “purely a question of the dignity of the United States Senate”—a dignity impeached by Cohn, acting with McCarthy’s full support.
The show had great impact, though even anti-McCarthy commentators, like Gilbert Seldes in the Saturday Review and John Cogley in Commonweal, criticized the technique of offering as a “report” what was in fact a superbly calculated attack.
In January 1955, Murrow spoke at the banquet honoring those, Kennedy among them, who had been selected by the Junior Chamber of Commerce as the Ten Outstanding Young Men of 1954.
Clair. | saw him briefly at a football game last fall and he looked so relaxed | hardly recognized him. | hope the same thing has happened to you. | don’t get to Boston very often, but | hope on one of my visits there we can get together for a few minutes anyway.
What you say about being in Boston makes me say that it would be a delight to see you and that | shall be sad indeed if you come this way and don’t come in.
John McClellan became chairman of the Investigations Subcommittee, and Robert Kennedy chief counsel.
He said that he thought the Investigations Subcommittee would gradually return to its old function— looking into waste, fraud, corruption and mismanagement in government.
Kennedy also reviewed McCarthy’s files on Communist infiltration into defense plants.
Most of the persons accused did not work at plants handling classified material; those who worked at such plants mostly did not do classified work.
Matthews and Louis Budenz as his experts, he turned to scholars like Professor Philip Mosely of Columbia.
Browder found Kennedy “pleasant and eager” and was impressed that anyone from a congressional committee should try to learn what communism was all about.
More and more, however, as Kennedy had forecast in Louisville, the committee was returning to its old functions.
It now concentrated on such subjects as fraud in the government purchase of military uniforms (an inquiry that resulted in six convictions); contracts let by the Foreign Operations Administration for the erection of grain storage elevators in Pakistan; inefficiencies in the Department of Agriculture’s grain storage bin program; and similar issues of waste or graft in federal operations.
The counsel for the Republican minority protested, and the investigation stopped.
Harold Talbott, Eisenhower's Secretary of the Air Force, had retained halfownership in Paul B Mulligan & Company, a firm of so-called efficiency engineers.
Early in 1955 John Kennedy’s friend Charles Bartlett heard that Talbott was hustling business for the firm out of his Pentagon office.
Bartlett thereupon proposed a joint inquiry to Robert Kennedy, an alliance of the newspaperman and the Senate investigator, each tapping his own sources and pooling the results.
They were Palm Beach acquaintances of the elder Kennedys and had many friends in the Senate.
But Bartlett soon published letters by Talbott, on Air Force stationery, soliciting contracts for Mulligan from firms doing business with the Pentagon.
He asked Talbott, aged sixty-seven, whether he had ever instructed anyone in the Air Force to make representations to RCA for not renewing a Mulligan contract.
Talbott, wrote Arthur Krock, was not a crook but rather a man whose “excessive egotism” led him to suppose that no one could question his motives.
Robert, after the bad doldrums of the Hoover Commission, was working hard and cared deeply about what he was doing.
Ethel was raising children —five by 1956—and rushing to cheer Bobby on in hearing rooms at the Capitol.
They lived unpretentiously on S Street, simple in their tastes, unsophisticated in their ways.
These were the days when, as Ormsby-Gore later said, the dogs still outnumbered the children.
We went into every single house for ten miles, | suppose, until we finally found...the owner.
Acquaintances did not understand it, misconceived his laconic humor, and sometimes found him curt and contentious.
He did not like to be put on the defensive and avoided this, in the family style, by asking his own questions before others could question him first.
But, where John Kennedy asked questions impersonally, Bobby asked them with curious intensity.
Politically he was accounted a conservative Democrat, his father’s son, though more interested in investigations than in politics.
No doubt the “number one member” crack was induced by Krock’s apprehensions about John Kennedy, whose politics had begun to display what he doubtless saw as wayward tendencies.
Nineteen fifty-four was the year when Secretary of State Dulles and Vice President Nixon advocated American military intervention in Vietnam.
The world’s biggest democracy could not “stand idly by” while communism swallowed small countries and toppled the dominoes of Asia.
The makers of foreign policy looked with “condescending disdain on those who challenge their omniscience,” Supposing the layman unable to comprehend the “mystic intricacies” of diplomacy.
His brother, though now a member of the Government Operations Committee, was not on the Investigations Subcommittee.
The courtship was on occasion conducted at the younger Kennedys’ house in Georgetown, where the four often met at the end of the day for dinner and a movie.
At one big Kennedy weekend at Hyannis Port, the boys were playing touch football on the lawn while Jacqueline read on the veranda.
In a few moments Robert came over and said that he could well understand why she might think football barbaric, but it did mean a lot to Jack.
Spirits were high; and Bobby and Teddy, completing their assignment in a scavenger hunt, stole a policeman’s hat.
An outraged father called the family together and delivered a polemic on the enormity of this offense; it would get into the columns and make the family look ridiculous.
John was increasingly drawn toward foreign policy, Robert increasingly to the exposure of corruption.
For a season the two brothers, their fondness undiminished, had separate preoccupations.
William O Douglas and Adlai Stevenson THE TALBOTT investigation ended at 1:30 pM. on July 28, 1955.
Two hours later, Robert Kennedy, in the same rumpled, dripdry seersucker suit he had worn at the last hearing, was on a transatlantic plane.
His mother, who flew with him to Paris, gathered that making the trip was about the last thing he wanted to do.
At 7:30 the next morning, dead tired and harassed, he arrived in Teheran.
Joseph Kennedy was the only man in the country who could preserve simultaneous friendships with Senator McCarthy, the deadly enemy of the Bill of Rights, and Justice Douglas, its devoted champion.
He preferred high mountains, primitive lands and places where few men had traveled before.
He had already traversed non-Soviet central Asia and in 1950 conceived the plan of visiting the contiguous Soviet republics to find out whether communism had made a difference.
Joseph Kennedy, never neglecting a chance to widen a son’s experience, asked Douglas to take Robert along.
Douglas recalled only the “very much subdued” little boy he had seen years before; but he liked the young law student he soon encountered when he spoke at the Charlottesville Forum.
The Soviet press had unmasked Douglas as an American spy when he climbed Mt.
Mercedes Douglas asked her husband why he still wanted to take this rigid and hostile young man to Russia.
Stalin was dead, the line had changed, and the Kremlin was preparing fora conference with Eisenhower at Geneva.
When Kennedy arrived, Flott’s impression was of a highstrung, take-charge young man.
The bush jackets came in three sizes and were distributed according to seniority.
Flott, who had not yet received his Soviet visa, parted company with them at Pahlevi.
They put this terrific soread before us of soup, all kinds of fruit, watermelon, honeydew, apples, cherries, chicken, etc.
Douglas said that the Soviet embassy in Washington had promised them one.
They went to the hotel, holding on the way a whispered conversation on strategy.
Once in their rooms, Douglas said loudly to the concealed microphones that he would call Khrushchev and tell him of their wretched treatment.
At a collective farm near Baku, they were served a twenty-one-course meal.
Someone toasted Douglas and his family and then Ethel and the four children.
From Baku they flew on to Ashkhabad, the capital of Turkmenistan, where Kennedy, an ardent photographer, was arrested for taking snapshots.
They inspected the notorious Bug Pit, where, a century before, the Emir Nasullah had consigned two adventurous Englishmen for refusing to acknowledge Mohammedanism as the true faith; after two months among reptiles and vermin, they were beheaded.
They watched Tadzhik dancing—“everyone by himself—jumping up and down —moving in rhythm, swaying and moving heads back and forth.
Cultural notes alternated in Kennedy’s diary with data about wages, prices, working conditions, housing, child care, courts, factories, and rather especially churches.
His technique was to appear interested and accommodating, drawing out the people with whom he talked until, having won their confidence, he could hit them with a factual issue and hope for a frank response.
Kennedy, the investigator, was exasperated and hostile, as if determined to find nothing good.
Fred Flott, who finally got his visa, followed their trail through central Asia.
Throughout the trip Kennedy ate very little and drank nothing, subsisting mainly on watermelon and nervous energy.
He explained to Flott that he hardly knew the boy; his father, to whom he owed his Supreme Court seat, had said that Bobby had never gone on a he-man trip and asked that he be taken along.
Douglas joined the discussion, pointing out, Kennedy wrote in his journal, “that we in the United States had been brought up on the fundamental we possessed to find fault with government where we found things going wrong.
Douglas brought up academic freedom, suggesting that the professors would be in trouble if they criticized communism in their classrooms.
The travelers here and elsewhere inquired especially about the indigenous peoples of central Asia, whose high cheekbones and dark complexions, language, schools and customs set them so sharply apart from their Russian overlords.
They were as different, the travelers thought, as the Moroccan from the Frenchman or the Malay from the Englishman, and quite as subject to imperial rule.
When Douglas mentioned that one third of the Kazakh population had apparently been liquidated during the collectivization of the farms, the professor dismissed the figure as the invention of British intelligence.
Douglas and Kennedy pointed out that Soviet census statistics showed a decline of almost one million Kazakhs between 1926 and 1939The professor was displeased and, as Kennedy noted, “became rather vehement.” “| hope,” Kennedy wrote the children from Tashkent in mid-August, “you are all...doing what your mother and Ena tell you to do.
Cables of congratulation to Kennedy over the Talbott affair pursued them; and his companions took pleasure in introducing him as the People’s Prosecutor, the American Vyshinsky.
Kennedy was forever sending postcards, when he could find any—a portrait of Lenin, for example, to Cardinal Spellman with a cryptic message scratched on the back.
They visited a Baptist church with a congregation of more than a thousand.
In Alma Ata, to the east, they visited more collective farms and were served more gargantuan meals.
At another, there were “many toasts, the host got looped, spilled champagne over Douglas.
In the university at Alma Ata, the rector, a biochemist, observed that, while Soviet scientists read American scientific journals, American scientists, judging from the absence of citation, did not read Soviet scientific journals.
Douglas insisted that the travelers stop for a breather in the Tien Shan range.
He was struck by the wholehearted way Kennedy threw himself into mountaineering.
It took three hours for a large, heavy-boned woman physician to appear.
He was shot full of penicillin and rushed to bed, while the others went on, as scheduled, by train.
In this laconic fashion he glided over both an intense illness and the devotion of the Soviet doctor.
Perhaps he was disinclined to yield too much credit either to his own weakness or to Communist medical care.
In another twenty-four hours he had recovered sufficiently to take the plane west.
On September 2, Ethel Kennedy, accompanied by Jean and Pat, met the party in Moscow.
A few hours later, a hotel maid knocked at the door of Fred Flott’s room and handed him, with a note from Robert Kennedy, an Army bush jacket, ‘medium,’ freshly laundered.
In the aftermath of the Geneva summit, the travelers encountered a confusion of moods in the Soviet Union.
World Report, differed “from the reports of some of the other people who visited Russia in that | was far more distrustful of Russia’s intentions.
He had called Angie Novello, the most efficient stenographer on the Investigations Subcommittee staff, to Hyannis Port where he dictated a text.
Slides selected from the more than a thousand photographs he had taken on the trip illustrated the lecture.
But Angie, sitting in the middle of the auditorium, could hardly hear the speaker.
All | ask is that before we take any more drastic steps that we receive something from the Soviet Union other than a smile and a promise—a smile that could be as crooked and a promise that could be as empty as they have been in the past.
We must have peaceful coexistence with Russia but if we and our allies are weak, there will be no peace—there will be no coexistence.
This was the question that so exercised Douglas of the Russian treatment of ethnic nationalities in central Asia.
Kennedy gave the Soviet government full credit for economic development.
Unlike more obdurate Cold Warriors, he did not see western empire as a bulwark against communism nor suppose that anticolonialism in Asia and Africa was organized in Moscow.
The regime was detestable, and he detested it; but he came back with a considerably more differentiated sense of the Soviet Union.
His notes include a paper entitled “Good Things”; More school construction work.
Great deal of hustle—people seem generally better off than people in comparable areas of Middle East.
If you agree with principal of nurseries certainly the ones we saw were well managed.
Government loosening up 1) people allowed in Kremlin 2) Amnesty for criminals 3) Sentences being reviewed 4) MVD power cut 5) Farmers allowed more freedom 6) Visitors allowed in country People enthusiastic about their work Music good—Azerbaijan music group in Baku as good as anything we have seen—music catchy and dancers excellent.
The ensuing investigation led to a prolonged wrangle in which the administration claimed the right to deny information about trade policy to Congress—both classified information, on the ground that it was a breach of national security; and “working-level papers,” on the ground that exposing the internal policy process was contrary to the public interest.
The term “executive privilege” had not yet been coined to give such denial specious constitutional status.
But the idea had emerged in full force and with the support of rightminded people during the Army-McCarthy hearings.
The ambassador was equally disapproving of his older son’s growing interest in the vice presidential nomination.
But Theodore Sorensen was busy lining up support for Kennedy as Vice President.
Peter Lawford, the actor, who had married Patricia Kennedy in 1954, offered them the penthouse suite he rented by the year in the Ambassador East.
Robert’s puritanism was offended by the idea of keeping so expensive an apartment and using it so rarely.
To O’Donnell’s dismay, he insisted that they move to a double room several floors below.
HST thinks Humphrey “too radical”; dismisses Kennedy as a Catholic; has no use for Kefauver.
In the end, Stevenson made his decision, or nondecision, to throw the vice presidential nomination to the convention.
He then intelligently departed while Robert put the call through to Cap d’Antibes.
John McCormack, “literally propelled toward the platform at the last minute by Bob Kennedy,” as Sorensen described it, seconded the nomination.
So did much of the south in Confederate resentment over Kefauver’s courage on civil rights.
McCarthy replied concisely, “All we have are Protestants and farmers,” later complaining that Kennedy had sent a boy to talk to him.
Then Tennessee shifted from Albert Gore to Kefauver, and the fight was over.
Kennedy in a graceful speech asked that Kefauver be named by acclamation.
Jacqueline, now pregnant (when she told Robert and Ethel she wanted a baby, they had said they would pray for her every morning), was with her mother in Newport.
When she recovered consciousness around two in the morning, her baby lost, the first person she saw, sitting by her bed, was Robert.
Her mother had phoned him, and he had driven over at once from the Cape.
Many years later Jacqueline learned that Robert had arranged for the burial of the dead child.
From the Stevenson viewpoint, Robert Kennedy’s presence would signal Catholics, conservatives and friends of his father that all was not lost.
From the Kennedy viewpoint, here was a chance to find out how to run, or not to run, a presidential campaign.
From my own viewpoint on Stevenson’s staff, Robert Kennedy seemed an alien presence, sullen and rather ominous, saying little, looking grim and exuding an atmosphere of bleak disapproval.
My reaction was colored by recollections of our altercation two years before.
Blair may have had in mind the whistle stop in Lewiston, Pennsylvania, when a group of children made so much noise that Stevenson could not begin his speech.
After a moment of confusion, Kennedy climbed down from the train, shouted, “I can beat anyone from here to the lamppost,” and took off with the children in hot pursuit.
One’s memory was of Bobby making notes, always making notes, whether huddled by the window in the rear of the bus or plane or even sitting on a railroad track while the candidate spoke from the rear of the train.
When we came into Springfield, Illinois, Kennedy said to Newton N Minow, Stevenson's law partner, “Il have heard the Governor speak before, but | have never been in Springfield before.
Kennedy grew even more silent than usual, and Minow saw that he was deeply moved.
Fog and rain set in, and a single plane was available to By the candidate out of Morgantown.
We became friends at once and remained so for the rest of his life. | could never take seriously thereafter the picture of Robert Kennedy as a bearer of grudges, vindictive and unforgiving.
Because of his looks and his accent and his known background, this gave an appearance of insincerity.
We could never get it clear that it was not so much what he said but how he said it. | spoke again and again to people around him to try to get him to change his technique but he never would do it.
As for his Boston speech, an attack on big business, Kennedy pronounced it “incredibly bad.” | told him | didn't think it would go over in Boston but Schlesinger and Galbraith were of a different opinion although a compromise was ultimately worked out. | told him that | felt he should talk about something he was interested in so he would appear sincere and that necessarily would be foreign policy. | told him | thought it was a great mistake to talk about matters he was obviously not interested in because he did not make an impression on television.
He joined us one Sunday at Stevenson’s house in Libertyville for an exasperating session on Campaign planning in general and on Stevenson’s controversial proposal for a ban on nuclear testing in particular.
It was a conference that really disturbed me as far as thinking that he should be president of the United States.
He spent all day long discussing matters that should have taken, at the most, a half hour.
For instance, for four hours, with 8 12 people there, we discussed who should go on his television program—Senator Anderson, Senator Jackson or Senator Symington.
For another couple of hours we discussed whether the hydrogen bomb was fission or fusion and whether it was safe to say hydrogen bomb tests should be stopped at one mega-ton.
At the first discussion, | thought one of his clerks could have made that decision and contacted Anderson, Jackson or Symington and made the arrangements.
On the second question, | didn’t think it made much sense for 8 or 12 men to discuss scientific matters about which no one knew anything.
The ostensible purpose of the meeting was to plan how the campaign for the last three weeks would be handled and that was hardly discussed at all.
These matters were discussed rather pleadingly, and again no decisions were made.
Jimmy Hoffa EIGHT Days after the 1956 election, Robert Kennedy, back as counsel for the Senate Permanent Subcommittee on Investigations, arrived in Los Angeles.
An investigation earlier in the year into government procurement of uniforms had turned the committee’s attention to a fresh subject—labor racketeering.
Hoodlums and mobsters, attracted by the spectacular growth of trade-union welfare and pension funds, attracted also by the convenience of unions as a cover for exercises in bribery and shakedown, were, it appeared, engaged ina systematic invasion of the American labor movement.
The idealism generated in the great organizing battles of the 1930s was largely spent, except in the United Automobile Workers and a few other unions.
The American Federation of Labor and the Congress of Industrial Organizations, mending their historic split in 1955, had chosen George Meany of the AFL Plumbers as president.
Nor, for that matter, did state or federal law provide effective standards for the management of the burgeoning welfare and pension funds.
In the meantime, newspapermen across the country — Edwin Guthman in Seatde, John Seigenthaler in Nashville, William Lambert and Wallace Turner in Portland, Pierre Salinger in San Francisco, Clark Mollenhoff in Washington—dug into the problem.
They found the International Brotherhood of Teamsters an especially rewarding field.
Mollenhoff, a lawyer as well as a newspaperman, was a hectoring and fearless reporter in the fashion of the old muckrakers.
Early in 1956 he began to importune Kennedy about setting the Investigations Subcommittee on the trail of labor racketeers.
He doubted whether the Government Operations Committee had jurisdiction; trade union affairs belonged to the labor committees.
Mollenhoff replied that the labor committees were afraid of labor’s political power.
If unions were misusing tax-exempt funds and rendering dishonest financial reports to the Labor Department, this involved government operations.
In August he got Senator McClellan to authorize a preliminary check into labor racketeering.
Kennedy remembered something about labor law from Charlottesville, but he knew little about the labor movement and was especially innocent about the Teamsters.
Daniel J Tobin, president for nearly half a century, had been everybody’s friend, especially Franklin Roosevelt’s.
It was to the Teamsters that FDR had given the famous speech in the 1944 campaign about his little dog Fala.
Over lunch in the Teamsters’ cafeteria, Cheyfitz, an ex-Communist, confided to Kennedy that he had seen Walter and Victor Reuther in Russia in 1933 and was still not sure the Reuther brothers had ever broken with communism.
In 1933 the union membership was only about 75,000, hardly three times what it had been when Dan Tobin became president in 1907.
Tobin, a craft unionist of the old school, had no use for the mass unionism of the 1930s.
In Minneapolis a group of Trotskyites, led by Farrell Dobbs and the Dunne brothers, controlled the Teamster locals.
Farrell Dobbs’s particular goal was to bring in the “over-theroad” drivers—the long-haul interstate truckers—whom the old leadership had disdained.
One of his ardent disciples was a young organizer from Detroit named James Riddle Hoffa.
Hoffa, who moved to the fore after Dobbs’s departure, disavowed his mentor’s Trotskyism.
But he never disavowed his admiration for Dobbs as an organizer and later offered large salaries to lure him back to the union.
Even Dobb’s Trotskyism may have had more influence than Hoffa admitted.
Dobbs, Hoffa told the writer John Bartlow Martin, “was a very far-seeing man.
Hoffa was designed for fighting—five feet, five and a half inches tall, with broad shoulders, big hands, thick legs; built, as John Bartlow Martin observed, like one of his own trucks.
He had an incisive intelligence, an unparalleled knowledge of the trucking industry, a stinging tongue, unlimited energy and, for his followers, unlimited charm.
His achievements in raising wages, reducing hours and improving working conditions for the drivers were beyond dispute.
Even the trucking associations were soon grateful to him for stabilizing labor relations in an industry notoriously vulnerable to unexpected work stoppages.
He was also devious and perverse, had a raging temper, a bullying and sadistic disposition, a total absence of scruple and an impressive capacity for hatred.
Paul Jacobs, an ex-Trotskyite himself and far from unsympathetic to Hoffa, wrote, “When Hoffa becomes really angry, his gray-green eyes get incredibly cold and menacing.
By 1956 the Teamsters, with a million and a third members and welfare and pension funds rising toward a quarter of a billion dollars, were the largest and richest union in the country.
There was one other exception to the prevailing labor stagnation—the United Auto Workers.
If the Teamsters owed their vitality in great part to the organizing energy of Jimmy Hoffa, the Auto Workers owed theirs to the intellectual drive of another Detroit trade unionist, Walter Reuther.
On one occasion, when John L Lewis conducted a raid against the Detroit Teamsters, Reuther opposed Lewis and saved Hoffa.
He depends on us and we depend on him.... lf Walter would have stayed in the labor movement rather than getting into politics, we’d never had any trouble.
Reuther, with his commitment to union democracy, his modest salary, his personal frugality, his activity in the Democratic party, his Spacious liberalism on every question of domestic and foreign policy, represented the afterglow of the labor idealism of the thirties.
Hoffa, with his dictatorial control, his high salary, his expensive suits, his Cadillacs, his manifold deals on the side, his sweetheart relations with employers, his sympathy for the Republican party, was the epitome of business unionism.
Bellino, who had run the accounting unit in the FBI before becoming a consultant to congressional committees, was an artist in his profession.
With ledgers and canceled checks spread out before him, he could reconstruct the most carefully disguised financial transactions.
He had watched earlier congressional investigations into labor racketeering come to nothing.
In Los Angeles they learned of collusive arrangements between the Teamsters Union and trucker associations.
They met a Los Angeles union organizer who, as Kennedy wrote later, “had traveled to San Diego to organize juke-box operators.
When he regained consciousness the next morning he was covered with blood and had terrible pains in his stomach.
The pains were so intense that he was unable to drive back to his home in Los Angeles and stopped at a hospital.
Later he was told that if he ever returned to San Diego it would be a watermelon.
There William Lambert and Wallace Turner of the Oregonian explained to him the complex local relations among politicians, Teamster officials and the underworld.
Clark Mollenhoff had phoned Edwin Guthman of the Seattle Times, a Beck specialist, to say that Kennedy was coming.
He had never heard of Kennedy and told Mollenhoff he had no interest in being used by the Senate committee and then left high and dry.
When Kennedy assured him that the committee was serious and that informants would be protected, Guthman decided to cooperate.
Kennedy’s informant also told him that Nathan W Shefferman, head of a Chicago labor relations (i.e., as it later developed, union-busting) firm, held the key to Beck’s financial operations.
Then they went to Chicago a few days before Christmas to interview Shefferman, who had been making purchases for Beck and receiving payment from union funds.
Shefferman yielded up his records, and they carried them back through a blizzard to the hotel for examination.
His father thought the inquiry into labor racketeering a terrible idea.
An investigation, he said, would not produce reform; it would only turn the labor movement against the Kennedys.
He was deeply, emotionally opposed, and father and son had an unprecedentedly furious argument.
The ambassador, who did not give up easily, asked Justice Douglas to intervene.
Then Kennedy, as George Meany’s biographer put it, “jolted” the AFL-CIO president by telling him that Beck was a crook.
CIO leaders like Reuther meanwhile reminded Meany that they had dealt with their Communists; now the AFL leaders had to deai with their criminals.
Moreover, the new AFL-CIO constitution, breaking with hallowed traditions of union autonomy, authorized the executive council to suspend or expel unions involved in corrupt practices.
Late in January 1957 Meany got the executive council, over Beck’s bellowing opposition, to pledge full cooperation with a congressional investigating committee.
Meany thought John McClellan “an antilabor nut” and objected to the Investigations Subcommittee.
The Senate compromised by establishing a select committee with four members drawn from Investigations and four from Labor.
Jackson, declining the assignment, explained to Kennedy that Beck had “a great deal of power and ... could make things most difficult” in 1958 when he was up for reelection.
After some vacillation Symington, who had presidential ambitions, followed Jackson’s example.
This made Sam Ervin, a conservative on labor issues, the second Democrat from Investigations on the select committee.
Senator Patrick McNamara of Michigan, a former trade unionist, agreed to be one of the two Democrats from the Labor Committee.
He felt at first that one Kennedy investigating the labor movement was quite enough.
Lyndon Johnson, the majority leader, told Kennedy it was madness for him to think he could take on labor and survive as a serious contender in 1960.22 Still, if Kennedy refused, his place would go to Strom Thurmond of South Carolina, a Democrat in 1957 and noted then, as later, for regressive views on all questions.
He asked me to come and give him some support or the committee would be top conservative and would have seemed anti-labor.
On January 30, 1957, the Senate unanimously approved the Select Committee on Improper Activities in the Labor or Management Field with an appropriation of $350,000 and McClellan as chairman.
The office, cluttered with documents stacked in piles, had, John Bartlow Martin thought, the air of a secondhand bookshop.
Kennedy asked the tireless and cheerful Angie Novello, who happened also to be Carmine Bellino’s sister-in-law, to be his secretary.
When she said she would think about it, he said, “You’re not going to think about it.
He drafted his old friend Kenneth O’Donnell as his administrative assistant.
A lot of people think he’s the Kennedy running the investigation, not me.
Assuming that the job had been cleared with John Kennedy, O’Donnell came to Washington.
When the senator heard about it, he had words with his brother and later told O’Donnell irritably, “| need you up in Massachusetts.
Within, while they discussed investigatory strategy, they used to pass a football back and forth as if they were still at Harvard.
Kennedy took the reliable LaVern Duffy from the Investigations Subcommittee.
In February he broke from the usual committee pattern by hiring a portly, cigar-smoking newspaperman, Pierre Salinger.
The previous summer, Colliers had asked John Bartlow Martin to do an expose of the Teamsters.
When Martin joined the Stevenson campaign, the assignment fell to Salinger, an experienced reporter in San Francisco.
In December, as the Salinger series was awaiting publication, Collier’s expired as a magazine.
Einar Mohn, a Teamsters vice president whom Salinger knew from California, asked him to be public relations director for the Teamsters.
Salinger, who suspected the Teamster offer as a device to insure his silence, turned his material over to Kennedy.
On Salinger’s first day in the office Kennedy directed him to serve a subpoena; it turned out to be for Einar Mohn.
Salinger walked over to Mohn’s office in the marble palace and said, “Einar, you know you offered me a job as public relations director for the Teamsters. | want you to Know | was also offered another job at the same time and that was investigator for the Senate Labor Rackets Committee.
Kennedy kidded him about his cigars, devised contests to bring down his weight, without much success, and took the Salingers along on Christmas skiing expeditions.
In April another investigator joined the staff, a lawyer and former FBI agent named Walter Sheridan.
Kennedy, rushing to a hearing, hired Sheridan going up the stairs from his office.
Later they discovered they were both born on the same day in the same year.
Soon after Sheridan was taken on, Kennedy ordered him to Chicago to join Salinger on the investigation of Nathan Shefferman.
No one worked harder than Kennedy, jacket off, shirtsleeves rolled up, necktie pulled loose under his button-down collar, horn-rimmed glasses pushed to the top of his head, sitting under photographs of Franklin Roosevelt and Douglas MacArthur.
The staff, numbering more than a hundred by 1958, was devoted to him, and he to them.
He had an uncanny ability to get people to do more than they thought they could do.
He gave people a sense of personal interest in themselves, their work, their families.
People wrote about union officials who declined to call union meetings or to audit union books.
They wrote about rigged elections and theft of union funds, about racial discrimination, goons, intimidation, extortion, about beatings, acid throwing, murder.
A second attempt in Washington produced the same result; so did a third approach through Senator McClellan.
Around eleven o’clock at night some weeks later, Kennedy called Seigenthaler in Nashville and said he was sending down two investigators.
The investigation led eventually to the impeachment and conviction of a judge, the dismissal of a district attorney, the defeat of a sheriff and the conviction of a number of police officials.
They went to the Hermitage, where Robert called Ethel to say where he was and spent so much time that he nearly missed the second plane.
V The countdown on Dave Beck had begun even before the formation of the select committee.
It was as if he felt “he could yell us into believing in the righteousness” of his cause.
Kennedy listened politely and then began to ask questions, derived from the Shefferman papers, about Beck’s financial life.
Beck said that, though he had nothing to hide, he could not indulge in a discussion of private matters.
Watching Beck, Kennedy was struck by his eyes—at first appearing lost in his large, moonlike face, but “soon you realized it was Dave Beck’s eyes more than anything else that attracted your attention.
But the committee staff, drawing on independent records and ancillary witnesses, was able, with the accounting wizardry of Carmine Bellino, to reconstruct much of the story—$370,000 taken by Beck from the Western Conference of Teamsters; $85,000 turned over to Shefferman to pay for personal purchases; loans from trucking companies; even thefts from a trust fund set up for a friend’s widow.
Mundt and Goldwater fed him general questions to which he returned the pontifical answers of a certified labor statesman.
Faltering before the onslaught of detail, Beck retreated to the Fifth Amendment, invoking it sixty-five times before the hearing was over.
The abrupt downfall of one of the most powerful and respected labor leaders in the country made the Rackets Committee overnight a national phenomenon.
To those of us who see your brother, John Kennedy, as probably the most dramatic liberal personality on the national scene today, the unfortunate possibility that he might be a victim of “guilt by association” and suffer from your current juvenile antics is depressing.
It was this same insolent and overbearing manner which was the downfall of Senator McCarthy.
To see people sit in front of us and lie and evade makes me boil inside.
He was committed to something that mattered; he was convinced of the rectitude of his cause; and he knew he was doing a good job.
Early in 1957 he bought from his brother John—for the same price, $135,000, that John had paid three years earlier—the fine old manor in McLean, Virginia, Known as Hickory Hill, once the Civil War headquarters of General George B McClellan, latterly owned by Justice Robert H Jackson of the Supreme Court.
After Jacqueline’s miscarriage in 1956, the great house, complete with its new nursery, was too sad and echoing for the senator and his wife.
It was ideal for Bobby and Ethel, whose five lively children were overflowing their small house in Georgetown.
A handsome white quasi-Georgian mansion, rich in historical association, with high ceilings, white woodwork and crystal chandeliers, surrounded by five and a half acres of rolling green land, Hickory Hill happily absorbed the Kennedys, their children and assorted dogs, horses, rabbits, chickens, goats and pigs.
But nothing discouraged her, and it took a good deal to rein in her high spirits.
On an August night in 1957 one of her Skakel sisters-in-law gave a party in Stamford, Connecticut, at which Ethel was photographed standing cheerfully next to a couple identified by the hostess as Mr and Mrs.
The local newspaper reported that Dave Beck himself had been at the party too.
In due course Cheyfitz, suggesting that Hoffa could be a force for good, urged Kennedy to sit down with him.
Hoffa had hired him, he said, as a spy, charged with penetrating the McClellan committee and reporting back on the progress of the Teamsters investigation.
Cheasty, an Irish Catholic, had served in the Navy, Secret Service and Internal Revenue Service.
He was already handing selected information to Hoffa when Kennedy went to Cheyfitz’s house on the snowy evening of February 19, 1957.
Hoffa’s enthusiasm about the meeting had been even less than Kennedy’s.
Hoffa “made rather a point of the fact that he did not drink,” Kennedy noted in a memorandum two days later.
He said people were always trying to destroy him and therefore he had to destroy them.
Many officers in these paper organizations were hoodlums who had worked with Johnny Dio , Tony Corrallo and other eminent racketeers.
Hoffa freely admitted organizing the phony locals but claimed it was done to circumvent the noraiding pact scheduled to go into effect after the AFL-CIO merger.
Ethel said that a driver, skidding on the icy road, had banged into a tree at Hickory Hill and was now sitting, hysterical, in their living room.
Hoffa saw Kennedy as the arrogant rich kid for whom everything in life had been easy.
Kennedy saw Hoffa as the cynic who betrayed honest workingmen and had no object in life beyond money and power for himself.
Vill Their next meeting took place at midnight three weeks later in the federal courthouse.
John Cye Cheasty had continued to supply Hoffa with material, especially Carmine Bellino’s analyses of Beck’s financial sprees.
Hoffa, shaking hands with him, stuffed a wadded two thousand dollars in his palm.
As Hoffa entered the Dupont Plaza Hotel, the FBI arrested him on charges of bribery and conspiracy.
At the courthouse an hour later, Hoffa and Kennedy sat in uneasy silence.
After an interval they fell into an almost friendly conversation about who could do the more pushups.
Hoffa remembered saying at the time, “Listen, Bobby, you run your business and I'll run mine.
Employing all his persuasiveness, he contended that he had hired Cheasty as a lawyer and as a matter of course accepted any documents his lawyer gave him.
The federal attorney, caught off guard by Hoffa’s appearance, was feeble in cross-examination.
The jury was two-thirds black; and the sight one day of Joe Louis embracing Hoffa in the courtroom no doubt had its effect.
The Washington Afro-American published what was in effect a pro-Hoffa issue, in which columns and advertisements portrayed the defendant as a lifetime friend of the Negro people—he had indeed opposed segregation in the Teamsters—and denounced the judge; Cheasty and Senator McClellan as enemies of civil rights.
Angie went to the hearing room, where Kennedy was interrogating a witness, and passed him a note.
He arrived, it need hardly be said, on an early morning plane, and by midafternoon he had served subpoenas on officials in five Teamster locals.
When he returned to his office in the federal building, the phone rang.
The next morning Salinger, reinforced by Carmine Bellino, went to Teamster headquarters.
After more than an hour’s wait, they were ushered into Hoffa’s office and seated in low chairs in front of his desk.
Hoffa, his own chair placed, like Mussolini’s, on a slightly raised platform, stared down at them.
Five union officials, clutching subpoenas, stood uncomfortably in a semicircle behind.
The records were in poor shape, with names torn off checks and hotel bills.
And he’s got to investigate for weeks and weeks to find out what we already know.... | know what | done wrong and what | didn’t.
Well, there certainly is, and it is going to remain so.... | believe that management and labor very definitely must at all times have something in common because one without the other cannot survive.
Determined not to plead the Fifth Amendment, he chose instead to plead the imperfections of memory.
Under the pressure, the newspapers reported, Hoffa’s eyes narrowed, his lips tightened, his facial muscles twitched.
To the best of my recollection, | must recall on my memory, | cannot remember.
HOFFA. | cannot recall the substance of this telephone call, nor place the facts together concerning what it pertains to.
But if these things do not refresh your memory, it would take the power of God to do it.
You have had the worst case of amnesia in the last 2 days | have ever heard of.
Told him | did not want him to talk to our investigators as he had been doing.
The last two days of hearing he was a beaten man compared to the beginning.
His tone was subdued & no longer did he give the hate looks that he enjoyed so much at the beginning.2"" A little later Kennedy wrote that things were much more relaxed after the Hoffa hearings; the committee, he thought, might be able to finish its job in another year.
The Teamsters rallied behind him, electing him their new president in September by a vast majority and defiantly voting Beck an annual pension of $50,000.
Ata highly emotional AFL-CIO convention in December, Meany succeeded in expelling the Teamsters.
In the same month his trial on the wiretapping charge ended in a hung jury—11-1 for conviction.
He traveled around the country in triumph, proclaiming new organizing drives and haranguing the faithful.
After a parade of mobsters marched across the stand, Hoffa himself returned grimly to the Senate Caucus room.
Sometimes, for an hour or so, he appeared, Kennedy wrote in his journal, morose and discouraged.
At the end of one grueling afternoon McClellan proposed a night session.
We have been going on for a long time without a break & | have about had it. | shall be happy when Hoffa is finished next week.
When Martin asked what Kennedy pinned his hopes on, Kennedy said, “I felt a little like 1864, when Grant took the Union Army to go back into the Wilderness—to go back slugging it out. | didn’t pin my hopes on any one thing.
Just before lunch, Kennedy accused him of threatening to kill Sol Lippmann, the general counsel of the Retail Clerks Union.
During the luncheon recess, Kennedy slumped at his desk before a sandwich and a glass of milk while Pierre Salinger called Lippmann.
The fact he threatened you and made these statements to a leading union official like you—everybody would know you’re telling the truth.
He turned to Salinger and said, “He said, ‘The Retail Clerks depend on the Teamsters in many ways.
Both, in separate ways, had an instinct for the underdog; both had the instinct of underdogs themselves.
Martin retained the passage; his relations with Kennedy were not impaired.
As they drove along, Kennedy noticed a light burning in Hoffa’s office.
Hoffa often did indeed work late, but he also, according to Williams, heard of Kennedy’s reaction and thereafter, when his day’s work was done, took special pleasure in leaving his office lights blazing away.
You take any industry and look at the problems they ran into while they were building up—how they did it, who they associated with, how they cut corners.
The look sometimes went on for five minutes or so, as if he thought that by staring long and hard enough he could destroy his adversary.
Whenever Bobby would get tangled up in one of his involved questions, | would wink at him.
It was widely supposed he hated Hoffa; but some who worked most closely with him did not think so.
In later times, when his self-awareness and sense of the complexity of life increased, Kennedy might have seen Hoffa in another context, appreciated his vitality, his impudence, his struggle and the material benefits he had won for the Teamsters.
But, just as Hoffa never forgave Kennedy for having been born rich and for believing in the possibility of justice under capitalism, so Kennedy could never forgive Hoffa for his vindictiveness toward dissenting members of his own union, for his ties with the underworld, for his conviction that American society was irremediably corrupt.
Kennedy’s exposure to the labor movement had given him impassioned sympathy for those in the Teamsters who, at tremendous personal risk to themselves, opposed the Hoffa dictatorship.
He came to identify himself with workers who were expelled, beaten, murdered.
As he concluded his case, Between birth and burial, the Teamsters drive the trucks that clothe and feed us and provide the vital necessities of life.
They control the pickup and deliveries of milk, frozen meat, fresh fruit, department store merchandise, newspapers, railroad express, air freight, and of cargo to and from the sea docks.
Quite literally your life—the life of every person in the United States—is in the hands of Hoffa and his Teamsters.
The Teamsters no doubt occupied a strategic position in the economy; but their power to bring the nation to a stop was theoretical.
Indeed, the Teamsters were traditionally cautious about calling strikes.
It was true also, as Paul Jacobs insisted, that many of Hoffa’s sins were practiced by his brethren in the labor movement.
Gallo pounced on him, frisked him and explained to the bemused Kennedy staff, “No one is going to see Mr Kennedy with a gun on him.
Joey Gallo had been a suspect in a murder case where the victim had been shot so many times in the face that identification was impossible.
There was Paul Dorfman who took over the Waste Handlers local union in Chicago when the president was murdered in 1939.
Young Allen Dorfman, who did not even have an insurance brokerage license at the start, became a rich man in short order and a convict in the longer run.
He evaded a committee subpoena until investigators finally tracked him down in Las Vegas.
Two or three of us get together on a deal and everybody says it is a bad thing.
Called before the committee, he took the Fifth Amendment thirtythree times while Pierre Salinger set forth the more colorful features of his record.
GIANCANA. | decline to answer because | honestly believe my answer might tend to incriminate me.
One son-in-law ended up on the payroll of an Illinois congressman; the congressman promptly emerged as a doughty defender of Jimmy Hoffa.t42 A dapper fifty in 1958, Giancana liked to hang around show people and attracted show people who liked to hang around gangsters.
The singer Frank Sinatra became his buddy;24& another singer, Phyllis McGuire, his mistress.
In 1966, the Chicago Tribune reported that he had been haled before a syndicate tribunal in order to “defend himself against charges of having permitted his international playboy activities to interfere with more serious, day-to-day business of running the underworld organization.
Giancana’s activities were far more international than anyone could have supposed.
Fifteen months after he giggled before the Rackets Committee, a fellow hood named John Rosselli approached him on behalf of the Central Intelligence Agency to solicit his help in a plot to murder Fidel Castro.
The syndicates were penetrating corridors of power that not even McClellan or Kennedy in their worst imaginings would have suspected.
In 1963 he was convicted of extortion and sentenced to seven years in prison.
In the meantime, he rose to an international vice presidency in the Teamsters.
His longtime alliance with Hoffa came to a bitter end in the early 1970s.
It was Tony Pro with whom Jimmy Hoffa may have thought he had a rendezvous when he himself disappeared on July 30, 1975448 XI With his quasi-Trotskyite views of capitalism, Hoffa probably considered gangsters no more immoral than businessmen or politicians.
The hearings documented in grim detail the brutality with which they punished those who would not go along.
As Kennedy saw it, Hoffa had begun by hiring hoods as business agents in Detroit because he needed strong-arm men.
Then they told colleagues in other cities that Hoffa was a “right guy” and they should let him in.
To get into Chicago he needed the okay of Joey Glimco and Paul Dorfman, and he gave Dorfman the Teamsters’ insurance business.
He was becoming a vital link between the underworld and respectable society.
Kennedy was learning from testimony what Hoffa had learned from life—that organized crime was a great unseen power.
The Eighteenth Amendment, by driving the liquor business underground, had first changed gangsters into businessmen.
The word racket appeared in the 1920s to describe the passage of crime from the free enterprise stage into the era of cartels and syndicates.
The Twenty-first Amendment ended prohibition but not the criminal organizations prohibition had spawned.
The ‘gangster-outlaw,’ like John Dillinger and Pretty Boy Floyd, gave way to the ‘gangster-businessman,’224 whose specialty was not simple and reckless deeds, like robbing banks, stealing automobiles, kidnapping, but the provision of services.
Thus, for example, burglars are lawbreakers who, if they could be abolished miraculously, would not be missed; but boodeggers, panderers, fixers and many racketeers have a social function ... for which there is some kind of public demand.,”122 The nature of these criminal organizations remained a mystery.
In 1950-51 a Senate committee headed by Estes Kefauver, after communing with a number of racketeers of Italian extraction, suggested that “a loose-kni organization” called the Mafia provided the connection among the major criminal syndicates in the United States.
The theory of the Mafia, moreover, plucked chords of romantic memory going back not only to the ancient secret society in Sicily but to the Camorra and Black Hand of America at the turn of the century.
It hardly did credit, however, to the notable contributions that Irish and Jewish gangsters had made to the rise of organized crime.
Thomas E Dewey conducted his Campaign against organized crime, including Lucky Luciano, without ever mentioning the Mafia.
A sergeant of the state police, his curiosity piqued by the influx of black limousines, frightened the gangsters into ignominious flight into the surrounding forests.
Fifty-eight conferees, including Vito Genovese himself, were picked up; twenty-two of these were involved in labor or labor-management relations.
This group has made fortunes in the illegal liquor traffic during prohibition, and later in narcotics, vice, and gambling.
These illicit profits present the syndicate with a financial problem, which they solve through investment in legitimate business.
The word Mafia did not appear in Robert Kennedy’s book about the Rackets Committee, The Enemy Within.
But he took from the hearings an appalled sense, defined more carefully than McClellan had done, that “the gangsters of today work in a highly organized fashion and are far more powerful now than at any time in the history of the country.
They have stretched their tentacles of corruption and fear into industries both large and small.
After Apalachin, Robert Kennedy had asked for the FBI files on the conventioneers.
The FBI, Robert Kennedy said, “won’t keep these fellows under surveillance.
Angie Novello recalls that he generally mistrusted and sometimes disliked investigators who had once worked for the Bureau; Bellino and Sheridan were exceptions.
Walter Reuther NoT ALL THE RACKETS COMMITTEE was enthusiastic about the pursuit of Jimmy Hoffa.
He was, after all, a supporter of Republican candidates, a model of cozy relations with employers, a declared believer in private enterprise.
His purpose, he explained to the committee, was to get a better deal for his Teamsters, not to transform the system.
Seizing the cue, Hoffa obligingly condemned the use of union power to bring about political and economic change.
Walter Reuther had become the supreme bogeyman for American conservatives.
Hoffa, for all his sentimental memories of Reuther, craftily nourished this fear.
He called Reuther “the leader of Soviet America,” insinuated Reuther was protecting organized gambling in the auto plants and hinted that Robert Kennedy was going easy on him in order to get the United Auto Workers behind his brother in 1960.
He bragged to Clark Mollenhoff that he had passed this “information” to the Republicans on the Rackets Committee.
Asked about this on Meet the Press, Kennedy said, “We have no information at the present time showing that Mr Walter Reuther personally misused any union funds.
The Republicans now set up a cry for an investigation of the strike, the UAW and Reuther.
At this point, they had to confront the rather private way Senator McClellan and Robert Kennedy ran the committee.
He was exasperated by Pat McNamara, who had both Hoffa and Reuther among his constituents and, an old trade unionist himself, regarded the investigation of unions with extreme discomfort.
When McNamara resigned from the committee in 1958, Frank Church of Idaho took his place.
Once Kennedy and Salinger, in order to verify their suspicions, sent the eight senators a draft report in which the key page was written in eight different ways.
The version that promptly appeared in the newspapers was the one sent to Mundt.
In the spring of 1957 the Rackets Committee underwent its first change in membership.
Joe McCarthy was in marked decline, a specter haunting the scenes where he had so recently swaggered.
Because he was a sensationalist rather than a true believer —his was the glory drive, Edward Bennett Williams used to say, not the power drive—he had no core of inner certitude to sustain him in adversity.
After some talk Kennedy ascertained that McCarthy was talking about a man named Robert Greene. | told him the Bob Greene indictment had been dismissed and denounced as a political indictment because of the work Greene was doing investigating Mayor Kenny in Jersey City, and furthermore, that he was an Irish Catholic and could not be considered antiCatholic.
The next thing | heard was that he made a speech on the Senate Floor stating that the Committee had hired an investigator who had been indicted.... | told the press that afternoon that | had great confidence in Greene and also told the facts surrounding his indictment back in 1951.
McCarthy persisted, explaining to the committee that anyone who wallowed with hogs—Greene had worked for the anti-McCarthy Long Island paper Newsday—must be a hog himself.
Finally Senators Mundt and McNamara were designated to look into the matter and promptly cleared Greene.
B.—Evidentally a Wisconsin newspaperman had heard the same thing because latter told me he was going to print it.... |am sure that Joe McCarthy knew of this & | felt a little strain about him. | am glad that we talked in the manner we did before he died. | dismissed the office for the day.
It was all very difficult for me as | feel that | have lost an important part of my life—even though it is in the past.
Robert Kennedy also attended the ultimate funeral in Appleton, Wisconsin.
The Republicans, except for Irving Ives, were now more deeply conservative than ever.
Kennedy detested Curtis, as he later did Homer Capehart of Indiana, who replaced Ives in 1959.
As the Rackets Committee set out after Hoffa, the Republicans increased their demand that Reuther and the Kohler strike receive equal time.
The National Labor Relations Board had recently concluded two years of hearings on Kohler.
Newspaper stories quoted unidentified Republican senators as saying that the Kennedys were covering up for Reuther.
As for Reuther, he had supported Kefauver against John Kennedy during the vice presidential contest in 1956 and distrusted Robert because of the McCarthy committee.
At the next meeting of the committee, John Kennedy, flourishing Newsweek, said that, if this were the way Republican senators felt, let them speak up.
Mundt proposed a reorganization designed to reduce Robert Kennedy’s control of the investigations.
This was rejected, but the counsel agreed to give the committee a full briefing on investigative developments every Monday morning.
As for the Reuther problem, Robert Kennedy suggested that Jack McGovern, a Republican hired at Goldwater’s request (“the only appointment made to the staff,” Kennedy said later, “because of political considerations”), be assigned to the UAW-Kohler investigation.
Curtis, Kennedy wrote later, “made no comparison between himself and animals or birds” but expressed general happiness.
The Republican senators, however, received regular reports, and in October McGovern sent a long memorandum to McClellan.
Reuther placed his administrative assistant, Jack Conway, in charge of the operation.
Kennedy said, “I will,” and, to the astonishment of Conway, who thought he might go in a month or so, flew to Wisconsin the same night.
Kohler, a family-owned corporation operating a company town, was the second largest manufacturer of plumbing ware in the United States.
In 1934 it had brought in armed guards to break a strike, killing two strikers and wounding nearly fifty more.
In 1954, with the contract up for renewal, the company rejected the union demands.
There were violence and vandalism, condoned if not encouraged by UAW officials.
After a time the union was ready to concede every point except for a small wage increase.
He saw the enamel shop, where the heat of the ovens brought the temperature well above a hundred degrees and workers took off face shields for a moment to gobble lunch; the UAW had been asking for a thirty-minute luncheon break.
He talked to Lyman Conger, the company attorney, who “made no secret of his deep and abiding hate for the union.
On his return to Washington he joined members of the committee at a dinner with Meany and other labor leaders.
After dinner , Meany sat ona couch with Ives on one hand and McClellan on the other.
Meany, though no fan of Reuther’s, observed that the UAW investigation was “a political investigation because we knew as well as he did that there wasn’t anything to look for.
Nor did Kennedy and O'Donnell neglect the political possibilities in the UAW connection.
One night, at dinner with John Kennedy, Robert Kennedy said bluntly that, if they went into the 1960 convention, they did not want to get caught in the situation of 1956.
At least five different texts of the letter were in circulation by 1958.
The recipient of the letter, Melvin Bishop, had long since turned against the Reuthers.
Bishop said that he had given the original to a schoolteacher in 1935 and had not seen a copy since.
Carmine Bellino tracked down the schoolteacher; she said she had never heard of the letter.
McClellan spoke contemptuously of Bishop’s “established unreliability” and dismissed the whole thing.
The Republicans, repenting their enthusiasm for hearings, urged postponement.
The Kennedys, Knowing they would be blamed for protecting Reuther, insisted that the committee go ahead.
McClellan said grumpily that he could not understand what the Republicans had to fear from letting Reuther lead off.
McClellan, Ervin and John Kennedy argued through four more executive sessions for the early calling of Reuther.
But Jack Conway favored the Washington civil liberties lawyer Joseph L Rauh, Jr.
Goldberg himself, when approached, felt that his own first obligation was to the Steelworkers, of which he was counsel, and also recommended Rauh.
You say that the men can put the equipment in the oven, then they can step back and eat their lunch during that period of time.
There were those who felt, and | felt at the time, he looked so bad there might be some sympathy created for him.
However, he had found no support on the committee for bringing out this material, “other than Jack and of course, he and | were both suspect.
Every time we were getting into trouble, Jack would enter the Hearing Room, take his seat on the Committee dais and help us out.
After one session he called Conger “a despicable———,""as Kennedy primly reported the scene in his notes, and the following day Conger raised a big stink about it.
Joe Rauh then got into a shouting match with McClellan in which Mundt joined in.
In the afternoon Mazey lost his temper again and raged against the Catholic priests of Sheboygan for signing a proKohler statement.
Later in the day Rauh, who stopped by Kennedy’s office each afternoon to check the next day’s schedule, found Kennedy and O'Donnell passing the inevitable football back and forth.
Once on the stand, with his inexhaustible intelligence, confidence and fluency, he dominated the hearing.
He freely admitted past UAW error—mass picketing, violence—and then went on the offensive.
The long, cruel strike came to an end, with most strikers given their old jobs and the largest back payment award in American history.
V As for Goldwater, who had wished the philosophy of Hoffa to prevail over the philosophy of Reuther, he found himself trapped in a paradox.
The Rackets Committee was presumably required by its title to inquire into improper activities in management as well as in labor.
Kennedy’s response was that, because of limited jurisdiction, the committee could not go into improper business activities unless there was some direct connection with labor.
Certain investigations, however, like Kohler, did involve what Kennedy later called “the respectables, ""1 The trail of Nathan Shefferman thus led not only to Dave Beck but also to the venerated American house of Sears, Roebuck.
Shefferman specialized in wrecking union organization drives in the name of labor relations.
After a quarter century diddling labor for Sears, Roebuck, he established a firm that, Walter Sheridan said, was a Sears, Roebuck ""creation” and engaged in union-busting activities on behalf of Sears, its subsidiaries and suppliers.
When Salinger and Sheridan first asked about Shefferman, the Sears vice president “outright, Hatly lied” to them for several hours and, indeed, weeks.
Nothing took place in the hearings to alter Robert Kennedy’s bleak view of business.
Hayes of the Machinists, chairman of the AFL-CIO Ethical Practices Committee, added that only the subpoena power of government could ferret corruption out.
The committee released reports on dismal situations in other unions—the Meat Cutters, the Carpenters, the Hotel and Restaurant Workers, the Sheet Metal Workers.
At the same time, the Kohler investigation proved that the committee could distinguish between honest and crooked unions.
Among thoughtful labor leaders the committee soon lost its initial antilabor reputation.
You have every reason to be proud of your outstanding work ... and of the contribution that you have made to decent honest democratic American trade unionism.
In March he told McClellan that he planned to leave the committee in August.
Communities infected by corruption had given “the merest lip-service” to clean-up efforts.
The National Association of Manufacturers and the United States Chamber of Commerce had taken no action whatever against businessmen engaged in questionable activities.
Bar associations had done nothing to discipline lawyers engaged in unethical practices.
Privately Hundley shared the prejudice of Department of Justice lawyers against congressional committees and simply did not think that Kennedy’s cases were solid, at least as they came from the Hill.
Two months later a strange coalition of business, the Teamsters and the Eisenhower administration killed the bill in the House.
In the meantime, the House was considering a far more severe bill proposed by Robert Griffin of Michigan and Philip Landrum of Georgia.
Robert Kennedy now launched a personal campaign in support of his brother’s bill.
Alas, the letters failed to discriminate between the Kennedy-Ervin and LandrumGriffin bills; and the House, responding to a personal appeal by President Eisenhower, passed Landrum-Griffin.
Only heroic effort by John Kennedy in conference achieved a tolerable compromise between the House and Senate bills.
Though labor leaders harshly denounced the new law, the machinery it established for honest and supervised elections made a vital contribution in later years to union democracy in the United Mine Workers, the Steelworkers and other unions.
When John Bartlow Martin’s absorbing Saturday Evening Post series “The Struggle to Get Hoffa” came out in the summer of 1959, even McClellan seemed a little annoyed, afraid perhaps that Robert Kennedy was getting all the glory.
No longer merely his father’s son or his brother’s brother, Kennedy was emerging as a national figure in his own right.
Still on the trail of Reuther, Goldwater had snapped out a statement accusing Kennedy of running out on the UAW investigation.
Kennedy, indignant, asked if there was anything further Goldwater thought he ought to do.
Kennedy said he did not consider himself in politics; it was a bipartisan committee, and he had tried to run the investigation on nonpolitical lines.
Some observers rejoiced to see a fearless young crusader exposing wickedness.
Others saw more than ever a merciless prosecutor, battering witnesses and overriding constitutional rights.
An assessment of Kennedy’s performance requires an understanding of the congressional investigative power.
In defending congressional inquiries into the Harding scandals thirty years before, Felix Frankfurter had rejected the analogy between atrial in the courtroom and a hearing before a congressional committee.
The first, he said, placed a man’s liberty in jeopardy and therefore, called for stringent rules of evidence and procedure; the second was an “exercise of the informing function of Congress” and had different standards.
Anything the committee reasonably claimed as necessary to the exercise of a valid legislative function, the Court concluded, was permissible.
Newspapers might complain about the “bullying and badgering"" of witnesses; but Black, reprinting passages of disingenuous and evasive testimony, observed that, after an investigator has tried every technique, politeness, kindness, blandishments,...he is sometimes driven in the presence of a witness who is deliberately concealing the facts to attempt to shake it out of him with a more drastic attack.
That is why the embarrassing question from the Senator or Congressman sitting at the end of the table serves a high function.
His right to demand an answer spells in a crucial way the difference between the totalitarian and the democratic regime.
In 1954 a former Communist named John T Watkins told the House Committee on Un-American Activities that he would answer questions about himself or about persons he believed still to be members of the Communist party but not about people who had left the Communist movement.
In overturning the conviction in 1957, the Court vigorously reaffirmed the right of Congress to conduct inquiries in furtherance of law-making tasks.
Moreover, the Court ruled, the investigative power was subject to the restraints of the Bill of Rights.
Vill In spite of the multitude of investigators—“the largest investigative team,” Kennedy said, “ever to operate from Capitol Hill” —and the service of more than eight thousand subpoenas for witnesses and documents, the Rackets Committee, unlike Black’s committee twenty years before, was not charged with abusing the subpoena power.
Kennedy, Pierre Salinger said, talked “to every investigator before he went on the road about the proper use of the subpoena—the fact that these were not to be used for fishing expeditions.
Carmine Bellino developed a technique by which, through close analysis of long distance telephone toll tickets, he could find out to whom anyone talked on a given day.
The committee rules were in fact designed to avoid the excesses of the McCarthy era.
Witnesses were assured the right to counsel and the right to submit questions for cross-examination.
When the committee anticipated derogatory testimony about a person not present, Kennedy notified him in advance and offered the opportunity for instant denial.
Remembering the slovenliness of the McCarthy investigations, Kennedy prided himself on the care with which his own hearings were prepared.
He checked and rechecked testimony before he put witnesses on the stand; and he rarely asked a question in public hearings to which he did not know the answer.
For every hour a witness testified on the stand before the Committee, he was interviewed on an average of five hours.
Kennedy, he later told Victor Lasky, often became flustered before labor hoods or their lawyers.
He considered Kennedy’s questioning “painfully amateurish” and said it was “ridiculously simple to get him to lose his temper.
Where Rauh, Frankfurter’s first law clerk, viewed congressional investigations in the spirit of Professor Frankfurter, Bickel, the twentieth clerk, viewed them in the spirit ofjustice Frankfurter, a more conservative figure.
In such cases, Bickel argued, Kennedy was not discharging the informing function but rather trying to punish by publicity.
The committee was plainly dealing with questions on which legislation could be had; and it is hard to see that Bickel’s horrid examples were greatly different from things that Hugo Black and other sorely tried congressional investigators had done in the past.
Nonetheless, he raised a troubling point about the Fifth Amendment—a point to which Kennedy himself was sporadically sensitive.
Edward Kennedy, now at the Virginia Law School, challenged Williams’s assertion.
He also reported Williams’s charge to his brother, who wrote angrily in his journal, “As of yet we have not had a witness in Executive who has taken 5th & whom we have had in open.
Kennedy stoutly defended the Fifth Amendment and called it one of the distinguishing marks between democracy and dictatorship.
Practically, in such cases as Beck and Glimco, he may well have been right.
But he admitted he did not always have “positive proof” on such matters; and he instanced a case where Senator Curtis asked a Fifth Amendment witness a question on which the committee had no information at all and thereby put a wholly fanciful innuendo into circulation.
But there lay indistinctly behind Bickel’s not always forceful contentions a genuinely forceful apprehension—that Kennedy in these matters had displayed an excess of zeal; that he was a man driven by a conviction of righteousness, a fanaticism of virtue, a certitude about guilt that vaulted over gaps in evidence.
The courts might acquit Hoffa, and Kennedy might say he accepted that as “a citizen or a lawyer,” but still in some deeper sense, Bickel felt, he Knew Hoffa to be guilty.
He asked John Seigenthaler, who was completing a year as a Neiman Fellow at Harvard, to come to Hickory Hill and help on the manuscript.
Most books and articles in America in the 1950s with titles like The Enemy Within had a single subject— communism.
But the enemy within, as Robert Kennedy saw it, was organized corruption, spreading from the underworld into labor, business and politics, expressing, he asserted, the moral sickness of a greedy society.
For the first time he had been forced to confront the power structures of organized labor, of organized business, of organized crime and of law enforcement.
He saw men lie, cry, run terrible risks, display great cowardice and great courage.
He learned, as in the case of the jolly rogue Frank Brewster, that he could quite like people of whom he morally disapproved.
The experience helped strengthen the instinct of sympathy within him—that instinct more or less repressed since childhood—and gave it for the first time social direction.
Moreover, he understood more than ever that toughness and concern were not necessarily enemies.
Too often, | think he felt that liberals articulated this sense of compassion, but never did anything about it....l think this is the thing that finally rang the bell with Bobby Kennedy.
John Kennedy himself said later of his younger brother, “He might once have been intolerant of liberals as such because his early experience was with that high-minded, high-speaking kind who never got anything done.
His concern with organized crime, for example, did not fit into their categories; such a preoccupation appeared unseemly and irrelevant.
Kennedy had proceeded into the jungle of labor racketeering, Kempton wrote in 1960, without guide or experience.
Robert Kennedy, Kempton wrote, looked upon labor racketeers as men who had betrayed a priesthood.
When John Kennedy came up for reelection in 1958, Robert’s main contribution was to fly to Boston and hear the returns.
Preoccupied with the Rackets Committee and then with The Enemy Within, Robert did not enter the campaign full-time until the end of 1959.
Later Stephen Smith, who had married Jean Kennedy in 1956, took charge in an inconspicuous Washington office.
He was thirty-one years old, had received his political Initiation in John Kennedy’s 1958 campaign, was softspoken, sharp and funny.
In the course of the year Robert added David Hackett, the great friend of his youth.
Then his old chum told him over the phone that, since he had done so well in English at Milton, he would be ideal to handle Senator Kennedy’s political correspondence.
The next day John asked Salinger with some asperity who had authorized it.
Inside the campaign he was the tireless invigorator and goad, responsible for everything except the speeches.
Outside he became the man to do the harsh jobs, saying no, telling people off, whipping the reluctant and the recalcitrant into line.
When reporters began in due course to write about the “well-oiled Kennedy machine,” the myth arose that the Kennedys were master political planners.
Governor Michael DiSalle of Ohio, a jovial veteran of Truman days, aspired to be his state’s favorite son.
Kennedy offered DiSalle this distinction if DiSalle would agree to endorse him forthwith for President.
DiSalle knew that Kennedy could probably beat him in the primary but had no desire to be the first governor to come out for Kennedy—among other reasons, perhaps, because Truman was so hostile to the Kennedys.
Robert Kennedy and John Bailey met DiSalle to put on additional pressure.
This left the Kennedys free to concentrate on their first critical test —Wisconsin.
Though he and John Kennedy were in broad agreement on issues, their lives could hardly have been more different.
Nearly forty-nine, six years older than Kennedy, Humphrey had come of age during the depression, growing up a druggist’s son amidst the dust storms of South Dakota.
He worked his way through college, taught, entered politics and flashed into national attention as the fiery champion of civil rights in the Democratic convention of 1948.
He was a man of swift intelligence, immense sympathy and great gusto, a stem-winding orator in the style of midwestern populism, sentimental, vulnerable, accommodating, a generous and open man but easily hurt and not always easily forgiving.
His implacably loyal wife, Muriel, joined him in Wisconsin, as did a group of devoted supporters from Minnesota, especially Orville Freeman, the able governor, and the witty and somewhat cynical congressman Eugene McCarthy. “1 should be the candidate for President,” McCarthy was supposed to have said.
Kennedy said, “Well, Joe, there’s this old saying in Boston politics, never trust a Catholic politician who reads his missal in the trolley carn”) Humphrey’s Minnesotans worked hard.
Patrick Lucey, the state chairman, told him he should decide whether to be manager or campaigner.
A slight figure—he lost a pound a week in Wisconsin—bare headed, his collar turned up against the icy March winds, he drove from town to town along roads piled high with snow, stopping at high schools, Rotary clubs and political rallies to explain why his brother should be President.
One was an Italian American named Jerry Bruno, whom John Kennedy had persuaded the summer before to leave his job on the staff of Senator William Proxmire and organize Kennedy clubs around the state.
Bruno had dropped out of school in the ninth grade; but, as he later wrote, “John and Robert Kennedy sized you up very quickly.
If the meeting was a success, credit went to the candidate; if a failure, everyone blamed the advance man.
Forty-six years old, of Canadian birth, at one period very close to the Communist party, at another a devotee of Joe McCarthy, he had lived by his wits on the fringes of the labor movement and the Democratic party.
With gravelly voice, authoritative manner and unlimited effrontery, he was a natural-born con man.
He took cheerful delight in causing trouble and in reorganizing the truth.
When Helen Keyes of Boston came to help in Wisconsin, Robert Kennedy committed her to Corbin’s doubtful protection.
He was prepared thereafter to do anything he conceived to be in Kennedy’s interests, whether or not Kennedy, if he had known what Corbin intended, would have approved.
In time Corbin even became a Catholic himself in order to have Robert and Ethel as godparents.
His impudence perhaps touched some Irish folk memory; Corbin could have been a character out of Ed O’Connor’s Boston.
His entirely cynical view of people’s motives was joined to wondrous investigative skills.
Robert Kennedy himself was defensive about him and on occasion exasperated by him.
In later years, Robert McNamara, hearing of some Corbin mischief, suggested that he be given a lie detector test.
And, though he was not sure that the Kennedys were responsible, he was enraged by the anonymous mailing of anti-Catholic tracts to Catholic households across the state.
Whenever Kennedy shook hands with a nun, the picture appeared in the papers.
Corbin, inviting a group of seminarians to a Kennedy rally, begged them to wear sport Shirts.
But, after a harrowing night, it was evident that the margin was too small to be conclusive.
Commentators diminished it further by attributing it to the crossover of Catholic Republicans.
In an election-night interview Walter Cronkite of CBS asked John Kennedy about the Catholic vote.
In fact, the agreement had not been communicated to Cronkite, and he was to have many more interviews with both Kennedys.
In December, the reply came, no one had known that Kennedy was a Catholic.
Once that is done and in Jack’s speeches he gives answers to rational questions, then he must go on to show that there is something more important to those people than anything to do with religion.
John Kennedy addressed the religious issue—“Nobody asked me if | was a Catholic when | joined the United States Navy”22—and a state filled with kindly and patriotic people responded to the appeal for tolerance.
He was genuinely appalled by what he saw as he traveled across the verdant countryside— hungry, hollow-eyed children, dispirited families living on cornmeal and surplus lard, gray, dismal towns, despair about the future.
Arriving at the tipple of coal mines as the shifts were changing, he would speak to the miners —“My name is Bob Kennedy.
My brother is running for President. | want your help”—shake their hands and then drive on, his own hands now black with coal dust, his face grim.
Shortly after Wisconsin he asked Franklin D Roosevelt, Jr., to meet with his sons in Palm Beach.
So in July 1957 John Kennedy had made his speech in the Senate calling for the independence of Algeria.
Kennedy was criticizing an ally, imperiling the unity of NATO and so on.
Joseph Kennedy privately told James Landis the speech was bad policy and bad politics.
But when John Kennedy, disturbed by the criticism, called his father, Mr Kennedy said, “You lucky mush.
When John entered the room a moment later, his father said emphatically that he would bet a million dollars in Las Vegas on winning the nomination and the election.
Slating provided a quasilegal cover under which money flowed to local politicians in the guise of campaign expenses.
Obviously, our highest possible contribution was peanuts compared to what they had received from the Kennedy organization.”42 “| must tell you,” Walter Lippmann had written John Kennedy in January, “that | do not look forward with any pleasure to the contest between Humphrey and you.
You both will be doing and saying things that as President you would wish you hadn't had to say and do.”43 “| can’t afford to run through this state with a little black bag and a checkbook,” Humphrey cried as the tide began to turn.
They also decided that the retaliation should come, not directly from the Kennedys, but from Franklin Roosevelt, to whom they passed on the material.
What happened thereafter is beyond the capacity of history to reconstruct.
Roosevelt’s memory is that, as Humphrey became more intemperate, he was under insistent pressure, especially from Robert Kennedy, to bring up Humphrey’s war record.
According to O’Brien, Roosevelt, exasperated by ‘Humphrey’s demagoguery, brought it up on his own.
Humphrey had in fact been turned down by both services during the war because of physical disabilities.
He later wrote that his organization “made repeated contacts with the Kennedys demonstrating the untruth of the allegations.
But he praised Roosevelt’s contribution to the Campaign, which indeed had been great, and kept him on as a campaigner.
Robert Kennedy and O’Donnell did not think their gains had sufficed to overcome the anti-Catholic prejudice.
Others urged Humphrey to keep his delegates together till the convention.
Rauh said this would only prove that Humphrey was part of a stop-Kennedy movement.
Humphrey approved it, “and | called Bobby Kennedy,” Rauh said later, “and read it to him.
Of course, we thought it was Senator Kennedy coming over to thank Hubert.
Everybody walked backwards, and there was a path from the door to the other side of the room where Hubert and Muriel were standing.
I’ve always wondered whether she had on her mind at that moment that she was going to poke him because she was really not very happy about the outcome.
Anyway, he was very nice and very gracious, and it was the right thing for him to have done.
But at the moment, it was sure something.V Humphrey’s withdrawal left Lyndon Johnson, as Robert Kennedy had predicted in February, the principal opposition.
The shooting down of a CIA U2 over the Soviet Union and the consequent cancellation of the Paris conference between Khrushchev and Eisenhower now galvanized his candidacy.
If foreign affairs were crucial, Stevenson appeared the most qualified Democrat.
It seemed to some of us that he might develop enough strength to stop Kennedy without developing enough to nominate himself.
Early in June at Hyannis Port, Kennedy talked about Johnson with a mixture of admiration and despair.
Early in June | joined a group of liberals—Rauh, John Kenneth Galbraith, Henry Steele Commager, Arthur Goldberg, James MacGregor Burns and half a dozen others—in a statement endorsing Kennedy.
A few days later | received a letter on another matter from Robert Kennedy.
Well, North Dakota, they had the unit system ... we won it by half a vote.
Carmine de Sapio came to me and said what we’d like to do is make a deal—30 votes will go to Lyndon Johnson and then you'll get them all back on the second ballot. | said to hell with that; we’re going to win it on the first ballot.
If Kennedy did not win at once, there might have been, as O'Donnell later contended, some strength held in reserve, but there were also delegates, as in Pennsylvania, who would have left him after the first ballot.
Stevenson aroused far more emotion among the people who flocked around the sports arena.
But the operation organized on his behalf consisted not just of true believers, like Eleanor Roosevelt, Herbert Lehman, Thomas Finletter, James Doyle, George Ball; but of surprising newcomers, like Hubert Humphrey and Eugene McCarthy, who were thought to be for Johnson but had unexpectedly declared for Stevenson after they arrived in Los Angeles.
The Stevenson drive at the convention therefore struck many of us, from Reuther and Rauh to Robert Kennedy, as a Johnson front, organized to prevent a Kennedy nomination on the first ballot.
If it succeeded, Johnson, with his southern delegates and his potential support among northern bosses, appeared far more likely to benefit than Stevenson, a two-time loser with few delegates.
John Connally of Texas announced in press conference that Kennedy had Addison’s disease and was physically unfit for the Presidency.
Jean Kennedy Smith said, “I know, Daddy, but he’s challenged him toa debate”; and to Seigenthaler, “You'll see.
In a few moments the flash came by radio that Kennedy had accepted the challenge.
Kennedy, who probably had not Slept at all, fixed him with a cold eye and said, “Look, nobody asked you here.
Yet, when Joseph Tydings of Maryland misjudged the situation in Delaware and, by agreeing to a unit rule, lost the state to Johnson, he went at once to the Biltmore to tell Robert Kennedy he had blown Delaware.
Kennedy said, “The important thing is that you told me right away so that we knew it, so that we’re not counting on them.
Once again, | was impressed with the sharpness of his direction of the campaign.
He insisted practically on the name, address and telephone number of every half-vote.
There has been much speculation as to why and how John Kennedy chose Lyndon Johnson.
Early in 1965 Robert Kennedy read my account in the first draft of A Thousand Days—an account | had based in part ona memorandum written shortly after the event by Philip L Graham.
In 1960 Graham, the publisher of the Washington Post and one of the most brilliant and attractive men of my generation, had served as an intermediary between Johnson and Kennedy, both of whom he knew intimately.
He said what a mistake it was when it was such an important position that you only had twentyfour hours to think about it.” | asked why it had not been thought about earlier.
Presidential candidates always prefer to keep the vice presidential situation fluid until their own nomination is assured.
Key political figures who are led to think they might be under consideration for the Vice Presidency can be helpful in tight spots.
Beyond such time-honored tactics, however, John Kennedy unquestionably had given serious, if fragmentary, thought to the second place in the weeks before the convention.
He had asked Walter Reuther and Jack Conway to talk to Humphrey about going on the ticket,24 and he told Galbraith and me at Hyannis Port on June 12 that he was for Humphrey.
Edwin Guthman, who came down from Seattle to cover the convention, asked about his own senator, Henry Jackson, another veteran of the Investigations Subcommittee.
He added that Jackson would have to convince leaders like Mayor Daley of Chicago, Governor Lawrence of Pennsylvania and John Bailey that he could help the ticket the most.
Humphrey finally eliminated himself on Tuesday when he went back on the understanding that he would endorse Kennedy.
Graham in the meantime encouraged the Post to report that Kennedy would probably offer the Vice Presidency to Johnson.
When the Post containing this word was delivered to the District of Columbia delegation, Joseph Rauh, who had been laboring prodigiously to keep black delegates in line for Kennedy, went in some agitation to see Robert Kennedy.
Kennedy assured him, as he had before, that it would definitely not be Johnson.
John Kennedy became pale with anger, so evidently wounded that it took a moment before he could collect himself.
At eleven o’clock a labor group—Reuther, Arthur Goldberg, Jack Conway, Alex Rose—came to see Kennedy.
Robert Kennedy thereupon saw Johnson twice—first to feel him out; then, after further consultation, to ask him to withdraw.
So | said, “There's going to be a lot of opposition”’—this was what we worked out, that I'd tell him there was going to be a lot of opposition, that it was going to be unpleasant, that it was going to focus attention, and we were going to have trouble with the liberals ... and the President didn’t think that he wanted to go through that kind of an unpleasant fight.
Instead Robert Kennedy proposed that Johnson become chairman of the national committee.
The President wanted him to play an important role and he could run the party—the idea being that to run the party he could get a lot of his own people in; and then if he wanted to be President after eight years or something, he could have the machinery where he could run for President or do whatever he wanted. | mean that was son of the idea at the time.
We didn’t really know whether he’d want to go through with it, and, in any case, the President wanted to get rid of him.
As Kennedy spoke his lines, Johnson, he said, burst into tears. | mean, it was my feeling at that time, although I’ve seen him afterwards look so sad | don't know whether it was just an act.
So it was that kind of a conversation. | said, “Well, then that’s fine.
Graham remembered his calling John Kennedy, Kennedy’s reassuring Graham (“Bobby’s been out of touch and doesn’t know what’s been happening”), reassuring Johnson, then speaking to his brother.
John Kennedy told him, “ ‘I just got a call from Clark Clifford or somebody saying that “this is disastrous.
Robert Kennedy said to James Rowe, “My God, this wouldn’t have happened except that we were all too tired last night.
The sun was setting, and Robert Kennedy’s children were splashing ina fountain in front of Marion Davies’s house.
Mr Kennedy, ina velvet smoking jacket, stood grandly in the doorway, his hands clasped behind his back, as John Kennedy drove up.
He had had nothing to do with the Johnson decision, despite later stories to the contrary, nor is it easy to imagine why he should have intervened in favor of Johnson on Thursday after having been called pro-Nazi by Johnson on Tuesday.
Once, when Theodore White was chatting with a couple of Kennedy aides in the Washington headquarters, the manager, tieless and in shirtsleeves, burst into the cramped office.
The morning after Kennedy’s nomination, | began urging the importance of bringing the Stevenson people into the campaign.
Robert Kennedy listened patiently, then put his hand on my knee and said, “Arthur, human nature requires that you allow us forty-eight hours.
In forty-eight hours | will do anything you want, but right now | don’t want to hear about the Stevensonians.
Eventually most of the Stevenson leaders and even Johnson’s John Connally received jobs in the Kennedy administration.
Where it was weak, he worked through the Citizens for Kennedy Committee, headed by Byron White of Colorado.
White, an all-American football player, PT-boat veteran and Rhodes Scholar, represented a combination of accomplishments irresistible to the Kennedys.
He sent William Walton, urbane and shrewd, to pull the Kennedy operation together in the city.
Professor Richard Wade, the Kennedy coordinator in the Rochester area, told Corbin he had to stop promising the embassy in Ecuador; he had already offered it to three people; there were nineteen republics down there, and he could at least spread his offers around.
Kennedy traveled from state to state lashing local Democrats into activity.
Ralph Horton, the Kennedy coordinator in Nebraska, had gone to Choate with John Kennedy (whom he had joined in inventing an underground society called the Muckers) and had known Robert as a little boy.
Kennedy, said Tydings, was “absolutely strong, steel-willed, didn’t mind telling a mayor of a city or governor or anyone else what he thought if he stepped out of line.
Tydings added that Kennedy only got rough at the top; “he was never unkind or inconsiderate of anybody who was down in the lower echelon”; he was “fantastic” with volunteers, particularly with women and with the young.
The fight between the regulars, organized by the forceful professional Jesse Unruh, and the liberals, led by Thomas Braden, then a newspaper publisher in Oceanside, was more than usually embittered.
Joan Braden thought Kennedy “the most terrific man to work for that I’ve ever known.
The former President gave the young campaign manager a genial scolding.
Kennedy protested that the stories were exaggerated; he was not such a monster.
The brothers had been entirely devoid of racial prejudice but only intermittently sensitive to racial injustice.
The debate over the Civil Rights Act of 1957 had begun John Kennedy’s education.
McClellan, for some reason, got furious with him and threw the various union cards in his face.
In 1959 John Kennedy was ready to welcome what white southern support he could get.
At the same time, the Kennedys fully intended to stand for civil rights in the north, and believed they could do so without undue harm to their southern prospects.
He had carried the black vote, he said, simply because Senator Robert Byrd, an ex-Klansman, had backed Humphrey.
In May the candidate had asked Sargent Shriver to organize a civil rights section in the campaign.
Shriver brought in Harris Wofford, an ardent young law professor, recommended by Chester Bowles and Father Theodore Hesburgh, as civil rights coordinator.
In one of those morning meetings at the Biltmore, Robert told the Kennedy organizers that this was “the best civil rights plank the Democratic party has ever had” and directed them to carry the word that the Kennedy forces were “unequivocally” for it.
Wofford, astonished, felt like crying out to Kennedy that the plank was beyond where they really wanted to go; they had written it expecting it to be cut down.
Martin Luther King, Jr., the Baptist preacher who had emerged as the most eloquent southern leader in the battle for racial justice, was arrested in Atlanta for sitting in in a department store.
Six months before he had received a suspended sentence and probation for a minor traffic transgression in DeKalb County, Georgia.
Though the Atlanta authorities released him, the DeKalb County judge seized the opportunity to sentence him to four months of hard labor for violating probation.
The sentence was frightening to all who knew what hard labor in Georgia might mean, especially for uppity blacks.
King's wife, who was five months pregnant, was wild with concern—all the more so when King was brusquely awakened at four-thirty one morning, put in handcuffs and leg chains, removed from the county jail, transported along dark country roads and deposited ina penitentiary deep in rural Georgia.
Then Governor Ernest Vandiver of Georgia begged the candidate not to issue it; it would be politically disastrous in the south, and he would get King out himself.
Wofford thought it might be a good idea for John Kennedy to speak to her.
Louis Martin, the wise black newspaperman from Chicago, also working in the civil rights section, agreed.
King phoned Wofford the next morning to say how wonderful Bowles was to call.
Wofford finally reached Shriver, who tracked down Kennedy in a motel in the Chicago airport.
As has often been told, Shriver waited for everyone else to leave the room, fearing that general discussion would kill the idea.
Later in the day, as the party was arriving in Detroit, he said casually to Salinger, “By the way, | talked to Mrs.
Khrushchev or Martin Luther King, it would end Kennedy hopes in the south.
At the same time he was personally angered by the judge’s refusal to grant bail to Dr.
Seigenthaler, who had been hearing all day from southern leaders about John Kennedy’s phone call, thought it a poor idea.
Seigenthaler drove him to the airport, confident that he had been dissuaded from calling the judge.
Later in the day the wire services began querying the headquarters about a story that a brother of the senator had called the judge and asked for King’s release.
Kennedy said, “Yes, it just burned me all the way up here on the plane.
The conversation, Kennedy added, was restrained and calm; he had not been angry nor the judge hostile.
The brothers, in making their phone calls, had acted independently of each other.
A Southerner is a warm-blooded soul who likes his potlikker and his politics hot.
George McGovern, running for the Senate in South Dakota, called to say that he was falling behind; could the national committee send someone out to help.
Robert Kennedy knew that McGovern was in trouble because of his staunch support of John Kennedy in an anti-Catholic state.
To McGovern’s astonishment he flew out to South Dakota himself on the Friday before the election.
After a series of soeeches, they sent him back to Chicago on a bitterly cold, windy night, ina lightweight plane with an inexperienced pilot, a local doctor.
By October he was thin, weary, deep gray circles under his eyes, his shoulders slumped with fatigue.
If Kennedy debates with Nixon on who can best manage the status quo, he is lost.
By midnight people were wandering restlessly, almost grimly, around the communications center in Robert Kennedy’s house.
John Kennedy strolled with Cornelius Ryan across the dark lawn between the houses in the compound.
Ryan thought he heard Kennedy say, “I’m angry,” and supposed that the awful wait had finally Snapped the imperturbable composure.
Later, when Theodore White put the story in the manuscript of his book, Kennedy told White, “That isn’t what | said in the dark.
More than a third of the states were going one way or another by a percent of the vote or less.
If he won by a single electoral vote, it would be enough, and he proposed to go forward on the assumption that he had been elected President of the United States.
Someone at Hyannis Port observed that Nixon might at least have had the decency to appear himself and thank the people who had voted for him.
Earlier in the autumn Walter Reuther and Jack Conway had come to Hyannis Port.
It was a crisp fall day, but the sun was warm, and the labor men sat pleasantly on the beach talking with Jacqueline Kennedy.
Gunmen had tried to kill Walter Reuther in 1948 and Victor Reuther in 1949.
Don’t let the precautions run your life, Reuther said; you can’t stop living.
He went down for a pass, and someone ran into him, and he fell to the ground.
The President-elect had a clear view, derived from the Roosevelt model, about what he sought in the State Department.
He was looking for someone who would be wise in counsel, persuasive on the Hill and effective in modernizing what he regarded as an unduly passive and conservative Foreign Service.
He had worked with Fulbright, knew him better, was very impressed with the way he ran the Senate committee.
Prior to the time he was appointed to the Foreign Relations Committee, he thought Fulbright to be rather pompous, opinionated, and didn’t like him too much.
It finally came down, the last week, to David Bruce and Dean Rusk and William Fulbright. | was very strongly against Fulbright. | felt ... that any time we took a position against any of the nations of Africa, or any time that we would take a position that was unpopular, that the Russians and the others would be able to say, “Well, this is all done because we have a Secretary of State who feels that the white man is superior to the Negro.” | said in the last analysis Jack was going to be the Secretary of State; this was a position in which he would be making his own decisions.
All he needed was advice and ideas by an expert but the decisions would be made by him and that we’d be unnecessarily burdened by having a man in that job who had this terrible impediment of having signed the Southern Manifesto.
Charlie Bartlett was there and took the position that Jack could appoint Fulbright. | was extremely strong against it and ultimately prevailed.
On the Friday before the selection, Jack was ready to take David Bruce.
Maggie Higgins was for him because she said he was tough with the Russians and would be able to stand up.
Nobody knew Dean Rusk particularly. | received word by noon that Robert Lovett was for Dean Rusk so | called up Jack just before he left for Florida and suggested that he call Robert Lovett.
It was the conversation with Lovett that convinced him that Dean Rusk should be the selection.
He came to Florida and the announcement was made the following Sunday afternoon.
Rusk had served in Truman’s State Department and was now head of the Rockefeller Foundation.
Rusk considered his first meeting with Kennedy a failure —“Kennedy and | could not communicate,” he told Bowles immediately afterward2—but Kennedy thought him lucid, competent and self-effacing and offered him the job.
He also mused over the curious fact that he and his brother had not considered the man who in retrospect would have made the best Secretary of State of all—Averell Harriman.
He was now sixty-nine years old, deaf in one ear, his tall figure a little stooped, his mien, now that he was out of power, tinged with melancholy.
He was twice Robert Kennedy’s age, and even John Kennedy saw him as a figure from the remote Rooseveltian past.
Nor was Harriman greatly admired by those of the Roosevelt generation the younger Kennedys knew best. | suppose that Joseph Kennedy thought as little of Harriman (whom Roosevelt had sent to London a few months after Kennedy had departed) as Harriman thought of him.
Max Beaverbrook, who had had memorable rows with Harriman during their Moscow mission in 1941,© often made cracks about him in subsequent years.
Both Kennedys changed their minds rapidly, of course, as the old crocodile got his teeth into things. | have often thought that the nation would have escaped much trouble in the 1960s if John Kennedy had chosen Averell Harriman as his Secretary of State.
We were not sure whether we wanted McNamara in the Treasury Department or going in as Secretary of Defense.
Gates could stay on as Secretary and possibly | would go in as Under-Secretary.
McNamara knew that he had a choice but he wanted to consider it over the weekend.
When he came in the following Monday he indicated that he wanted to be Secretary of Defense.
By that time Jack had made up his mind that one of the problems in keeping Gates was the fact that the political leaders including David Lawrence of Pennsylvania was concerned that Gates would come and run for Governor in the State of Pennsylvania and so they asked specifically that he not be retained.
The first conversation that Jack had with McNamara, he spoke to him about the possibility of hiring Franklin Roosevelt, Jr.
McNamara objected saying that the reports he had received on Franklin Roosevelt, Jr., were not very complimentary.
He had a letter with him which he presented to Jack, which set forth that McNamara had complete control over the collection of those in the Department of Defense.
Jack readily agreed as he had agreed verbally before. | put in a plug for Franklin Roosevelt, Jr., but it seemed to go on relatively blank ears.
Robert Kennedy asked them to find a place for John Kennedy’s old PT-boat friend Paul Fay in the Navy Department; and, having turned down Roosevelt for the secretaryship, McNamara decided to accept Fay for the under secretaryship.
As far as the Secretary of the Treasury was concerned , everybody was considered. | don’t think there is any question that the head of the Morgan bank—his name slips me right at the moment —would have received the job if during the course of the campaign he hadn’t come out as a political supporter of Richard Nixon just after Jack had gone to see him and had spent more than an hour with him.
In view of all the favors that Alsop had done | don’t think there’s any question that this was a factor.
However, obviously if Dillon hadn’t shaped up and hadn’t impressed Jack the decision would have been quite different.
There were some rumors around at the time his appointment was being considered that Clinton Anderson [of New Mexico, who had been Truman’s Secretary of Agriculture] himself was personally interested.
Jack called Clinton Anderson after it was virtually agreed that Stewart Udall would be the appointee and Clinton Anderson indicated that he was in fact interested.
We talked it over and the dangers of Clinton Anderson getting in there and putting in cronies and associates, a number of whom we had seen during the course of the campaign who were rather unsavory, unquestionably, and certainly of different viewpoints, different generation, ideas and thoughts as we have.
Finally, Jack called him and told him that he just thought that he had to go with Stewart Udall, that he didn't want to make Clinton Anderson give up his Senate position in seniority—it would be too dangerous.
Clinton Anderson bought it without any problem or difficulty so Stewart Udall was the first one agreed upon.
Hubert Humphrey and Stuart Symington pushed a Missouri farm leader named Fred V Heinkel.
Jack asked me to go in and interview him for a few moments to try to size him up. | asked him if he thought there was any solution to the problem in agriculture and he said that he thought there was, then mentioned as one of the major solutions to sell our surpluses abroad. | then asked what was the answer to the criticism of that made by those who said that it would “glut” the market and then therefore destroy the markets of countries such as the Argentine and Canada who were trying to sell wheat or meat to the same areas.
We had always considered as the second choice George McGovern but there was a good deal of opposition to him by the members of Congress on the Agricultural Committee.
They felt that he did not have the seniority which would warrant such an appointment.
This was his biggest problem and then the idea of appointing somebody who had just been defeated as a Congressional candidate was also a problem.
Finally ... we came back to Orville Freeman because of how impressed everybody was out in Los Angeles with him, his integrity and his vigor.
As far as George McGovern is concerned he was disappointed but | had told him right at the beginning that if he didn’t get this position he could be head of the Food for Peace [the agency distributing food surpluses abroad under Public Law 480]. | also told him | thought that if he was interested in ever running for political life again that the Food for Peace was a far better job.
He told me afterwards that it finally ended up that he was happy to be over as head of the Food for Peace.
Health, Education and Welfare went to Abe Ribicoff of Connecticut, to whom John Kennedy had originally offered Justice.
Working with Goldberg during the Rackets Committee had given both Kennedys confidence in his intelligence, resourcefulness and friendship.
But Goldberg’s name oddly was not on the list of candidates submitted by George Meany on behalf of the AFL-CIO, and Goldberg himself had reservations about accepting the job.
Jack wanted to finish the selection of the Cabinet at an early date because it had been delayed so much.
Somebody suggested Edward Day as a businessman and without a great deal of thought, without really clearing it through any political figures, Jack called him on the phone and asked him to be Postmaster General and he accepted.
It probably would have been better politically to have chosen somebody else but | was sure, at least based on the first month or so, that Edward Day would turn out well.
We always thought, looking back on it though, that this was a decision that was made with too much alacrity and that perhaps somebody else would have been more deserving.
Edward Day had not been active in the Campaign and had been difficult to contact when we needed his help.
This was much on his mind when | lunched with him in Washington on December 15.
Effective as the Senate and Campaign staffs had been, he said, the President needed some new people around him.
Moreover, the two staffs—the Sorensen group and the O’Donnell group—did not get along too well.
He asked me how | proposed to serve my country. | said that two weeks earlier his brother had asked whether | would be interested in an ambassadorship.
He turned to other matters. | heard nothing more and really supposed that this had been a passing courtesy.
On January 9, John Kennedy came to Massachusetts to address the legislature.
He said that he didn’t know what he would be doing as President either but guessed there would be enough to keep us both busy.
IV In 1965 | asked Robert Kennedy whether he had given any thought to working in the White House himself.
So for brothers—or at least for the two of us—we had to have our own areas. | had to be apart from what he was doing so | wasn't working directly for him and getting orders from him as to what | should do that day.
In June 1960 John Kennedy had said to me, “If I’d been knocked out of the presidential thing, | would have put Bobby into the Massachusetts picture to run for governor.
The first choice would be public service; second choice as an interim thing, would be a college presidency maybe.
But in the same breath, | don’t believe that you ought to take this job.
Ithought with the name the same, and brothers, | would be creating so many problems in civil rights.
They were going to keep Gates on... and then Gates would retire and | would become Secretary.
At Christmas time in 1959 Eunice Shriver, joking about the future, said, “Bobby we'll make Attorney General so he can throw all the people Dad doesn’t like into jail.
Having been turned down by Ribicoff, Kennedy decided to test the water.
Homer Cummings, Franklin Roosevelt’s first Attorney General, had once been chairman of the Democratic National Committee.
Eisenhower had given the job to Herbert Brownell, his campaign manager.
When | talked with John Kennedy on December 1, he still seemed undecided. | mentioned Orville Freeman.
But when he sounded out William Blair that evening, the word returned that Stevenson preferred foreign affairs.
John Kennedy needed someone in the cabinet whom he knew intimately and trusted utterly.
The reaction to the trial balloon suggested that criticism would be sharp but transient and, if Robert did as well as his brother expected, quickly forgotten.
James McInerney, his first boss at Justice a decade earlier, said he shouldn't do it.
Justice Douglas said that Kennedy would serve with distinction and that the voices of his critics would be drowned out by his achievements.
Taking Seigenthaler with him, Robert set out the next morning for his brother’s house in Georgetown.
John Kennedy replied at length and with emphasis, addressing his remarks as if to Seigenthaler.
With that, he pushed back his chair, got up and went into the kitchen, as if for more coffee.
He had tried for a moment to escape his brother and confirm an independent identity.
But, if his brother wanted him, he would not say no—a sacrifice of himself to which John and Jacqueline Kennedy responded in their separate styles.
For Christmas they gave him a copy of The Enemy Within handsomely rebound in red leather by a London bookbinder, title and author inscribed in gold.
Vi | lunched with him the day he had agreed to become Attorney General.
He wrote in the 1961 memorandum, “Once | had made up my mind ... | was glad it was all behind.
Arthur Goldberg was a great support as were some of the labor people generally.
On the other hand the building trades met in Washington and sent an emissary to Jack telling him that he shouldn’t appoint me as they would consider it with disfavor.
More than any executive officer, Bickel wrote, the Attorney General is required to regard means as above ends, process above results.
James O Eastland, the committee chairman, was a combination of Mississippi demagogue and Washington cynic.
Robert Kennedy, with his Irish weakness for rogues, liked Eastland, however, and Eastland evidently liked him too.
When Kennedy called on him before the hearings, Eastland leaned back in his chair, his face wreathed in cigar smoke, and ruminated about the Department of Justice.
Actually, they wouldn’t have been tough questions because there wasn’t much | was prepared to say.
On the morning of January 13, 1961, Robert Kennedy rather nervously entered the gleaming marble and walnut-paneled hearing room of the Judiciary Committee.
Eastland read into the record messages of support from Whitney North Seymour, president of the American Bar Association, and from J Edgar Hoover.
Everett Dirksen of Illinois, the Republican leader, began the questioning.
He saluted Kennedy’s “impeccable character” but pointed out that the Attorney General-designate had never practiced law in any state or federal court.
Senator Roman Hruska of Nebraska pursued the inexperience point with dogged fervor.
Kennedy’s old friends from the Rackets Committee, John McClellan and Sam Ervin, intervened from time to time, defending his experience under them.
Asked about a national crime commission, he said that he had already worked out an arrangement with the FBI, the Bureau of Narcotics and the Internal Revenue Service for the pooling of intelligence; he planned to give this a try first.
A week later, with only one senator speaking in opposition—Gordon Allott, a conservative Republican from Colorado—the Senate confirmed Robert Kennedy as Attorney General of the United States.
Vil Robert Kennedy turned thirty-five two months before he was sworn in as Attorney General.
Only two of his sixty-three predecessors had been younger—Caesar Augustus Rodney, thirty-five by a bare two weeks when Jefferson made him Attorney General in 1807, and Richard Rush, thirty-three when appointed by Madison in 1814.
In the days of Rodney and Rush, however, Attorneys General were private lawyers on presidential retainer.
They kept up their own law business on the side and did not even live in Washington.
It was not until 1853 that an Attorney General—Caleb Cushing—took up full-time residence in the capital, nor until 1870 that the Department ofjustice was established.
The Attorney General, as the government’s chief legal officer, had a wide mandate throughout the executive branch.
The Department of Justice was by tradition as well as by function a citadel of the status quo—or at least of stare decisis.
Despite the hostile comment, Robert Kennedy was not wholly unqualified.
In one field of importance to law enforcement—organized crime—he knew considerably more than his critics.
As for the argument that he lacked courtroom experience, John Kennedy thought this quite missed the point.
He wanted first-class lawyers who would be strong, nonpolitical and young.
Secretary of the Army, Secretary of the Air Force, deputy attorney general.
He was a man of stern and circumspect intelligence, realistic judgment, dry humor and solid legal proficiency.
He also was well acquainted among the lawyers of his generation, especially where the writ of the Yale Law School ran, and he now recruited some of the best for his new Department.
They were all Democrats who saw themselves as heirs of the great legal generation of the New Deal, but they were without partisan inclination.
Their qualities—integrity, judgment, drive, understatement, personal reserve—commended them to Kennedy.
Kennedy was temperamentally more attuned to the result-oriented jurisprudence propagated in New Haven than to the processoriented jurisprudence of Cambridge; to William O Douglas, say, than to Felix Frankfurter.
The appointment of Professor Archibald Cox of the Harvard Law School to the post of solicitor general, the third-ranking job in the Department, broke the Yale monopoly.
Cox had worked with the President-elect on labor legislation and had headed his research staff in the 1960 campaign.
He was already celebrated, at least in the law school world, for his patrician bearing, direct and lucid mind, crisp style, crew-cut hair and bow ties, the last abandoned when he dressed himself magnificently in swallow-tailed coat to argue before the Supreme Court.
William O Douglas and Sam Rayburn urged the appointment of the youngest of the assistant attorneys general, Ramsey Clark of Texas, thirty-three years old, to head the Lands Division.
Clark’s father had been Attorney General under Truman and was now on the Supreme Court, and Clark himself had met Professor Katzenbach at the Chicago Law School.
For Antitrust, Sargent Shriver and Hubert Humphrey recommended Lee Loevinger of Minnesota, forty-eight years old and the oldest of the new appointees.
The head of the Criminal Division, Herbert J Miller, Jr., was a Republican whom Kennedy had known as a member of the Board of Monitors appointed by the courts in a vain effort to clean up the Teamsters.
For his personal staff Kennedy drew on newspaper friends from Rackets Committee days.
John Seigenthaler became his administrative assistant, Edwin Guthman his press man.
Byron White brought from Denver as his deputy Joseph Dolan, who had worked for John Kennedy on Senate committees and had served in the Colorado legislature.
Seigenthaler, Guthman and Dolan helped segregate the rest of the cast from the importunings of politics.
It was the most brilliantly staffed department we had seen ina long, long time, and that was very impressive.
Over the next years Kennedy filled it with sofas, tables, lamps, children’s photographs, a varnished sailfish over the mantlepiece, an old blunderbuss on the wall, a model of a Chinese junk on a table, a stuffed tiger standing near the fireplace.
There were chimneys sticking up at wrong angles and roads that were going everywhere and airplanes that were flying through what they said was the air.
But they were wild, beautiful colors, the kind of thing that would jump out of a child’s imagination and fantasy.
Kennedy wandered the corridors, put his head into offices to find out what was going on, talked to people who had worked in the Department for years without ever speaking to an Attorney General.
Patricia Collins, a lawyer who had first come to Justice when Robert Kennedy was nine years old and had served fourteen Attorneys General, said, “We never had an Attorney General who had close personal relationship with the staff.
He carried the personal touch to the outlying parts of his domain—federal attorneys through the country, FBI offices, immigration and naturalization offices, prisons.
As an administrator, he matched his taste in selecting associates by his readiness to leave them alone.
He expected the assistant attorneys general to keep him informed about anything they were doing that might have public implications, but did not interfere unless they requested his counsel or support.
In that event he supported you and shared the blame even if what you did turned out to bea mistake.
He never hesitated to put the heads of the Tax, Lands, Legal Counsel and Civil offices (Oberdorfer, Clark, Katzenbach, Douglas) into civil rights, or his civil rights and lands men into antitrust.
They dispatched word about his virtues to the bar associations and the law schools.
They took care always to call him Bob, rightly supposing that his detractors used the diminutive in order to emphasize youth and imply unfitness for a serious job.
They saw themselves, in the romantic tide of Edwin Guthman’s memoir of the period, as a band of brothers.
IX Below the top staff, he exerted control, according to mood and need, through humor, through brusqueness, through solicitude.
When Angie Novello admonished him in a plaintive memorandum that “it would be extremely helpful if the Attorney General of the United States ... would notify his immediate staff of his whereabouts at all times,” Kennedy returned it with a handwritten scrawl, “What if I’m lost.
He clasps his hands as if in prayer and regards his clenched knuckles with a cataleptic stare.
His face, when it lacks that boyish, photogenic grin, is not a pleasant sight.
It has a certain bony harshness and those ice-blue eyes are not the smiling ones that Irishmen sing songs about.
Joseph Dolan, who worked closely with him for eight years, thought him exceptionally self-contained.
Over the resistance of career officials he had a gymnasium built on the roof of the Department.
Ethel arranged for a Snack bar with tables and umbrellas in the courtyard.
J Edgar Hoover THE CENTER of institutional resistance was the Federal Bureau of Investigation.
The FBI, the largest single unit within Justice, disposed of nearly 50 percent of the Department’s thirty thousand employees and over 40 percent of its budget.
Its director, technically a subordinate official, had far more power and fame than his nominal chiefs.
Rarely had any institution been so totally the lengthened shadow of a single man.
It must not, he said, concern itself “with political or other opinions of individuals"" but only with conduct forbidden by the laws of the United States.
In 1933, when Stone, now on the Supreme Court, heard that the newly elected Franklin Roosevelt might replace Hoover, he sent Felix Frankfurter a powerful letter urging the director’s retention.— The Bureau of Investigation (Hoover added Federal to the title in 1935) soon gained a quiet reputation, largely deserved, as an effective, technologically advanced and lawabiding organization manned by fearless and incorruptible agents.
The director proved himself adept at modernizing his methods, at dominating his subordinates and at propitiating his superiors.
To first-class administrative Capacity he joined unexpected talent for showmanship.
Beginning in 1934, articles, books and movies began to pour out celebrating the G-men and their victories over crime.
Roosevelt, confident of his ability to control Hoover, charged him with investigations of Nazi and Communist activities in the United States.
National security was now propelling Hoover across Stone’s line between conduct and opinion.
When war broke out in Europe, Hoover was forty-four years old; he had been director since he was twenty-nine.
Pearl Harbor increased his conviction that he alone knew how to protect the nation from subversive forces.
He established a catchall “Security Index” listing people the FBI thought should be locked up in time of national emergency.
In 1943 Attorney General Francis Biddle ordered him to destroy the list.
He instructed his agents to change the label on the files, to “continue to prepare and maintain security index cards” and, above all, not to mention it to anyone outside the Bureau.
So did his command of Congress, his manipulation and intimidation of the press, his stature in the country.
Edgar will in all probability get this backward looking Congress to give him what he wants.
Truman’s comment suggested the widening gap between the inside perception of the director and the popular myth.
Those who dealt closely with the great patriot came to know his authoritarian instincts, his profoundly right-wing prejudices, his egomania and his vindictiveness.
They knew his agitation over “bleeding hearts,” “professional dogooders” and other malefactors.
They felt that Hoover had too much power and too little accountability.
Its standards compared favorably to those of most police forces at home and abroad.
A decade before the Miranda decision, Hoover had instructed FBI agents to advise persons in custody of their rights to silence and a lawyer.
They were under instructions to fire only in self-defense or the defense of others; there was no shooting down of people in flight.
After her death his cherished companion was an FBI associate, Clyde Tolson.
He had a brother and sister, but George Allen could not recollect his ever mentioning them.
He was obsessed by what he saw as a decline in sexual morality and was exercised even over the personal appearance of FBI agents.
He feared germs, hated flies and could not abide people, especially agents, stepping on his shadow.
Subordinates who displeased him were exiled to remote places like Butte, Montana.
In time Hoover’s Bureau began to take on the internal lineaments of the Communist party he so fervently hated.
Survivors developed great skill in sending Hoover worshipful letters and collecting funds to give him elaborate presents on Christmas and his birthday.
As the director grew older, no flattery became too gross for him to swallow.
He regularly misused Bureau employees, equipment and funds for entirely personal purposes.
Subordinates rushed to do whatever he told them, zany as his orders might sometimes sound.
After inspection of a new agent training class, Hoover told the instructor, “One of them is a pinhead.
The instructor dared ask no more but surreptitiously looked at my the class.
For days thereafter special agents patrolled the Canadian and Mexican borders looking for they knew not what.
Since the work was done on government time, Sullivan recommended that the royalties go to charity.
Support for the FBI became a patriotic duty, Hoover himself a national idol.
The moment he would get something on a Senator, he would ... advise the Senator that “We’re in the course of an investigation and by chance happened to come upon this data on your daughter.
Hoover was nowhere regarded with more veneration, or fear, than in Congress.
The House Appropriations Committee always gave him all the money he requested and, on occasion, more.
The Senate Appropriations Committee hardly ever asked him to appear at all.
In Congress criticism of Hoover was a form of lese majesté—a fact forgotten in later years by congressional committees when they piously condemned executive officials for reluctantly yielding the FBI a latitude that every Congress for a generation had demanded that they accord him enthusiastically and reverently.
Roosevelt might have contemplated getting rid of Hoover, but there is no compelling evidence even of that.
None of his successors seriously considered taking so drastic a step—a step that would have enraged Congress and the country.
The FBI, as Dean Rusk, a cautious man, said in 1974, had “developed into an extraordinarily independent agency within our Government.
Mr Hoover, in effect, took orders only from himself, sometimes from an Attorney General, usually from a President, and that was it.
Through the years, the FBI had depended on a variety of investigative methods.
Most important, from the viewpoint of obtaining convictions, were 'informants' — members of or infiltrators into groups under suspicion.
The advantage of informants was that their testimony could be used in court.
Other techniques were employed to gain ‘strategic’ intelligence rather than to build legal cases.
Bugging required ‘trespass’ if the bug was planted inside a person’s room; nontrespassory bugs were also possible.
Then there was ‘surreptitious entry’ or ‘black bag’ jobs—breaking into an office or dwelling in order to copy papers or for other purposes, such as, very often, the installation of a bug.
And there was ‘mail opening’—intercepting and photographing personal letters.
Since some of the things it was doing were patently illegal means to allegedly patriotic ends, it was not the habit of Attorneys General to inquire too closely.
Of the FBI methods, only one—wiretapping (as distinct from bugging)—required the Attorney General’s specific authorization.
When Harlan Stone reorganized the Bureau of Investigation in 1924, he had banned wiretapping.
A Seattle bootlegger named Olmstead, protested that wiretapping was a form of unreasonable search and therefore forbidden by the Fourth Amendment.
In 1928 the Supreme Court ruled in the Olmstead case that wiretapping did not breach the Constitution.
Faced with the anomaly that one of his bureaus was tapping while another was forbidden to do so, Herbert Hoover’s Attorney General removed Stone’s ban on tapping by the Bureau of Investigation.
The Supreme Court soon ruled that wiretap evidence and evidence derived from wiretap leads were inadmissible in federal courts.
He added his hope that Congress would authorize tapping under safeguards.
Wiretapping was not the black-and-white issue it became in later years.
Ardent New Dealers like Henry Morgenthau, Jr., Harold Ickes and Fiorello La Guardia favored tapping for their own presumably benign purposes.
Moreover, the rise of Hitler and fears of his Fifth Column argued for vigilance.
This strained construction licensed the FBI to tap wires and disseminate the results within the government.
Jackson, who regarded the whole business with distaste, thereafter left the problem to Hoover without himself passing on each case.
Francis Biddle, his successor in 1941, established the practice of case-by-case authorization by the Attorney General, sometimes turning down Hoover’s requests.
Roosevelt saw wiretapping primarily as a wartime measure of counterespionage.
In 1946 Attorney General Tom Clark, transmitting a draft prepared in the Bureau, asked Truman to renew Roosevelt’s 1940 authorization.
Thereafter Hoover claimed that the Roosevelt memorandum authorized the FBI to tap in a wide variety of cases, though still with case-by-case approval by the Attorney General.
State and local police were tapping happily in at least half the states.
In most of these states wiretap evidence was admissible in state courts.
The rise of the unwired microphone—the ‘bug’—gave the FBI a means of electronic surveillance they used without application to the Attorney General.
In 1952, however, Attorney General Howard McGrath caught on and forbade the Bureau to install bugs involving trespass.
But in 1954 Hoover procured a memorandum from Attorney General Herbert Brownell envisaging “the unrestricted use” of bugs “in the national interest” and omitting to require case-by-case authorization from the Attorney General.
Hoover took the Brownell memorandum as a general license for bugging, even with trespass.
He could now switch back and forth, using bugs when he wanted to minimize an Attorney General’s knowledge, taps when he wanted to maximize an Attorney General’s complicity.
With so minuscule an advantage in the popular vote, the President-elect was not about to take liberties with a national icon.
In the 1950s Robert had had more direct dealings than his brother with the director.
His early impulse no doubt had been to place Hoover in the Great American Patriot niche along with Herbert Hoover and Douglas MacArthur.
It’s what kept Hoover happy for three years because he had the idea that he had direct contact with the President, and he used to tell me that every month, | guess, Franklin Roosevelt used to have him over for lunch.
Amenities were carefully observed between the Attorney General and the director.
Kennedy conspicuously omitted to introduce us, remarking later that he had not wanted to upset Edgar too much.
AS 1964 approached, Kennedy told Ben Bradlee of Newsweek “how FDR used to have Hoover over regularly [a thought Hoover constantly pressed in slightly exaggerated form on both Kennedy brothers], and said he felt it was wise for him to start doing the same thing, with rumors flying and every indication of a dirty campaign coming up.
Once the prim-prurient director sent over an FBI report describing a mettlesome American ambassador who, caught in a woman’s bedroom, hastily departed through a window without his trousers.
O’Donnell, who had had little use for Hoover since Rackets Committee days, said that, yes, the President had seen the report.
Brothership worked no political magic for Sam Johnson, for example, or Donald Nixon or Billy Carter.
Moreover, if Roy Cohn can be believed, Hoover had cordially disliked him ever since the Annie Lee Moss incident.
He was upset by Kennedy’s excursions around the Department, and FBI memos of the period reflect a continuing surveillance by the Bureau of the Attorney General’s movement.
As the three men talked, Kennedy, to Hoover’s repressed rage, idly tossed darts ata board on the wall.
Hoover became even more upset when Kennedy missed the board, and darts lodged in the paneling.
Hoover and Tolson cut their visit short and later agreed, as the director told another subordinate, that it was “the most deplorably undignified conduct they had ever witnessed on the part of a Cabinet member.”22 “| was in Bobby’s office once when he summoned Hoover,” William Hundley of the Organized Crime Section recalled.
Hundley had been reporting on a political case where Hoover had been, as he Saw it, dragging his feet.
So he hit a goddam buzzer and within sixty seconds, the old man came in with a red face, and he and Bobby jawed at each other for about ten minutes.
Robert Kennedy’s deference, which he evidently thought abundant, was from Hoover's viewpoint strictly limited.
While the Attorney General was happy to appease the director with occasional White House luncheons, he insisted (with imperfect success) that FBI communications to the White House pass through his own office.
No Attorney General had tried to do this since Biddle fifteen years before.
He instructed the Bureau to send its press releases to Guthman’s office instead of putting them out, as it had done for years, on its own letterhead.
Once when Hoover’s secretary answered a Kennedy call, the Attorney General informed her curtly that hereafter he expected the director to pick up the phone himself.
Kennedy did not hesitate to call FBI men working on cases without speaking to the director first.
Hoover was further irritated by Kennedy’s habit of dropping in on regional FBI offices and asking questions about current cases.
The Attorney General even persuaded FBI offices to place a photograph of John Kennedy next to the obligatory photograph of Hoover, though he affected to believe that it was always the same photograph, circulated by the Bureau to be put up ten minutes before his arrival.
To Kennedy such visits were part of the Attorney General’s responsibility.
Over the years the director had successfully withdrawn the Bureau from the oversight of the Department of Justice.
The arrival at Justice of a President’s brother, a brash young man determined to annex the Bureau to the Department, radically altered his position.
For a while Hoover got it into his head that Adam Yarmolinsky, a blameless and scholarly lawyer working for McNamara in Defense, was scheming to get his job.
In his usual manner, he leaked items to the press designed to discredit Yarmolinsky.
Hoover was no more enthusiastic about the idea of a successor from inside the Bureau and harbored dark suspicions that one or another subordinate was aspiring to the directorship.
From time to time—or so it seemed from the Attorney General’s office—someone would organize a keep-Hoover Campaign.
But on January 1, 1965, the director would have his seventieth birthday.
Hundley was convinced “that the thing that finally destroyed their relationship was that Bobby mentioned to too many people who complained to him about Hoover that, ‘Look, just wait,’ and we all got the message that they were going to retire him after Jack got reelected and Hoover hit seventy.
The spirit you demonstrated —the spirit of Valley Forge and Monte Cassino—will, we hope, spread through the entire Department ofjustice.
A lot of it was so far fetched that even on the face of it it didn't make any sense. | mean, if you were going to do that kind’ of thing, you wouldn’t go on over to the LaSalle Hotel with the Secret Service surrounding the place.
But | think the idea was just so that you would know that they were continuously getting into this information.In public, the Attorney General meticulously defended the director.
If Robert Kennedy generally contained himself, his irrepressible wife could not.
The director, who was perennially feuding with city police chiefs, particularly disliked Chief William H Parker of Los Angeles.
Once ata Department ofjustice party Ethel Kennedy had some words with Hoover.
Forty years later Anthony Lewis asked Robert Kennedy whether he thought Hoover just a nasty person or truly dangerous.
The Mob THE ENCOUNTER between Robert Kennedy and J Edgar Hoover was, within its peculiar limits, a fascinating case history in the politics of administration: the aggressive executive versus the supreme bureaucrat; the presidential brother versus the national hero.
The limits were imposed on one side by the fact that even a presidential brother dared not provoke a national hero to resignation,+ on the other by the fact that even a national hero dared not break with the President’s brother.
At stake in this first round was Robert Kennedy’s determination to complete the unfinished business of the Rackets Committee and bring the men who ran the mob and the labor rackets to the bar ofjustice.
For years he had warned his fellow countrymen against the diabolic machinations of these godless masters of deceit.
Despite the patriotic endeavor of the FBI, however, the threat, at least as measured by the director’s rhetoric, apparently continued to grow.
The Rackets Committee had instructed him in the covert realities of power and corruption in American life.
The racketeer was no longer “someone dressed in a black shirt, white tie and diamond stickpin, whose activities affect only a remote underworld circle.
Of the writers Wald mentioned, Kennedy promptly chose Budd Schulberg, whom he remembered as the author of On the Waterfront, the powerful Sam Spiegel-Elia Kazan film of 1954 about labor racketeers.
Responding, Schulberg recalled, “simply and modestly; in fact, diffidently,” Kennedy said, “Good.... | wrote those last pages very carefully—I didn’t want the book to seem to be aimed against a single man or a single union.
The next ten years, he told Schulberg, might mark a turning point in American history—either an America infected with corruption or the rebirth of the idealism with which the nation had begun.Kennedy was determined to stop the drain of power in America to obscure forces beyond moral and legal accountability.
In insisting on the spreading threat of organized crime, he offended J Edgar Hoover doubly—by dismissing the cherished Red menace and by raising a question the director had done his best for forty years to ignore.
In 1934, after Roosevelt’s anticrime legislation established federal jurisdiction over a variety of interstate felonies (including flight across state lines to avoid prosecution or even to avoid giving testimony in court), the FBI ended the careers of notorious outlaws like Dillinger.
Often, like Bonnie and Clyde, they were amateurs engaged in sporadic and desperate acts.
In fact, of the hundreds of crooks thus honored, very few had any connection with organized crime.
While the Bureau had chased Bonnie and Clyde, it left Vito Genovese and Meyer Lansky of the syndicates to flourish in peace.
In the meantime, Elmer lIrey, chief of the Treasury Department’s Intelligence Unit, quietly brought down Al Capone, Johnny Torrio, Waxie Gordon and Willie Bioff.
Harry Anslinger of the Bureau of Narcotics was spinning tales about the Mafia.
Organized crime was not precisely a secret even in the 1930s, except evidently to J Edgar Hoover.
None of the mobsters above, save for a passing reference to Capone, was even mentioned in Don Whitehead’s authorized history, The FBI Story, written with Hoover’s cooperation in 1956.
Robert Kennedy had discovered Hoover’s indifference to organized crime when he requested FBI dossiers on the Apalachin conferees in 1957.
William Sullivan of the Intelligence Division persuaded Hoover to assign the best FBI crime researcher, Charles Peck, to prepare a report on organized crime.
But, when Hoover read the Peck report, he denounced it as “baloney” and ordered it suppressed.
Attorney General Rogers brought William Hundley over from the Internal Security Division to head up the Organized Crime Section of the Criminal Division.
Eminent gangsters were crossing state lines every day, for example, to avoid prosecution or the giving of testimony.
When mobs put out contracts on their enemies, they tended as a matter of standard operating procedure to import gunmen from another state.
Hoover had carved out his spacious jurisdiction in internal security with virtually no statutory basis at all.
Former FBI agents laid great stress on Hoover’s infatuation with statistics.
It required a heavy investment of agents in long, tedious investigations that might or might not produce convictions at the end.
The statistical preoccupation steered Hoover toward the easy cases—bank robbers, car thieves, kidnappers and other one-shot offenses.t The statistics race—each year had to be better than the year preceding—also increased the Bureau’s dependence on local law enforcement.
The FBI very often inflated its statistics by claiming credit for work performed by local police, as in the recovery of stolen cars.
For the mobs often had their own arrangements with local police, politicians and businessmen.
Still there was little chance of their being bribed by the American Communist party.
In addition, the great proponent of the Mafia thesis was Harry Anslinger, the director’s ancient rival and a leading figure on his hate list.
Beyond all this, one cannot omit the possibility that Hoover, who was among other things a right-wing ideologue, honestly believed that Communists were far more dangerous to the republic than organized criminals.
For whatever reason, the director of the FBI had stayed out of a battle that the former counsel of the Rackets Committee considered crucial to the national future.
After his experience with the Teamsters and the mobs, Robert Kennedy now found himself unexpectedly embroiled with a third secret organization, almost as impenetrable and selfhallucinated as the others, but this time operating under the color of law.
But none knew what the others had discovered about the underworld, and the FBI seemed to know least of all.
This situation had led to Kennedy’s call from the Rackets Committee for the pooling of intelligence through a national crime commission.
Hoover hated to share FBI intelligence on the pretext that other agencies could not be trusted and that somewhere an informant would be betrayed.
Luther Huston, the departing information officer for Justice, described what may have been the climactic moment.
Scheduled to pay his formal farewell to Hoover, Huston had to wait because the new Attorney General was already in the director’s office.
Apparently Kennedy wanted to set up some kind of supplementary or overlapping group to take over some of the investigative work that the FBI had been doing.
My surmise is that Mr Hoover told Bobby, ‘If you’re going to do that, | can retire tomorrow.
Frustrated here, the Attorney General approached the problem circuitously.
Two key agencies in the campaign against organized crime were the Internal Revenue Service and the Narcotics Bureau, both in the Treasury Department.
Hoover, having prevailed on the national crime commission, had to go along on this more modest proposal.
For the first time all the federal groups that knew anything about the underworld came together in the same room and exchanged information.
Kennedy gave the job of coordination not to the FBI but to the Department’s Organized Crime Section.
At the same time, Kennedy quadrupled the Organized Crime Section in size and encouraged its lawyers to conduct investigations and try cases.
After two years he brought back Hundley, who had stayed on as one of his special assistants and had handled special assignments with dash and discretion.
If lack of jurisdiction was Hoover’s alibi, then Kennedy would make FBI jurisdiction explicit; at least this would weaken the alibi.
In September Congress enacted five of his eight proposals, the most important of which covered interstate travel in support of racketeering, interstate transportation of gambling equipment and interstate transmission of gambling information.
Even with this enabling legislation, however, it remained a battle to get Hoover to acknowledge the existence of organized crime.
Then in 1962 Joseph Valachi, a member of the Genovese gang now in the Atlanta penitentiary, killed another prisoner whom he mistook for a fellow mobster commissioned to kill him.
Faced with the death penalty, Valachi agreed to talk in exchange for life imprisonment.
He knew a great deal, apparently had total recall and poured out voluble recollections.
His account of Italian criminal “families” gave the disparate intelligence accumulating in Justice a unifying theory.
In the past we’ve heard that so-and-so was a syndicate man, and that was about all.
Since Hoover had always scoffed at the idea of the Mafia, the new phrase allowed him to discover organized crime without appearing to admit that the detested Anslinger had been right.
In early 1963 an article signed by Hoover and intended for the Reader’s Digest reached Edwin Guthman’s desk for clearance.
Casually imbedded in the middle was a quick reference to the Cosa Nostra.
Kennedy, Hundley said, was “really very reluctant”; Hoover even more so.
Hundley warned that, if Justice did not cooperate, the committee would subpoena Valachi.
After intricate negotiation, the FBI seemed to agree that Valachi’s appearance would not compromise other underworld sources.
The committee, without consulting the Department, put the hearings on television.
He got more money as well as more explicit and possibly wider jurisdiction, and he preserved the autonomy and secrecy of FBI operations.
Wiretapping remained the single FBI investigative technique requiring the specific approval, case by case, of the Attorney General.
Kennedy, who had watched Jimmy Hoffa wilt before Frank Hogan's wiretaps in 1957, believed that tapping had a significant if restricted role to play in law enforcement.
At the same time, there is a great deal of indiscriminate wiretapping that now goes unpunished.
Legalized wiretapping is a two-edged sword that requires the most scrupulous use.
For that reason, | would not be in favor of its use under any circumstances —even with the court’s permission—except in certain capital offenses.
On a cold day in March 1961, he convened his advisers on the stone terrace at Hickory Hill to discuss the wiretap problem.
Archibald Cox and Burke Marshall thought a reasonable statute could be drafted.
Ramsey Clark, Joseph Dolan and William Orrick demurred, Orrick most emphatically of all.
Kennedy, who could not imagine letting legal niceties halt the search for a kidnapped child, grew heated.
His goal was a comprehensive system by which all wiretapping, federal, state or local, would be made a federal crime, except when specifically authorized by a federal judge.
In effect, he wished to move toward the British system, where tapping was forbidden without a warrant, though his proposal that the warrant be issued not by the executive (the Home Secretary) but by the judiciary improved on the British model.
The FBI, however, demanded that the bill skip court orders for national security cases, a position he reluctantly accepted.
The Keating bill, while purporting to limit federal wiretaps, would have permitted state and local cops to tap wires in any way authorized by state law.
In 1962 Katzenbach drafted a bill2® designed to clear up what Kennedy described as the “chaotic” situation.
The new bill proposed to outlaw warrantless wiretapping, whether conducted federally or locally, publicly or privately, except in cases involving serious threats to national security.
It defined cases where taps might be permitted under judicial supervision, limited the officials who could apply for court orders, required that each application state grounds in detail and provided for automatic termination of all judicial warrants.
Some observers considered the 1962 bill a responsible effort to strike a balance between the competing claims of privacy and law enforcement.
Francis Biddle, who had clerked for Holmes and defended civil liberties for a lifetime, testified for it.
The critics believed that a wiretap system was inherently uncontrollable and that the dangers to personal freedom far outweighed the gains to law enforcement.
They denied the possibility of an American compromise along British lines.
Recalling the familiar phenomenon of “judge shopping,” they questioned whether judicial warrants could provide effective control.
In any case, where a search warrant authorized only a single search for specified objectives, a wiretap warrant was a dragnet.
Nor did they believe that wiretap evidence made all that much difference.
The bill failed in Congress in 1962 and, despite expectation in 1963 that the Valachi testimony would help, it failed thereafter.
Federal wiretaps remained under the control, not of the federal courts, but of the Attorney General.
In three and a half years as Attorney General, Kennedy authorized taps on about sixteen American citizens involved in eight separate cases.
Martin Luther King, Jr., and two associates, tapped in order to test Hoover's assertion that King was involved with Communist agents.
In some cases—Baldwin and his secretary, Norman, the erring ex-FBl agent—the Bureau tapped first and got Kennedy’s written approval later.In the main, Kennedy consented to Hoover’s wiretap requests.
Nor did he do much to tighten the controls he had inherited from his predecessors.
Always the improviser rather than the planner, he handled wiretap authorizations with surprising casualness and inattention.
For all his strong feelings about organized crime and Jimmy Hoffa, he authorized no wiretaps against racketeers or Teamsters.
He wished it, if used at all, to be hedged around by statutory safeguards.
V Kennedy evidently supposed that the power to authorize wiretaps was the power to contain the FBI’s electronic surveillance.
The director was under exasperating pressure from the Attorney General.
At no time did he seek bugging authorization from the Attorney General.
In later years, however, when the public began to catch on to the extent of FBI bugging, he claimed vigorously that Kennedy had known what the FBI was doing —a claim that Kennedy with comparable vigor denied.
Courtney Evans, who had served as FBI liaison with Kennedy in Rackets Committee days, continued in that role in Justice.
Kennedy no doubt supposed that the meeting had been covered by an informant.
In 1966 Hoover demanded that the Chicago agents prepare affidavits saying that in the light of the discussion Kennedy would have had to conclude that the Bureau was engaged in bugging.
One was a letter from Herbert Miller to Senator Ervin in 1961 reporting that the FBI had sixty-seven bugs in operation.
Miller assumed, he said later, that the bugs had been legally installed—as, with the owner’s consent, in a restaurant or apartment, or on an informant’s person.
Kennedy, observing that the request had to do with telephones, evidently thought that he was approving the leasing of a line to be used for wiretaps, and that the Bureau would come back to him for authorization in each specific case.
The FBI request was in any event disingenuous, since the leasing never took place.
He had been in the FBI for a quarter century and had great loyalty to the organization.
He saw his task as that of keeping the Attorney General and the director together.
Still, “it worked very well for one basic reason,” observed Katzenbach, “and that is Courtney would explain something to Bobby one way and explain something to Hoover another way.
According to Edwyn Silberling in 1966, Kennedy told Evans that he wanted the FBI to use more “technical equipment” against the syndicates.
G Robert Blakey, a lawyer in the Organized Crime Section, recalled “quite vividly” in 1966 “when you turned to Courtney Evans and told him more or less, ‘Let’s get some of this security equipment on the street.
The Attorney General stated he recognized the reasons why telephone taps should be restricted to national-defense type cases and he was pleased we had been using microphone Surveillances, where these objections do not apply, wherever possible in organized crime matters.
There is no evidence that White ever saw it, nor did Hoover release it in his 1966 barrage against Kennedy.
Once an FBI report on Las Vegas casinos contained internal evidence of FBI bugging.
Dolan felt in addition that the electronic world was a mystery to the Attorney General.
Hundley, thinking to himself, “I’d rather go down in history as a guy who might have moved around a little than as an idiot,” told Kennedy that, even if he hadn’t known, it would be better politics to say he had.
This, without malice toward Evans’s “unfortunate human trait of trying to please everybody,” appeared to be Kennedy’s own conclusion.— Robert Kennedy, in my judgment, had not understood that the FBI was bugging the mob, certainly not with trespass.
Here was a first-class administrator, an indefatigable question-asker, experienced in the war against crime, surrounded by clues.
In a later time he would readily agree that of course he should have done this. | imagine there were several reasons that he didn’t.
He was probably the busiest man in Washington, increasingly involved in affairs far outside the Department of Justice.
And, though he was coming to understand the importance of the Bill of Rights, his sensitivity to civil liberties in these years was less than his concern about organized crime.
Vil Under Kennedy's pressure the national government took on organized crime as it had never done before.
The Patriarca gang in Rhode Island and the De Cavalcante gang in New Jersey were smashed.
After the Rackets Committee reports, Eisenhower's Department of Justice had decided in the summer of 1960 to indict Hoffa for mail frauds in connection with Sun Valley, a Florida real estate venture in which he had a personal financial interest.
At the last minute, while James Dowd, the Justice Department lawyer, was making the case for indictment in a Florida grand jury room, the Department changed its mind and summoned Dowd back to Washington.
He may well have put Herbert Miller in charge of the Criminal Division less because of Miller’s criminal law experience, which was scant, than because of his experience as counsel for the anti-Hoffa members of the Teamster Board of Monitors.
Kennedy then asked Walter Sheridan to set up a unit on labor rackets in the Organized Crime Section.
But he was a superb investigator, patient and careful; and he surrounded himself with crack lawyers, like James Neal and Nathan Lewin.
He did not like competing investigative teams and he mistrusted agents who had left the Bureau.
But, though out of favor in the Washington headquarters, Sheridan, as an ex-agent, had many FBI friends and gained extensive cooperation in the field.
The Sheridan group became known popularly, though never in the Department, as the Get-Hoffa Squad.
By October 1961 he was complaining to the press that twenty-nine grand juries had been convened to get him, that half the lawyers in the Department and half the agents in the Bureau were enlisted in the effort.
A number of Teamster leaders, including Anthony Provenzano and Barney Baker, were in due course convicted and sent to prison.
Then an investigation of the Teamsters’ Central States Pension Fund in Chicago disclosed a larger case.
Soon a new indictment was in preparation, charging Hoffa with conspiring to defraud the trustees of the pension fund.
Since the new indictment covered Sun Valley, Kennedy decided to drop the Florida case and concentrate on the Chicago prosecution.
In the meantime, a grand jury in Nashville indicted Hoffa on the charge of taking illegal payments from an employer in violation of the Taft-Hartley Act.
This, like Sun Valley, was a case Kennedy had opened up in the Rackets Committee.
In 1948 Hoffa had intervened to settle a damaging strike against a Detroit trucking firm in the company’s favor.
Shortly thereafter the Test Fleet Corporation, a truck-leasing company, was incorporated in Tennessee.
Through the years this convenient arrangement had provided Hoffa with hundreds of thousands of dollars.
He reported that Hoffa had once asked him whether he knew anything about plastic bombs.
Kennedy had guts, Hoffa continued; he drove around by himself in a convertible, swam alone in his Hickory Hill pool and had no guards in the house.
The judge declared a mistrial and called for a grand jury investigation of jury tampering.
Cox said he would have no difficulty arguing the case before the Supreme Court.
The relations between the Teamsters and the syndicates continued to grow.
An FBI electronic microphone, planted from 1961 to 1964 in the office of Anthony Giacalone, a Detroit hood, revealed Hoffa’s deep if wary involvement with the local mob.
Here they no doubt reflected that, as long as John Kennedy was President, Robert Kennedy would be unassailable.
Yet he was spending a conspicuous part of his life as Attorney General doing exactly that.
All this engraved more deeply the public face he was trying to escape — the face of the implacable prosecutor.
His critics seized on the pursuit of Hoffa as a pretext for new criticism.
Kennedy was represented as “single-minded” in that pursuit, as if chasing Hoffa consumed all his days and nights.
No one except the President divided his mind among a greater variety of concerns and enterprises.
When he thought about Hoffa, he thought hard about him; but thinking about Hoffa occupied a very small part of his time. | saw a great deal of him in these years and can hardly recall his mentioning Hoffa.
Thinking about Kennedy unquestionably occupied a greater part of Hoffa’s time.
In 1969, under the Nixon administration—which was sympathetic to Hoffa, later granted him clemency and would have been delighted to dig up something on the Kennedys—the Justice Department was ordered by the Supreme Court to turn over all electronic overhearings related to the Hoffa cases, whether or not relevant to the indictments.
One was authorized by the judge in order to record a Hoffa lawyer conspiring to fix a juror.
Whether the FBI also opened Hoffa’s mail, burgled his office or rubbed invisible powder on his clothes no one outside the FBI can Say.
The most dangerous power of the prosecutor: that he will pick people that he thinks he should get, rather than pick cases that need to be prosecuted.
It is in this realm—in which the prosecutor picks some person he dislikes or desires to be embarrassed, or selects some group of unpopular persons and then looks for an offense, that the greatest danger of abuse of prosecuting power lies.
He was deciding that people were guilty and then looking for something they could be found guilty of.
He was convicting them not for their real crimes but for Slips that anyone might have made.
Beginning with the criminal rather than with the crime led to selective justice.
Hoffa was no doubt a menace to society, and the Get-Hoffa Squad might have a righteous purpose.
But the precedents created might beget in other hands Get-NAM Squads, Get-ADA Squads, Get-Enemies-List Squads in any form.
Kennedy and Mortimer Caplin had brought the Internal Revenue Service roaring into the battle against organized crime.
In the end, 60 percent of all organized crime cases in these years were tax cases,24 This practice raised questions.
Some lawyers believed that the purpose of the tax laws was to collect revenue, not criminals.
Their tax returns should be subject to the same random review as those of any other citizen.
Louis Oberdorfer, the highly scrupulous chief of the Tax Division, accepted a working compromise according to which the Criminal Division could make recommendations to the IRS for investigations (Oberdorfer was not then aware of the electronic methods used by the IRS), and the Tax Division would apply the same criteria to racketeers as to all other cases submitted by the IRS for possible action.
Someone committed a murder, a rape, a robbery, and the job of law enforcement was to find out who did it.
That was what the ‘enforcers’ and ‘soldiers,’ like Joe Valachi, were for.
Because top racketeers were remote from overt acts, they were vulnerable only on the margin, as in their tax returns.
Nor were they forlorn individuals, outmatched by the massed power of the federal government.
During the Nashville case Hoffa had six high-priced lawyers sitting in a hotel room to consult with the four other lawyers they had in the courtroom.
In March 1929 a group of Chicago citizens waited on President Herbert Hoover.
Hoover and a group of cronies used to begin each day by tossing medicine balls at each other in the White House.
Indeed, the conviction of Capone was regarded as one of the few accomplishments of his administration.
It was not as if Kennedy had decided to go after the mob and the Teamsters out of abstract prejudice.
The Rackets Committee had dug up a mass of concrete information on lawbreaking.
The targets may have received disproportionate attention in the Department of Justice.
But selectivity is inescapable in any situation of limited resources, and the suspects received due process in the courts.
If there were, remedy lay in the larger constellation of forces outside the courtroom.
The methods that sent Capone and Hoffa to prison achieved useful social results that might not have been achieved otherwise.
When those methods are abused by unscrupulous prosecutors, other forces—the courts, the legislature, the press, public opinion—must act, and in the past have acted, to restore the balance.
The criticism of his pursuit of Hoffa baffled and dismayed Robert Kennedy; but it was part of the process that kept that pursuit from creating precedents by which his successors could use less defensible methods against less deserving targets.
Civil Rights ""| won’T SAY | stayed awake nights worrying about civil rights before | became Attorney General,” Robert Kennedy remarked in these years.
He had always acted with impetuous decency when racial discrimination forced itself on his attention.
He did not see racial injustice as the urgent American problem, as the contradiction, now at last intolerable, between the theory and the practice of the republic.
After the collapse of Reconstruction, the ex-slaves and their descendants had been consigned to legal and social inferiority, forgotten by the courts, by Congress, by Presidents.
In the 1930s Franklin Roosevelt did more for black Americans than any President since Lincoln, thereby switching black political allegiance from the Republican to the Democratic party.
But he did it initially by general aid to the dispossessed and by government appointments, White House hospitality and other symbolic gestures for blacks.
It was not until A Philip Randolph, the leading black trade unionist, threatened a march on Washington that Roosevelt sponsored a direct if limited attack, through the Fair Employment Practices Committee, on the structure of segregation.
With the legislative branch hostile and, after 1952, the executive indifferent, the civil rights movement turned to the courts.
The National Association for the Advancement of Colored People challenged the constitutionality of segregation in a series of suits, many argued by Thurgood Marshall, a leading black lawyer.
Under Chief Justice Earl Warren’s leadership, the Supreme Court began to fill the void in the constitutional process.
The 1957 Civil Rights Act, strengthened by a second act in 1960, was intended to secure southern blacks the right to vote.
But the laws were weak, and Eisenhower's Department of Justice applied them with all deliberate lethargy; nor, save for a few determined liberals in the Senate, did white Democratic politicians accord racial justice the highest priority.
In the middle fifties Adlai Stevenson, the liberal hero, had actually contemplated an appeal to black leaders for a year’s “moratorium” on agitation.
But it took presidential politics to involve them with the movement; and then the prospect of responsibility to make them think intensively about the problem.
Many things can be done by a stroke of the Presidential pen’”—an executive order ending discrimination in housing, for example.
Wofford doubted that Congress would pass civil rights legislation in the near future, and he was sure that the legislation already passed had not been fully used.
John Hannah, chairman of the Civil Rights Commission, the independent government agency established under the Civil Rights Act of 1957, gave Kennedy a series of recommendations in February, all relying on executive authority.
They faced each other gloomily and sat through intervals of painful silence.
Kennedy wondered whether he would ever be able to communicate with Marshall.
The next problem was getting him through the Senate Judiciary Committee.
Kennedy went to Chairman Eastland’s office and said, “I have Mr Marshall outside who is going to be head of our Civil Rights Division. | thought you'd like to meet him.
AS Kennedy recorded the story in his journal, “Eastland snorted and said.
Afterwards Eastland said he wouldn’t hold Marshall’s appointment up but he wanted it understood that he was going to vote against him.
It was the first time that either one of us had been involved directly ... with the way that the segregation system worked in practice, and how difficult it was going to be.
Kennedy was quickly impressed by the self-effacing Marshall’s precise mind, incorruptible character, dry humor and intense moral conviction.
There ’ was no one on whose judgment he relied more during the rest of his life.
Robert kennady was not learned in the intricacies of civil rights—considerably less so than his brother, who had debated these questions in the Senate.
Nicholas Katzenbach recalls taking the executive order establishing the President’s Committee on Equal Employment Opportunity out to Hickory Hill one evening in February 1961.
As Katzenbach started to explain, the President cut in with questions that Katzenbach could not have answered himself had he not been studying the problem for a week.
Finally Robert said to his brother, “1 don’t Know why the hell | sign this thing and give it to you.
At his first staff meeting in February, Kennedy, stressing the importance of example, called for “thorough integration” of all Justice’s offices, north and south.
In short order the Department had many more black lawyers than ever in history.
The same belief in the necessity of example led him to a private challenge of the Metropolitan Club, which refused to admit blacks even as guests for luncheon.
A major problem in voting rights cases had been the difficulty in finding witnesses willing to testify against the system of exclusion and intimidation.
Apparently the FBI has given little or no priority to requests for investigation by the Civil Rights Division.
The result, he said, was only to enrage “vociferous minority groups” when the Bureau failed to produce immediate results.
In 1948 Joseph Rauh asked Clark to have the FBI look into the attempted murder of Walter Reuther.
Southerners simply did not accept “mixed education” as the means “whereby the races can best be served.
As for the “crusade for integration,” its leaders were threatening violence, and its organizations were major targets for Communist infiltration.
The tradition of cooperation with the local cops further set the Bureau against racial cases in the south.
For reasons of policy as well as prejudice, Hoover succeeded in withdrawing the FBI almost completely from civil rights investigations.
When Kennedy asked Hoover about black agents, the director replied virtuously that the Bureau did not catalogue its employees by race, creed or color.
Kennedy said that Hoover’s answer was most commendable, but he still wanted to know how many black agents there were.
Kennedy’s insistence caused, as William Sullivan remembered it, an “uproar” in the Bureau.
During the war he had made his chauffeur and office boy special agents in order to protect them from the draft.
But none of the so-called black agents conducted real investigations or received, as white agents did, retraining in Washington; they mostly served as drivers.
Professing great astonishment—five black agents out of five thousand—Kennedy instructed Hoover to begin hiring more at once.
Doar began to supply them with elaborate questionnaires so that they would have no excuse for not coming back with the needed data.
In March 1961 he sent over to Justice Hugo Black at the Supreme Court an editorial torn from an Alabama paper.
Griffin Bell, who had managed the Kennedy campaign in Georgia, made the advance preparations and accompanied Kennedy from the Atlanta airport to the university at Athens.
He declared his personal belief in the Supreme Court’s decision on school desegregation.
He was “very sensitive,” Katzenbach remembered, “as to the explosive nature” of the situation.
Kennedy also used his two southern assistant attorneys general, Ramsey Clark of Texas and Louis Oberdorfer of Alabama, as well as his southern assistant, John Seigenthaler of Tennessee.
Preparing for the new wave of school desegregation in the fall of 1961, these men traveled about conferring with local educational officials.
The Supreme Court’s law came on them as a threat to tradition, womanhood and social order.
Southern blacks, awakening after so many years to their constitutional rights, were growing as militant for federal law as whites were for local custom.
The negotiating approach underestimated both the intractability of the oldschool whites and the passion of the new-school blacks.
In December 1960 the Supreme Court had outlawed segregation in the terminals as well as in the trains and buses used in interstate transportation.
The following May, James Farmer of the Congress of Racial Equality , an organization inspired by Gandhi's principles of nonresistance, led a small party, black and white, ona journey to assert constitutional rights in southern bus stations.
The Freedom Riders traveled through Virginia, the Carolinas and Georgia with an occasional fracas and arrest but without major trouble.
Then, dividing into two groups, one Greyhound, one Trailways, they entered Alabama.
In Anniston a screaming white mob burned one bus, boarded the second and beat up civil rights workers.
In Birmingham, members of the Ku Klux Klan, promised fifteen minutes of immunity by the police, set on the Riders with baseball bats, lead pipes and bicycle chains.
Gary Thomas Rowe, Jr., an FBI informant in the Klan, had alerted his superiors.
In the White House, John Kennedy, preparing for meetings with de Gaulle and Khrushchev in Europe, thought the Riders an unnecessary burden.
Plainly the federal government had an obligation to protect travel in interstate commerce.
Robert Kennedy sent John Seigenthaler to Birmingham to see what could be done.
Seigenthaler found the beleaguered group, heads bloody and bandaged, still in the bus terminal.
After long negotiations—the airlines had received bomb threats—Seigenthaler took them on a plane to New Orleans.
Acting on the principle of initial resort to local authority, Robert Kennedy asked for assurances of safe passage across the state.
He assured Seigenthaler that Alabama could keep the peace without the Kennedys.
Floyd Mann, the state director of public safety and a man of courage, told Seigenthaler his troopers would protect the bus on the highways.
But no one could be found to drive the Greyhound bus to Montgomery and on to Mississippi.
Somebody better get in the damn bus and get it going and get these people on their way.
Mr Cruit, | think that if some of your people would just sit down and think for a few minutes that somebody would be able to drive a bus 80 or 90 miles.
Floyd Mann’s state troopers escorted the group to the outskirts of Montgomery.
A menacing crowd, carrying chains and ax handles, surrounded the Montgomery terminal.
In Washington, Peter Maas saw Robert Kennedy immediately after he heard about Seigenthaler.
On Sunday, May 21, Robert Kennedy sent in five hundred marshals with Byron White in command.
Governor Patterson informed Kennedy that he and General Henry Graham of the Alabama National Guard could not guarantee King’s safety.
According to Patterson, White thereupon advised Kennedy to pull out the federal force.
Fifteen hundred blacks gathered on Sunday evening to hear King at the First Baptist Church.
An angry white mob burned an automobile in front of the church and evidently meant to burn the church too.
Even when the marshals arrived, it was a serious question whether they could hold the church.
Military intervention was the last thing the Kennedys wanted, except that defiance of federal law and racial war were even worse.
But, reinforced by the valiant Floyd Mann and a squad of state troopers and finally by the National Guard, the marshals drove the mob back.
The enraged whites did not disperse, however, and the blacks in the church dared not leave.
Through the long night Kennedy was on the phone with Patterson and with King.
I’ve been four and a half years in the Army, and | know Gls like the back of my hand.
After an initial refusal the Confederate leader agreed to get the people in the church safely home.
He called Washington and said, “1 don’t know how to be a law enforcement officer.
James P Coleman, the former governor of Mississippi, warned Burke Marshall that his successor, Ross Barnett, could not be trusted and that the Riders would be killed before they reached Jackson.
Eastland added that the Riders would be arrested as soon as they arrived in Jackson.
That is not going to have the slightest effect on what the government is going to do in this field or any other.
The fact that they stay in jail is not going to have the slightest effect on me.
Perhaps it would help if students came down here by the hundreds—by the hundreds of thousands.
You can determine what’s best just as well as | can, but don't make statements that sound like a threat.
It is not tied to black supremacy or Communism but to the plight of the oppressed.
You must understand that we’ve made no gains without pressure and | hope that pressure will always be moral, legal and peaceful.
But the problem won't be settled in Jackson, Mississippi, but by strong federal action.
Even before the Freedom Ride, he had suggested that the Interstate Commerce Commission act against segregation in the terminals.
Kennedy had responded that the ICC was an independent commission, not subject to presidential order and notoriously slow-moving on its own.
On May 29, nine days after the Montgomery mob had tried to burn down the First Baptist Church, Kennedy, in a quite novel administrative step, asked the ICC to issue regulations ending segregation in interstate bus terminals.
Kennedy’s negotiators set to work again, persuading local officials to take down WHiTE and NEGRO signs.
Though mopping-up operations were required in McComb, Mississippi, and elsewhere, Jim Crow was soon banished from bus travel.
Voting rights cases had ordinarily been argued by local federal attorneys; but Marshall sent his own lawyers into the field and the courtroom.
John Doar, a lanky, reticent man of great personal courage, led many of these expeditions into the south.
Kennedy may have thought that Eastland’s wink licensed this violation of his sanctuary.
In conducting interviews, Doar’s lawyers concentrated on blacks, who were generally frightened by FBI agents, and the agents concentrated on whites, who were often frightened by Justice Department lawyers.
In the end, Kennedy’s Department of Justice brought fifty-seven voting suits, including thirty in Mississippi and one in Jim Eastland’s own Sunflower County.
The Civil Rights Commission, though all for black enfranchisement, denied that it was a cure-all.
Its 1961 report, Burke Marshall complained, “went out of its way” to point to counties in the deep south where blacks registered freely with no discernible effect on the caste system.
The administration did not believe such points invalidated the strategy.
In June 1961, meeting with representatives from King’s Southern Christian Leadership Conference , CORE and SNCC, Robert Kennedy argued that voter registration would be far more productive than demonstrations.
The black leaders understood that the administration would provide protection.
In August, after heated debate between “direct action” and “voter registration” wings, SNCC decided to join the Ccampaign.
It was still going strong fifteen years later with John Lewis, the Freedom Rider, as executive director.
In the rural south the drive bogged down in white intimidation, black fear and apathy.
And it was action, as one CORE worker later put it, with widespread repercussions.
Lubell asked a Mississippi housewife to name the biggest problem in the country.
The civil rights activists had interpreted the administration’s assurance of cooperation as a promise of protection.
They felt bitterly betrayed when white sheriffs, policemen and good old boys struck back with apparent impunity.
In Itta Bena, Mississippi, in the summer of 1963, fiftyseven blacks made a night march to the house of a deputy sheriff to ask police protection for voter registration.
The next day all over fourteen years old were peremptorily tried, convicted, fined and sent to prison for months on charges of disturbing the peace.
In Clinton, Louisiana, twelve blacks wrote respectful letters to the mayor and district attorney requesting the establishment of a biracial committee to combat racial tensions.
A black walking down the street in Clarksdale, Mississippi, wearing a T-shirt with core on the front and FREEDOM Now on the back was arrested for parading without a permit.
As activists went in increasing numbers into the deep south, as southern blacks asserted their rights with new vigor, local retaliation grew more atrocious.
The rage of those who believed they were defending the Constitution became harder to contain or to answer.
Under the federal system police power was reserved for local authorities.
The national government could intervene only when, as Robert Kennedy said, there was a specific and clear “federal responsibility”’—as when Alabama failed to protect interstate travel or when local authorities defied federal court orders.
Nor did existing legislation provide sure footing for more general intervention.
Sections 332334 of Title 10 of the United States Code permitted the President to send federal troops in case of a widespread breakdown of law and order.
It was not a remedy for sporadic incidents of brutality by local police officials.
Sections 241242, Title 18, of the Code had been enacted during Reconstruction to prevent the deprivation of civil rights.
But the first section required proof of conspiracy, the second of specific intent.
The Supreme Court had long since narrowed their scope and attenuated their force.
Burke Marshall sought to make it easier to initiate criminal prosecutions when local cops or mobs interfered with persons exercising constitutional rights in the cause of racial justice.
He got the FBI to make investigations of alleged police brutality and encouraged the filing of criminal informations to get around the reluctance of southern grand juries to return indictments.
The Department of Justice in March 1962 sent up a bill that would have made forms of police brutality a federal crime; no one pressed the bill in Congress, and there were no committee hearings.
Beyond the infirmities in the law, the southern system of justice remained the most formidable obstacle.
In civil rights troubles, white police were more likely to arrest the victims than the leaders of mobs.
White juries rarely convicted white men charged with violating the rights of blacks.
White judges often imposed heavy bail or harsh sentences on civil rights workers while going easy on segregationists.
The rules of federal-state comity discouraged federal interference in state criminal proceedings.
With only forty attorneys, Marshall felt he could deploy limited manpower more profitably in voting than in protection cases.
The marshals we have used are taken from duty in the service of papers, and the like, in many states.
There is no substitute under the federal system for the failure of local law enforcement responsibility.
There is simply a vacuum, which can be filled only rarely, with extraordinary difficulty, at monumental expense, and in a totally unsatisfactory fashion.
The law is quite clear that the federal government is not the policing authority.
Only a few years before, Justice Robert H Jackson had warned somberly that “the establishment of the supremacy of the national over the local police authorities” could be a first step toward a totalitarian state.
Nor was there reason to believe that a national police force could easily overcome massive local opposition.
The federal balance had historically been the means by which a far-flung, diverse and turbulent nation had preserved a measure of cohesion.
Yet he understood that this could have awful consequences too— above all, in cynicism about the power, or will, of law and government to achieve justice.
His pessimism was mitigated only by his conviction that new local perceptions and new federal statutes might give the executive branch new opportunities.
As pressure rose, the Department of Justice found itself doing things each new year it had declined to do the year preceding.
This confirmed Marshall’s suggestion that the question was one of political as well as of constitutional possibility.
You would have accomplished much more if you had had a dictatorship during the period of time that President Kennedy was President because you would have gotten ... all kinds of domestic legislation.
We could have sent perhaps large numbers of people down to Mississippi and be able then to protect that group down there.
But | think that it comes back to haunt you at a later time. | think that these matters should be decided over a long range of history, not on a temporary basis or under the stress of a particular crisis....l think it’s for the health of the country.
A generation rendered sensitive by Watergate to the case for constitutional process finds this view more persuasive than did the men and women who went south in defense of elemental rights in the early 1960s.
For a time Robert Kennedy became almost as unpopular among civil rights workers as he was among segregationists.
Nothing lay more clearly within the field of executive initiative than good judicial appointments.
Yet nothing in Robert Kennedy’s attorney generalship received more valid criticism than his early recommendations for the southern bench.
Every judicial nomination had to have the approval of the Senate Judiciary Committee.
In the spirit of local patriotism Chairman Eastland wished Kennedy’s first appointment to come from Mississippi; wished, in addition, the appointee to be his college roommate, William Harold Cox.
With many more appointments coming up, the administration thought it essential to keep Eastland reasonably happy.
But Cox on the bench, he added, boded ill “for any litigation not keyed to the mores of 1861.
He had not been associated with the Klan or the White Citizens Council.
He was the only judge, | think, that | had that kind of conversation with.
He was very gracious; and he said that there wouldn’t be any problem.... | was convinced that he was honest with me, and he wasn’'t,”208 Soon after Cox’s nomination, the administration sent three black names to the Judiciary Committee—two, like Cox, for district judgeships, and Thurgood Marshall for the circuit court.
Up to that point only one Negro, William Hastie, had been appointed to the circuit court.
The famous story of Eastland’s remark to Robert Kennedy—“tell your brother that if he will give me Harold Cox | will give him the nigger”122— iS perhaps apocryphal, but was true in some vaguer sense.
When Congress adjourned without acting on Marshall’s nomination, John Kennedy gave him a recess appointment.
In May 1962 a Judiciary subcommittee brooded over Marshall but rendered no report to the full committee.
So that there wasn’t any reason to get all excited about it and | told Thurgood Marshall that he’d be appointed.
He no sooner got on the bench than he denied the Department of Justice the right, granted in the 1960 Civil Rights Act, to inspect public voting records in a Mississippi county where no black had registered for thirty years.
Cox was only one of the sour Kennedy appointments to the district courts of the Fifth Circuit, covering the deep south from Florida to Texas.
Administration senators, according to firm tradition, proposed the judges for their own states, especially for the district bench.
Southern senators were particularly in need of propitiation in 1961 because they held committee chairmanships vital to Kennedy’s program—not only Judiciary itself, but Finance, Armed Services and Foreign Relations.
None of the judges appointed was a segregationist on the public record, except for Elliott; and Elliott was endorsed by the courageous liberal judge Elbert H Tuttle as well as by black leaders in Georgia.
He also had his share of duds.A careful analysis of judges named by Eisenhower and Kennedy in the Fifth Circuit showed that each was responsible for five segregationists, Eisenhower for eight moderates and Kennedy for three, Eisenhower for two integrationists and Kennedy for eight.
Xl The selection of southern judges was one point at which the practice of the executive-action strategy fell considerably below the theory.
The President in 1961 found the problems involved—legal, political, administrative—more complex than the campaigner had anticipated in 1960.
Then, after he and Robert Kennedy walked the beach at Hyannis Port over Thanksgiving pondering the question, he decided to try first for a department of urban affairs.
He intended to appoint Robert C Weaver, an eminent black economist, as secretary.
Legislative leaders made it clear that Congress would not create the new department if he issued the housing order.
The House Rules Committee, hating the idea of the first black cabinet member in history, killed the reorganization bill anyway.
This was the congressional mood—and explains why there appeared no alternative to the executive-action route.
The President, recalling that the fatal phrase came from Harris Wofford, suggested that they be piled on Wofford’s desk.
As the issue became a symbolic test of the executive-action strategy, civil rights groups wanted to extend the order beyond housing affected by federal loans and guarantees to cover housing financed by savings and loan associations and even banks.
Democratic congressmen, including northern liberals, were apprehensive about the impact the order might have on the campaign.
It proved neither the calamity predicted by opponents nor the blessing anticipated by advocates.
The housing order raised an interesting question, little discussed at the time.
The civil rights leaders, seeking every road to equality, had no fear of the Presidency.
But the constitutional objection was generally discounted in those years as a neoConfederate pretext.
Perceptions sharpened by the Imperial Presidency found it more impressive later.
The Kennedy executive order not only forbade discrimination but imposed on government contractors the requirement of “affirmative action” to assure equality in employment.
Kennedy, desperate, like all Presidents, to find things for his Vice President to do, asked Lyndon Johnson to serve as chairman of the new committee.
Johnson, his intimate friend William S White reported, “privately flinched” from the assignment, fearing that as a southerner he would be blamed if the committee were a bust.
Finally, Johnson, whose civil rights record before 1957 had been deplorable but who was himself wholly lacking in racial bigotry and perhaps perceived political advantage in proving himself where he had previously been regarded with suspicion, accepted.
One of the public members was Robert Troutman, Jr., an amusing and energetic Georgian who had known young Joe Kennedy years before and had been a Kennedy lieutenant in 1960.
Troutman’s contribution was Plans for Progress, a campaign to sign up firms in voluntary agreements to employ blacks.
Johnson resented Troutman’s access to the Kennedys as well as his initiative on a committee of which the Vice President was nominal head.
Robert Kennedy lacked Troutman’s faith in voluntary action, but respected his organizational drive and was impressed that a southerner, who still pronounced the word ‘Nigra,’ cared about equal rights.
In 1962, Troutman, discouraged by Johnson’s attitude, retired to Atlanta.
After September 1962 the executive vice-chairman was Hobart Taylor, a black lawyer from Detroit, a Texan by birth and a longtime Johnson man.
Though the executive order empowered the committee to conduct hearings, terminate contracts and recommend criminal penalties for companies furnishing false information, Johnson and Taylor favored conciliation and cajolery.
Since the committee lacked statutory authorization, this caution was understandable.
Robert Kennedy and the successive Secretaries of Labor, Arthur Goldberg and Willard Wirtz, came to feel that the committee was badly run and that it was Johnson’s fault.
It was mostly a public relations operation. | mean, it accomplished a good deal more than it had accomplished under Nixon.
The refusal to call for legislation, the failure to protect civil rights workers, the interminable litigation over voting rights, the southern judicial appointments, the prolonged postponement of the stroke of the pen, the leniency with government contractors—all these were beginning to convince the movement that good intentions were not solving many problems.
Within the government itself, the Civil Rights Commission became a strong voice of concern.
The commission’s authority was limited to investigation, including the holding of hearings, and recommendation.
Under Eisenhower it had been a cautious and rather technical body, compiling information and proposing modest remedies.
When the new Department of Justice preempted the practical ground, the commission saw itself increasingly as a source of fresh ideas, moving out ahead and educating a larger public.
The commission had thus questioned the administration’s bet on voting litigation, arguing instead for an across-theboard attack on inequality through legislative as well as executive action.
It campaigned vigorously for the housing order and for the attempt to broaden its coverage.
Father Theodore Hesburgh, the president of Notre Dame, was an influential member.
He therefore wrote an addendum to the 1961 report demanding more protective intervention by the federal government.
When the commission met with the President in 1961, an argument arose over the number of southern state universities that admitted blacks.
Moreover, “they were investigating violations of civil rights in areas in which we were making investigations. | thought that they could do more in the north. | thought that there were ... subjects that they could go into which perhaps would be helpful.
Few agencies have had a better record of recommendations translated into statutes than the Civil Rights Commission.
The loyal Robert C Weaver sensed an “overcautiousness” in the President.
Forman of SNCC regarded John Kennedy as “quick-talking, double-dealing” and his voter registration drive as preparation for his reelection in 1964448 Those who dealt personally with the Kennedys could not Share this bitterness.
Something about them—their openness, interest, the alertness of their sympathy— redeemed the hesitancy of their policy and offered hope for the future.
King was sure the nation was eager for bold leadership in civil rights.
Discerning no such national eagerness, doubting whether presidential exhortations could create an emotional urgency the white majority was resolved not to feel, Knowing the resistance they would encounter on Capitol Hill, the Kennedys felt they had to row to their destination with muffled oars.
Ross Barnett and George Wallace THE KENNEDY CIVIL RIGHTS STRATEGY, however appropriate to the congressional mood of 1961, miscalculated the dynamism of a revolutionary movement.
So James Meredith, his spirit quickened by John Kennedy’s inaugural address, applied on January 21, 1961, for admission to the all-white state university at Oxford, Mississippi.
Meredith was a lonely, taciturn and quixotic man of courage and purpose.
Hoping to avert trouble, Robert Kennedy now began a series of phone conversations with Barnett—twenty between September 15 and September 28.
Everyone was in shirtsleeves except Nick Katzenbach, who sat saturninely in the background and said softly that he saw no reason to issue a Statement at that time.
Guthman had drafted a statement, to which | added a quotation from the Mississippi Legislature in 1832 denouncing the interposition doctrine.
The mixture of shirtsleeved casualness, soft voices and evident determination was impressive.
In the end, Bob agreed with Nick about the statement, and it was deferred.
He told me, by the way, that he regarded Governor Barnett ... as genuinely loony—that he had been hit on the head by an airplane propellor last summer and had never been the same since.
We have been a part of the United States but | don’t know whether we are or not.
Must it be over one little boy—backed by communist front—backed by the NAACP which is a communist front?... |’m going to treat you with every courtesy but | won’t agree to let that boy to get to Ole Miss. | will never agree to that. | would rather spend the rest of my life in a penitentiary than do that.
As | told you, you are a citizen not only of the State of Mississippi but also of the United States.
Though a doctrinaire segregationist, he really did not wish to take on the federal government, and he liked to be liked.
Once Barnett read a grandiloquent proclamation rejecting Meredith—and then gave him the embossed document as a souvenir.
Barnett proposed a show of force, federal marshals with their guns drawn, as a cover for his own retreat.
Even Eastland thought this ridiculous, but Kennedy was willing to try anything.
In Washington apprehension grew that federal marshals might not be enough.
His consuming fear was a mini-civil war with Gls and Mississippians shooting each other down.
On September 28, Robert Kennedy met with General Maxwell Taylor, chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, and Cyrus Vance, who had become Secretary of the Army two months before.
Later that day the Attorney General told me he understood better now how Hitler had taken over in Germany.
The time had come to see whether his personal intervention could sway Barnett.
Early Saturday afternoon, September 29, | was summoned to the Oval Office.
The Attorney General, Burke Marshall and Kenneth O'Donnell were with the President.
The President reported that Barnett had said, “Just tell ’em to cool off and you can sneak him in.
At midnight Norbert Schlei of the Office of Legal Counsel came to the White House with a proclamation ordering persons obstructing justice in Mississippi to desist and disperse and an executive order federalizing the Mississippi National Guard.
Kennedy took Schlei into a small study on an upper floor, sat down at a table, turned on a lamp and read the documents.
The theory of registration on Sunday was that few students would be around.
John Doar was with McShane and Meredith at the Millington Naval Air Station near Memphis.
There, too, were Louis Oberdorfer and Joseph Dolan, rehearsing the federal marshals.
On Sunday morning Kennedy had asked Katzenbach whether he had any plans for the afternoon.
Kennedy added an old football friend, strong as a bull and faithful in a pinch, Dean Markham.
Harold Reis, an able lawyer in the Office of Legal Counsel, poked his head into the office.
It was not till they were halfway to the Andrews Air Force Base that Reis learned where he was going.
Soon Meredith arrived on campus flanked by McShane and Doar—“two of the bravest men | have ever known,” Meredith called them later.
After a time the state police, despite Katzenbach’s protestations, were withdrawn.
Five minutes before the President went on the air in Washington, Katzenbach told the marshals, some hurt and bleeding, to protect themselves by discharging tear gas.
In a while the crash of bottles was punctuated by the crackle of bullets.
Cyrus Vance, looking at the military timetable, promised the President quick action.
When the summons arrived, the first group, according to the Army theory of riot control, was armed only with nightsticks.
John Kennedy, in between conversations with Barnett, called Vance and the Pentagon.
Vance, consulting his schedule, assured him the troops were on their way.
We’d call twenty minutes later, and they hadn’t even arrived to get ready to leave.
The first helicopter went in the air and then circled and waited for the rest of the helicopters.
They said they’d get there in two hours if | gave them the notice—and they didn’t arrive for five hours.
It was so frustrating for the Army to continuously give false, wrong, inaccurate information.
As the hours dragged on, John Kennedy called Vance in the Pentagon, General Creighton Abrams in Memphis—“the worst and harshest conversations with Cy Vance and with the General that | think I’ve ever heard him ,” Robert recalled.
At the airport, half a mile away, the field commander, operating by the book, waited for his whole force to disembark and fall in before moving.
The Army and daybreak brought a melancholy quiet to the embattled campus.
In the next months Meredith doggedly pursued his destiny in face of harassment by loutish classmates.
Their assumption in 1961 was that unreasonable problems would yield to reason and law.
Ole Miss showed them how stubborn, Savage, deeply rooted the problems were.
I’m coming to believe that Thaddeus Stevens was right. | had always been taught to regard him as a man of vicious bias.
They were men endowed by a bitter ancestral history of their own with a conviction of the precariousness of social forms in face of the bloodiness of human existence.
If survival were the issue, far better to use force in support of law than to accept violence in defiance of law.
This was the way that most Americans, including many white southerners, perceived the battle of Ole Miss.
Yet the movement, instead of breaking out into the open plains of progress, remains constricted and confined.
His message to Congress enumerated in ringing language the costs of racial discrimination.
But on the whole the proposals gravely disappointed the civil rights leadership — nothing serious about fair employment, school desegregation, public accommodations or federal protection for civil rights workers.
A tacit alliance, they decided, had developed between the administration and the movement.
If the movement could create a public demand, the administration would respond.
Robert Kennedy urged King not to force the issue while the horrible Connor was still in power.
Released on bond after eight days, he led the campaign into a new phase.
This time Connor’s cops retaliated frightfully with nightsticks, pressure fire hoses and growling police dogs.
On May 4 newspapers across the land ran appalling photographs of the dogs, teeth bared, lunging viciously at the marchers.
The Attorney General sent Burke Marshall and Joseph Dolan to Birmingham.
King subsequently acknowledged “initial misgivings,” fearing that Marshall had been sent to urge a cooling-off period.
Marshall met around the clock with everybody, listening endlessly, talking quietly, forever seeking common ground.
He tried to show the whites that King was not intending revolution; all he wanted was recognition of “what was right and what was unfair.
A week of marathon negotiations produced an agreement on a measure of desegregation and black employment.
The Reverend Fred Shuttlesworth, another black leader, prepared to lead the marchers back into the streets.
But when they got through talking, things, you Know, were pretty much resolved.
That night segregationists bombed the house of King’s brother and the motel where the civil rights leaders had their headquarters.
In savage response angry blacks streamed down the streets, throwing rocks, breaking windows, burning shops and even attacking police officers.
Birmingham convinced Kennedy that the next great battlefield for racial justice lay in the cities.
Baldwin and Kennedy had met the year before at the White House dinner for Nobel Prize laureates.
Baldwin was a brilliant, passionate, sensitive, dramatic man imbued with a conviction of utter hopelessness about the black fate in white society.
He therefore proposed that Baldwin assemble a group with thoughts about the northern ghetto.
Baldwin, acting on short notice, made an effort to enlist experts on the northern city, like Kenneth B Clark, the social psychologist, Edwin C Berry of the Chicago Urban League and Clarence B Jones, an attorney for Martin Luther King.
But what Baldwin called “this sociology and economics jazz” was not his métier.
Jerome Smith, as Baldwin put it later, “set the tone of the meeting because he stammers when he’s upset and he stammered when he talked to Bobby and said that he was nauseated by the necessity of being in that room. | knew what he meant.
To say, as the Attorney General heard it, that being in the same room with Robert Kennedy made him feel like throwing up seemed a rough way to begin.
We were the reasonable, responsible, mature representatives of the black community.
Lorraine Hansberry said, ‘You've got a great many very, very accomplished people in this room, Mr Attorney General.
Bobby got redder and redder and redder, and in a sense accused Jerome of treason, you know, or something of that sort.
Well, that made everybody move in to protect Jerome and to confirm his feelings.
You could not encompass his anger, his fury, in a set of statistics, nor could Mr Belafonte and Dr.
She talked wildly about giving guns to Negroes in the street so that they could start killing white people.
Kennedy said, as he had before, that his grandparents had encountered discrimination and now, two generations later, his brother was President; a Negro would be President within forty years.
Baldwin replied furiously, “Your family has been here for three generations.
Kennedy, who privately agreed, passed the question to Burke Marshall, who said that “special men""—that is, lawyers from the Civil Rights Division —went into areas where the Bureau seemed delinquent.
It went on for three hours; then suddenly stopped, out of sheer exhaustion.
Clarence Jones, King’s lawyer, drew Kennedy aside and said, “I just want to say that Dr.
Kennedy said, “You watched these people attack me over Birmingham for forty minutes, and you didn’t say a word.
Harry Belafonte had tried to smooth things over earlier by mentioning to the group the hospitality he had enjoyed at Hickory Hill; after a time, he had fallen into uncomfortable silence.
You can’t talk to them the way you can talk to Martin Luther King or Roy Wilkins.
It was all emotion, hysteria—they stood up and orated—they cursed—some of them wept and left the room.” | worried “that his final reaction would be a sense of the futility rather than of the urgency of trying to bridge the gap.
He was interested in policy, the blacks, Clark and Berry apart, in witness.
What Clark called the “excruciating sense of impasse”82 seemed inevitable.
He began, | believe, to grasp as from the inside the nature of black anguish.
To complete the Birmingham settlement, he had to get King’s demonstrators out of jail.
He called on his old UAW friends, Walter Reuther, Jack Conway and Joseph Rauh, and $160,000 in bail money was rapidly on its way.
For two years he had heard from Lyndon Johnson’s Committee on Equal Employment Opportunity bland reassurances about the steady increase of blacks in government jobs.
But, when the committee met on May 29—its first meeting since the previous November—he discovered that, aside from the Post Office and a Veterans’ Administration hospital, only 15 of the 2000 federal employees in Birmingham were black—less than 1 percent in a city that was 37 percent black.
At the committee’s next meeting, twenty days later, the Attorney General was on the warpath.
NASA had contracts of $3. billion and, Kennedy discovered, only one and a half men in Washington working on equal employment.
KENNEDY. | asked how many people you have got in your program and you said one and a half men.
Wess. | would like to have you take enough time to see precisely what we do.
KENNEDY. | am trying to ask some questions. | don’t think | am able to get the answers, to tell you the truth.
Johnson, obviously angry, slumped grimly in his chair, his eyes half closed.
It brought tensions between Johnson and Kennedy right out on the table and very hard.
And then finally, after completely humiliating Webb and making the Vice President look like a fraud and shutting Hobart Taylor up completely, he got up.
One of the great problems has been the fact that this committee has not really accomplished what ... the press releases would indicate that it had, the result being a stepped up effort which Burke, Bill Wirtz and | have had to take with a great deal of care.
Johnson was so furious several weeks ago with Bill Wirtz and fora while it appeared that he would never talk to him.
This was all because Bill Wirtz had given some statistics on the number of government contractors who had no Negro employees.
An ambitious and cocky politician named George Wallace had been elected governor.
During his campaign he had promised to place himself in the doorway of any schoolhouse under court order to admit blacks.
On his inauguration in January 1963 he noted that he was standing where Jefferson Davis had stood when he became president of the Confederate States of America; and now, “from this Cradle of the Confederacy, this very heart of the great Anglo-Saxon Southland.,... | draw the line in the dust and toss the gauntlet before the feet of tyranny.
On May 21 the federal district court ruled that the university must admit the black applicant to its summer session.
The Attorney General had already begun preparations to prevent Tuscaloosa from becoming another Oxford.
The university’s president and board of trustees were ready to comply with the court order.
The administration now sought to rally Alabama business leaders in a campaign to dissuade Wallace from defiance.
On April 25, Kennedy, accompanied by Marshall and Guthman, arrived at the state capitol.
State troopers, their steel helmets painted with Confederate flags, surrounded the building.
There is no time in my judgment when we would be ready for it in my lifetime.
They continued talking across each other, Kennedy reiterating his duty to uphold the Constitution, Wallace reiterating his determination not to submit to federal tyranny and hoping as he went to trap Kennedy into damaging admission.
After a time Wallace said it looked as if the matter would wind up in court.
We have a responsibility, Governor, to insure that the integrity of the courts is maintained...and all of the force behind the Federal Government will be used to that end.
That is what you are telling me today, if it is necessary you are going to bring troops into Alabama.
Wallace caught the personal thrust of Kennedy’s last remark and fell into a trap himself.
You would not use—” Kennedy replied that he expected the court order would be obeyed.
Kennedy objected, rallied, evaded Wallace’s snare and returned the conversation to the question of the supremacy of law.
Kennedy observed that the very people who objected to Negroes working in downtown stores had Negroes serving their tables at home.
Wallace said that the problem in Birmingham was that “faker” Martin Luther King.
The federal judge warned Wallace’s lawyers that, if Wallace violated the court order in a substantial way, he would receive a substantial sentence.
The Attorney General also contemplated the immediate federalization of the Alabama National Guard.
In the early morning, Kennedy and Katzenbach worked out a final plan over the telephone.
Katzenbach would escort the students to the university (“Dress as if you were going to church,” John Doar told them), leave them in his automobile and, if Wallace blocked the doorway to registration, simply declare them registered and take them to dormitories to which they had already been assigned.
It would also permit the Justice Department to avoid arresting him for contempt because the students would not be physically present.
If Wallace persisted in obstruction, then federalize the Guard; but leave the onus for that on Wallace.
Katzenbach arrived and began the long walk under the broiling Alabama sun to the registration building.
He sent word to Katzenbach through the National Guard commander that there would be no problem; he just wanted a chance to say something.
Now, standing incongruously behind a lectern, a microphone draped around his neck, he awaited Katzenbach.
White semicircles painted in the doorway indicated where Wallace should stand in order to look his best on television; this irritated Katzenbach, who felt the situation was sufficiently theatrical already.
Katzenbach began by saying he had a presidential proclamation commanding Wallace to cease and desist from unlawful obstructions.
When the students appeared again for registration in the afternoon, Wallace stepped aside.
Nor did he block the enrollment two days later of a third black student at the university’s branch in Huntsville.
Wallace had lost—essentially, Robert Kennedy thought later, because of the appeal to respectable opinion in the state.
If he had received great popular support in the state ... standing in the door, continuing to stand in the door, | think that’s what he would have done.
At the end of the long day, Robert Kennedy scrawled notes to his children.
Martin Luther King ON THE NIGHT Of Wallace’s capitulation John Kennedy delivered a television address to the nation.
It was a response not alone to Birmingham and Tuscaloosa but to an entire springtime of gathering outrage and atrocity—the white postman from Baltimore murdered on a ‘freedom walk’ in Alabama; black demonstrators in Mississippi slugged, stomped on and then arrested for disturbing the peace; protests, riots; hardening resolve, hardening resistance.
The President, deeply disturbed, decided the time had come to assert leadership and appeal to the nation.
For most of the next day he and Robert were on the telephone discussing developments in Tuscaloosa.
An hour before the telecast the Attorney General and Burke Marshall met the President and Sorensen in the cabinet room.
Five minutes before the President went on the air Sorensen returned with most of a draft; no peroration, however.
Its power came too from its unusual sense of identification with the victims of segregation.
Let the white American, Kennedy said, contemplate the plight of his black fellow citizen.
The time had come, he said, “for this Nation to fulfill its promise” of freedom.
That night the white killer shot down Medgar Evers in front of his house in Mississippi.
There was trouble in Cambridge, Maryland, where a black protest movement and the local authorities were in bloody collision.
In Prince Edward County in Virginia, there had been no public education at all since 1959, the local board of supervisors preferring to close schools rather than to integrate them.
In 1961 the Department of Justice had sought a judicial order requiring the county to reopen the schools; but the case had progressed glacially in the courts.
In February 1963 John Kennedy told his brother that some way must be found in the meantime to educate the black children.
Vanden Heuvel worked out a plan for a private operation called the Prince Edward Free School Association.
With highly qualified teachers coming in from outside, the Free Schools even attracted a handful of white children.
In May 1964 the Supreme Court ordered Prince Edward County to reopen its public schools.
The militants of racial justice continued to condemn the Attorney General for not doing enough.
A few days after the murder of Medgar Evers, Kennedy spoke to an angry demonstration in front of the Department of Justice.
Someone shouted that they hadn’t seen many Negroes come out of the building.
With all the smiles and all the graciousness of Dick Russell and Herman Talmadge and Jim Eastland and George Smathers and Holland...none of them really made any effort to counter this.
Now Bull Connor and George Wallace had at last made civil rights a legislative possibility.
The blacks were in the streets, moreover, and the President felt he would lose control over an increasingly dangerous situation unless he exerted leadership.
But O'Donnell and O'Brien also opposed civil rights legislation, fearing it would wreck the rest of the administration's program.
The discrimination in department stores and lunch counters, against which Martin Luther King had launched his protest, violated no federal statute.
The moment had arrived, the Kennedys felt, to make equal access to places of public accommodation a matter of law.
As for education, the drafters considered and ultimately abandoned the idea of deadlines for total school integration and settled instead on a provision authorizing the Attorney General to sue for school desegregation.
As for federal funds used in discriminatory state or local activities, they originally supposed that withholding would be too much for Congress.
Finding to their surprise general support for such a provision, they added it to the bill.
Kennedy finally decided to endorse fair-employmentpractices legislation in his message, but not put it in the bill.
Unable to decipher his warily delphic utterances in meetings, John Kennedy sent Burke Marshall to see him.
Johnson at first filiobustered, reminiscing at length about the way he had found jobs for Negroes when he worked for the National Youth Administration in Texas during the depression.
Johnson, a little disgruntled, said he had asked for fifteen minutes alone with the President on the bill.
He said this, he explained, not because he opposed civil rights legislation—no one in the country wanted to do more for the Negroes—but because so little had been done to prepare the country for it.
John Kennedy himself somewhat shared this pessimism, but saw no alternative except to go ahead.
There’s obviously a revolution within a revolution in the Negro leadership.
We could see the direction of Martin Luther King going away from him to some of these younger people, who had no belief or confidence in the system of government...and thought ... that the way to deal with the problem is to start arming the young Negroes and sending them into the streets, which | didn’t think was a very satisfactory solution because, as | explained to them, there are more white people than Negroes and although it might be bloody, | thought that the white people would do better.
Together he and Marshall talked to all the members of Congress they could find.
He proposed that the President invite influential groups to the White House—lawyers, educators, clergymen, businessmen, labor leaders, hotel, restaurant and theater owners.
Some in the White House continued to think John Kennedy should not get so personally identified with the fight.
In the previous December, Bayard Rustin, the talented black organizer, had called on A Philip Randolph, the revered president of the Brotherhood of Sleeping Car Porters.
Recalling Randolph’s 1941 victory in threatening a march on Washington and getting the wartime FEPC in exchange, Rustin proposed a new march.
The Kennedys were about as enthusiastic over a march on Washington as Roosevelt had been twenty-two years before.
It seemed to me a great mistake to announce a march on Washington before the bill was even in committee.
The blacks were already in the streets; better that they march under nonviolent leadership; if the march were called off, they might turn to new and desperate leaders.
A good many programs | care about may go down the drain as a result of this—so we are putting a lot on the line.
What is important is that we preserve confidence in the good faith of each other. | have my problems with Congress; you have yours with your own groups.
John Kennedy talked to Walter Reuther, who shared the concern that an allblack march might lose votes on the Hill.
Reuther proceeded to bring in white leaders, the churches and the labor movement.
Jack Conway, now back with the UAW, served as his representative in the planning sessions.
Within Justice, Robert Kennedy, following his principle that a good man could do anything, gave the charge to John Douglas, the newly appointed assistant attorney general for the Civil Division.
The list, extending finally to nearly seventy-five items, covered everything from route and timetable, the sound system and security forces, to food, soft drinks (in paper cups, so there would be no bottles to throw) and toilet facilities.
The Douglas group, meeting twice a day in Justice, kept its hand as invisible as possible.
Remembering Birmingham, they forbade the District police to include police-dog units in their riot-control precautions.
They brought in Jerry Bruno, the king of advance men, to work out the platform arrangements.
If less than 100,000 came out, he told me, it might persuade legislators that the demand for civil rights legislation was exaggerated.
Burke Marshall spoke to Reuther, and there were tense last-minute negotiations in the small office behind Lincoln’s statue in the Memorial.
What they did effectuated rather than betrayed the intentions of the planners—of Randolph, Rustin and King, of Roy Wilkins and Whitney Young.
The revolutionaries of course wanted to go further than the respectables.
Yet it also marked the effective, and no doubt inevitable, end of white and black collaboration in the mass movement for racial justice.
Thereafter the movement took its own course under black leadership, assumed new forms and passions, suffered vicissitudes and disenchantments, but bravely persevered in the necessary fight.
V Among those who viewed the March on Washington with particular loathing was J Edgar Hoover.
Though the FBI under Robert Kennedy’s pressure had finally entered the struggle for racial justice, Hoover’s personal feelings about blacks had not abated.
As if in compensation for the ground he had been forced to give on civil rights, he redoubled his determination to discredit the movement —discredit the Kennedy administration too, if it persisted in its alliance with Martin Luther King.
Before the march, William C Sullivan, the assistant director in charge of the FBI’s Domestic Intelligence Division, sent Hoover a memorandum asserting that the Communist party had failed “dismally” in its forty-year effort to influence the American Negro.
A subsequent memorandum pointed out that less than two hundred Communists were planning to take part in the march.
They suggested, he noted sarcastically, that Communists were having an “infinitesimal” effect on the blacks.
They'reminded him “vividly,” he wrote Sullivan, “of those | received when Castro took over Cuba.
Hoover stopped speaking to him, and, luckily for the historical record, the two men confined themselves to written exchanges for several weeks.
Sullivan had no doubt he must provide the director the words he wanted to hear.
Sounding for all the world like a Communist caught in some wretched deviation, Sullivan confessed error and affirmed his leader’s infallibility.
In January 1962 he told the Attorney General that a leading King adviser was a Communist.
In May he put King on the list of people to be rounded up in event of a national emergency.
You will recall that | have furnished you during the past few months substantial information concerning the close relationship between King and Levison.
A confidential source who has furnished reliable information in the past advised on April 16, 1962, that he had learned that Levison is forming in King’s name an organization to be known as the Ghandi Society for Human Rights.
Harry Belafonte...and A Philip Randolph are involved in the formation of the organization.
A few days later, the Senate Internal Security Subcommittee, no doubt tipped off by Hoover, subpoenaed Levison and interrogated him in executive session.
He went on, however, with the leftist attorney William Kunstler at his side, to challenge the committee’s right to inquire into political beliefs and thereafter took the Fifth Amendment.
He did so, he later explained, because he feared the session would turn into an attack on King.
Tactful and self-effacing, Levison helped supply King’s administrative deficiencies.
Soon he was donating much of his time to the SCLC, raising money, trying to straighten out the internal finances, writing King’s formal addresses, contributing legal passages to his articles and books, providing King professional counsel and personal understanding.
This was one of his executive assistants, a young black named Hunter Pitts O’Dell, whom Hoover also declared to be a member of the national committee.
In October 1962 the Bureau leaked incriminating material about O’Dell to southern newspapers.
No incriminating material was leaked on Levison, except the general allegations to the Internal Security Subcommittee.
They simply took Hoover’s word that Levison was a secret party muckamuck.
However hopeless the Bureau was in organized crime and civil rights, internal subversion was its undisputed field of expertise.
Levison’s appearance before the Senate committee was hardly reassuring.
At Hoover's request, Kennedy authorized a national-security wiretap on Levison’s office telephone in March 1962 and on his home telephone in November.
The Bureau also planted a microphone in Levison’s office, though as usual without telling the Attorney General.
The wiretaps on Levison’s phones produced no evidence of Communist deviltry; but this only showed, the Bureau replied, what a truly secret muckamuck he was.
Accordingly they decided that he must be warned for his own protection and for the protection of the movement.
Nothing would play more effectively into the hands of white supremacists than proof that Martin Luther King was under Communist control.
Belafonte, supposing that Levison was under consideration for a government appointment, gave a warm endorsement.
King said he did not like to accuse people who volunteered to help the cause; in any case, his associates could change neither his will nor the movement's policies.
Once the Kennedys decided to go all-out for civil rights legislation, Levison was no longer just a King problem.
Kennedy directed Burke Marshall to find out what the hard evidence against Levison was.
He had worked with them in the Henry Wallace and antiMcCarthy campaigns.
He was, in fact, a goodhearted and undiscriminating liberal of the type for whom there was no enemy to the left.
Levison had fallen under the suspicion of the Bureau because, he eventually came to believe, a business acquaintance under FBI investigation had tried to ingratiate himself with the Bureau by denouncing Levison.
Early in 1963, it had even reported that Levison had criticized the CPUSA on the ground of Communist neglect of civil rights.
The Bureau advised him in the most formal and emphatic manner and for the first time (though Hoover must have muttered something of the sort to Eastland, judging by Eastland’s questions before the Senate committee) that Levison was in fact a key figure in the Soviet intelligence apparatus in the United States.
It would have been an act of gross bureaucratic imperialism for the FBI to invade CIA territory and run an agent in Moscow.
CIA counterintelligence later came to regard Fedora as a double agent under KGB control.
If this were so, then the KGB may have collaborated with the FBI in setting up Levison, both agencies wishing to discredit King and destroy his alliance with Kennedy, the KGB receiving the added benefit of heightened racial bitterness in America.
Or perhaps Hoover had simply got it into his head that Levison was a Communist, as he had got it into his head that the Communists dominated the civil rights movement, and was prepared to say anything to make others accept what he so urgently believed the truth.
Certainly the story the Bureau told Marshall was difficult to reconcile with Hoover’s earlier portrait of Levison as a top party functionary.
But Marshall, whose sptecialty was civil rights, not Communist espionage, understandably believed the FBI story.
In June 1963 all anyone had was the certification by the high priest of national security that Stanley Levison, Martin Luther King’s intimate adviser, was a top Soviet intelligence operative—and this at a time when the Kennedy administration was staking its future on the integrity of the civil rights movement.
On June 22, after his meeting with the civil rights leaders, John Kennedy invited King to stroll in the Rose Garden outside the Oval Office.
Kennedy began (so King later told Andrew Young) by saying that Eastland and others were denouncing the March on Washington as a Communist trick.
The fall of the British Secretary of State for War had dominated the spring headlines.
Macmillan is likely to lose his government because he has been loyal to a friend.
King wrote O’Dell in ten days making his temporary resignation permanent.
They met at the federal courthouse in New Orleans, where Marshall was discussing a civil rights case.
Marshall walked Young around the corridors and told him that the FBI considered Levison a Soviet spy.
The President in his July 17 press conference said there was “no evidence” to show that any civil rights leaders were Communists or that the demonstrations were Communist inspired.
He had directed Sullivan to push the Attorney General’s office on wiretaps for King, and Sullivan had been faithfully pushing.
If Levison was indeed a top Soviet agent, then, as Marshall put it later, “it would not be responsible for ... the Attorney General to refuse a tap” on the American leader with whom Levison had established so intimate a relationship.
The still sacrosanct Hoover had vast power to do damage to King, to the civil rights bill, to the Kennedys.
In the short run, Hoover had only to leak to the Hill and the right-wing press.
In the longer run, he could do to John Kennedy what he had done to Truman ten years before over the case of Harry Dexter White; he could tell a congressional committee that a President had deliberately ignored his solemn warnings and had thereby endangered the republic.
If Robert Kennedy refused a tap on King and anything went wrong, Hoover would have a field day.
Such considerations undoubtedly led Kennedy to raise with Courtney Evans on July 16, 1963, the possibility of “technical coverage” on King.
Kennedy commented acidly that, if that report reached the Hill, he would be impeached.Z2 Then, though King and Levison did not meet for another year or so, King decided that his promise to drop Levison had been a mistake,22 and they resumed telephonic communication—a fact Hoover joyously passed on to Kennedy.
Kennedy had a natural desire to find out whether this renewal of association would hurt the common cause.
Kennedy finally consented, stipulating that all the King taps be evaluated “at the end of thirty days” and that the question of continuing the surveillance be decided then.
On its own, the FBI maintained taps on King’s home phone till mid1965, on the SCLC phones for even longer, on Levison and at least one other King associate, not to speak of at least twenty-one microphone installations in King’s hotel and motel rooms.
What was less excusable, if understandable for a period after November 22, 1963, was the failure of the Attorney General to terminate the taps.
Though outsiders have condemned the taps as indefensible in any context, neither King nor, for that matter, Levison held the taps against the Kennedys in this particular context.
After all, John Kennedy had personally warned King about FBI surveillance.
It’s hard to remember back then, but when you were anxious about your life, civil liberties seemed a tertiary consideration.
King had declined to endorse John Kennedy in 1960 and remained opposed in principle to the idea of endorsing presidential candidates.
They were so committed to our movement, they couldn’t possibly risk what could have been a terrible political scandal.
The Bureau had expanded its dissertation on King, and in October Hoover directed that the resulting top-secret “monograph” be sent around the government.
This memorandum may startle the Attorney General, particularly in view of his past association with King, and the fact that we are disseminating this outside the Department.
Hoover, sensing Kennedy’s rage, quickly agreed that the document be recalled.
Some white friends explained it in psychological terms as an unconscious attempt to prove himself as virile as his father.
Black friends stressed the importance of machismo, the affirmation of masculinity, among subjugated peoples; they recalled the historic obligations of evangelical preachers in the south to the women of the congregations.
Those who worked with King accepted this as an expression of both a cultural tradition and a demonstrative temperament.
After the exertions and triumphs of the March on Washington, King had relaxed in his suite at the Willard Hotel with friends of both sexes.
The FBI was quite capable of planting the bug itself, but this has not been proved.
In any event, the results of the August séance accounted for the zeal with which the Bureau bugged King’s hotel rooms in the future.
Robert Kennedy was genuinely shocked by the revelations but did not feel that King’s private life had anything to do with his probity as a public leader.
Hoover abominated sex in general and regarded interracial sex in particular as evidence of moral degeneracy.
King, it appeared, was not only subversive but depraved, a more frightening menace than ever.
Within the Bureau, Sullivan, still trying to redeem himself, called a meeting on the King problem.
The Bureau expended much of its energy, it must be said, on singularly inane objectives—trying to stop King’s honorary degrees, the publication of his articles, his meetings with British leaders after he collected his Nobel Prize.
Goaded by King’s defiance, Hoover ordered Sullivan to prepare a composite tape, culling high spots from Washington, San Francisco and Los Angeles, and to mail it to Mrs.
If the marriage broke up, Hoover reasoned, this would diminish King’s stature.
King had asked for tapes of his speeches; and the FBI tape had been added to the pile.
Katzenbach and Marshall thereupon flew to President Johnson's Texas ranch on November 28.
In the midst of the civil rights debate Senator Richard Russell of Georgia asked the Justice Department what the rumors were all about.
When Katzenbach briefed him, he “just wasn’t interested; wondered why | was wasting his time.
Others felt that disclosure would destroy King’s “image,” especially among his white supporters.
The others laughed, but Clark felt the time had come when love and conciliation were not enough.
Most of the meeting consisted of a monologue by Hoover on the Bureau’s marvelous record in the south.
The FBI excised this sentiment before they passed the transcript on to Hoover, fearing his rage.
IX “The United States,” Robert Kennedy told the Senate Commerce Committee on July 1, 1963, “is dominated by white people, politically and economically.
The question is whether we, in this position of dominance, are going to have not the charity but the wisdom to stop penalizing our fellow citizens whose only fault or sin is that they were born.
The Judiciary Committee added a fair-employment-practices provision and strengthened the bill in other particulars; and, on the day of the March on Washington, John McCormack, now Speaker after Rayburn’s death, predicted that an FEPC could pass the House.
John Kennedy doubted whether Republicans would go along with any bill that contained what he wanted.
He had a crucial ally in William McCulloch of Ohio, a man of principle and ranking Republican on the House Judiciary Committee.
In mid-October the President called the House leaders to the White House.
The Attorney General thought that the President’s eloquence had swept Halleck along, “that finally he nodded his head in assent, and he had given his word, so he didn’t want to go back on his word.
The Judiciary Committee’s constitutional sage was the charming and formidable Sam Ervin—an authentic expert, save that his Constitution stopped with the ten amendments adopted in 1789; he appeared to regard the rest, especially the Fourteenth and Fifteenth, as apocrypha.
For nine days between July and September, the Attorney General was the administration witness.
The only thing you have a right to ask of me is that | stand and fight for the Constitution, and that is what | am doing now.
KENNEDY. | asked you whether, in your judgment, any discrimination existed in the State of Mississippi against Negroes.
KENNEDY. | would say, Senator, | have a lawyer here who could take you down into some of these places and maybe your eyes would be opened.
For the Attorney General, life had taken racial justice out of the middle distance.
Civil rights had displaced organized crime as the issue of law enforcement closest to his heart.
The more you learned about how Negroes were treated in the South,... the madder you became.
When Victor Navasky asked Marshall to measure the rise in Kennedy’s civil rights consciousness, Marshall shot his right arm up toward the sky.
The Politics of Justice ""| AM GETTING OUT Of all political activities as fast as | can,” Robert Kennedy said in his first interview as Attorney General.
Though he shielded his department from partisan politics, Robert Kennedy himself kept a vigilant eye on party affairs.
It offended J Edgar Hoover, who assured the press and the House Un-American Activities Committee that Corbin had been a Communist.
The Attorney General, Courtney Evans told the Bureau, “seems to have gone completely overboard in trying to defend Corbin.
John Kennedy could never understand why his brother valued Corbin, and Kenneth O’Donnell detested him.
He sniffed truculently around, smelled graft, some fancied, much real, and eventually uncovered highly dubious goings-on lower down in the national committee itself, thereby confirming Robert Kennedy’s regard for him and producing a schism in the Irish Mafia.
He telephoned in person or sent word through his staff about certain appointments of postmasters and rural letter carriers.
Among those whom he nagged relentlessly was Adlai Stevenson, not one of his favorites at best.
A member of Lawrence O’Brien’s staff called me (I served as liaison between the President and Stevenson) and said the Montero appointment had to be stopped. | disagreed but consented to look into the matter.
To my delight, | discovered the UN mission was hiring Montero on the insistent and repeated request of Robert Kennedy.
On another occasion the White House politicos opposed an appointment for James MacGregor Burns, the Williams political scientist, on the ground of his seditious activities as an antiorganization Democrat in Massachusetts.
The President instantly took the matter up, called in Kenny and said he could see no reason why Burns should not receive an appointment.
The same day | received a memo from Bobby saying that there was no tenable objection to Jim’s appointment.
No doubt he took dynastic satisfaction in appointing the son of the man who had reintroduced Joseph Kennedy to Franklin D Roosevelt thirty years before.
In 1962 he thought that Morgenthau, who had rapidly proved himself a first-class public servant, might be a good candidate for governor.
When the embattled Democrats gathered in Syracuse, Kennedy persuaded Buckley to switch from Frank O’Connor, the candidate of the old school, to Morgenthau.
The major family political enterprise in 1962 was the election of Edward Kennedy to the Senate from Massachusetts.
If it was left up to he probably would have run for Attorney General,” an elective office in Massachusetts.
The two brothers discussed the debate as they tossed a football on the lawn.
Robert answered, “If you get that question, tell them about public service.
Ancient resentment of the Kennedys among Irish pols mingled with wrath at Edward’s presumption in the intellectual community.
The first was from Bobby in Hyannis Port to say that, in view of Eddie McCormack’s performance in the primaries, he wished that | would persuade Mark Howe to endorse George Lodge in similar terms for November.
Action or success make them suspicious; and they almost lose interest. | think that’s why so many of them think that Adlai Stevenson is the second coming.
One was George McGovern, who, after an effective interlude as Food for Peace director, was thinking of trying again for the Senate.
When McGovern came down with hepatitis in the midst of his campaign, Robert sent Ethel out to South Dakota.
We had maximum coverage on television, radio and the press, and she was gay and hopeful.... | never knew until later that she was four or five months pregnant at that time.
For a year they were sending names to the Hill at the rate of nearly ten a month.
Robert Kennedy took his responsibility conscientiously but had one small problem.
Nor did the ABA, having insinuated itself into the appointing process during the Eisenhower administration, want to risk its position now by giving too much offense.
In the end, 6. percent of Kennedy’s judges, as against 5. percent of Eisenhower’s, failed the ABA test.
Sometimes senators had interests contrary to the administration’s interests; “and this is where the struggle takes place.
Since the doughtily reactionary Harry Byrd of Virginia was chairman, Kerr was essential to the success of the administration’s tax proposals.
He was an imperious figure, generally accounted, after the departure of Lyndon Johnson, the most powerful and ruthless man in the Senate.
Now he demanded that Luther L Bohanon, an Oklahoma friend, be named district judge.
The President asked the secretary to the Senate, Bobby Baker, to find out from Kerr what the problem was.
It sounds terrible.... you stand fast on principle, and Kerr doesn’t get his judge, and you don’t get any tax legislation.
So Bohanon became a judge—and turned out, to general surprise, not too bad, at least on civil rights.
Kennedy asked Ramsey Clark, another Hughes backer, to explain in three minutes why she should be nominated.
She has served twenty-six years on the bench and has been a good judge.
Second, women live longer than men, so if you want to be scientific about it, give her the benefit of the doubt.
After a talk with Kennedy, the committee agreed to give Reynaldo B Garzaa “qualified” rating.
The ambassador hated to harass his sons to find out what they were up to; instead, he had come to rely on reports from Morrissey.
A cheerful, roundfaced little man, Morrissey was not without his subtleties and decencies; but the sons had come to see him almost as their father’s spy, nor did they suppose for a moment that his appointment would elevate the federal judiciary.
McGeorge Bundy, who was present, remarked that this was one more sign Morrissey’s appointment would cause unnecessary trouble.
Except for the disastrous southern judges, the KennedyKennedy record in the circuit and district courts was in the main excellent.
The others he was perfectly satisfied to leave to other people’s judgment, and he would ask only occasional questions about them.
Hastie, a Harvard Law School graduate, appointed by Truman in 1949 as the first black circuit court judge, had proved himself steady, able and hard working.
The President called in Clark Clifford, who after observing that the judiciary had been Truman’s great failure, exhorted Kennedy to make only distinguished appointments.
When Kennedy mentioned Hastie, “I said | thought it would bea mistake for him to reach out just to put a Negro on the bench” for the sake of having a Negro; Hastie’s record was “reasonably good” but not great.
If you were going to consider the five or six best judges of the Circuit Court, you’d put him there.
So was Katzenbach, though he asked the President whether there would be a problem if he named a second Jew with Frankfurter still on the Court.
The President, wishing to forestall the request, now proposed appointing Byron White at once.
Make the point, the Attorney General characteristically said, that White was no mere professor or scholar but had actually seen ‘life’—in the Navy, in private practice, in politics, even on the football field.
So White left Justice, with Katzenbach taking his place as deputy attorney general.
John Kennedy at one point sympathetically asked Max Freedman of the Manchester Guardian, Frankfurter’s designated biographer, whether the Justice would be willing to resign if he and the President could agree on a successor. | later asked Kennedy what Frankfurter had replied.
We discussed who might replace him and he thought about putting Paul Freund on. | made the point that Archie Cox had come to work for the Administration and had done a fine job while Paul Freund had refused the position of Solicitor General.
Therefore, | thought that Archie Cox deserved the appointment more than Paul Freund.
We talked about the necessity of putting a Jew on. | said | thought if a Jew was placed on the Court it should be Arthur Goldberg although | thought it was very difficult to part with him.
We discussed it a couple of times again and the only reservation about Arthur Goldberg was the fact that he was so valuable to the Administration and could handle labor and management in a way that could hardly be equalled by anyone else.
Certainly a major factor in giving up the services of Arthur Goldberg was the necessity of replacing Frankfurter with a Jew.
The President said that Mike Feldman (of the White House Staff] indicated clearly that the various Jewish organizations would be upset if this appointment did not go to a person of the Jewish faith.
Frankfurter must have regretted his refusal of Kennedy’s earlier proposal.
It was at the swearing-in of Carl McGowan as judge of the District of Columbia Court of Appeals.
He sat in his wheelchair and spoke fluently and coherently, though not very relevantly, for about twenty minutes.
Since everyone expected a short tribute to McGowan, and since the Justice did not mention McGowan and showed every sign of being able to go on for hours, a restiveness crept over the courtroom.
People passed notes, and finally Joe Rauh, who had accompanied the Justice, leaned over and suggested that perhaps he had talked long enough.
The Justice said cheerfully — and loudly—“I may be Joe Rauh’s judge, but he is not my lawyer”—and continued.
Finally something happened to his microphone and, though he went on talking, no one could hear him.
Judge Bazelon said, “Mr Justice, Mr Justice, your power has gone'""—a terrifying metaphor, given the occasion.
Tony Lewis considered it a great tragedy for the Justice to expose himself in his rambling and garrulous old age.
This supposed right, born in response to the irresponsible requisitions of Joe McCarthy, received in 1957 the name of‘executive privilege’ and thereafter acquired with mysterious rapidity the status of ancient and hallowed constitutional doctrine.
Toward the end of the Eisenhower years Congressman Porter Hardy, chairman of a House Subcommittee on Foreign Operations and Monetary Affairs, tried to get records relating to the foreign aid program in Peru.
When Kennedy came in, the State Department renewed the Eisenhower directive.
On March 10, 1961, the frustrated Hardy dropped a letter of complaint at the White House.
Three days later Secretary of State Rusk promised delivery of the documents.
At the next hearing, however, State Department witnesses showed up with a letter from Rusk forbidding them to testify.
The Department’s legal adviser hastily withdrew the Rusk letter, asking Hardy to ""treat it as though it had not been sent,” and transmitted the documents.
So in every instance that has been brought to our attention in the Department of Justice so far by various departments of the Executive Branch where this question has been raised, we have suggested and recommended that they make the information available to Congress.
We will continue to do that. | don’t say that there might not be an instance where Executive privilege might have to be used, but | think it is terribly important, with the Executive Branch of the government as powerful and strong as it is, that there be some check and balance on it.
And in the last analysis the group that can best check and insure that it is handling its affairs properly is the Congress of the United States.
So we will lean over backwards to make sure that they get the information they request.
There were cases where withholding had a serious point; but these, Robert Kennedy felt, were the rarest exceptions.
In February 1962 a Senate committee, on an expedition of harassment, demanded to know by name which Pentagon officials had deleted warlike passages from speeches by fireeating generals and admirals.
The memorandum acknowledged the “great appeal” of the Eisenhower principle for the executive branch. it is not enough to assert “managerial responsibility” without at the same time weighing the needs of Congress for the information withheld.
Furthermore, | am inclined to believe that the internal advice rule, however honestly designed to protect subordinate officials from Congressional criticism, as often as not has the effect of protecting those whom we claim to be responsible, for frequently the information withheld would show that an agency head got good advice and ignored it.
Justice therefore recommended an explicit presidential declaration that the use of the privilege in this single case “is not to be regarded as precedent for its invocation in other circumstances where Congressional questioning of subordinate officials has more justification in bringing out relevant information.
That he really believed in an executive responsibility to supply information to Congress was shown in a few weeks when Porter Hardy again sought foreign-aid documents, this time about Angola, and the State Department again withheld them.
Within an hour after the question was raised in a press conference, Hardy received the records.
Department of Justice lawyers watched to see what the Attorney General would do.
One day the President asked Seigenthaler whether his brother planned to indict Vincent Keogh.
Perhaps to make it clear that politics would not affect his decision, Robert Kennedy put the Eisenhower holdover, William Hundley, in charge.
But the investigation convinced Hundley that the government’s evidence was credible and that Keogh had in fact taken the money.
It appeared that Chacharis had received over $200,000 in payoffs and failed to report them in his tax returns.
There was no evidence that Chacharis had used the money for himself; he had faithfully plowed it back into his political organization and evidently did not suppose he had done anything wrong.
Congressman Ray Madden of Gary, a powerful figure in the House, brought Chacharis to see the Attorney General.
Madden reminded Kennedy that Chacharis, a Greek immigrant who had come up the hard way, had been the driving force for John Kennedy in Indiana when Kennedy needed help.
As the conversation proceeded, Chacharis, an emotional man who had actually been proposed as ambassador to Greece, broke down and cried.
The prosecutor was aggressive, theatrical and, in the view of some in Justice, a grabber of headlines.
The McCloskey Construction Company had built— very badly—a Veterans’ Administration hospital in Massachusetts.
The Civil Division proposed a suit against the McCloskey firm for faulty construction and breach of contract.
Fred Korth, a Johnson protégé, had succeeded John Connally as Secretary of the Navy.
Korth, it was discovered in 1963, was using department stationery, the Navy yacht Sequo/a and other official facilities on behalf of his bank back in Fort Worth.
The Vice President was sure Robert Kennedy was pursuing Baker in order to force Johnson off the ticket in 1964.
Actually both Kennedy and Johnson were, in different ways, on the spot.
Soon after he became Attorney General, Kennedy was faced with the problem of the relationship between the Boston textile manufacturer Bernard Goldfine and Sherman Adams, a governor of New Hampshire and subsequently President Eisenhower’s chief of staff.
The disclosure that he had accepted favors from Goldfine had forced Adams to resign in 1958.
The favors, it now appeared, went far beyond hotel rooms and the famous vicuna coat.
His lawyer was Robert Kennedy’s one-time friend and later antagonist Edward Bennett Williams.
Goldfine also implicated a former Democratic governor of Massachusetts and a couple of Republican senators, among them Styles Bridges of New Hampshire.
One problem was that Goldfine himself was so ill with arteriosclerosis that he could not always remember things coherently.
A trail of cashier’s checks Adams had given his Washington landlady seemed to corroborate Goldfine’s allegations in general; but Goldfine himself would obviously not be a strong witness.
Hundley interviewed Adams, who seemed extremely nervous—as if he were ready to jump out the window, Hundley thought—and, confronted by the cashier’s checks, admitted receiving money from unremembered donors, but not, he insisted, from Goldfine.
Obviously the Kennedys could not afford to bring a case against Adams and lose it.
Because it would not be hard to confect a defense—people might always arise to swear they had given the money to Adams out of disinterested patriotism —Louis Oberdorfer, as head of the Tax Division, recommended against prosecution.— It is said, though | have been unable to verify the story, that John Kennedy sent the incriminating data on Adams over to Eisenhower at Gettysburg.
The new President was keenly aware of his predecessor’s continuing popularity and might have thought it useful to put the old general under obligation.
On inauguration day, as they rode together to the Capitol, Kennedy had asked what Eisenhower thought of Cornelius Ryan’s vivid account of D-day, The Longest Day.
The new President “was rather fascinated,” Robert Kennedy recalled in 1964, that Eisenhower never read the book and in fact hadn’t seemed to have read anything.
According to the story, Eisenhower, after looking at the Adams dossier, sent back a message to Kennedy expressing fervent hope that Adams be spared further humiliation.
This was not the reason the Department of Justice failed to indict Adams; but Eisenhower presumably did not know this, and the apparent favor may well have, for a period, restrained his criticism of his successor.Vi The most painful cases of all involved friends of the family.
But his brother Oleg made dresses for Jacqueline Kennedy and attended White House parties.
And Igor— Ghighi to his intimates —was an acquaintance of Joseph P Kennedy’s in Florida.
He was also a friend of the Dominican dictator Trujillo, with whose bloody regime the United States had recently broken relations; and he claimed one Palm Beach evening that Trujillo would reform if the United States restored recognition; adding darkly that, if Washington did not alter its policy, the Dominican Republic would fall to communism.
In April 1961 the State Department sent the veteran diplomat Robert Murphy to take a look.
After their return Robert Kennedy heard rumors that Cassini’s interest in Trujillo was more than academic.
He thereupon instructed the FBI to investigate reports that Cassini, who had not registered as a foreign agent, was taking money from the Dominican tyrant.
Cassini assertedly shared in payments of nearly $200,000 stashed away in a Geneva bank account.
Anew democratic regime opened the Trujillo files to newspapermen and congressional investigators.
Maas remarked to someone in this period how much he liked Robert Kennedy.
Maas said to himself, “If that’s the way it is and Bobby is going to get me, the hell with it.
His wife thought that at least he was obligated, as a friend, to tell Kennedy what he had discovered.
He sat there kind of hunched over in that big chair in that big room with his chin on his fingers.... | finished.
There were fifteen different ways his people could have fouled up the investigation or done something to have it thrown out of court.
James M Landis had been a faithful friend of Joseph Kennedy and all his children for nearly thirty years.
He had performed legal work, written articles, helped the father on his memoirs, drafted legislation and speeches for the sons.
He never, for example, despite protestations from Joseph Kennedy and from his own law partners, sent Kennedy bills for his legal services.
In 1956, under business pressures, he had delayed filing an income tax return, applied for one extension, forgot to apply for another, put the whole thing out of his mind.
The next year he filled out his tax form but could not figure out how to answer the question whether he had filed a return the year before; so he deposited the amount owed the government in a separate bank account and put the return in a drawer.
After the 1960 election, John Kennedy asked Landis, who, among other things, was an expert on the administrative process, to prepare a report on the regulatory agencies.
This assignment led to a routine security check and in turn to the discovery that the Internal Revenue Service had no recent tax returns from Landis.
With the help of Joseph Kennedy’s accountant, new tax forms were filled out; and, with the help of a loan from Joseph Kennedy (the money Landis had set aside covered taxes and interest but not penalties), he filed delinquent returns, paying $48,000 in 1961 and another $46,000 in 1962.
But, with a friend of the President involved, no one was willing to declare the action voluntary.
Commissioner Mortimer Caplin of the IRS passed the buck to the Justice Department.
On Katzenbach’s insistence, and for self-evident reasons, Robert Kennedy disqualified himself.
No doubt he felt that otherwise the Republicans would say that Robert Kennedy had fixed the case to protect his father’s friend.
He was undergoing neurological treatment at the Columbia Presbyterian Hospital.
Everyone supposed, in view of the circumstances, that, like the far worse malefactor Igor Cassini, he would receive a fine and a suspended sentence.
He came, however, before a self-righteous judge who, after a lecture, sentenced him to thirty days in prison.
This was not a fraud case; a sentence so harsh for a man so ailing made no sense in terms of rehabilitation, deterrence or anything else.
The unyielding judge, rejecting the plea of Landis’s physician that he needed the facilities at Columbia’s Neurological Institute, sent him to the Public Health Service Center on Staten Island, where he was flung into a ward largely populated by screaming psychotics.
Justice and Poverty HE WAS TIRED, Robert Kennedy had said, of chasing people.
The Rackets Committee had persuaded him that the American malaise was a problem not just of crooked individuals but of a corrupt system.
He increasingly perceived a nation stained with inequities —in the distribution of power, in the dispensation of justice, in access to opportunity.
The findings documented the conviction Kennedy had taken from the Rackets Committee that the United States had in fact two systems of criminal law.
Most guarantees of due process— the rights to counsel, to present evidence and call witnesses, to trial by jury, indeed to the very presumption of innocence itself—were effective only for those who could pay for them.
The Allen committee devoted particular attention to bail, the most visible example of the power of money in the system ofjustice.
Every year thousands of poor people remained behind bars for months after arrest.
But within ten days of the decision the Department of Justice drafted the bill that, as the Criminal Justice Act of 1964, extended guarantees of competent defense to every stage of federal judicial proceedings.
Kennedy then established the Office of Criminal Justice to deal with social issues affecting the criminal process from arrest to rehabilitation.
He gave strong support to James V Bennett, the notably humane director of the Bureau of Prisons.
They set up halfway houses to help ease the return of convicts to civilian life.
Kennedy worried especially about youthful offenders, too often incarcerated with, and thereafter indoctrinated by, their hardened seniors.
In 1963 they began planning youth centers for persons under twenty convicted of federal crimes.
The Attorney General had it reduced to fifteen years, the more customary sentence for bank robbers.
Scales had been the only Communist sent to prison under the membership clause of the Smith Act.
He had received a longer sentence than top Communists convicted under other sections of the act.
After the Red Army invaded Hungary in 1956, he had broken with the party and was thus serving his sentence as an ex-Communist.
In 1962 antiCommunists of the left, led by Norman Thomas and Joseph Rauh, urged his release.
But Scales, even as an exCommunist, flatly refused on grounds of principle to identify people he had known in the party.
The release of Scales, he told the Attorney General, would make it impossible for the FBI to insist that Communists or ex-Communists name names in the future.
Byron White and Nicholas Katzenbach successively recommended against commutation of Scales’s sentence.
And nobody did do anything and | never heard for a period of time and | looked at it.... | just thought that... based on the penalties for others, the amount of time of his sentence and... the problems he had at home that... | had his sentence commuted. | never discussed it with the President.
John Douglas of the Civil Division believed that Service’s suit had merit and that Justice should settle but warned the Attorney General there would be objection on the Hill.
A well-known scholar on Sino-Soviet affairs applied for the validation of his passport to permit travel to mainland China.
The CIA and the FBI scented espionage, because the scholar, who had once worked for the research side of CIA, had, in violation of regulations, taken copies of his own studies with him when he moved on to the RAND Corporation.
Kennedy told Abba Schwartz, head of the Bureau of Security and Consular Affairs at State, he was sure any violation was technical; but the FBI was pressing for criminal action.
Together they persuaded the security agencies that the scholar was at most subject to administrative reprimand.
Few solicitors general had discharged this duty with more style than Archibald Cox.
He knew the law, and he knew the Court; and, like all the best solicitors general, he entered so intimately into decisions as to become, at times, a sort of tenth justice.
Their most extended contact had come in 1958-59 when Cox was working with John Kennedy on labor legislation and Robert Kennedy had argued for more stringent provisions than Cox, or John Kennedy, thought wise.
It had become a custom for Attorneys General to argue one case in person at the summit.
Even had there been no such custom, Kennedy would have wished to appear before the Court.
Mencken had written in 1928, “because old apportionments give them unfair advantages.
Malapportionment was held the cause of a host of troubles— especially the neglect by state government of the cities and the urban poor, the consequent encroachment of the national government and the enfeeblement of federalism.
Still there were, as Marshall observed later, “lots of reasons” for Robert Kennedy not to get into it.
Reform threatened vested political interests, especially in the south, where the Attorney General was sufficiently unpopular anyway.
The case he chose at the end of 1962 involved the countyunit system in Georgia.
Earlier in the year the Court had changed its mind about its power to deal with inequality in voting.
In 1946 it had pronounced unequal representation a political question, beyond judicial remedy.
With the increase in urban and suburban population in the fifties, protest rose against the impasse created by judicial restraint.
A law passed in 1901 still determined the composition of the state assembly.
Legislators showed no inclination to change the law against theif own interest.
As the Kennedy administration took over, a Tennessee lawsuit — Baker Carr—was making a slow ascent toward the Supreme Court.
Henry—asked that the Department ofjustice enter the case as amicus curiae.
Accepting Cox’s proposition that gross and unreasonable malapportionment was in conflict with the equal protection clause of the Fourteenth Amendment, the Court held in Bakerv.
Carrin March 1962 that apportionment was a justiciable issue and that courts could provide relief.
Though it declined to reach the question of substantive standards, it reversed its 1946 decision in effect if not in form.
The system heavily weighted the Democratic primaries in favor of low-population rural counties.
This, Cox said in a memorandum to Kennedy, was an “easier” question than legislative apportionment.
However, he warned the Attorney General against adopting the position “that all votes must be given equal weight.
In my opinion, we should not argue for this dogmatic interpretation even in the case of statewide elections, for although Justices Black and Douglas might buy it, the argument is very unlikely to command the assent of a majority.
Kennedy’s problem of advocacy, Cox said, was to knock down all conceivable justifications for discriminating in favor of the country voter.
On January 17, 1963, improbably clad in morning coat and striped trousers, looking, said one reporter, “like a nervous and uncomfortable bridegroom,”24 Kennedy confronted the Court in the case of Gray Sanders.
His mother, his wife, two sisters, his brother Edward, his sister-in-law Jacqueline and four of his children were in the audience.
Ultimately at stake, he concluded, was the capacity of state government to deal with the problems of an increasingly urban and suburban nation.
Looking at Dolan “with that look he has,” Kennedy said, “They got a lot of nerve asking the Attorney General of the United States questions like that.
Douglas distinguished the issue of suffrage from that of legislative representation.
A strong liberal in objectives, he was conservative about the role courts should play in attaining them.
The problem of substantive standards, avoided in Baker Carr, could no longer be escaped.
In August 1963 Cox recommended that representation on the basis of population be required in one house of every state legislature but that deviations—substantial but not extreme —be permitted in the other house.
A Colorado case, where malapportionment had been sustained by a popular referendum, gave Cox particular difficulties.
In June 1964 Chief Justice Warren, speaking for a nearly unanimous Court, ruled that both houses of a state legislature had to be apportioned on the basis of population.
The reapportionment revolution did not have the results predicted in the reinvigoration of representative government, the salvation of the cities or the strengthening of federalism.
Nonetheless, by outlawing manifest distortions and irrationalities, the reapportionment decisions increased the chance of finding solutions within the political process.
Loevinger, a fluent Minnesotan, spent too much time for the Attorney General’s comfort making speeches around the country and too little taking hold of his organization.
In antitrust, as elsewhere in Justice, the Attorney General was determined to keep politics out.
The title of his soeech—“Vigorous Anti-Trust Enforcement Assists Business”—was evidently thought up by someone who supposed that businessmen really believed in free competition.
Kennedy began with a trail of jokes, all of which fell flat, and went downhill from there.
He had hoped to repeat the success of his Georgia speech where he candidly told a southern audience he intended to enforce civil rights decisions.
The administration had thought its wage-price guideposts secure when it induced the Auto Workers and then the Steelworkers to accept noninflationary contracts.
A few days after the steel wage agreement, on a Tuesday afternoon in April, Blough made his celebrated call on the President to announce United States Steel’s decision to raise prices six dollars a ton.
He felt, moreover, that Blough, who had said nothing to him, to Secretary of Labor Goldberg or to David McDonald of the Steelworkers about raising prices, had personally double-crossed them all.
The next day Sorensen read the Attorney General the statement the President planned to make in his press conference.
It was agreed that Sorensen would write it up and the President will give it along those lines.
Bethlehem was the second largest steel company; and the press had quoted Edmund F Martin, its president, as saying ina stockholders’ meeting shortly before, “There shouldn’t be any price rise.
The Attorney General accordingly asked the FBI to check Martin’s exact words with the reporters who wrote the stories.
Preliminary investigation in antitrust cases was a routine mission for the Bureau.
Katzenbach instructed Courtney Evans to have the agents interview the steel executives at their offices.
FBI agents thereupon visited them at their homes in Philadelphia and Wilmington before dawn the next morning.
The Attorney General, as usual, took full responsibility for the Bureau.
In actuality, beyond his general request that the FBI find out what Martin had said, he had nothing to do with the midnight calls.
He convened a grand jury to see whether the steel companies had violated criminal law.
On Monday night, according to Blough, he assured the general counsel of United States Steel that the administration was not vindictive and there would be no further problems with subpoenas and grand juries.
The Attorney General was talking, however, about inquiries related to the recent price rise.
The Anti-Trust Division had been preparing other indictments against the steel industry before Blough exploded his bomb.
In these matters the steel companies eventually pleaded nolo contendere.
The President’s quest for peace was not helped when word got around that, like his father, he thought that all steelmen were sons-of-bitches.
The steel battle was something of a shock for the President as well as for Blough.
Kennedy did not like to use that much power and realized it could not be easily used again; and he did not like to excite that much enmity.
Archibald Cox, who had been through earlier struggles as chairman of Truman’s Wage Stabilization Board, suggested in June that the President might be given authority to delay vital price or wage increases until a public commission rendered a report on economic impact.
Kennedy was disturbed, not, as he told me, at the content of Cox’s speech but at the timing.
The bottom fell out of the stock market the same day, and the White House hastily disclaimed responsibility for Cox’s ruminations.
If anyone is to blame for that speech, it’s me”—whereupon he called for his car and went over to the White House to set everybody straight.Z& John Kennedy, Cox said in retrospect, “thought of power as a bank account.
Most businessmen, perceiving that the Kennedys did not like them, responded to their attitudes rather than to their actions and credited them with antibusiness designs they did not have.
The question remained whether the steel crisis had led, as was Charged then and later, to a gross misuse of executive authority, especially by Robert Kennedy.
When Blough made clear his determination to wreck the stabilization effort, Kennedy had to choose between stopping him or letting him get away with it.
American Presidents had tried to defend the general welfare against private corporations since the age of Jackson, and Kennedy was in a respectable tradition.
Once he had decided to stop Blough, he could no more risk losing than Andrew Jackson could have risked losing to Nicholas Biddle.
Success did not even embolden them to seek improvements in the stabilization policy beyond the guideposts.
In view of this aftermath, it was not perhaps such a famous victory as it seemed at the time.
As the circumstances faded from the public mind, what lingered, especially in the business community, was the fantasy of the Attorney General ordering FBI agents to pound on doors in the dead of night.
Vi The Kennedys were more resolute in fighting for the poor and dispossessed than they were in fighting against the rich and powerful.
When he named a delegation of jurists to represent the United States at the Inter-American Congress of Attorneys General, a majority “for the first time in history” were Spanish-speaking Americans.
Ramsey Clark’s office in Justice, the Lands Division, disposed of more money than any other in the Department; but the Attorney General was not deeply moved by land titles and condemnations.
Clark and Kennedy now perceived the opportunity to try the novel policy of settling the claims.
Professional Indian lawyers and witnesses, who had been living off the litigation, did not like to see the cases resolved.
Indians themselves, with exalted ideas about the value of their land, were often disappointed by the results.
Still Clark, with Kennedy’s backing, persisted .84 Congress, which had to pass appropriations in each particular case, was especially resistant to big payoffs to Indians.
But political pressure on Indian issues, Clark recalled, “would never come directly to me.
When the Oklahoma delegation, led by the redoubtable Robert Kerr, objected to the size of a proposed settlement with the Cherokee Nation, the Attorney General intervened personally.
If government belonged where evil needed an adversary and people in distress could not help themselves, then government must devise new forms of action.
It all began mildly enough when Robert Kennedy in his first press conference spoke about the “alarming increase” in juvenile delinquency.
The predicament of the young always concerned him; in part, no doubt, because of the contrast between his own economically secure childhood and the scramble for survival among kids in the slums.
Jack Newfield once asked him what he might have become if he had not been born a Kennedy.
He named as his special assistant charged with coordinating the federal effort his intimate friend of so many years David Hackett.
But some sociologists had long doubted whether case treatment was in fact the answer to delinquency.
Hackett encountered the ideas set forth by two professors at the Columbia School of Social Work, Lloyd Ohlin and Richard A Cloward, in their 1960 book Delinquency and Opportunity.
Ohlin and Cloward argued that delinquency was more a product of social than of individual pathology.
It was what happened when a culture excited middle-class aspirations and then maintained barriers—of status, income, education, race— that made these aspirations unattainable for the poor by legitimate means.
The disparity between ideals and opportunities left the poor with the choice of accepting inferior status, thereby emasculating themselves, or of asserting identity through defiance and lawlessness.
Its cure, Ohlin and Cloward suggested, lay not in changing the client but in changing the structure of opportunity.
Those who traced delinquency to the disturbances of early childhood, for example, considered it excessively optimistic in its intimations of rapid social improvement.
Yet its very optimism made it attractive to activists who wanted to do something.
The Children’s Bureau in the Department of Labor hoped to dominate any federal antidelinquency effort.
Hackett, who was greatly impressed by the opportunity theorists, feared that the Children’s Bureau was more interested in treatment than in prevention.
In May 1961 John Kennedy established the President’s Committee on Juvenile Delinquency and Youth Crime, with Robert Kennedy as chairman and Hackett as executive director.
Hackett and Ohlin, who became head of the Office of Juvenile Delinquency, enlisted a number of ardent spirits.
Soon they began to see it also as a cover word for racial discrimination.
The attack on delinquency required, they believed, comprehensive planning to coordinate federal effort at the local level, where services were actually delivered.
Mobilization for Youth experimented with a diversity of new approaches —preschool education, vocational training and placement, employment of people from the neighborhood, decentralization in welfare departments, day care and community service centers, legal services for the poor.
In 1962 planning began for Harlem Youth Opportunities Unlimited , which had come into being under the direction of Dr.
Kenneth Clark when Harlem residents protested the city’s decision to import an out-of-neighborhood agency to work with black youth.
By the end of 1963, with its initial appropriation coming to an end, the committee had made seventeen grants for demonstration projects in sixteen cities.
He interrogated the experts, visited projects, chatted with youth gangs in the streets of East Harlem,222 talked up the program in speeches.
He helped particularly in dealing with Congress, first getting the legislation through and then keeping Edith Green happy thereafter.
Green, a comely and strongminded woman who had led the Kennedy forces in Oregon before Los Angeles, was chairwoman of the House subcommittee handling the program.
The Juvenile Delinquency Act meant one thing to Hackett’s guerrillas, something quite different to Edith Green.
She had expected a scattering of small pilot projects flung into operation as fast as possible and administered by agencies already in the field.
Wesley Barthelmes, her administrative assistant, accustomed to seeing legislators call on cabinet members, was surprised by Kennedy’s readiness to go to the Hill and spend time on what was, compared to civil rights and organized crime, a relatively small program.
The Attorney General contended quietly that projects like Mobilization for Youth were not inconsistent with the aims of the legislation.
Green, only a bit mollified, did not relent in her determination to keep the guerrillas from running wild.
Her attitude toward the Attorney General, recalled Barthelmes, was that “of a sorrowful mother for an errant son, which is an attitude Mrs.
Fifteen years before, Eunice had served in the Department of Justice as executive secretary to the National Conference on Juvenile Delinquency.
After marrying Sargent Shriver she had worked with teenage delinquents in Chicago.
Her consuming interest now was in a domestic peace corps modeled on Franklin Roosevelt’s Civilian Conservation Corps as well as on the undertaking her husband was running with such élan overseas.
Hackett suggested a cabinet-level committee with the Attorney General as chairman and Richard Boone of the Ford Foundation as staff director.
The children were inside, standing in a room which was bare but for a few benches.
The only toilets for the approximately seventy patients in a large ward were located in the middle of the room, permitting no privacy.
The hospital’s hard-working but inadequate staff could provide at best only custodial care.
They had no money and virtually no hope; they did not know where to turn for help.
Kennedy meanwhile took the District of Columbia as his personal responsibility.
In 1962 he began paying visits, without publicity and often without notice, to Washington public schools.
He organized an annual benefit—Ella Fitzgerald performing one year, Sammy Davis, Jr., the next— to raise a fund to prevent teenage blacks from having to drop out of school for economic reasons.
He also arranged for playgrounds, recreation centers, sports programs, summer job programs.
He knew these were no more than palliatives, but they “were at least intended,” as he later explained to his brother’s successor, “to show the children and juveniles that their government cared about their problems,”222 Typically, he asked his assistant on transportation matters, Barrett Prettyman, Jr., an able young lawyer who had clerked for three Supreme Court justices, to take on juvenile delinquency in Washington.
Kennedy discovered that the Dunbar High swimming pool had been closed for eight years for want of $30,000 to make necessary repairs.
An official from the city recreation department, perhaps hoping for commendation, approached him.
The Attorney General pointed out curtly that the shallow end of the pool was too deep for small children and asked him what he was going to do about it.
Then, moments later, as he began to leave the area, hundreds of black children ran after him, calling his name.
Richard Cloward and Frances Fox Pliven suggested that one motive was political—the desire “to strengthen the allegiance of urban blacks” to the Democratic party.Certainly, because the Juvenile Delinquency Committee had a three years’ supply of funds and kept the lowest of profiles, it provided a means of getting money to blacks in the inner city without provoking further strife with Confederates on Capitol Hill.
But this had more to do with preserving urban peace than with attracting urban votes.
By 1963 the civil rights struggle in the south assured the overwhelming popularity of the Kennedys in the ghettos, even if they had done nothing about juvenile delinquency.
Many blacks, in addition, did not vote; and helping the black underclass carried with it the backlash risk of estranging the white working class.
Robert Kennedy was of course determined to secure his brother’s reelection; but the Committee on Juvenile Delinquency was not an important factor in his calculations for 1964, except as the failure to redeem implied promises might cause trouble.
Richard Boone attributed it to his compulsive exploration of social reality.
Leonard Duhl of the National Institute of Mental Health, one of Hackett’s guerrillas, thought the clue lay in Robert Kennedy’s personal history —in his “notion of what an extended family is, and how a family works, and the mutual relationships between a family.
When Dave Hackett started to take him around... to visit the ghettos,” he responded both because he felt so keenly the misfortune of children denied the nourishment of family and because his extended family embraced all children in distress.
This was simply the Robert Kennedy who twenty years before at Milton rushed to the side of the underdog and never worried about embarrassing his friends.
Life had only enlarged his knowledge of underdogs—first the Rackets Committee, then the civil rights movement, then the poverty wars.
Few Attorneys General had ever been so busy in so many diverse directions.
Yet the Justice Department occupied only a portion of Robert Kennedy’s days.
In foreign affairs, his brother was navigating tricky waters with a crew of strangers.
When storms blew up, there was all the more reason to summon a shipmate of longer standing.
A son of the Cold War, John Kennedy saw it not as a religious but as a power conflict.
He opposed Dulles’s idea of responding to local aggression by massive nuclear retaliation at times and places of American choosing.
He opposed Dulles’s excommunication of the neutralist states of the Third World.
He opposed Dulles’s insistence on regarding the islands of Quemoy and Matsu off the Chinese coast as casus belli.
He worked for closer economic ties with Poland and Yugoslavia, for increased assistance to India and other underdeveloped countries, for the independence of Algeria and of Indochina.
Kennedy’s interest in negotiation with the Soviet Union went back at least to 1953.
In 1959 Kennedy argued against the resumption of nuclear testing (as recommended by Governor Nelson Rockefeller), and called for a test-ban agreement.
Ormsby-Gore actually provided the statistics John Kennedy used so effectively in Campaign speeches describing how few people in the American government were working on disarmament.
He charged in the campaign that the United States was in trouble—that the Soviet Union had been far more successful in identifying itself with nationalism in the Third World; that the massive-retaliation strategy left the United States helpless in face of aggression too limited or local to justify the use of nuclear weapons; even that Russia was well on its way to nuclear superiority.
Retired generals—James M Gavin in War and Peace in the Space Age, Maxwell Taylor in The Uncertain Trumpet— enthusiastically expounded it.
Even critics of the hard line perceived ominous changes in the power balance.
He urged Kennedy to avoid commitments about summit meetings but hoped that some alleviation might come through reciprocal concessions worked out in private discussions with Moscow.
When the Eisenhower administration in the heat of the canvass asked the Russians to release two American fliers shot down over the Arctic Circle, Khrushchev put it to the Politburo that this would help Nixon.
It may have meant simply that he supposed Kennedy would be easier to hornswoggle.
In any case amiable signals flashed from Moscow after the election to Harriman, Bowles and the President-elect’s brother.
On December 12, 1960, Mikhail Menshikov, the Soviet ambassador, invited Robert Kennedy to luncheon.
The ambassador blamed past trouble on middle-level American officials who had distorted the Soviet position on major issues.
Kennan, to whom Kennedy showed the paper, found it “considerably stiffer and more offensive” than Menshikov’s own remarks and believed it had been drafted in the Kremlin.
In a pugnacious speech on January 6, 1961, the Soviet leader proclaimed the irresistible triumph of communism.
This would take place neither through world war, he said, because nuclear war would destroy civilization, nor through local war, which could so easily grow into nuclear war.
Citing Vietnam, Algeria and Cuba as promising examples, Khrushchev called Asia, Africa and Latin America “the most important centers of revolutionary struggle against imperialism” and pledged full Soviet support to the insurgencies.
In reaffirming his rejection of nuclear war and his belief in “peaceful coexistence,” he insisted on positions that Peking found abhorrent.
By imbedding them in an otherwise truculent context, Khrushchev may have been trying to prove to the world Communist movement that nuclear coexistence was not incompatible with revolutionary militancy.
Perhaps he thought that his bellicosity would bemuse the Chinese while his softer words would gratify the west.
Inevitably Peking and Washington heard only the passages written for the other.
Certainly no one in Washington then recognized the extent of Russian-Chinese differences.
Much of the State Department continued for three or four more years to go on about “the Sino-Soviet bloc” as if it had been a marriage made in heaven.
Nor, recalling Khrushchev as the man who had banged his shoe on a United Nations desk a few months before, did many conceive him as notably subtle.
So Washington missed his subtleties, if indeed they were there, and heard only boasts and threats.
He responded by devoting his inaugural address a fortnight later almost exclusively to foreign affairs.
He did not intend the inaugural as a trumpet blast summoning Americans to war, nor was it so read in 1961.
He felt that previous Presidents, especially Eisenhower through his network of pacts, had overcommitted the United States, as in Southeast Asia.
The “revolution of national independence,” as he saw it, was the source and guarantee of the world of diversity.
But diversity, he argued, was ultimately incompatible with the Communist dogma that all societies passed through the same stages and all roads had a single destination.
But, if he did not think there could be an American solution to every world problem, he did not think there could be a Soviet solution either.
Khrushchev’s speech left no doubt in Washington that the Cold War of movement was on full blast.
Lest this drive the world toward the ultimate war, Kennedy considered it imperative to restore the military balance now tilting so alarmingly in the Soviet favor.
This meant both overcoming the alleged gap in nuclear missiles and creating a new capacity to fight nonnuclear war.
As a general, he was far less impressed by the Joint Chiefs of Staff, about whose business he knew everything, than he was by the Secretary of the Treasury, about whose business he knew nothing.
He discerned a selfserving budgetary design behind the wailing at the Pentagon wall.
He believed that an increase in defense spending could wreck the sacred free-enterprise system and turn America into a garrison state.
In a not unusual irony, Eisenhower was right for the wrong reasons; Kennedy, who did move, was wrong for the right reasons.
Kennedy moved on two fronts, increasing both nuclear and conventional force.
After becoming President, he discovered that the CIA questioned the missile gap.
Kennedy, in addition, was reluctant to get into a fight with the Joint Chiefs at a time when McNamara was struggling to gain control of the military establishment.
By autumn 1961 the new reconnaissance satellite persuaded even the Pentagon that the Russians had produced only a tiny proportion of the missiles claimed by the gap-mongers.
It ended any hope of freezing the rival strategic forces at lower levels.
It compelled Khrushchev to start worrying about the Soviet missile gap.
At the same time, Kennedy called for an increase in conventional force.
For a dozen years men of good will had sought ways of saving the world from nuclear suicide.
The best way to make sure nuclear weapons would never be used, it appeared, was to abandon the Eisenhower-Dulles strategy of predominant reliance on the bomb.
The nuclear arsenal should be only the shield against a Soviet first strike.
Limited-war forces should become the active element in American military strategy.
The purpose of all this was precisely to insure against nuclear catastrophe.
It was urged with persuasive force by Maxwell Taylor in The Uncertain Trumpet.
It was designed to enable the west to respond to Soviet aggression in Europe without immediate resort to nuclear weapons.
But a fateful side effect was to create forces that could be thrown into local conflicts in the Third World.
Not only would the creation of capabilities now make such intervention feasible; the escalation process, imperceptibly raising the level, step by small step, could make commitment irreversible.
The diversification of the American defense posture, along with new initiatives in foreign aid, seemed the best way to stabilize that changing power equilibrium about which even men like Kennan and Stevenson had warned Kennedy and about which Kennedy, through a long campaign, had warned the nation.
The President’s hope was to make a standstill agreement with the Soviet Union.
Each superpower, he proposed, should abstain from doing things that, by upsetting the rough balance into which the postwar world had settled, might invite miscalculation and compel reaction by the other.
As everyone knows, Khrushchev brusquely rejected Kennedy’s general idea and threatened specifically to conclude a treaty with East Germany that would extinguish western rights in West Berlin.
Kennedy replied that so drastic an alteration in the global balance was unacceptable.
Khrushchev himself, he observed, would not submit to a comparable shift in favor of the west.
Khrushchev rejoined that, if America wanted war over Berlin, there was nothing the Soviet Union could do about it; he was going to sign the treaty by December 31.Earlier in the year Kennedy had asked Dean Acheson to undertake special studies of the problems of NATO and Germany.
In Acheson’s view the way to answer Khrushchev was to make the most conspicuous preparations for a military showdown, including the proclamation of a national emergency.
In July the President requested more defense appropriations, called out 150,000 reservists and announced a program, which he soon regretted, of fallout shelters for protection against nuclear attack.
The ""great battle” for five days before his brother’s speech, he noted, was whether we should ask for a tax increase. | was the one who fought for that policy and was supported by all of the Cabinet with the possible exception of Dillon, plus Edward R Murrow.
They felt it would not do any good financially and, in fact, might harm the economy of the country. | felt first that it would be helpful psychologically.
It would give everybody the sense of participation which they were lacking at the present time.
The day before the speech we heard some rumblings that Congress might cut down on the foreign aid program if we asked for the tax increase. | think it was this more than anything else that finally determined Jack not to go for it.
McHugh, a former professor of ethics at Georgetown, argued in America, the Jesuit magazine, that shelter owners had the moral right to kill unsheltered neighbors clamoring for admission.
When | discoursed before assembled potentates on the divisive results of the sauve-qui-peut ethic, the Attorney General interjected sourly, “There’s no problem here.
But leave it to us, who are specialists in this tricky business, to make foreign policy.
As we discussed at the time, he must have thought there was something sinister and complicated behind it all or otherwise, we would not have done anything quite as stupid.
The meeting considered steps to be taken if the Soviet Union tried to shoot down allied planes flying to West Berlin.
General Lem-nitzer and General Taylor felt very strongly that we should fire back.
It is my feeling that the Russians feel this, feel strongly that if they can break our will in Berlin that we will never be able to be good for anything else and they will have won the battle in 1961.
They speak with one voice—they do not have to worry about opposition or what other countries think.
Their plan is obviously not to be the most popular but to be the most fearsome and to terrorize the world into submission.
My feeling is they do not want war but they will carry us to the brink.... | remember Chip Bohlen said in the beginning of the year that 1961 was going to be a fatal one on decision.
This was the year the Russians were going to come the closest to nuclear war. | don’t think there is any question but that that is true.
After the meeting Jack asked me what | thought. | said | wanted to get off.
Vi “| want to take a stronger lead on Berlin negotiations,” the President informed Rusk on August 21.2© “AH wars start from stupidity,” he said to Kenneth O’Donnell.
He grew increasingly frustrated in his dealings with the State Department.
Those who supported negotiation, like Harriman, Bohlen and Stevenson, were excluded from the Berlin discussions.
The pronegotiation cables from Ambassador Llewellyn Thompson in Moscow were discounted.
The head of the Berlin working group, Foy Kohler, was an all-out Achesonian.
Perhaps, he said, he should offer these points in the speech he was about to give to the UN General Assembly.
Stevenson said they were all excellent points, except the one about moving the UN to Berlin.
If the west were pushed out of Berlin, he believed, it would transform the whole European balance and make peace impossible.
Then Kennedy’s military preparations, including even the egregious shelter program, made it clear that the Soviet Union could not win Berlin by psychological warfare.
This very likely strengthened Khrushchev against Frol R Kozlov and the hard-liners.
The erection of the Wall in August meanwhile stopped the flight of refugees, thereby reducing the East German pressure for a separate treaty.
The Berlin crisis, fora moment so frightening to the world, subsided, and was rather quickly forgotten.
The evidence of Kennedy’s patient search for negotiations with the Soviets over Berlin is part of the historical record, and it is only by ignoring the plain facts that the authors in question have managed to construct their image of Kennedy as a Cold Warrior.
A notable by-product of the Berlin crisis was the extraordinary personal correspondence between the two leaders, initiated by the Russian in order, as he wrote Kennedy, to bypass the foreign office bureaucracies and to eliminate the propaganda obligatory in formal communications.
His State Department seemed a stuck record, spinning endlessly in the grooves of the past.
Their own travels in the early 1950s had verified the ambassador's discontents.
In 1960 John and Robert Kennedy discussed their plans to regenerate the Department.
Finally he said, ""Sons, | want to tell you that | once went to see Franklin D Roosevelt, who made much the same kind of talk that you’re making now.
The first problem was to gain control of the national security machinery.
The President and | discussed on a number of occasions after the election of moving Rusk out perhaps to the UN and appointing Bob McNamara Secretary of State.
He liked Ed Murrow very, very much.... he really felt at the end that the ten or twelve people in the White House who worked under his direction with Mac Bundy ... performed all the functions of the State Department.
Kennedy to an exceptional degree became his own Secretary of State—more so than FDR, thought Harriman, who had served them both.
Still, even if the President might try to know everything, he could not do everything.
After the Bay of Pigs, Robert became his brother’s eyes and ears around the national security establishment.
Kennedy ambassadors, frustrated by State Department orthodoxies, made the Attorney General’s office a port of call on home leave.
The national security community soon recognized him as a major countervailing force on international decisions.
He nagged the Secretary about the Department’s dilatoriness in hiring blacks.
The Kennedys were also exasperated by State’s philosophic attitude toward the travel restrictions that mocked America’s pretense of being a truly open society.
The Immigration and Nationality Act of 1952 excluded from the United States past and present members of proscribed organizations, such as the Communist party and Communist-front organizations, and advocates of proscribed doctrines, such as communism.
However, it also empowered the Attorney General, when State so recommended, to grant waivers for reasons of compassion or of the national interest.
The Eisenhower administration administered the proscriptive sections of the act with enthusiasm.
Dulles selected Scott McLeod, a Joe McCarthy protégé, as head of the Bureau of Security and Consular Affairs.
In the Dulles atmosphere, consuls abroad automatically denied visas to all remotely suspicious persons.
Exchange agreements with Communist countries permitted the entry of party members from behind the Iron Curtain; but artists, writers and scientists from western Europe or Latin America whom someone had charged with committing an offense against American ideas of political propriety were regularly turned away.
Their admission, the President and the Attorney General believed, was unlikely to destroy the Republic.
In 1962 President Kennedy appointed Abba Schwartz administrator of the bureau.
Schwartz, a liberal, a law partner of James Landis’s, a close friend of Eleanor Roosevelt’s, had long experience in refugee and immigration problems.
You will be my personal appointee. | expect you to assert your authority and act for me.
You know what | want—an Open Society—with the freest possible movement in and out of the country.
Keep in touch with the Attorney General. | don’t Know what you'll find in the State Department but you'll just have to work that out.
The Secretary appeared indifferent; indeed Kennedy had never mentioned Rusk in his talks with Schwartz.
Together they vigorously used Justice’s waiver authority to reopen the United States to those formerly excluded.
When, for example, Professor Kaoru Yasui, a Japanese winner of the Lenin Peace Prize, was invited to the United States in the autumn of 1963, his visa application was at first turned down.
Schwartz got on the case, discussed it with the Kennedys, the Attorney General issued the waiver and Yasui made his visit.
The republic survived, though ina few months Schwartz had to justify the action before seven closed sessions of the House Un-American Activities Committee.
Carlos Fuentes, the Mexican novelist, had been refused a visa in 1962 before Schwartz came to the Department.
Finally George Ball, Acting Secretary on a day when Rusk was out of town, sent the request over to Justice.
He favored admitting foreigners to the United States— and permitting them to stay when it was dangerous for them to return home.
Once the Iranian ambassador told Rusk that the Shah wanted twenty Iranian students in American colleges sent back to Iran.
The Secretary explained to the Attorney General that they were Communists, and the United States had better get rid of them.
Kennedy consulted his old friend William O Douglas in the justice’s capacity as an expert on Iran.
In the forties and fifties the Department grew accustomed to refusing passports to politically suspect citizens.
In 1958 the Supreme Court outlawed this practice in the absence of statutory authority.
In 1961, however, the Court, by upholding the constitutionality of the Internal Security Act of 1950, brought into play provisions in that law forbidding passports to members of organizations required to register under the act.
Robert Kennedy initiated a test case, which resulted ina Court decision in 1964 to invalidate the passport provision in the Internal Security Act.
The most irksome constraint on travel came from the practice of placing the presumably more offensive Communist countries—China, North Vietnam, North Korea, Albania, Cuba—off limits.
IX The essential Kennedy problem with State was how to annex the Department to the New Frontier.
It was difficult to do anything about Rusk; so the presidential eye moved on to the under secretary.
Ironically, Chester Bowles was the most devoted New Frontiersman in the Department.
But, save for his first-class ambassadorial selections, Bowles had had small impact on the entrenched bureaucracy.
A disturbed Bowles called the President, who promptly invited him to luncheon.
He said precisely the things you and | have been advocating for years, and he said them well.
He then expressed his deep disappointment at the failure of the State Department effectively to translate his views into action.
He went on to say that changes must be made, and since it was generally assumed that the Under Secretary was in charge of administration, | was the logical one to change.
An affectionate Bowles lobby swung into action and saved him for a moment.
Three weeks later Robert Kennedy sent his brother a glowing account by Ambassador Philip Kaiser of Bowles’s performance at a conference of American diplomats in Lagos.
Rusk is no detail man and with both of them in those top jobs things are going to get steadily worse.
George Ball, who succeeded Bowles in November 1961, brought a refreshing crispness to the job.
The administrative responsibility fell to George McGhee, under secretary for political affairs and Rusk’s best friend in the Department.
McGhee was soon shipped off as ambassador to Bonn, and the seventy-year-old Harriman took his place.
Harriman had the signal advantages of wisdom, confidence and the knowledge of how to deal with Presidents.
Presidents, Harriman said, always look around the room to see who agrees with a proposed decision and who does not.
He also had a singular capacity to get things done within the Department.
In an effort to tighten the internal workings, Robert Kennedy sent William Orrick over from Justice in late 1962 to become deputy under secretary for administration.
He wanted me, if | could, to interpret...the Foreign Service to him by whatever means | could.
When Orrick overcame that, he discovered both that the problems were deep and that the Kennedys to some extent misconceived them.
With relief he seized the chance to come back to Justice in 1963 as chief of antitrust.
He’d be pretty outrageous sometimes in some of the things he’d talk about or get excited about.
You weren’t ever sure whether he was just speaking for himself or for the President.
Actually, | think in most cases he was speaking for himself, and if he thought what he elicited...was of significance, he would pass it on to the President.
Foreign policy, the Attorney General thought the President should point out, was no longer a matter of transactions among chancelleries.
Therefore, greater attention has to be given than has been true in the past to these new and sometimes revolutionary elements”—labor leaders, intellectuals, students.
For those discussions our Foreign Service must know what we are doing here in this country; understand internal problems that we are facing—unemployment and racial difficulties —and know also what remedial steps we are taking.
They must understand what this government has accomplished for its people in a social way such as social security, minimum wage, housing, and what we are trying to do in the future.
They must know our history and our culture so that they can discuss these matters freely and with candor.
They wanted to replace protocol-minded, stripedpants officials by reform-minded missionaries of democracy who mixed with the people, spoke the native dialects, ate the food, and involved themselves in local struggles against ignorance and want.
This view had its most genial expression in the Peace Corps, its most corrupt in the mystique of counterinsurgency.
The gospel of activism became the New Frontier’s challenge to the cautious, painstaking, spectatorial methods of the old diplomacy.
Of all the New Frontiersmen, no one was a greater enthusiast for action diplomacy than Robert Kennedy.
What was sometimes later described as Kennedy activism was in fact its opposite.
So in Italy the White House after long and painful argument induced the Department to remove the veto imposed by the Eisenhower administration on a center-left government in Rome.
This withdrawal of American intervention in Italian politics was peculiarly criticized by State Department people as itself an act of intervention.
And in special circumstances activism was useful —especially so in places where the United States in the preceding decade had intervened against social change.
In India, Africa and Latin America activist ambassadors gave valuable counsel to governments struggling against massive difficulties.
John Paton Davies, Jr., the old China hand, inspected the scene with dismay.
Davies was not surprised that the Foreign Service did not win the confidence of the New Frontier.
A process involving the constant participation of the American Ambassador, no matter how high his motives or how great his political skill, in the domestic affairs of the country to which he is accredited cannot produce constructive results.
Perhaps there was more to be said for the old diplomacy than Robert Kennedy, at least, realized in 1961.
Philip Graham of the Washington Post made the case after the President spoke to him late in 1962 about superseding Rusk by McNamara.
It encouraged the illusion that an internal crisis in a remote land might affect the peace of the world.
It led American diplomats to try to do things in foreign countries that the people of the country ought to have done for themselves.
It nourished the faith that American ‘know-how’ could master anything; the ‘when in doubt, do something’ approach to an intractable world; the officious solicitude that degenerated into cynical manipulation and finally into bloody slaughter.
The professionals were right to question New Frontier activism in the execution of policy.
They were equally wrong to resist, aS SO many did, all departures in the substance of policy from the hallowed doctrine as revealed to Acheson and Dulles years before.
Dulles had purged the Department of independent-minded Foreign Service officers and converted it into a mighty temple of Cold War orthodoxy.
The failure of State to contribute to the President’s drive for Berlin negotiations showed the grip of Cold War dogmas.
In subsequent years critics sought oddly to portray the President himself as a rigid and zealous Cold Warrior.
The CIA and Counterinsurgency THE STATE DEPARTMENT remained the citadel of caution, professionalism and entrenched Cold War ways.
The Pentagon and the CIA had grown far more than State at the pap of the Cold War.
Almost at once the Kennedys were forced to confront the power of the military-intelligence complex.
The occasion was the invasion of Cuba in April 1961 by the so-called Cuban Brigade, a band of twelve hundred anti-Castro exiles, recruited, trained and launched by the CIA on a plan approved by the Joint Chiefs of Staff.
Dick Bissell [the CIA's deputy director of plans] at Jack's instructions came over to the Department of Justice and briefed me.
He told me at that time that the chances of success were about two out of three and that failure was almost impossible because ... even if the force was not successful in its initial objective of establishing a beachhead, the men could become guerrillas and, therefore, couldn't be wiped out and would be a major force and thorn in the side of Castro.
This, as it later turned out, was completely incorrect. | think that the President might very well not have approved of the operation if he had known that the chances of these men becoming guerrillas was practically nil.
Afterwards | said to Jack that | thought that ... based on the information that had been given to him by Dick Bissell, Allen Dulles, the Joint Chiefs of Staff, Mac Bundy and the others ... there really wasn't any alternative to accepting it.
These men had to be gotten out of Guatemala and Nicaragua; and if we brought them back to the United States and turned them loose, it could be a tremendous problem both here in this country and abroad.
The chances of success as outlined by the CIA and outlined by the Joint Chiefs of Staff were extremely good.
President Kennedy also had to reckon the political repercussions if he were to disband his predecessor’s Cuban liberation corps in the face of expert assurance that the project would prevail.
He called me down in Williamsburg where | was speaking and said we had run into some trouble.
When | arrived there there was a meeting going on and the situation already looked dark.
He agreed to permit the Navy to come in closer to shore and ended the meeting by saying he wanted to be kept closely advised, that he’d rather be called an aggressor than a bum.
In other words we didn’t want to have this thing planned and the United States support and have it go wrong.
That afternoon Dick Bissell called me at the Department of Justice and said that troops had been able to capture the air fields and the situation looked better.
It then turned out that the ship the CIA had in mind was the ship that was supposed to arrive there two or three days later and they couldn’t get it there any earlier and they took no cognizance of the ammunition ships that had run out on the action.
He said that we had made a commitment that no American forces would be used and that the President shouldn't appear in the light of being a liar.
It was pointed out of course that the alternative was possibly destruction. | took the position that we didn’t really have enough information to know whether the air cover would make any difference or not.
If the air cover should save the operation, perhaps we should take that step.
On the other hand if it just meant the delay of a few hours before absolute and ultimate collapse, there wasn’t any sense in it.
It was, therefore, decided that the Navy would make a reconnaissance over the beach and try to determine where the fighting was taking place and whether there was any possibility or chance of these men holding out.
He explained that it would take six or seven hours to get a reply and that meant that there couldn’t be any air cover that day because we didn’t get the request until about noon or one o’clock.
Anyway we went ahead with that and they came back about seven o’clock that night and said they couldn’t see any fighting going on and it would appear that the beach was extended to about ten miles.
The President for the previous three hours was battling hard to make arrangements to evacuate.
By the time we received this information, however, the men were in the water.
It was too late to send the destroyers in because they could be destroyed by artillery fire.
He ordered them, however, to run up and down the beaches as close as they could and try to pick up any Survivors.
Over a period of the next six or seven days they picked up 25 or 30 men.
Ultimately from the dispatches that | read and studied the CIA should have known that this was in bad shape and that we should take action to evacuate these men at a much earlier time than we did. | think it was incompetency and lack of communications and nervousness.
Dick Bissell always twists his hands and he was twisting them even more by the time this was over and for the following week.
He had the gout and had trouble walking and he was always putting his head in his hands.
It even had a great physical effect on Jack. | noticed him particularly a week from the following Saturday when we had a talk for a half hour before the meeting began and even during the meeting he kept shaking his head, rubbing his hands over his eyes.
During the midst of this conversation about the difficulty in re-establishing a position and the fact that he felt that he had been badly undermined, Mrs.
He therefore summoned General Maxwell Taylor out of retirement to perform an autopsy.
Robert Kennedy, Allen Dulles and Admiral Arleigh Burke joined Taylor on a board of inquiry.
The Cuba Study Group met for six weeks in April and May and interrogated some fifty witnesses.
After spending the day on the Bay of Pigs, Kennedy generally worked in his office on racial justice and other matters till late at night.
The transcript shows that the Attorney General took the lead in examining the witnesses.
His unsparing questions disclosed how pathetically ill considered the adventure was.
What comes out of this whole Cuban matter is that a good deal of thought has to go into whether you are going to accept the ideas, advice and even the facts that are presented by your subordinates.
If you work with a person for a long period of time, you take that into consideration when you are considering his ideas.
He was taking them at face value and when they told him that this was guerrilla country, that chances of success were good, that there would be uprisings, that the people would support this project, he accepted it.
The fact that we have gone through this experience in Cuba has made the President a different man regarding his advisers, and the Joint Chiefs of Staff are well aware of this.
They realize far better now what their responsibilities and obligations are in this field.
The President was looking to them for their military evaluation and they really didn’t give it the attention that was necessary and study that was essential and didn’t analyze the facts.
For instance they didn’t make any study whether this country was proper guerrilla country.
It was guerrilla country, but it was guerrilla country between 1890 and 1900.
Now, with helicopters, it is no longer guerrilla country and there was no way these men fighting in here in this swampy area could possibly supply themselves.
Their assessment of an earlier version of the invasion plan, Robert Kennedy scribbled in private notes on the Study Group meetings, showed “what really bad work the Joint Chiefs of Staff did on this whole matter.
Their real function was to preserve the CIA and JCS from feelings of persecution.
Taylor, as chairman and draftsman, concentrated on securing a unanimous report.
Actually Castro had dispersed his planes and, he told John Nolan of the Justice Department in 1963, had moved fifty antiaircraft guns to the area shortly after the invasion began.
Even if, against these precautions, the strike had been tactically successful, it would still have left 1200 CIA Cubans on the beachhead, surrounded by an avid enemy force two hundred times its size.
Maxwell Taylor was fifty-nine years old, articulate, dashing, urbane, both a consummate Army politician and an authentic war hero.
He was impressed too by Kennedy’s attitude toward his brother—“a reversal of the normal fraternal relationship of a big brother looking after a younger one.
A warm friendship, solidified on the tennis court, survived subsequent policy disagreements and lasted to the end of Robert Kennedy's life.
The collapse of the ‘missile gap’ had given the Kennedys an early skepticism about the Joint Chiefs.
The new President was not one for men in uniform with pointers reading aloud sentences off flip charts he could read much faster for himself.
In the spring of 1961 Kennedy received the Net Evaluation, an annual doomsday briefing analyzing the chances of nuclear war.
Finally Kennedy got up and walked right out in the middle of it, and that was the end of it.
They had sedulously cultivated relations with powerful conservative legislators—John Stennis, Mendel Rivers, Strom Thurmond, Barry Goldwater.
They hunted and fished with right-wing politicians, supplied them aircraft for trips home and showed up at their receptions.
The alliance between the military and the right disturbed the Kennedys.
This was why the President backed McNamara so vigorously in the effort to stop warmongering speeches by generals and admirals.
Radicals of the right were conducting an impassioned crusade not only against negotiation with the Soviet Union but also against social measures at home (the fluoridation of water was deemed a particular threat) and against the Warren Court.
Major General Edwin A Walker, the rightwing demagogue who had made a menacing appearance at Ole Miss during the Meredith affair, was in a sense the heir of Major General George Van Horn Moseley, who had gone, in the thirties, from high Army commands to the domestic fascist movement.
When the popular thriller Seven Days in May depicted a Pentagon attempt to take over the government, the President remarked, “It’s possible.
If there were a second Bay of Pigs, the military would begin to feel it their patriotic obligation to preserve the nation.
Kennedy asked Reuther what he thought the federal government could do, within the First Amendment, to curb right-wing extremism.
Reuther, who never liked to be at a loss for a program, said he would make some recommendations.
In December 1961 they gave the Attorney General a memorandum addressed particularly to the problem of the radical right and the armed services, and recommending, among other things, withdrawal of tax exemptions from right-wing foundations and re-examination of free radio and television time for radical-right commentators.
The memorandum, which received fairly wide distribution around the government, soon leaked, producing an aggrieved counterattack on the Attorney General.
For this and other reasons, the administration moved cautiously on the Reuther recommendations.
The President tried to interest Senator John Pastore of Rhode Island, chairman of the Senate Communications Subcommittee, in doing something about right-wing harangues on the airwaves.
Phillips moved to the Democratic National Committee and encouraged persons and organizations attacked on the air to demand reply time.
The effort resulted in over five hundred replies in the next few months and doubtless had an inhibiting effect on right-wing broadcasts.
Robert Kennedy shared his brother’s admiration of and affection for the Secretary of Defense.
The Kennedys also thought highly of Gilpatric, Cyrus Vance and the other civilian officials.
Still, as civilians, the McNamara people remained outsiders; so, after the Cuba board of inquiry finished its work, Kennedy kept Taylor on as military representative in the White House and a year later, when Lyman Lemnitzer’s term expired, made him chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.
With Taylor reinforcing McNamara, Kennedy believed that the Joint Chiefs of Staff, in the absence of further Bays of Pigs, were under control.
The Bay of Pigs raised acute questions about the Agency’s responsiveness to higher authority.
Haynes Johnson's excellent book The Bay of Pigs reported CIA operatives telling the Cuban Brigade that, if the President tried to call off the invasion, they should ‘arrest’ the operatives and go ahead anyway —“virtually treason,” Robert Kennedy thought.
Dulles and Bissell, it was evident, had misled the White House about vital features of the plan—especially the uprising behind the lines that, they had given the White House to understand, would follow the landings.
And the CIA had given a totally false impression about the ease with which the invaders could slip away from the beachhead to become guerrillas in the back country.
In addition to misinformation, one surmises that there were equally vital thoughts withheld.
It is hard to believe that Dulles and Bissell assumed the operation would succeed within the limits imposed.
They may well have assumed that, if it faltered, the President, having gone so far, would have no choice but to follow the road to the end and send in American troops.
CIA operatives actually assured the Brigade leaders American military assistance would be there if they needed it.
Howard Hunt, the original chief of political action for the project, had no doubt about this.
When Kennedy publicly excluded the use of American troops before the invasion, “I did not take him seriously.
The CIA planners did not reckon with his inherent prudence and his ability to refuse escalation.
Reflecting, that summer at Hyannis Port, on those who had wanted to go in with full force, Kennedy said, “We’re not going to plunge into an irresponsible action just because a fanatical fringe ... puts so-called national pride above national reason.
In order to get him to go along, Dulles had to suggest repeatedly, without ever saying so explicitly, that, if Kennedy canceled the project, he would appear less zealous than Eisenhower against communism in the hemisphere.
The elimination of Castro in a vacuum would only have led to a more violent Cuban regime under Fidel’s radical younger brother Raul or under the Argentine revolutionist Che Guevara.
In the context of invasion, however, the murder of Castro might produce enough shock and disorganization to put the regime in jeopardy.
King, chief of CIA’s Western Hemisphere Division, recommended that “thorough consideration be given to the elimination of Fidel Castro” in order to “accelerate the fall” of his government.
V Intelligence agencies, sealed off by walls of secrecy from the rest of the community, tend to form societies of their own.
Prolonged immersion in the self-contained, self-justifying, ultimately hallucinatory world of clandestinity and deception erodes the reality principle.
So intelligence operatives, in the CIA as well as the FBI, had begun to see themselves as the appointed guardians of the Republic, infinitely more devoted and knowledgeable than transient elected officials, morally authorized to do on their own whatever they believed the nation’s security demanded.
Through most of the 1950s the fact that the Secretary of State and the director of Central Intelligence were brothers gave the Agency unusual freedom.
Covertaction operators, working on relatively small budgets, helped overthrow governments deemed pro-Communist in lran and Guatemala , failed to do so in Indonesia , helped install supposedly prowestern governments in Egypt and Laos and planned the overthrow and murder of Castro in 1960.
Congress and the press looked on these activities, insofar as they knew about them, with complacency.
Only one group had grave misgivings and informed criticism; expressed, however, in the deepest secrecy.
This, improbably, was the President’s Board of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities, created by Eisenhower in 1956 and composed of unimpeachably respectable private citizens.
Almost at once the board had appointed a panel, led by Robert Lovett and David Bruce, to take a look at CIA’s covert operations.
With “a horde of CIA representatives” swarming around the planet, CIA covert action was exerting “significant, almost unilateral influences ... on the actual formulation of our foreign policies ... sometimes completely unknown” to the local American ambassador.
All too often the State Department knew “little or nothing” of what the CIA was doing.
In 1957 the CIA station in Indonesia decided that the United States should back a military revolt against Sukarno.
The spooks moved on many fronts, even fabricating a Sukarno mask for an actor to wear ina pornographic film to be ground out in the blue movie mills of Los Angeles and used thereafter to discredit the Indonesian leader.
John Allison, the ambassador in Djakarta, opposed the idea of overthrowing the regime.
Though Allen Dulles had personally promised to keep the new ambassador, Howard P Jones, apprised of CIA activity in Indonesia, Jones was not informed that CIA was giving military assistance to the rebels.
As the rebellion collapsed in May, a CIA pilot, Allen L Pope, was shot down and captured.
The chief result, the board said, had been to strengthen the Communists in Indonesia.
In 1959 the 5412 Special Group began for the first time to meet regularly.
Esterline briefed the board late in 1960 on the Cuban project, its members, Lovett particularly, registered dismay, especially over the manner in which the planning was being administered.
In addition, we believe that CIA’s concentration on political, psychological and related covert action activities have tended to detract substantially frorti the execution of its primary intelligence-gathering mission.
But its testimony demolishes the myth that the CIA was a punctilious and docile organization, acting only in response to express instruction from higher authority.
Like the FBI, it was a runaway agency, in this case endowed with men professionally trained in deception, a wide choice of weapons, reckless purposes, a global charter, maximum funds and minimum accountability.
Lovett told him that CIA was badly organized, dangerously amateurish and excessively costly.
This, he said, had not been possible with Dulles as director and Eisenhower as President.
He called it the President’s Foreign Intelligence Advisory Board and named James R Killian, Jr., of MIT as chairman and Clark Clifford as a member.
Because the board enjoyed greater presidential support under Kennedy than before , most of its recommendations were adopted.
It was not organized to find out things an agency adept at concealment wished to conceal.
Bissell was replaced as chief of the clandestine services by Richard Helms, an OSS-CIA veteran whose background lay in secret intelligence rather than in dirty tricks.
The 5412 Special Group was reconstituted with new authority over CIA covert action and with Maxwell Taylor as chairman.
To complete the chain the President quietly gave Robert Kennedy an informal watching brief over the intelligence community.
His Cuba report concluded with a proposal for an extraordinary reorganization of the entire government in order to fight the Cold War.
Cold War strategy, Taylor recommended, should be decided by an interdepartmental strategic resources group in charge of all situations around the planet certified as ""critical"" by a Cold War indications center.
Rusk understandably saw the scheme as Taylor's takeover bid for control of foreign policy.
Robert Kennedy, filled with inchoate urgencies after the Bay of Pigs and also beguiled by Taylor, had endorsed the grandiose plan but does not appear to have objected to its disregard thereafter.
The President did, however, pluck from the exercise not only Taylor himself, whom he saw as a handy instrument for managing a benighted JCS, but also fragments of Taylor’s bureaucratic dream.
One aspect of the Taylor approach—the idea of concerted action in critical countries—appealed to a President who had believed ever since his visit to Vietnam in 1951 that the characteristic mode of Communist military pressure was not direct confrontation but indirect aggression and especially guerrilla warfare.
Subsequent guerrilla successes in Cuba and Laos, accompanied now by rising guerrilla threats in Latin America and Africa, provided the background from which the famous Khrushchev speech derived its plausibility and menace.
With nuclear war inconceivable and limited war improbable, guerrilla war had evidently become the chosen Soviet weapon.
If Kennedy was deceived about the efficacy of this threat, so no doubt was Khrushchev.
In any event Kennedy in 1961 saw counterguerrilla action as the way to plug the great gaping hole in the fabric of peace.
Taylor had advocated conventional force for limited war, not special forces for guerrilla war, though he was delighted to add counterinsurgency to the menu of ‘options’ available in the name of flexible response.
The theorists did not see counterinsurgency as any permanent solution to the turmoil of the Third World.
Guerrilla warfare was the means by which “scavengers of the modernization process” sought to exploit emergent revolutionary aspirations.
Counterguerrilla action was the Shield that would protect the development process from Communist disruption until the nation gained the social strength to control the situation itself.
If counterinsurgency meanwhile persuaded Moscow to drop the weapon of national-liberation wars, the world could look forward to an era of tranquility.
At his first National Security Council meeting, on February 1, 1961, the President directed McNamara to instruct the Pentagon to place more emphasis on counterinsurgency.
Where the Special Group was intended to control CIA covert action, Special Group was supposed to coordinate overt American efforts to help foreign governments threatened by guerrilla insurrection.
The model of successful counterinsurgency lay at hand in Ramon Magsaysay’s victory over the Hukbalahaps in the Philippines in the early 1950s.
After working with Magsaysay, the attractive and fervent Lansdale had moved on to Saigon as CIA station chief.
Pyle’s dream was to establish a Third Force in Vietnam, opposed equally to the colonialist French and the Communist Viet Minh.
The result, as rendered by Greene, showed the horrible consequences of ignorant good intentions.
He combined confident ideological naiveté and a disregard of consequences with genuine affection for alien lands and a certain political realism.
Still, his emphasis on the political character of people’s war—on preempting the revolution and thereby taking the human base away from the guerrillas—was at the heart of the Kennedy theory of counterinsurgency.
Vill The mission of Special Group was less the waging of guerrilla war than its prevention.
It was essentially an ad hoc, trouble-shooting, expediting body, established, not to create policy, but to make a slow-moving bureaucracy act quickly It soent the most time on Latin America, then on Southeast Asia—Cambodia, Laos, Siam; not very much, however, on Vietnam.
Moreover, the use of force to overthrow certain types of government is not always contrary to United States interests.
Counterinsurgency might best be described as social reform under pressure.
Any effort that disregards the base of social reform, and becomes preoccupied with gadgets and techniques and force, is doomed to failure and should not be supported by the United States.
The Special Forces were instructed in harvesting crops, digging wells, curing diseases, delivering babies and other benign undertakings.
The Cl Group was more effective, however, in other areas —especially in training Latin Americans to cope with insurgencies.
Academies in Washington and Panama instructed police officers in riot control, a practice much criticized later.
But, as John Bartlow Martin observed in the Dominican Republic, “the police, trained under Trujillo, knew nothing but to shoot to kill.
Actually Castro had begun his covert action program against Latin America in the spring and summer of 1959, some months before the United States went into the business against him.
By 1963 the progressive democratic regime led by the dauntless Romulo Betancourt in Venezuela was Castro’s main target.
Castro plainly saw Betancourt as a greater threat than, say, Perez Jimenez, the Venezuelan dictator in the fifties, would ever have been.
Latin America, we thought in the early sixties, might be facing an ultimate choice between the Castro way and the Betancourt way.
Betancourt's fight for democracy, Kennedy continued, had made him “a symbol of what we wish for our own country and for our sister republics.
In November 1963 the Cuban government staged a “Week of Solidarity with the Venezuelan Revolution” to cheer on the disruption of the presidential election scheduled for December.
Later in the month the Venezuelans discovered four tons of arms shipped by Castro to a cache on their northwest coast.Z® Castro’s campaign was a flop.
Despite the threat that voters would be picked off by revolutionary snipers, 90 percent went to the polls.
United States technical assistance to the Venezuelan police unquestionably helped the Betancourt government to put down the guerrillas, though no amount of police efficiency would have availed had not Betancourt’s social policy won hearts and minds.
For the first time in Venezuelan history one elected president peacefully succeeded another.
There is no evidence that the American schools ever offered courses in torture.
Still the instruction was much concerned with the psychology of interrogation; and too many of the students added torture when they got home.
The Costa-Gavras film State of Siege was much exaggerated but had its point.
There was also the danger that police training might be used for the repression of progressive democrats seeking constitutional change as well as of terrorists sent in from abroad.
The President took a highly publicized personal interest, enlarging the Special Forces, sending to Fort Bragg for their literature on guerrilla war, putting them in green berets as a mark of distinction.
Counterinsurgency training had been given to 114,000 American officers and nearly 7000 from foreign countries.
Foreign Service officers, even ambassadors, had to attend counterinsurgency seminars before assignment to the Third World.
After the Bay of Pigs and the Berlin Wall, he did not feel his brother could afford another setback.
The Attorney General cross-examined those called before the Cl Group as caustically as, in the same period—before the Committee on Equal Employment Opportunity—he cross-examined officials whose agencies had not hired enough blacks.
After a notably harsh session, a man from the State Department told a reporter, “If one of you guys writes one more time about his looking like a choirboy, I'll kill you.
Take a look at that bony little face, those hard opaque eyes, and then listen to him bawl somebody out.
Despite the President’s benediction and the Attorney General’s zeal, counterinsurgency retained strong opponents within the government.
The Army was institutionally hostile to freewheeling officers like Lansdale and irregular formations like the Green Berets.
Guerrilla action was simply beyond the conception of an opulent military establishment dedicated to high-technology war.
The State Department, except for Harriman, who thought counterinsurgency had its uses in Latin America, was even less enthusiastic.
The theory the Kennedys had taken from Lansdale—winning the people by “social reform under pressure”—had a superficial plausibility.
Very few governments under guerrilla attack cared much about their own dispossessed.
The regimes most severely challenged were those most suicidally determined to hold on to despotic power and privilege.
Modernization and reform might well undermine whatever stability the regime had without eliciting the active loyalty of a long-suffering populace.
And since the American ambassador was by definition debarred from using the ultimate sanction—withdrawal of American support—he lacked leverage to force apprehensive oligarchs to take measures they believed threatening to their own Survival.
The professional military, American and native, lacked ability or desire to make social revolutions.
The Special Forces themselves tended by a self-selecting process to attract, with notable exceptions, men whose taste was less for good works than for violence.
As a weapon, counterinsurgency was turning cruelly in the hand of the user.
Its primary consequence was to keep alive the American belief in the capacity and right to intervene in foreign lands.
The failure of counterinsurgency was another phase in the education of Robert Kennedy.
The night the Bay of Pigs collapsed, Maxwell Taylor was struck by John Kennedy's already ""deep remorse"" about the Cubans captured by Castro.
He had had trouble sleeping, he told O'Donnell one morning; ""I was thinking about those poor guys in prison down in Cuba.
So we wanted to do whatever was necessary, whatever we could, to get them out. | felt strongly about it.
From start to finish Castro spoke with rare consistency of an “indemnity” of five hundred bulldozers.
Moreover, the machines Castro specified—D-8 Super Caterpillar bulldozers—seemed better suited for the construction of airfields and missile bases than for agricultural work.
Castro finally said he would settle for the dollar value of the bulldozers, which he estimated at $28 million.
The committee expired at the end of June 1961 ina burst of recriminatory statements to and from Castro.
In Key West, exiles formed the Cuban Families Committee for the Liberation of the Prisoners of War.
Nine months later, at the end of March 1962, the prisoners were brought to trial.
Roberto San Roman, whose brother Pepe was in the dock but who had himself escaped from the beachhead, flew from Florida to Washington.
He invited San Roman to telephone “ten times a day” and sent him to see Richard Goodwin at the White House, who, among other things, got President Joao Goulart of Brazil to ask Castro to spare the prisoners.
Robert Kennedy now proposed an exchange of $28 million worth of agricultural products for the prisoners.
On the evening of April 5, | noted in my journal, “the President called me at 7 o’clock to find out what the Food-for-Prisoners deal is all about.
We had all assumed that the President knew about it, but apparently no one had told him.
This morning Adlai Stevenson had mentioned it to him, and JFK had not known what he had been talking about.
The President asked me to check into the matter and let him know how far things had gone. | called Bobby, who seemed a little surprised and chagrined that his brother did not know about it, and agreed to call him and bring him up to date.
Two days later, representatives of the Cuban Families Committee, led by Alvaro Sanchez, Jr., arrived in Havana with pledges of $28 million in agricultural products.
To prove good faith, however, he said he would release sixty sick and wounded prisoners to the United States.
For this first installment he expected an interim payment of $2. million.
The sixty men arrived in Miami exactly one year after they had left Nicaragua for the Bay of Pigs.
Explaining that the government could not pay the ransom, he advised the exiles to form a fundraising committee.
Public relations sages advised the Cubans to sign up an eminent chairman for a sponsoring committee.
Donovan took the case without knowledge of the Attorney General’s interest22 and without fee.
Reports from the prisons gave an alarming picture of hunger, sickness and degradation.
Castro asked about the $2. million due for the prisoners released in April.
After discussion they agreed, in effect, that Castro could call the ransom indemnification and in return would take it in medicine and food.
In September, Robert Kennedy noted that it seemed “virtually impossible for us to send $60 million worth of equipment to Cuba with part of our population and a number of political leaders calling for an invasion of Cuba""; $25 million perhaps, but not $60 million.
In early October, though suffering from acute bursitis, Donovan flew again to see Castro.
Two days later John Kennedy announced the discovery of nuclear missile bases in Cuba.
Redeeming the prisoners was only part of the unfinished business with Castro.
There was also the regime itself, now by Castro’s own statement a Marxist-Leninist outpost in the western hemisphere.
Lemnitzer, Burke, Rusk, Mac Bundy, Bissell, Allen Dulles, several others present.
Jack and | then left the meeting and took a walk and they worked for another three or four hours. | came back and visited them around three o’clock.
There was discussion about whether we should send American troops into Cuba.
Some of the people at the meeting were very outspoken and took an attitude of ‘He can’t do this to us.
He started complaining after one of the meetings on D plus two that he was against Cuba. | told him that he might have been against it before but that he was for it from then on.
The other great question is getting an Assistant Secretary of State for Latin America. | thought John Connally would do the job.
Not an expert in the field but at least he is a man of action.... | had a slight flare-up with Lyndon Johnson at one of these meetings.
At D plus two we started to go around the table to try to find out who was in favor of the project.
We had the impression he was just trying to get off it himself. | had a talk with Dean Rusk after D plus two and | believe with McNamara to make sure that everybody in their Departments understood that the important matter was to stand firm and to not try and pass the blame off to somebody else.
They all accepted that and | think we had very little difficulty along those lines.& | had gone to Europe shortly after the Bay of Pigs.
When | returned early in May, | attended meetings of the Cuban task force on postdebacle policy.
At the National Security Council meeting the next day, McNamara expressed Department of Defense opposition to this idea too.
Not many are really prepared to send American troops in there at the present time but maybe that is the answer.
Mansfield sensibly recommended “gradual disengagement of the United States government from anti-Castro revolutionary groups,...a taciturn resistance to the political blandishments or provocations from those at home who would urge that we act directly in Cuba,...a cessation of violent verbal attacks on Castro by officials of the government” and full steam ahead on the Alliance for Progress because without economic progress “Castroism is likely to soread elsewhere in Latin America whether or not Castro remains in power in Cuba.
With his brother under Communist harassment in Berlin and Southeast Asia and under Republican harassment in the United States, with Castro’s operatives plotting against democratic regimes in Latin America, Robert Kennedy was determined to find quicker ways of striking back.
In the interstices of his other battles of 1962—with the segregationists and with the mob, with Jimmy Hoffa and with Edgar Hoover—he now began to expend much time and concern on the overthrow of the Castro regime.
McCone proved, as expected, an able executive and, as not expected by some of us, a detached analyst of intelligence, even when the intelligence might clash with his own robustly conservative views.
Robert Kennedy used to kid him about his conservatism and try to nudge the Agency to the left.
With sure bureaucratic instinct, the Agency seized on the Cuban problem as the way of making its comeback from the Bay of Pigs.
The CIA wished to organize Castro’s overthrow itself from outside Cuba, as against those in the White House, the Attorney General’s office and State who wished to support an anti-Castro movement /nside Cuba.
The CIA’s idea was to fight a war; the others hoped to promote a revolution.
Any successful anti-Castro movement inside Cuba would have to draw on disenchanted Castroites and aim to rescue the revolution from the Communists.
This approach, stigmatized as Fidelismo sin Fidel, was opposed by businessmen, both Cuban and American, who dreamed of the restoration of nationalized properties.
But the CIA alternative was probably dictated less by business interests than by the Agency’s preference for operations it could completely control—especially strong in this case because of the Cuban reputation for total inability to keep anything secret.
The CIA specifications favored those Cubans “most willing to accept CIA identification and control” and discriminated against Cubans who insisted on running their own show. | had in mind the anti-Castro radical Manuel Ray, who was believed to have the most effective network on the island.
Robert Kennedy, remembering Lansdale’s doctrine of preempting the revolution and aware that the Army did not want him in Vietnam, thought that the savior of Magsaysay might have the answer to Castro.
McN said he would make latter available for me—I assigned him to make survey of situation in Cuba—the problems & our assets.
My idea is to stir things up on island with espionage, sabotage, general disorder, run & operated by Cubans themselves with every group but Batistaites & Communists.
Do not know if we will be successful in overthrowing Castro but we have nothing to lose in my estimate.
He recommended “a very different course” from the CIA “harassment” operations of the summer, conceived and led as they were by Americans.
Instead, the United States, Lansdale argued, should seek out Cubans who had opposed Batista and then had become disillusioned with Castro.
IV Mongoose, like the baby in the old story, was attended at the cradle by good fairies with divergent wishes.
Since “anything big was going to be charged to the United States,” Mongoose had to be kept small, functioning at what was known in intelligence circles as a low noise level.
Nor did the President wish undue activity to jeopardize the lives of the Bay of Pigs prisoners.
Lansdale’s wish was activity—a lot of it—leading to internal revolution.
Task Force W, the CIA unit for Mongoose, soon had four hundred American employees in Washington and Miami, over fifty proprietary fronts, its own navy of fast boats, a rudimentary air force and two thousand Cuban agents.
The Miami headquarters became for a season the largest CIA station in the world.
Whereas the Special Group had accepted the presidential decision that “t he one thing that was off limits was military invasion,” the Agency persisted in seeing the objective as the creation of “internal dissension and resistance leading to eventual United States intervention” (October 1962).24 The Agency, in short, was more bent than ever on fighting a war.
William King Harvey had begun as an FBI counterespionage agent, renowned for having turned the Nazi spy William Sebold into a double agent during the Second World War.
Fired by Hoover for drunkenness in 1947, he caught on with the CIA and became one of its celebrated operators.
His great coup, the ‘Berlin tunnel,’ had enabled the CIA for many months in 1955 56 to intercept communications between East Berlin and Moscow.
He was a histrionic fellow who always packed a gun, even in CIA headquarters in Langley.
But the momentum of the overblown Miami establishment generated its own excesses.
Lansdale would ask what they expected random hit-and-run raids to accomplish.
Lansdale made his directives increasingly precise in the hope of stopping aimless sabotage and saving courageous Cubans from pointless death.
Harvey protested to McCone about the “tight controls exercised by the Special Group” and the “excruciating detail” he was expected to provide.
Harvey’s people included soldiers of fortune like William Robertson, a flamboyant figure who, in defiance of presidential orders, had landed on the beach at the Bay of Pigs.
It was the ‘dirty dozen’ spirit, action for action’s sake, without concern for the safety of the Cubans involved or for the reprisal effect or for political follow-up.
We have a tendency as a people to want to see things done right—and, if thpy aren’t, we step in and try to do them ourselves.
As for Robert Kennedy, he found Harvey and his meaningless melodrama detestable.
He wanted it to do more, the terrors of the earth, but what they were he knew not.
He was wildly busy in 1962 —a trip around the world in February, the steel fight in April, civil rights always, Ole Miss in September, organized crime, Hoffa, apportionment, fighting with Lyndon Johnson about minority employment, fighting with Edgar Hoover about everything.
Castro was high on his list of emotions, much lower on his list of informed concerns.
When he was able to come to meetings of Special Group , as he did his best to do, he made up in pressure for what he lacked in knowledge.
With the intelligence-collection phase ending in August 1962, the Mongoose group meditated a “stepped up Course B Plus” intended to inspire open revolt.
Kennedy, who was away on the west coast, endorsed B Plus in a message to Taylor.
On the same day, CIA experts were poring over photographs just taken by a U-2 plane over western Cuba.
V The CIA had yet another program against Castro, the one initiated in 1960 and dedicated to his death.
The Agency had considered assassination within its purview since the early Eisenhower years when it gave a special unit responsibility for, among other things, kidnapping and murder.
The Church committee found no evidence that this special unit tried to kill any foreign leaders.
In August 1960 the CIA decided to kill Patrice Lumumba, the pro-Soviet Premier of the newly independent Congo, and delivered a bag of poison to Leopoldville for that purpose.
One idea was to dust Castro’s shoes, if he chanced to leave them outside his hotel room, with thallium Salts in the expectation that this would cause his beard to fall out and destroy his charisma.
Since Castro’s speeches often gave an impression of disorientation anyway, it is not clear how much difference the toxic cigar would have made.
By August 1960 the Agency had progressed to the project of impregnating cigars with botulinum, a poison so deadly that a man would die after putting one in his mouth.
The cigars were ready in October and were delivered to an unidentified person the following February.
She fell in with Frank Fiorini, an adventurer who had fought beside Castro, but turned against him and went to work for CIA; under the name of Frank Sturgis, Fiorini figured in the Bay of Pigs and later in Watergate.
The CIA, Lorenz claimed in 1976, appealed to her patriotism, promised her money for her old age and asked her to kill Castro.
Sturgis gave her two poison capsules, which she secreted in a jar of cold cream.
When she arrived in Havana, Castro greeted her warmly, took his phone off the hook, ordered food and coffee and then fell asleep on the bed with a cigar, evidently not a CIA model, in his mouth.
Lorenz went to the bathroom and opened the cold cream. “| couldn’t find the capsules,” she said in 1976.
When Castro’s revolution swept into Havana at the end of 1958, it swept out not only Batista but the dictator’s partners in the North American mob.
Batista and the criminal entrepreneur Meyer Lansky fled on the same day.
The closing of the casinos, the bordellos and the drug traffic cost the mob perhaps $100 million a year.
Back in God’s country, Lansky was reputed to have persuaded his associates to join in a pledge of a million dollars for Castro’s head.
Frank Sturgis claimed in 1975 that the mob had offered him $100,000 in 1959 to kill Castro.
The masterminds of CIA now decided the syndicate possessed uniquely both the motives and skills required to rid the world of the Cuban revolutionary.
Since the mob had its own grudge against Castro, a gangland hit would be less likely to lead back to the American government.
The CIA commissioned Robert Maheu—a former FBI agent, later a private eye involved for a time with Hoffa’s friend Eddie Cheyfitz and now working for Howard Hughes— to put out the contract.
Rosselli, who had no illusions about his middling rank in the underworld, brought in the Chicago big shot Sam Giancana, who was a don and could make the right connections.
Giancana’s vital connection for this purpose was Santos Trafficante, Jr., the boss of organized crime in Florida; not so long before, in Havana.
CIA case officers made their contact with the underworld notables before they informed their own chief, Allen Dulles.
That this was not the case suggests the liberties casually taken even by lesser CIA officials in the Agency’s golden age.
In the fall of 1960, CIA installed Giancana and Rosselli in a Miami Beach hotel.
For his part Giancana, plotting away in Miami and jealously apprehensive that his girl, the singer Phyllis McGuire, might have her own plots in Las Vegas, asked the CIA to arrange an illegal wiretap in the room of his putative rival, the comedian Dan Rowan.
When the tap was discovered, the Agency did its best to stop prosecution.
He had been a prime suspect in the barbershop murder of Albert Anastasia in 1957.
Havana was his base, and he was the only syndicate boss to stay on after the revolution.
For an enemy of the people, Trafficante lived behind bars in surprising comfort.
Chums from the mainland visited him, among them the Dallas hood Jack Ruby.
With his Cuban business presumably destroyed, but with part of the gang still in Havana, Trafficante had both motives and men for the CIA job.
A Federal Narcotics Bureau document in July 1961 reported rumors in the exile community that Castro had “kept Santo Trafficante, Jr., in jail to make it appear that he had a personal dislike for Trafficante, when in fact Trafficante is an agent of Castro.
With Giancana shot seven times in the throat and mouth as he was frying sausages in his Chicago kitchen in June 1975, with Rosselli hacked up, stuffed into an oil drum and dumped into the sea near Miami in July 1976, it is impossible to know how they viewed their CIA mission.
Rosselli, according to some accounts, was in his way a patriot, persuaded he was serving his nation.
The cynical Giancana, a draft dodger during the Second World War, very likely entered his country’s service now exclusively in the expectation that he would thereafter be immune to prosecution.
Their first idea was to slip some pills into Castro's drink shortly before the Bay of Pigs.
After one batch of CIA pills failed to dissolve, a more soluble batch killed some innocent monkeys and was deemed suitable.
The obliging Trafficante produced a Cuban who, he said, had access to one of Castro’s favorite restaurants.
No one has been able to discover that the executive-action crowd did much apart from Cuba.
Whatever else Harvey was, he was a professional, and he found the six-link operation—CIA to Maheu to Rosselli to Giancana to a Cuban exile to a Cuban assassin—intolerably loose.
Some genius proposed that James Donovan, during his negotiations for the Bay of Pigs prisoners, give Castro a scuba diving suit contaminated by a tubercle bacillus and dusted inside with a fungus designed to produce skin disease.
Donovan, who knew nothing of this, innocently foiled the Agency by giving Castro a clean diving suit on his own.
Then Desmond FitzGerald, who replaced Harvey as head of Task Force W in January 1963, suggested depositing a rare seashell, rigged to explode, in a place where Castro might skin-dive and pick it up.
In the Lumumba case, Eisenhower said something in a meeting of the National Security Council that at least one person present understood as an assassination order.
A week later Gordon Gray, Eisenhower’s special assistant for national security affairs, passed on to the Special Group the President’s “extremely strong feelings on the necessity for very straightforward action”; not intending, however, to imply assassination.
The next day Allen Dulles sent the assassination order to the CIA station in Leopoldville.
Intelligence people might fear to say too much on the ground that Presidents do not, or should not, want to know too much.
Certainly words like “removal” and “elimination” caused trouble, then and later.
To most people around a table, they meant removal from political office.
As for the Special Group, while it approved the plan to train Cuban exiles for an invasion of their homeland, it never approved— and probably, though the evidence is murky, never considered—any plot to kill Castro.
And it is hard to suppose that even the runaway agency mordandy portrayed in the reports of the President’s Board of Consultants would have decided entirely on its own to kill the chief of a neighboring state.
On the other hand, Gordon Gray told the Church committee that such descriptions greatly exaggerated Nixon’s role.
Nixon’s apprehensive allusions to the Bay of Pigs in the privacy of his own Presidency remain enigmatic.
It is likely to blow the whole Bay of Pigs thing, which we think would be very unfortunate— both for the CIA, and for the country.
The leads run out to people who had no involvement in this, except by contracts and connection, but it gets into areas that are likely to be raised.— Whether or not it had been so commanded by someone in the White House, the CIA in the Eisenhower years had confidently taken unto itself the authority to kill foreign leaders.
Though the assassination plan was confided to Robert Maheu, though it became a staple of Sam Giancana’s table talk and a joke among the mob, there is no evidence that any Agency official ever mentioned it to any President— Eisenhower in 1960, Kennedy after 1960, Johnson after 1963 —except for operations already terminated.
Nor was it disclosed after the Bay of Pigs to Maxwell Taylor and his review board.
On every occasion in the Kennedy years when CIA officials might naturally have brought it up—Bissell’s briefings of his old Yale friend Mac Bundy after the inauguration, the Bay of Pigs meetings, the Taylor board, the missile crisis—they studiously refrained from saying a word.
The argument that the Kennedys knew and approved of the assassination plan comes down, in the end, to the argument that they must have known—an argument that, of course, applies with equal force to Eisenhower and Johnson.
The CIA, it is said, would never have undertaken so fearful a task without presidential authorization.
In John Kennedy’s case, Bissell and Helms offered contradictory theories about the nature of that authorization.
Bissell assumed the project had been cleared with Kennedy, as with Eisenhower, in ways that were tacit, “circumlocutious,” camouflaged, leaving no record.
Helms thought CIA’s authority was derived, not from supposed “circumlocutious” talks, but from the “intense” pressure the Kennedys radiated against Castro.
The CIA operators were undoubtedly misled by the urgency with which the Kennedys, especially Robert, pursued Mongoose.
No member of the administration told Helms to kill Castro, but no one had ever specifically ruled it out, so the Agency, he believed, could work for Castro’s overthrow as it deemed best.
In this context the murder of Castro had an arguably rational, if wholly repellent, function.
After the Bay of Pigs and the abandonment of invasion fantasies, the radical change in context ought surely to have compelled reconsideration both of the project itself and of the alleged authorization.
The Mongoose committee was demanding at this time that all “sensitive” operations be presented in “excruciating” detail, case by case.
But the Agency, without consulting superior authority, resuscitated the assassination project on its own, the murder of Castro now becoming, without the invasion, an end in itself—a quite pointless end, too, in the unconsulted judgment of the CIA’s Intelligence Branch.
In October 1961 the Special Group asked for a contingency plan in the event Castro died from whatever cause.
Its main effect would probably be to strengthen the Communist position in Cuba.
Unfortunately the Intelligence Branch and the Clandestine Services were hardly on speaking terms.
It appears that the CIA regarded whatever authorization it thought it had acquired in 1960 as permanent, not requiring review and reconfirmation by new Presidents or, even more astonishingly, by new CIA directors.
For neither Bissell nor Helms even told John McCone what his own Agency was up to.
Harvey also knew that McCone, a devout Catholic, would fiercely disapprove.
Helms gave him a memorandum that described the operation as having been closed out before McCone took over.
Lumumba had not been killed during his tenure; but Nasser of Egypt wrote the new President soon afterward reproaching the American government for the part he was sure it had had in Lumumba’s murder.
To its credit, the Eisenhower administration had established contact with anti-Trujillo Dominicans, and in December 1960 the Special Group approved a program of covert support for the dissidents.
Henry Dearborn, the able American consul in the Dominican Republic, was in charge of the operation.
The dissidents believed —and Dearborn agreed—that successful action against the regime required the assassination of Trujillo.
On January 12, 1961, eight days before Kennedy took over, the Special Group approved the transfer of three revolvers and three carbines to the conspirators.
Since the leading conspirators were generals, they had sufficient access to arms of their own; their point was evidently to obtain symbolic support from the United States.
The Kennedy White House knew in a general way about the contacts, and approved.
He had known nothing about it and it was decided at that time that we'd put a task force on the problem and try to work out some kind of an alternative course of action in case this event did occur.
When he read that the dissidents had received weapons “attendant to their project efforts to neutralize TRUJILLO,” he circled the paragraph, underlined “neutralize” and took the document in to Kennedy.
In fact, Kennedy did not want Trujillo’s overthrow until he knew what would come thereafter.
He detested Trujillo and favored the OAS Sanctions against him, but for international reasons, preferred the Trujillo regime to a Communist takeover.
He told Goodwin to advise Dearborn that the United States was not going to get involved in assassination and that we were not going to give any more weapons to anyone.
Goodwin drafted a rejoinder intended to preserve friendly relations with the rebels while avoiding American implication in their plot.
The Dominicans who killed Trujillo the next day did so for Dominican reasons and with Dominican weapons.
Neither Eisenhower nor the Kennedys nor the CIA ordered Trujillo’s assassination.
At most, they were sympathetic to Dominicans who saw no other way to liberate their country.
When Trujillo was killed, the President was in Paris, where Pierre Salinger, running ahead of hard information, told reporters that Trujillo was dead, a statement that some thought indicated American foreknowledge.
We had been in contact with some of the generals who were anti-Trujillo.
They had been asking for some arms and it had been decided in the last week or so that we wouldn't furnish them. | was quite surprised that the extent of their requests were for sub-machine guns.
We still don’t know how much popular support this anti-Trujillo group has.
The great problem now is that we don’t know what to do because we don’t know what the situation is.
Szulc said the murder of Castro would not necessarily change things and it was not anything the United States should be doing.
A day or two later, Goodwin, out of curiosity, raised the question with Kennedy, observing that it sounded like a crazy idea to him.
Kennedy’s old friend Senator George Smathers of Florida used to press him in those days to take a tougher stand against Castro.
Kennedy, Smathers recalled, was certain it could be done but doubted whether it would accomplish what he wanted.
At last, one summer evening in the White House, “I remember that he took his fork and just hit his plate and it cracked and he said, ‘Now, dammit, | wish you wouldn’t do that.
CIA officials, anxious to protect Sam Giancana from the legal consequences of the wiretap he had demanded on Dan Rowan’s Las Vegas telephone, brought insistent pressure on the Justice Department to refrain from prosecution.
This meant, they explained, that CIA was utilizing underworld sources in Havana for intelligence purposes.
Finally, on May 7, 1962, Lawrence Houston, the CIA’s general counsel, explained why the case was so momentous.
The CIA, he told Robert Kennedy, had recruited Giancana to murder Castro; therefore the Las Vegas prosecution involved national security.
It was Houston’s understanding, as he later testified, that “the assassination plan aimed at Castro had been terminated completely,” and he so informed the Attorney General.
He did not know that it had been resurrected and that Harvey had already passed on a new vial of CIA poison pills to Rosselli.
Houston did not recall that Kennedy expressed himself on the principle of assassinating Castro.
Moreover, the gangster no doubt thought he had another, and equally esoteric, hold on the Kennedys.
For, through his friend Frank Sinatra, Giancana had met in March 1960 a pretty girl named Judith Campbell whom Sinatra had introduced to John Kennedy the month before.
If Campbell can be believed, she devotedly cultivated her relations with both men, the don and the President, over the next two years.
White House logs show that Campbell telephoned some seventy times after January 1961 in pursuit of her friendship with John Kennedy.
On March 28, Hoover brought a memorandum about her to one of his luncheons with the President.
Between CIA protection and the blackmail potentiality, Giancana expected immunity from federal prosecution.
The Attorney General remembered him well as the powerful Chicago racketeer who had giggled before the Rackets Committee.
FBI agents followed him everywhere—to the Armory Lounge, his favorite bar; to church; to the golf course, where four agents played the hole behind him.
Lest this allusion be unclear, the intermediary explained how close Giancana was to Sinatra.
The judge obligingly instructed the FBI agents to play golf at least two foursomes back.
For unknown reasons—perhaps the CIA again—the federal attorney declined cross-examination.
Later Giancana, given immunity from prosecution by a grand jury, refused to testify, was held in contempt and went to prison for the first time since 1942.49 On his release, after a year, he went into gilded exile in Cuernavaca.
Sinatra had been an ’ enthusiastic Kennedy fund raiser in the campaign.
A report of August 13, 1962, prepared by the Organized Crime Section at Robert Kennedy’s request, set forth in detail Sinatra’s associations with the mob.
Sinatra, expecting to entertain Kennedy in his Palm Springs house, had put in a helicopter pad and made other preparations.
Shortly before a California trip in the spring of 1962, Kennedy called Peter Lawford.
The lovely actress Angie Dickinson told me the next year that she had heard Sinatra say, “If he would only pick up the telephone and call me and say that it was politically difficult to have me around, | would understand. | don’t want to hurt him.
She said, “Well, the President excluded Frank, so Frank excluded Peter, ""104 John Kennedy appreciated Sinatra’s services in 1960 and liked him personally; no one, when the mood was on him, could be more charming than Sinatra. | think the President may have felt a little badly about it.
Fora moment in late 1963 Sinatra was on the guest list for a White House state dinner; at the last minute, on a pretext, the invitation was withdrawn.
It was subsequently said that Robert Kennedy shared this regret and ignored recommendations from the Organized Crime Section for an investigation of Sinatra.
According to Hundley, however, his people investigated Sinatra with care and found nothing incriminating beyond associations.
Helms testified that he never told Robert Kennedy about any assassination activity and never received any assassination order from him.
Harvey testified that he never informed the Special Group or any of its members of the ongoing plots.
Lansdale testified that Harvey had never told him about any such activities and that he had never discussed assassination with Robert Kennedy.
The subject of assassination came up at one of the Augmented Group’s meetings, on August io, 1962.
McNamara raised the question— one can only assume, in view of his ready dismissal of the idea a few days later, either in an academic survey of options or in a moment of acute frustration.
On reading the memorandum, McCone blew up, called McNamara and demanded that it be withdrawn.
When McCone’s stern disapproval of assassination was later communicated to Helms and Harvey, neither thought it necessary to tell their boss about Rosselli.
He took care to send CIA his statement of May 29, 1961, that the United States could not as a matter of general policy condone assassination.
No doubt the CIA people took it as another of those superb efforts in misdirection to which they were addicted in their own daily work.
Perhaps the failure of the Kennedys, McCone and others at the top specifically to forbid the assassination of Castro may have reinforced the CIA’s delusion that killing foreign leaders was permissible.
On the other hand, since none of them, including McCone, knew that Castro’s assassination remained so heavily on CIA’s mind, they would probably have regarded such an order as superfluous.
Several circumstantial points strengthen the conclusion that the Kennedys knew nothing about the continuing assassination policy.
If the Kennedys had been informed, the informer would have had to stipulate that they not mention the plots to McCone, who was deliberately not informed.
Given John Kennedy’s reliance on McCone to bring the Agency under control and Robert Kennedy’s close personal friendship with McCone, it strains credulity to suppose that either would have accepted such a stipulation from some subordinate CIA official.
In any case, both Bissell and Helms denied ever talking about assassinations with either Kennedy.
If the Kennedys had any obsessive feeling about Cuba, it was to save the lives of the prisoners.
Some have written that the Kennedys had got their Irish up and were determined to get even with Castro at any cost.
The Kennedys no doubt felt a personal animus toward Castro; but, if they were consumed by a vendetta, they would have had the perfect pretext when the Soviet Union sent nuclear missiles to Cuba in October 1962.
Many advisers urged them then to seize the opportunity, invade Cuba and smash Castro forever.
Then there is the fact that Allen Dulles withheld from the Warren Commission all information regarding the assassination plots.
One obvious reason might have been his fear that, if Robert Kennedy now learned about the extent of the plots, he might hold the CIA responsible for his brother’s death.
The available evidence clearly leads to the conclusion that the Kennedys did not know about the Castro assassination plots before the Bay of Pigs or about the pursuit of those plots by the CIA after the Bay of Pigs.
No one who knew John and Robert Kennedy well believed they would conceivably countenance a program of assassination.
McNamara said it would have been “totally inconsistent with everything | knew about the two men.”242 | too find the idea incredible that these two men, so filled with love of life and so conscious of the ironies of history, could thus deny all the values and purposes that animated their existence.
Robert Kennedy and the Missile Crisis Eary IN 1961 Robert Kennedy had become acquainted with a Soviet official named Georgi Bolshakov.
Nominally the embassy press attache, Bolshakov conveyed the impression that he was in fact Khrushchev’s personal representative in Washington.
In November 1961 Kennedy noted, “Russian told me K is Kennedyizing USSR Gov.—bringing in young people with new vitality, new ideas—I told this to Jack who laughed & said we should be Khrushchevizing the Am.
Most of the major matters dealing with the Soviet Union and the United States were discussed.
He said he’d speak to Khrushchev, and they took their tanks out in twenty-four hours.
This, the Attorney General emphasized, was a personal message to Khrushchev.
Georgi came back to see me the following day and | told him that the President was pleased with the message and again, that we were going to do all that we could with Souvanna Phouma but Khrushchev also had to work on his people on the other side.
Khrushchev was “very pleased with the settlement in Laos,” Bolshakov soon reported, but worried about American troops in Thailand.
On September 30, 1961, Bolshakov delivered to Pierre Salinger the first in the extraordinary exchange of letters initiated by Khrushchev as the Berlin crisis was subsiding.
Thereafter the letters were passed along in cloakand-dagger fashion, Salinger meeting Bolshakov at Washington street corners or bars, receiving documents enclosed in folded newspapers or placed surreptitiously in the pocket of his trench coat.
Za Rubezhom, the weekly political journal, described him in June 1962 as an enemy of the working class, defender of monopolies, organizer of guerrilla warfare against Cuba, champion of preventive war.
But Bolshakov, on behalf of the Kremlin, invited him to visit the Soviet Union.
In the first place | couldn’t possibly learn Russian. | spent ten years learning French.
Behind the obligatory Cold War rhetoric, the two leaders were trying to forestall conflict and to seek accommodation.
All this built in the course of 1962 a measure of mutual understanding, even of mutual confidence.
Having established a measure of confidence, Khrushchev proceeded to abuse it.
It would have been far more disturbed had it known that Khrushchev was sending nuclear missiles too.
Shortly afterward Bolshakov returned from Moscow with further reassurance.
He had met with Khrushchev and Anastas Mikoyan, the first deputy chairman.
This was the time to lower tensions, Khrushchev had said; Castro was getting only defensive weapons.
Even if double agents had not told him the CIA was trying to kill him, the Mongoose campaign left little doubt that the American government was trying to overthrow him.
It would hardly have been unreasonable for him to request Soviet protection.
Castro’s aim was to deter American aggression by convincing Washington that an attack on Cuba would be the same as an attack on the Soviet Union.
No doubt he worried that the Soviet missile bases in Cuba would be an intolerable provocation to Washington.
In his memoirs he alleged the protection of Cuba as his primary motive.
The thought, he wrote, was “hammering away at my brain; what will happen if we lose Cuba?”— much as in American brains the thought was starting to hammer away about the dire consequences if Washington ‘lost’ Vietnam.
Losing Cuba, Khrushchev believed, would be a “terrible” blow, gravely diminishing Soviet influence throughout the Third World, especially in Latin America2+— the domino theory, | expect.
It would also, though Khrushchev did not say this, expose the Soviet Union to devastating ideological attack by Peking.
Still, if the protection of Cuba had been the only point, this could have been done far more simply, as Castro had proposed, through a proclamation or an alliance or the stationing of Soviet troops on the island.
If nuclear weapons were to be used, tactical weapons would have been easier to install, harder to detect and less likely to provoke.
By 1962 Khrushchev was in a state of acute frustration— blocked in Berlin, at odds with Peking, stalled in the Third World, left badly behind by the inordinate American missile build-up.
Inside the Soviet Union industrial growth was slowing down; agriculture was in its usual trouble; generals were demanding a larger share of limited resources for the military budget; old-line Stalinists were grumbling against internal liberalization.
The emplacement of nuclear missiles in Cuba would prove the Soviet ability to act with impunity in the very heart of the American zone of vital interest—a victory of high significance for the Kremlin, which saw the world in terms of spheres of influence and always inflexibly guarded its own.
It would go far to close the Soviet Union’s own missile gap, increasing by half again Soviet first-strike Capacity against American targets.It would do so without the long wait and awful budgetary strain attendant on an intensified missile production program.
Once they were operational, Kennedy, as a rational man, would not go to nuclear war in order to expel them.
If they were discovered prematurely, the congressional elections, not to speak of Kennedy’s past irresolution on Cuban matters, would delay the American response.
With one roll of the nuclear dice, Khrushchev might redress the strategic imbalance, humiliate the Americans, rescue the Cubans, silence the Stalinists and the generals, confound the Chinese and acquire a potent bargaining counter when he chose to replay Berlin.
He sent 42 medium-range (1100mile) nuclear missiles, 24 intermediate-range missiles , 42 IL-28 nuclear bombers, 24 antiaircraft missile sites and 22,000 Soviet troops and technicians.
This was something, he bragged to Castro, Stalin would never have done.
But Cuba remained a problem; and, for a diversity of reasons— Mongoose, the inertia at Foggy Bottom, the Republican exploitation of the Castro issue in the fall campaign—Robert Kennedy had seized the lead in Cuban policy.
The defensive surface-to-air missiles identified by American overflights, he feared, were only the first step.
Schlei produced a brief that justified intervention on the principle of self-defense, ideally with the sanction of the Organization of American States.
The Attorney General urgently recommended a presidential statement warning the Russians that long-range missiles would raise the gravest issues.
Rusk demurred, saying that the problem with the Soviet Union was worldwide, not just in Cuba.
With Katzenbach and Schlei, Robert Kennedy drafted a statement issued, with modifications, the same day.
Despite such precautions, however, almost no one in the administration believed Khrushchev mad enough to do what in fact he was doing.
Though the Attorney General had apprehensions, his attention was soon diverted by James Meredith and the Battle of Ole Miss.
Though John McCone had presentiments, he never communicated them to the Kennedysand went off to Europe on a honeymoon.
At the end of of September, a House Republican caucus called Cuba “the biggest Republican asset” in the approaching election.
Studying the blown-up photographs, Robert Kennedy, as he wrote in his excellent posthumous book Thirteen Days, saw only what seemed the clearing of a field, as for a farm or the basement of a house.
It was, Kennedy said, “an effort to materially change the balance of power,” “a deliberately provocative and unjustified change in the status quo”24just what he had counseled Khrushchev against in Vienna.
The consequences of so swift an alteration in the power equilibrium might be incalculable.
If you bomb the missile sites and the airports, he said on the first day, “you are covering most of Cuba.
The most formidable of the hawks was Dean Acheson, backed by Maxwell Taylor (“a twofold hawk from start to finish,” he later described himself) ,24 the Joint Chiefs (save for Shoup), McCloy, Nitze, and, initially, Dillon and McCone.
During the week of secrecy an unknowing Joseph Dolan brought the Attorney General a paper to sign.
On Thursday, October 18, the imperious old man had a private talk with the President.
There seemed to be three main possibilities ... one was do nothing, and that was unthinkable; another was an air strike; the third was a blockade.
The air strike planned by the Joint Chiefs of Staff, he said, would involve eight hundred sorties.
McNamara doubted that Moscow would take it “without resorting toa very major response.
Maxwell Taylor made the opposing case, Acheson having disgustedly retired to his country seat.
Taylor scouted McNamara’s “fear that if we used nuclear weapons in Cuba, nuclear weapons would be used against us”—a mysterious remark, for there is no other reference to an American nuclear attack on Cuba.
Probably Taylor was seeking to counter McNamara’s point about the risk of escalation to general war, and the rapporteur became confused.
If the Russians did not stop work on the missile bases, it would always be possible to move on to the strike.
He gave orders to begin with the blockade; also to make contingent preparations for an air strike and invasion.
Then the head of the Tactical Air Command told him that even a very considerable strike might leave missiles capable of being fired back at the United States.
The advisers he trusted most—his brother, Sorensen, McNamara—had all advocated quarantine since at least Wednesday.
One imagines that the President’s insistence on further military consultation expressed, not indecision, but a desire to establish a record.
Well aware of the Chiefs’ capacity for political reprisal, he may well have concluded he had better make a show of canvassing the military alternative to the end.
Gilpatric saw Kennedy after LeMay had boomed forth on the beauties of an air attack.
Driven by “the machismo quality” in his character,©2 by rage over deception, by egotistical concern over personal prestige, by fear of setbacks in the elections, by a spurious notion of international credibility, Kennedy exaggerated the danger, rejected a diplomatic resolution and instead insisted on a public showdown.
His purpose was the conspicuous humiliation of Knrushchev—eyeball to eyeball.
Pursuing so insensate a course, he risked the incineration of the world in order to satisfy his own psychic and political needs.
Instead of making a big issue of Soviet military aid to Castro during the summer of 1962, he minimized and, in the increasingly agitated Republican view, excused this aid.
As late as the day before the missiles were discovered, Bundy said on national television that there was “no present evidence” and in his judgment “no present likelihood” of a “major offensive capability” in Cuba.
Most critics have left the impression that, once the nuclear missiles were in Cuba, Kennedy should have done nothing at all.
Khrushchev by his own statement had sent the missiles in order to alter the balance of world power.
In a secret message via Bolshakov in June, Khrushchev had already warned the Kennedys of his intention to begin again in Berlin.
And acquiescence would have produced a shattering reaction in the United States.
He should, say, have discussed the missiles when Andrei Gromyko, the Soviet foreign minister, called on him at the White House three days after their discovery.
Charles Bohlen, that brilliant aficionado of Soviet policy, attended the meetings on the first two days.
Departing on the third day, to take up new duties as ambassador to France, he left Kennedy a valedictory memorandum.
For two days, at his direction, Sorensen and others worked on letters to the Kremlin.
The not unreasonable decision was therefore to announce the quarantine before beginning talks with the Russians.
After the announcement, the President began to lay the foundation for a peaceful resolution.
On Tuesday, October 23, he sent his brother to make clear to Dobrynin the implications of Knrushchev’s course.
Robert Kennedy’s memorandum of the meeting contains details omitted from Thirteen Days.
The Attorney General reminded the ambassador that his brother, on the basis of Soviet assurances, had taken a “far less belligerent position [on the arms shipments] than people like Senators Keating and Capehart, and he had assured the American people that there was nothing to be concerned about. | pointed out, in addition, that the President felt he had a very helpful personal relationship with Mr Khrushchev.
The Attorney General noted that the American President had met Khrushchev’s request for the withdrawal of American troops from Thailand.
So far as he knew, Dobrynin stoutly replied, there were no nuclear missiles in Cuba.
Plans were circulated for the evacuation of top officials to underground installations outside Washington.
We had come to the edge of final decision—& the President agreed. | felt we were on the edge of a precipice and it was as if there were no way off.
Robert thought inexplicably of Joe’s death, of Jack’s brushes with death.
It could neither remove those already there nor prevent the completion of the bases.
From the start, the Kennedys and their chief advisers had known that this was the task of negotiation, and they were prepared to negotiate.
The next day McNamara again said, “We would have to be prepared to accept the withdrawal of United States strategic missiles from Turkey and Italy and possibly agreement to limit our use of Guantanamo to a specified limited time.
Most present felt that to begin with concessions would legitimize Khrushchev’s action and give him an easy triumph.
It was Stevenson's timing and his Guantanamo proposal, Robert Kennedy said later, not his Turkish thoughts, that created his reputation as the supreme dove.
The President emphatically disagreed that the initial presentation to the UN should include our notion of an eventual political settlement.
Stevenson has since been criticized publicly for the position he took.... | think it should be emphasized that he was presenting a different perspective than the others, one which was therefore important for the President to consider.
Although | disagreed strongly with his recommendations, | thought he was courageous to make them, and | might add they made as much sense as some others considered during that period of time.
And the disagreement, it should be emphasized, was not over the necessity for but the timing of negotiations.
In short, the advocates of quarantine assumed from the start that their course implied diplomacy somewhere down the road.
The questions were when the trading should begin, how long it should take and what was to be put on the block.
Critics later accused Kennedy of waiting too long, imposing too peremptory a deadline and refusing the most obvious deal—Cuban missiles for Turkish missiles.
Repudiation of a dovish President by a hawkish electorate would have doomed any hope of a peaceful resolution.
And in the meantime some of the nuclear bases would have become operational.
If negotiations were protracted, in short, their success required a strong Kennedy showing in the election.
Ironically, this was in the main advocated by Republicans and opposed by Democrats on the Executive Committee—which suggests how little party politics mattered during the thirteen days.
The problem remains of the validity of the administration’s claim that the bases were about to become operational.
Ronald Steel has contended, correctly, that the long-range missile sites would not have been operational until mid-November; therefore Kennedy had plenty of time for negotiation, and the deadline must have derived from the election.
Steel, however, overlooked the medium-range missile sites, four out of six of which, Barton J Bernstein has argued, citing a CIA estimate, were already operational by Tuesday, October 23.
Therefore, according to Bernstein, the deadline had already passed, and Kennedy must have had some base motive for pretending otherwise.
Obviously the presence of nuclear warheads, not the technical operability of the sites, determined the deadline.
McCone thought that the missiles would be operational by the end of the week.
Khrushchev’s famous reply, arriving Friday evening, was a rather marvelous letter in the annals of correspondence among statesmen.
On Friday night the Executive Committee went to bed happy for the first time in eleven days.
On Saturday a second letter, signed by Khrushchev but having the ring of a declaration by the Presidium, added the Turkish missiles to the list of Soviet conditions.
Khrushchev well understood that the Turkish missiles—Jupiters of an ancient vintage— were obsolete.
Nonetheless their renunciation, he later claimed and may have thought at the time, would have “symbolic” value.
On the other hand, Khrushchev may have temporarily lost control of the Presidium.
The President had ordered the forever dilatory State Department to get them out of Turkey months before and was incensed to find them still there.
When McNamara and Stevenson had argued in the first week that Turkish missiles were a reasonable trade for Cuban missiles, Kennedy had agreed.
Dubious as Harold Macmillan had been at the start about the American reaction, and fearful as he remained throughout of the dangers of escalation, the Prime Minister never wavered in his resistance to the bargaining away of NATO assets.
Llewellyn Thompson, whose opinion carried particular weight because of his knowledge of the Soviet leadership, warned that a Turkish deal would be seen in Moscow as “proof of weakness” in Washington.
Then word arrived that a U-2 plane had been shot down over Cuba, its pilot killed.
Soon he increased the dismay of the hawks by ordering the defusing of the Turkish missiles.
Everyone remembers his own inspired suggestion that the President forget the second Khrushchev letter and answer the first.
The hawks, dreaming of a Monday morning war, rallied behind the hard line.
The Attorney General persisted in his criticism of the State Department letter.
In forty-five minutes Robert Kennedy and Sorensen produced a new letter offering a no-invasion guarantee in exchange for the removal of all offensive weapons systems from Cuba, all this to be accompanied by termination of the quarantine and UN inspection.
For, soon after the letter went off, the President instructed his brother to talk once more to Dobrynin.
If Cubans were shooting down American planes, he said, Americans were going to shoot back.
According to the Gromyko account, Kennedy said that, “should war break out, millions of Americans would die.
Later he gave his opinion that he was sure that the Soviet Union adhered to the same view.
Kennedy went on to say, according to the Soviet version, that “the Pentagon was exerting strong pressure on his brother” in connection with the shooting down of the U-2.
These remarks reflected the Attorney General’s opinion, but did not appear in his own memorandum of the conversation.
While the Kennedys did not altogether dismiss Seven Days in May, it is unlikely that Robert Kennedy would have confided such forebodings to the Soviet ambassador.— Dobrynin then asked what the Americans proposed.
Both accounts say that Dobrynin was the first to mention the Turkish missiles.
It was up to NATO to make the decision. | said it was completely impossible for NATO to take such a step under the present threatening position of the Soviet Union.
This understanding, the Attorney General added, would be canceled at once if the Soviet government tried to claim public credit for it.
So concluded a singular exercise in secret diplomacy— secret not only in process, as most diplomacy must be, but in result, which is generally inadmissible.
Macmillan and NATO were told nothing, nor was the American Congress, nor even the Executive Committee.
The American people certainly did not know until Robert Kennedy himself described the meeting in Thirteen Days, a half dozen years later—and then his account was so muted that Harold Macmillan believed to the end of the day that no such bargain was ever struck, and critics continued to portray John Kennedy as recklessly preferring confrontation to negotiation.The Russians made one attempt to put the deal on the record.
Two days after their decisive conversation, Dobrynin brought Robert Kennedy an unsigned letter from Khrushchev to the President spelling everything out.
After brooding over the letter, the Attorney General called the Soviet ambassador to his office.
You asked me about missile bases in Turkey. | told you we would be out of them—4-5 months.
Also if you should publish any document indicating a deal then it is off & also if done afterward will further affect the relationship.— Dobrynin withdrew the letter.
In short, the Kennedys made a personal, but not official, pledge that the Turkish missiles would go.
It is extremely doubtful that any Turkish agreement could have been made publicly in the forty-eight hours before the bases acquired nuclear warheads.
If the deal appalled Harold Macmillan, it would have been even more appalling to NATO governments less determined to get along with Washington.
Perhaps there may be a place for secret diplomacy, at least when nuclear war is involved and when no vital interests of a nation or ally are bartered away.
As the world knows, on that golden Sunday morning, the day after Robert Kennedy and Dobrynin had their chat about the Turkish missiles, Khrushchev announced his nuclear retreat from Cuba.
In Havana, Castro—who had not been consulted—cursed, kicked the wall in a rage and broke a mirror.
It was too bad, he said to me, that this had happened in the midst of the campaign.
Frequently, after the meetings were finished, he would circulate and whine and complain about our being weak but he never made... any suggestions or recommendations.
On Saturday night he started to move around saying he heard that the people felt we were backing down.
When | asked him for specifics he had none.— “He was against our policy on Cuba,” Robert Kennedy said the next year.
Castro in his rage refused to permit UN verification of the missile removal.
These, unlike the missiles, could be reasonably claimed as Cuban property.
Castro kept him waiting so long that Adlai Stevenson said it might be necessary to send James Donovan down to get him out.
Llewellyn Thompson advised Kennedy to insist on the IL-28S; Khrushchev, having swallowed a camel, would not strain at a gnat.
He was, however, prepared to lift the quarantine at once if the Russians would withdraw the bombers in thirty days.
After the two men talked in private, Dobrynin introduced the President’s brother to the dancers.
Three days after the Bolshoi evening, Robert Kennedy held “the most unpleasant conversation | have had with Dobrynin.
He needed an answer, Kennedy said, before the President’s press conference the next day.
Smiling broadly, he said, “I have a birthday present for you,” and handed him a letter from Khrushchev agreeing to remove the IL-28S in thirty days.
The State Department had never liked his special relationship with the Attorney General; nor presumably had Dobrynin, who had by now established a special relationship of his own with the Attorney General.
After Joseph Alsop exposed Bolshakov’s role in a column, the Kremlin decided that his usefulness in Washington was over and recalled him.
There is still peace even though you have been gone from the United States for more than two months. | would not have thought that possible.
The real reason Khrushchev pulled out was his hopeless military situation.
In his explanation to the Supreme Soviet in December 1962, he emphasized that Cuba was to be attacked in two or three days.
An American invasion of Cuba would have been a disaster for Khrushchev personally and for the Soviet claim to world revolutionary leadership—especially when Khrushchev’s own recklessness had handed America the pretext.
And, if Kennedy were serious about invasion, Khrushchev could do nothing about it, short of nuclear war against a stronger nuclear power.
Lacking strategic superiority, Khrushchev could not safely retaliate elsewhere in the world.
The missile crisis was a triumph, perhaps the only triumph, of flexible response.
A year’s secret correspondence had enlarged each one’s sense of the other.
Kennedy’s grim odds were based on fear, not of Khrushchev’s intention, but of human error, of something going terribly wrong down the line.
This is why he took such care to maintain tight control over American reactions.
In retrospect, | am bound to say that the risk of war in October 1962 seems to me to have been exaggerated— pardonably at the time and less pardonably in historical recapitulation.
Still Khrushchev, no less than Kennedy, might have been betrayed down the line—and perhaps he was more at the mercy of his military than Kennedy was of the Pentagon.
Had the Americans, as Soviet theology supposed, been looking for an excuse to smash Castro or, for that matter, the Soviet Union, they could hardly have found a better one than the Soviet attempt to make Cuba a nuclear outpost.
Kennedy’s restraint now persuaded Khrushchev of the point the Soviet leader had rejected in Vienna —that neither side dare tamper carelessly with the explosive international equilibrium.
The Kremlin fell silent about Berlin and for some years thereafter showed a certain respect for existing world frontiers.
On the other hand, the Russians, determined never to be caught again in a position of gross nuclear inferiority, stepped up their production of missiles.
Khrushchev meanwhile disappeared from the scene, in part a casualty of Cuba.
It also ended the de-Stalinization campaign, the loosening in the joints of a despotic society, the gusts of fresh air that this rollicking, erratic, passionate, indelibly human, curiously attractive figure brought to the nation he loved so much.
Once Khrushchev accepted the Vienna principle, it was possible to move toward détente.
After Cuba, relief was not only thought to be possible but felt to be imperative.
A world in which there are large quantities of nuclear weapons is an impossible world to handle.
Far from rejecting diplomacy in favor of confrontation, Kennedy in fact took the diplomatic path after arranging the military setting that would make diplomacy effective.
This was not the view of those in the best position to judge—neither of Khrushchev nor, in the end, of Castro himself.
But Khrushchev was older and wiser. | realize in retrospect that he reached the proper settlement with Kennedy.
Without him, John Kennedy would have found it far more difficult to overcome the demand for military action.
Even Senator Fulbright, in Kennedy’s meeting with congressional leaders before his television soeech, had advocated the invasion of Cuba as a “wiser course” than the quarantine.It was Robert Kennedy who oversaw the Executive Committee, stopped the air-strike madness in its tracks, wrote the reply to the Khrushchev letter, conducted the secret negotiations with Dobrynin.
The missiles of October were an interruption, framed between Ole Miss in September, the housing order in November, the preparation for the Georgia county-unit case in December.
One of them sent word to the Attorney General that they did not mind going but wanted to make sure he thought it worthwhile.
The ineffable William K Harvey, it developed, had conceived on his own the project of dispatching ten commando teams to Cuba.
The CIA, taking care of its own, made Harvey station chief in Rome, where he was soon sodden with drink.
Lansdale moved on to other matters, then retired in the autumn of 1963.
CIA’s mindless hit-and-run tactics, he said, far from creating a political movement against the regime, stiffened the “national resolve” behind Castro.
Had sabotage been more successful, the result could have been only to increase Cuba’s economic dependence on the Soviet Union.
The secret war, not unreasonably seen by Castro as preparation for a new and better invasion, intensified the Cuban desire for Soviet protection.
The program Robert Kennedy and Lansdale had intended was different from the program CIA carried out.
But the political base for their anti-Castro uprising simply did not exist inside Cuba, nor did the CIA wish to create such a base.
The Bay of Pigs ought to have made it sufficiently clear how covert action degenerated as directives passed from immaculate conference rooms at CIA headquarters to embattled officers in the field and from there to war lovers behind the lines.
Lansdale tried to control Harvey; but a Lansdale in Washington implied a Harvey in Miami, as a Harvey implied a Rip Robertson, and a Rip Robertson implied a Ramon Orozco, grinning as he brought his two severed ears back from Cuba.
The answer perhaps was a driven sense in the administration that someone ought to be doing something to make life difficult for Castro.
Castro had given his list of drugs and medicines—ten thousand items, specified in detail—to the unflagging James Donovan in mid-October, two days before the world knew of the Soviet missiles.
The crisis behind him, Castro was almost madder at the Russians than at the Americans.
He was looking for a way to reestablish himself as an independent actor on the world scene.
If you want to get rid of them, if you’re going to sell them, you've got to sell them to me.
Nicholas Katzenbach, who had spent two years himself in a prisoner-of-war camp, became coordinator; Louis Oberdorfer of the Tax Division, field commander.
John Nolan to work with Donovan; Barrett Pretty man to solve the transportation problems; John Douglas as a general trouble-shooter.
Mitchell Rogovin of the Internal Revenue Service handed down quick rulings on the tax deductibility of corporate contributions.
Dolan, tying up loose ends at Ole Miss, was summoned back to Washington by Oberdorfer.
The first problem was the drug industry—under congressional investigation for price markups and other sharp practices, filled with self-pity over what it regarded as bureaucratic persecution, distrustful of the Kennedy administration, even less fond of Castro and not disposed to do favors for either by donating drugs to ransom prisoners.
Speaking with uncommon eloquence before industry leaders, the Attorney General argued the American responsibility for brave men who, at American instigation, had risked their lives for freedom and now, unless freed themselves, would die miserably in Castro’s jails.
His presentation, according to Oberdorfer, “had a tremendous impact on those businessmen.
Many of the sixty-three companies that made donations were under antitrust or Federal Trade Commission investigation.
Tax rulings based on wholesale prices produced windfall profits for some companies because of the high markups.
Both antitrust and criminal prosecutions have been just as vigorous, and their legislative attitude is essentially the same and not entirely what we ourselves would think was the correct government policy.
The Pentagon, for example, worried about items of alleged military value on Castro’s list, such as retractable steel rulers.
Castro “leaped at the chance to take a group of us to Hemingway’s home,” a wild ride with two cars abreast along narrow country roads.
After half the remaining prisoners had been loaded into planes, the Cubans made it clear that this was it until they received the $2. million.
Robert Kennedy turned to Cardinal Cushing of Boston, a sponsor for the Cuban Families Committee.
In Washington the Executive Committee, now diminished in size and rebaptized the Standing Group, wrestled with Cuba policy.
The administration was no closer to an answer to Castro than in earlier years.
On one extreme was Bundy, who proposed on January 4, 1963, an exploration of the possibility of communicating with Castro.
Thereafter what Bundy called in April the “gradual development of some form of accommodation with Castro” became a standard item in lists of policy alternatives.
As for Robert Kennedy, he was particularly worried by Castro’s own secret war against Latin America, especially when the Cubans in February organized a guerrilla front against Betancourt in Venezuela.
On March 14, following what he evidently found a most unsatisfactory NSC meeting, he sent his brother a testy memorandum urging new efforts to counter Cuban-trained operatives in South America.
As for Cuba itself, John McCone spoke at the meeting today about revolt amongst the military.
Embittered by the peaceful resolution of the missile crisis, the anti-Castro zealots were now determined to force the administration into action against its will—by rumors and raids and exile manipulation of American domestic politics.
On January 31, 1963, the indefatigable Kenneth Keating declared that the Soviet Union had cunningly filled Cuban caves with nuclear missiles.
Richard Nixon denounced Kennedy’s Cuban policy—“we have goofed an invasion, paid tribute to Castro for the prisoners, then given the Soviets squatters’ rights in our backyard”—and demanded a “command decision” to get the Russians out.
Actually, by the time Reston wrote, the secret war was almost at an end.
McCone presentation—Gave facts & then said felt less criticism by newspapers & Congress if we do not stand down the raids.
The next day the administration announced it would “take every step necessary” to stop raids from the United States.
Early in April, Kennedy terminated CIA financial support for Miro Cardona and the Cuban Revolutionar)’ Council.
On April 3, Bundy informed a Cuba meeting that no further sabotage operations were under way.
This time Castro took them to the Bay of Pigs and delivered an amiable battlefield lecture.
To demonstrate the impassability of the area beyond the beachhead, he strode several paces into the salt marsh until mud oozed to the top of his boots.
They lunched on a boat in the bay and spent the sundrenched afternoon fishing and skin-diving, guided by a Russian PT boat.
Donovan's mission now was to secure the release of a number of Americans, including CIA men, from Cuban prisons.
At a minimum Donovan thought there must be assurances that Cuba would leave other Latin countries alone.
Castro gave Lisa Howard of the American Broadcasting Company ten hours of interview in late April.
She concluded that Castro was “looking for a way to reach a rapprochement,” probably for economic reasons.
Che Guevara and Raul Castro, Lisa Howard thought, opposed accommodation; Vallejo and Raul Roa, the foreign minister, favored it.
Returning after five weeks in a glow of enthusiasm, he did his best to dispel the anti-Soviet doubts he had himself fostered after the missile crisis.
The collapse of the 1963 sugar crop made him more dependent than ever on Soviet aid.
On the other hand, he may have also come back impressed by Khrushchev’s postcrisis desire for détente.
When the Standing Group met in Washington at the end of May, bafflement prevailed.
McNamara questioned the utility of Sabotage and preferred overt economic pressures.
The American government appeared, like Castro, to be facing in two directions.
For on June 19 the Special Group suddenly approved a new sabotage program directed at major segments of the Cuban economy.
Vi The June 19 decision meant the resurrection, in a highly qualified way, of the secret war.
The imperfect record also makes it hard to discover what had actually been going on since Mongoose.
The phrase “exile raids” implied that the Agency had been doing nothing itself.
The FBI continued raiding exile camps after June 19,42 but perhaps these were camps not under CIA control.
Kennedy replied, a little inconsistently, “Well, just going in blowing up amine... a bridge.
Some of them ended in disaster, people were captured, tried and confessed.
Other efforts were mounted against the Castro regime from Central America.
At the end of June, Luis Somoza, son of the thieving Nicaraguan dictator and a former president of Nicaragua himself, asked to see the Attorney General.
The State Department advised Kennedy that Somoza wanted to know the American attitude toward an anti-Castro base about to be set up in Nicaragua by Manuel Artime, the Bay of Pigs leader.
There was, indeed, an Artime operation and Hal Hendrix of the Miami News supposed it managed either by CIA or, “on a hip pocket basis,” by the Attorney General himself.
Somoza was soon telling Caribbean notables that he had received a “green light” from Robert Kennedy to mount antiCastro raids from Nicaraguan bases.
Robert Kennedy understood so lucidly the enormity of a Pearl Harbor air strike on a small country.
It is odd that he did not see that the same principle applied to the secret war.
Still, in the May of Birmingham and Bull Connor, in the June when George Wallace stood in the schoolhouse door, in the summer when Medgar Evers died and Martin Luther King dreamed, in the autumn of the civil rights bill, Cuba was not a subject to which the Attorney General devoted sustained attention.
The White House saw the resumed secret war as a way of keeping Castro off balance and neutralizing bureaucratic discontent while deciding whether it would be possible to risk a try at accommodation.
But the CIA, under its distended theory of authorization, saw it as a license to renew its attempts to kill the Maximum Leader.
The notion of invading Cuba had been dead for years. | suppose that, in 1961 and 1962, CIA might still have regarded assassination as the ultimate logic of a frenetic overthrow-Castro policy.
But in 1963, with invasion absolutely excluded, with the anti-Castro policy drastically modified and with the White House drifting toward accommodation, assassination had no logic at all.
In the spring of 1963, moreover, the Standing Group had asked the CIA’s Intelligence Branch to assess possible developments in the event of Castro’s death.
This had nothing to do with assassination plots; estimating the consequences of the death of a national leader, from whatever cause, was a favorite intelligence exercise, applied indifferently to de Gaulle, Khrushchev, Salazar or Castro.
The June 19 decision to revive the secret war now rekindled that old feeling.
The Agency recruited him in 1961 and gave him the code name of Am/Lash.
A heavy drinker and a psychiatric patient, Cubela was not the ideal operative; better, however, in the CIA view, than no man in Havana at all.
The Agency, which had dropped contact with Cubela after the missile crisis, got in touch again.
In early September he met a CIA man in Sao Paulo, Brazil, and said he was prepared to attempt an “inside job” against Castro’s life.
On September 7, the very day that CIA/Washington received the report on the Brazil meeting, Castro attended a party at the Brazilian embassy in Havana.
Their suspicions increased when Cubela requested murder weapons and a meeting with Robert Kennedy.
His subordinates, on the principle of admitting only defunct operations, explained Giancana away as a historical incident.
Nor, so far as the record shows, was anyone outside ClA—in the White House, State, Defense or Justice—told about Am/Lash.
Cubela asked anxiously for some means of killing Castro without being killed himself.
The case officer, who served as interpreter, did not remember any such disclaimer.
In addition, FitzGerald presented Cubela with a ball-point pen containing a hypodermic needle so fine that the victim would allegedly not notice its insertion.
No one remembers whether he took the poison pen with him or threw it away.
The meeting took place in Paris on November 22, 1963.94 The Agency plied Cubela with weapons and encouragement for another year and a half.
In the spring of 1965, it brought him together with Manuel Artime in Central America.
But Castro, as the CIA belatedly recognized, had penetrated the operation.
In 1966 he confessed plotting with Artime and begged for the firing squad.
In 1975 Castro gave George McGovern a list of 24 supposed CIA attempts over the same period, some against himself, some against other Cuban leaders.
In the other nine it admitted relationships with people mentioned but not for the purpose of assassination.
In the course of his talks with Donovan and Nolan in April 1963, Castro had got on the subject of assassination.
When Cubela met with what he believed to be Robert Kennedy’s “personal representative,” Castro may have had for the first time what seemed conclusive evidence tying the Kennedys directly to the plots against his own life.
In 1967 John Rosselli, now fighting deportation as well as charges of gambling fraud, disclosed to his lawyer, Edward Morgan of Washington, his role in the CIA assassination plots.
They dined together at Fort Lauderdale twelve days before Rosselli was hacked up and stuffed into the oil drum.
No Attorney General in history had pursued the syndicates so relentlessly.
There was every indication, after the Valachi testimony in the autumn of 1963, that the worst was yet to come.
A year before, he had discussed the President with a Cuban acquaintance.
After Khrushchev’s willfulness during the crisis, he no doubt Saw a need to assert Cuban sovereignty against the Soviet Union as well as against the United States.
This argued for placing his country in the position where it could play one superpower off against the other.
On Kennedy’s side, his objection had never been to the Cuban revolution per se.
It was to a Soviet-aligned Cuba, a repository for Soviet missiles, a base for the subversion of the Allianc e for Progress.
Cuba retaining its revolution and sovereignty but no longer a satellite ora subverter.
Each leader, however, surrounded by Cold War doctrinaires in his own camp, had to proceed in stealth.
His continuing campaign to lift the travel restrictions stamped in American passports now focused on Cuba.
He thought it preposterouso prosecute American students who wanted to inspect the Castro revolution.
Katzenbach, on Kennedy’s behalf, resoonded that their travel controls were for their own self-protection and that their security problems should not govern the rights of United States citizens to wander as they chose.
On the other hand, there was general agreement that travel restrictions are contrary to American tradition and put United States in unfavorable light around the world.
Accordingly our recommendation is that we give consideration to abolishing travel restrictions to all areas except Cuba.
Even this, however, went too far for a cautious Secretary of State confronted by a Cold War Congress.
The summer of 1963 saw the negotiation of the limited test ban treaty in Moscow, followed by John Kennedy’s unexpectedly successful western swing in defense of the treaty and then, on September 24, by its comfortable ratification in the Senate.
The people, it appeared, were considerably ahead of the politicians on Cold War issues.
Attwood, a gifted journalist, formerly an editor of Look, was American ambassador to Guinea, on home leave to convalesce from an attack of polio.
While recovering, he had been seconded to work with Adlai Stevenson at the United Nations.
The Guinean ambassador to Cuba had told him that Castro, unlike the Communists around him, disliked Cuba’s satellite status and was looking for a way of escape.
The Cuban leader had seemed, like Sekou Touré of Guinea, sufficiently naive to be swayed by Communist advisers but too idiosyncratic to endure Communist discipline.
Then, in early September, Carlos Lechuga, the Cuban ambassador to the UN, raised with Attwood the possibility of exploratory talks.
According to neutral diplomats and others | have talked to at the UN and in Guinea, there is reason to believe that Castro is unhappy about his present dependence on the Soviet bloc; that he does not enjoy in effect being a satellite; that the trade embargo is hurting him—though not enough to endanger his position; and that he would like to establish some official contact with the United States and go to some length to obtain normalization of relations with us—even though this would not be welcomed by most of his hard-core Communist entourage, such as Che Guevara.
But it would seem that we have something to gain and nothing to lose by finding out whether in fact Castro does want to talk and what concessions he would be prepared to make.... a discreet inquiry into the possibility of neutralizing Cuba on our terms.
The time and place for the inquiry, Attwood suggested, were the current session of the UN General Assembly.
As a journalist who had interviewed Castro, he could plausibly meet Lechuga and chat about old times.
For the moment, all | would like is the authority to make contact with Lechuga.
With a presidential election coming up the next year, it was a course filled with extraordinary risk.
If Keating or Goldwater (or Nixon or Rockefeller), if the Cuban exiles, caught a whiff of it, there would be hell to pay.
Averell Harriman, now under secretary of state for political affairs, was the first man in Washington to receive the memorandum.
Lisa Howard, brought in because of her Cuban friendships, talked to Dr.
On October 31, Vallejo told Howard that Castro was ready for a meeting and that, understanding the importance of secrecy, he would send a plane to fly a designated American official to a private airport near Havana.Z2 “The President gave the go-ahead,” as Robert Kennedy summed it up in 1964, “and was to go to Havana, | don’t know, December last year or January of this year and perhaps see Castro and see what could be done normalization of relationship,”22 In the meantime, President Kennedy was pressing the matter on an entirely separate channel.
Attwood and Ben Bradlee, both old friends of Daniel’s, urged the President to see him.
In the matter of the Batista regime, | am in agreement with the first Cuban revolutionaries.
Unfortunately, Kennedy continued, it had ceased to bea purely Cuban problem.
On November 5, Bundy told Attwood that the President was more interested than the State Department, in exploring the Cuban overtures.
A State Department memorandum of November 7 certainly took a much harder line than the White House.
This insistence on repealing most of the revolution was not part of Kennedy’s thinking, nor did it appear in a Bundy memorandum of November 12, prepared as guidance for Attwood.
The only “flatly unacceptable” points in Castro’s policy, Bundy said, were Cuba’s submission to external Communist influence and his subversion directed at the rest of the hemisphere.
Vallejo, the stout proponent of accommodation, kept calling Lisa Howard to promise that Attwood would be brought to Cuba secretly, that only he and Castro would meet him and that Che Guevara specifically would not be present.
Speaking before the Inter-American Press Association in Miami, he emphasized once again that the Alliance for Progress did “not dictate to any nation how to organize its economic life.
As for Cuba, a “small band of conspirators” had made it “a weapon in an effort dictated by external powers to subvert the other American republics.
Once Cuban sovereignty has been restored we will extend the hand of friendship and assistance to a Cuba whose political and economic institutions have been shaped by the will of the Cuban people.”-8© The next day Bundy told Attwood that the President wanted to see him as soon as he had spoken to Lechuga.
The President, Bundy said, would not be leaving Washington again, except for a brief trip to Dallas.
X In the meantime, Jean Daniel had been spending three fruitless weeks in Havana.
Castro declined to see him—perhaps estopped by his own hard-liners; more likely wishing to postpone bargaining until he knew the outcome of the attempt to disrupt Venezuela’s December presidential election.
This was the month when Castro, with great fanfare, was staging his Week of Solidarity with the Venezuelan revolution.
At ten o’clock on the evening of the nineteenth, Castro, accompanied by Vallejo, unexpectedly came to his hotel room.
He made Daniel repeat three times Kennedy’s indictment of Batista; three times also Kennedy’s remark that Castro himself, in defiance of the superpowers, had almost brought the world to nuclear war.
Daniel felt that Castro saw Kennedy as an “intimate enemy.” “| believe Kennedy is sincere,” Castro finally said.
But, instead of addressing himself to the particularities of negotiation, Castro rambled on about the iniquities of American policy.
He blandly denied to Daniel the Cuban revolutionary role in Latin America of which he had bragged earlier that month to Herbert Matthews.
As for relations with Washington, “We have forgotten the United States.
Still he could not understand why Washington would not accept Cuba as it was.
Someday, he thought, there would appear in the United States a man capable of understanding the explosive reality of Latin America.
Two days later, lunching in his villa at the beach with Daniel, he heard the news from Dallas.
On December 4, Attwood told me that his secret explorations were, he believed, reaching a climax; that Castro might be trying to get out from under Guevara and the Communists and strike a deal with the United States.
Castro was possibly prepared, even perhaps pleased, to move a Tito stride away from the Soviet Union in exchange for the resumption of trade with the United States.
But he was not yet prepared in November 1963 to throw in his revolutionary hand in Latin America.
The State Department, apart from Harriman, was not happy with Kennedy’s willingness to accept the social changes wrought by the revolution; nor, it must be supposed, did Kennedy’s Miami speech of November 18 delight former owners of plantations, mines and mills for whom the ‘liberation’ of Cuba meant primarily the restoration of lost wealth and privilege.
And, though the Attwood plan was closely held, it seems inconceivable that the CIA knew nothing about it.
American intelligence had Cuban UN diplomats under incessant surveillance.
It followed their movements, tapped their telephone calls, read their letters, intercepted their cables.
Suspecting, as it must have, that Attwood and Lechuga were doing something more than exchanging daiquiri recipes, the CIA, in pursuing the Am/Lash operation, must be convicted either of abysmal incompetence, which is by no means to be excluded, or else of a studied attempt to wreck Kennedy’s search for normalization.
But the deepest rage of all against John Kennedy was among the anti-Castro fanaticos in the Cuban exile community.
In their obsessed view normalization would complete the perfidious course begun at the Bay of Pigs and carried farther during the missile crisis.
No one had a greater interest in putting the Kennedy-Castro explorations on ice than those Cubans who had committed their lives to the destruction of the Castro regime.
But the administration made no effort to keep the Brigade alive as an entity or to make it a political or military force.
Miro Cardona resigned as chairman of the Cuban Revolutionary Council in an outburst of wild accusations against the Kennedy administration.
Orlando Bosch, denounced in an angry letter to the President as their betrayal by the Kennedys.
Martinez, huddled around the CIA case officers and went down the trail of espionage, deception and dirty tricks that ended in Watergate.
Paroled in 1972, he went underground, resumed murderous activities of diverse sorts and in 1977 was in a Venezuelan prison charged with organizing the bombing of an Air Cubana plane and killing all seventy-three aboard.
Other CIA Cubans were implicated in a wave of bombings and killings in Miami.
Missions to the Third World EVER SINCE THEIR JOURNEY across Asia in 1951, John and Robert Kennedy had believed that nationalism was the most vital political emotion in the developing world.
They instinctively sympathized with new nations struggling for survival; and, after Khrushchev’s 1961 prediction of Communist world victory through national liberation wars, they saw the Third World as the crucial battleground between communism and democracy.
As President, John Kennedy cultivated the new leaders, welcomed them to Washington and, to emphasize his personal concern, confided the Peace Corps to his brother-in-law and dispatched his brother on Third World missions.
The State Department had traditionally regarded Africa as a European preserve.
John Kennedy himself had been accused of doing this when he gave his notorious speech in 1957 on Algeria.
In the White House he proposed to deal with African questions on African merits.
In August 1961 the Ivory Coast celebrated its first anniversary of independence.
He chafed under the official briefings until the State Department produced a young officer named Brandon Grove, just back from three years in the Ivory Coast.
Impressed by Grove's intelligence and candor, Kennedy added him to the delegation.
Once in the Ivory Coast, Kennedy bridled at the embassy schedule of official receptions and demanded to talk to students and labor leaders.
Robert Kennedy asked whether thé United States should help Ghana build the Volta Dam.
The Volta Dam propelled Robert Kennedy into one of his few sharp disagreements with his brother.
His suspicions were emphatically reinforced when his old friend from Rackets Committee days, Clark Mollenhoff, returned from a year’s fellowship in Africa.
Muckraking as usual, Mollenhoff denounced the dam simultaneously as a capitalist plot pushed by American business interests and as a project whose main beneficiary would be the Communists.
Robert Kennedy, an NSC regular after the Bay of Pigs, used to sit modestly along the wall with the staff people rather than at the cabinet table with the statutory members.
His grounds were that commitments had been made, that the dam was of long-run benefit for the people of Ghana and Africa, that it made economic sense and that, presumably, Nkrumah would not be there forever.
Another strong reason ... is the effect it will have on the other African states.
Friends of ours such as the Ivory Coast, Togo, Upper Volta, have received anywhere from one to five or six million dollars in aid.
Ghana which is bitterly opposed to us and playing “footsies” with the Soviet Union is receiving this amount of money with no strings attached.
If | were one of these other countries | would certainly, from now on, figure the best way to get money for my country would be to play the Soviet Union off against the United States.... | think also, if we give this money without any strings attached it will encourage Nkrumah to be more stringent with his repressive measures.
He has already placed several hundred of his opposition in jail without trial and within the last month has passed some measures which will give him dictatorial control over life and liberty.
Robert Kennedy saw his opposition to Nkrumah as in the interests of true African nationalism.
The African Bureau found him its strongest ally in its perennial argument with the Pentagon and with the State Department’s Europeanists.
Thus in the summer of 1963 a dispute erupted over impending UN votes on African issues.
The Pentagon, arguing the alleged military indispensability of naval bases in the Azores and of tracking stations in South Africa, wanted to support Portugal and South Africa against black Africa.
This was the bitter summer of the civil rights war, and the Attorney General had more urgent matters on his mind and desk.
Robert Kennedy thought that their independence was both right and inevitable, that it was foolish for the United States to identify itself with Portuguese suzerainty and that the American interest lay in winning the confidence of the anticolonial leaders.
Rusk considered it improper, as by the book it doubtless was, for men engaged in rebellion against NATO allies to be received officially in Washington.
Perhaps, Fredericks suggested, the Attorney General might care to meet Mondlane in a neutral spot—dinner at someone’s house, for example.
Kennedy said, “I will see him in the office of the Attorney General of the United States.
At that point he was exercised over Zanzibar, where a “people’s republic” of obscure but impassioned views had recently been established.
Averell Harriman wrote a memorandum ... and George Ball wrote back and said it was foolish to waste our time, it was such a small country and added that, if God could take care of the little swallows in the skies.
Edwin Reischauer, the leading American historian of Japan and newly appointed ambassador to Tokyo, had urged the Attorney General to accept an invitation to Japan, where anti-American violence had forced Eisenhower to cancel a visit in 1960.
The uninhibited and sometimes unruly company tried Brandon Grove’s Foreign Service sense of propriety.
We do not condemn others for their differences in economic and political structures.
We call to the young men and women of all nations of the world to join with us in a concerted attack on the evils which have so long beset mankind—poverty, illness, illiteracy, intolerance, oppression, war.
He had begun at Nihon with a few sentences in what he supposed, after laborious rehearsal by Edwin Reischauer and his Japanese wife, might resemble the native tongue.
Several hundred had come to revile the brother of the American President.
When the critic, exhausted, came to an end, Kennedy, enlightened by instant translation, commenced a reply.
At this point the public address system, and every light in the house, went dead.
Someone from the embassy, anticipating the worst, had brought a batteryoperated bullhorn.
Although now President, he is still young, and all those who held key positions in his campaign are young.
The interpreter explained that this was the school cheerleader, desiring to make apology.
In a moment, the cheerleader was on the platform gesticulating wildly (inadvertently punching Ethel Kennedy in the pit of the stomach; “she doubled up, stood up immediately, smiled and went on,” observed Seigenthaler)24 and leading the student body in the Waseda song.
The audience responded, as if at a football rally before the homecoming game.
The Kennedy party, alas,’ learned the song—“Miyako no seihoku”—and later inflicted it mercilessly on parties at Hickory Hill.
They slept on floors, ate snails and seaweed for breakfast and whale meat for lunch, visited ancient temples and modern plants.
They finally reserved fifteen minutes before the group departed for Indonesia.
In the Eisenhower years the State Department had looked on him as a sort of communist.
John Kennedy, who thought it easy to understand why Sukarno might be anti-American after what the CIA had done to him in 1958,24 had him pegged as a clever nationalist politician and charmed him with notable success when Sukarno visited Washington in 1961.
While the Robert Kennedy party was still in Tokyo, Communists had stoned the American embassy in Djakarta and painted the city with KENNEDY GO HOME signs.
Sukarno, taking no chances with the safety of his guests, installed them in the presidential palace (which Ethel plunged into darkness one evening by plugging in her hair dryer and blowing the fuses) and surrounded them by soldiers wherever they went.
The only time he took a backward step was when it hit him; it knocked him back just a step.
The police grabbed the thrower, twisted both arms behind him, turned him upside down and rushed him out to a car.
Kennedy replied that his country had “vigorously supported Indonesia’s struggle for independence” and declared his hope that these “two close friends of the United States” would be able to work out West New Guinea.
We are going to disagree with Indonesia, and you are going to disagree with us.
A student who had done his homework in American history brought up the Mexican War.
Later the Attorney General told the press that he had been instructed to clear any future Texas speeches with the Vice President.
Like Khrushchev, he was offended by Sukarno’s satyriasis and by the gallery of nudes that adorned the presidential palace. “| don’t have respect for him. | think that he’s bright. | think he’s completely immoral, that he’s untrustworthy.... | think he’s a liar. | think he’s got very few redeeming features.
Robert Kennedy’s specific mission in Djakarta was to head off war between Indonesia and the Netherlands over West New Guinea, a territory whose status was left unresolved when Indonesia became independent in 1949.
Jones had long advocated a forthcoming policy on West Irian, as the Indonesians called it.
He saw no future in the United States taking the losing side in a colonial war.
The Indonesians had everything to gain and nothing to lose from negotiation.
In 1963 Sir Robert Menzies, the Australian Prime Minister, complained bitterly to the wife of the American ambassador about Robert Kennedy’s role.
Moscow sent Mikoyan to Djakarta in July 1962 in a last-minute effort to block the settlement.
We felt it was wrong of him not to inform us of his intentions in advance.
In any event, while continuing to support the Dutch publicly , the Americans obviously put pressure on them behind the scenes.
Since armed conflict had been avoided, our advisors who had been training the Indonesians were no longer needed, so they came home.
When Sukarno visited Washington in 1961, John Kennedy had asked for Pope’s release.
When it comes to women | am weak. | cannot stand even a strange woman ’s tears.
Kennedy concluded that he was trying to use Pope as a bargaining counter over West New Guinea.
Kennedy said he wanted “to make sure that when | leave here he knows how strongly we feel about this.
Kennedy went at once to Sukarno and said, “If | have offended you by my bluntness ... | certainly apologize for that.
Sukarno, the old fox, saw what the young fox was up to and evidently admired his technique.
Asked later whether Kennedy had been abrasive, Jones reflected, “He was a very positive guy.
There were one or two points where ... the discussions became very, very heated; but then they both calmed down, and their personal relations were cordial and friendly.
Evidence of that was that Sukarno welcomed Bobby back two years later” ;2> but that is another story.
Galbraith, back from Hawaii, noted in his journal that Robert “looked very tired,” but that “Ethel seemed unchanged by the round-the-world campaigning.
Arthur had written a speech for Bob to give in Berlin. | had thought it all right.
On second thought,| was forced to conclude, as did Arthur, that the criticism was sound.
Kennedy was evidently less of a Cold War rhetorician in 1962 than Schlesinger or even Galbraith.
On the plane to Europe Bobby was filled with reflections about his trip.
What was clearest of all, he told me, was that, in countries like Japan and Indonesia, America could make contact with the youth and the intellectuals on/yasa progressive nation.
The press party, which by this time had fallen in love with Bobby and Ethel, sent over champagne from their neighboring table, procured an accordionist and started an impromptu dance that went on till four-thirty in the afternoon. | somehow remember through vinous mists the newspapermen bringing in a motor scooter and Ethel driving it precariously between the tables, though that may have been another occasion.
The next day the Kennedys concentrated on matters spiritual, such as an audience with the Pope, while | stuck to the temporal side, meeting with Nenni, La Malfa and other political leaders and clearing the Attorney General’s German speeches, now amply revised, with Washington.
Willy Brandt, General Clay and Al Lightner (head of the United States Mission in West Berlin) met us at the airport.
After a brief airport ceremony and gallant but incompetent tries at German by Bobby and Ethel, we set forth ona motorcade to the Rathaus.
The streets were lined with cheering people, who had waited for hours in the bitter cold.
It was all deeply moving until one remembered that a good many of them were cheering just as hard twenty years ago for Hitler.
February 22 was his thirtieth birthday; also George Washington’s two hundred thirtieth.
Both events received due recognition at Mayor Brandt’s dinner that evening.
The wary Anthony Lewis now concluded that Robert Kennedy was “a very unusual person, a person who in a kind of tormented way was struggling to do everything on the merits, which was, | thought, all one could ask.
IX Even the Foreign Service conceded that, for all his strange hobbies, like youth and counterinsurgency, the Attorney General had peculiar skills as a propounder of home truths to world leaders.
So in December 1962 he was prevailed upon to undertake a mission to Brazil.
After the Battle of Ole Miss in September, the missile crisis in October, the housing order in November, he was now in December liberating Bay of Pigs prisoners, as well as, in spare moments, preparing for his Supreme Court debut in January.
But Brazil was the largest country in Latin America, and the Alliance for Progress needed its full collaboration.
In fact, the contribution of the Kennedy administration was to give ideas long proposed by progressive Latin American economists and political leaders comprehensive form, collective endorsement and public dollars.
If the Kennedy plan had been to integrate the southern hemisphere more firmly than ever in the American corporate economy, presidential soeeches stimulating and legitimizing social change in Latin America were an odd way of going about it.
It did not even occur to us to invite United States businessmen to the founding meeting at Punta del Este, Uruguay, in August 1961, till the week before.
Nor did we follow up on their recommendation that a permanent committee be established to promote foreign private investment.
Historically the United States had been committed to the Latin oligarchs.
Kennedy in fact overestimated the possibilities of peaceful revolution in Latin America—as Castro overestimated the possibilities of violent revolution.
Both Washington and Havana underestimated the rigidity of the old structures, the inertia of the masses and especially the tenacity of the oligarchs, who simply denied that those who made peaceful revolution impossible made violent revolution inevitable and were well used to calling out the army to suppress either.
The Alliance for Progress required a continent of Betancourts for success.
One terrible disadvantage of political parties of the Democratic Left all over Latin America is that they are poor, while their enemies are well-heeled.
In many a country where the Alliance may be pouring in tens of millions, the ultimate political battle may be lost because the parties of the Democratic Left lack a few thousands of dollars for desperately needed, legitimate, democratic action.
It seemed useful at the time—why should we not help the friends of peaceful revolution as much as the Russians and Cubans helped the friends of violent revolution?—but it established bad habits and contained an awful potentiality for abuse.
The deeper trouble was the ultimate artificiality of the conditions CIA intervention sought to create.
The progressive democratic leaders, while the finest people in Latin America, were falling out of touch with fresh currents in politics and with the militants of the younger generation.
If they could not sustain themselves, it was vain to try to sustain them from without.
He ended in 1963, as he had begun in 1961, by saying that this was no miracle to be passed in Washington; it depended in the end on the people of Latin America.
The intelligent but mysterious Janio Quadros had resigned after a few months as President in August 1961.
The Vice President, Joao Goulart, succeeded to the office at the price, exacted by the army and other conservative interests, of having to accept a prime minister and a quasiparliamentary regime.
Goulart, an inept pupil of the renowned Getulio Vargas, was a wealthy landowner of ostentatious populist sentiment.
He was rather a left-wing political boss who made deals with Communists or anyone else.
Pressed by George Meany to bring up Communist infiltration into the Brazilian labor movement, Kennedy recalled his own experiences on the Senate Labor Committee and introduced the subject “delicately,” Lincoln Gordon, now the American ambassador to Brazil, thought.
Congress was huffing and puffing over the expropriation of International Telephone and Telegraph properties by Goulart’s radical brother-in-law, Leonel Brizola, governor of the state of Rio Grande do Sul.
Harold Geneen of ITT, making an early foray into foreign policy, was urging what soon became the Hickenlooper Amendment—cutting off foreign aid to any country nationalizing American property without full and speedy compensation.
Still, Brazil must recognize that expropriation without compensation would only drive Congress to restrictive legislation.
His interest, Kennedy emphasized, was “in getting some procedure that would enable us to engage in ... frictionless nationalization”®2—a striking change from previous American Presidents whose interest was in stopping nationalization per se.
Campos thought Goulart “struck by Kennedy’s personality and liberal posture” and “pleasantly surprised” by the warmth of his reception.
On his return, however, Goulart plunged into a campaign for the restoration of full presidential powers.
Soon he forced the parliament to agree to a plebiscite on the question in January 1963.
In view of the political uncertainty, Gordon recommended that Kennedy postpone his visit.
Goulart did little about the Alliance, named a Brizola man as prime minister and watched economic confusion grow.
Still the gaucho in him responded to Kennedy’s handling of the missile crisis.
When the missiles were withdrawn, he poured out two huge whiskeys and proposed to Gordon that they drink a toast.
As the American ambassador formulated an innocuous speech to world peace, Goulart looked at him and smiled—“he has a very charming smile”—and said in effect, “To hell with that.
With political turmoil increasing, the ambassador considered a visit by President Kennedy more untimely than ever.
Still he felt that something ought to be done to strengthen the personal relationship established in the spring.
In late November 1962 Gordon proposed that Robert Kennedy come to Brazil and express the President’s concerns.
If the Brazilian people felt that Washington was allied with the elites, anti-Americanism was inevitable.
Some in the government, he conceded, had “fixed hostility to the United States—although not toward President Kennedy”; but that was a consequence of the continuing political crisis and would change after the plebiscite.
Kennedy, when he got the floor after more than an hour, wondered whether Goulart really understood President Kennedy’s concern.
The Kennedys, after all, had their own problems with American business.
Lincoln Gordon identified government agencies where he thought there had been serious left-wing penetration.
Washington could be sure, Goulart said, that he would not play the Communist game.
Goulart, he thought, resented Kennedy’s emphasis on Communist infiltration in his government and on the treatment of American corporations.
He looks and acts a good deal ... like a Brazilian Jimmy Hoffa.... | didn’t dislike him as much as | disliked Sukarno.
Goulart was unpopular in Congress, and Dantas failed to get the United States assistance he hoped for.
Later in the year Goulart fired his moderate ministers and headed down the VargasPerén road of demagogic populist nationalism.
The mission to Brazil lasted only twenty-four hours and therefore gave Kennedy no opportunity for his usual sessions with students and labor.
It was less successful than the mission to Indonesia, though in the end neither Sukarno nor Goulart could be ‘saved’—either for the democratic or the Marxist worlds; both succumbed to fantasy and were overthrown by their own armies.
Over the past twenty years we have paid dearly because of support given to colonial rulers, cruel dictators or ruling cliques void of social purpose.
For perhaps the last time in their history it was possible for Americans to feel as if all the world were young and all dreams within grasp. | exaggerate of course.
But many of us who came to Washington with the Kennedys did suppose that reason could serve as an instrument for social change and that we were moving in the grain of history.
Alas, it proved more difficult to change the world than to desegregate the Coast Guard.
Amidst the cascade of public responsibilities, the center of his life remained Hickory Hill, that graceful white mansion—the green lawn rolling down to the tennis court and swimming pool, a pandemonium of children, dogs, ponies, rabbits, cockatoos, jokes, games — where Ethel presided with inexhaustible high spirits.
It was hard to resist the raffish, unpredictable, sometimes uncontrollable Kennedy parties.
Soon there was a bigger table, in time a new wing, and the parties expanded accordingly.
When weather permitted, they were held on the terrace, with the small children “standing around peeping over the hedge, barefooted, in those little nightgowns” or watching “owl-like, with grave, proprietary eyes” from a tree house in the tall hickory.
One party gave me undesired notoriety when Lee Udall, the wife of the Secretary of the Interior, pushed me fully clothed into the Swimming pool as | stood on the edge, contemplating whether | should not jump in anyway to help Ethel, who had been tumbled in a few seconds before when her chair slipped from a platform suspended over the pool.
Children dissolved his reticences, released his humor and his affection, brought him, one felt, more fully out of himself and therefore perhaps more fully into himself.
Children in neglect, privation, distress wounded him, like an arrow into the heart.
Photographs of the period show him playing with his own children on the beach in summer or in the snow in winter, walking with them hand in hand, carrying them on his shoulders, holding them pensively in his arms.
He was a natural instructor, patient in answering their questions and in teaching them to throw and catch and swim.
Whenever he could, he swam, played tennis, sailed, skated, skied, pressed more or less unwilling friends into touch football.
In February 1963 John Kennedy happened on a 1908 letter from Theodore Roosevelt, another physical fitness maniac, laying down the proposition that Marines ought to be able to hike fifty miles in twenty hours.
The President sent the letter over to General Shoup, asking whether present-day Marines were as fit as their predecessors.
He then told Salinger that someone from the White House —preferably one whose sacrifice would inspire millions of other out-of-shape Americans—must march the fifty miles with the Marines.
The portly Salinger, who had studiously avoided all forms of exercise except cigar-smoking for twenty years, tried for several days to dodge the challenge, finally resorting to the desperate expedient of insisting on step-by-step coverage by the Whitt House press corps.
Around the country athletic citizens started off on fifty-mile walks of their own.
On the brink Salinger extracted a statement from the President’s Council on Physical Fitness saying that only persons in appropriate physical condition should attempt the hike—a standard, he pointed out, that clearly disqualified him.
On a Friday afternoon at the Department of Justice, Robert Kennedy, who always had to test himself against everything, decided that he too would make the hike.
At five o’clock on Saturday morning the four, joined by David Hackett, the best athlete at Milton, met by the old Chesapeake & Ohio Canal.
On December 19, 1961, while playing golf in Palm Beach, Joseph P Kennedy, now seventy-three years old, fell suddenly sick.
It was an intracranial thrombosis, paralyzing his right leg, arm and face, paralyzing the hemisphere of his brain that governed his ability to speak.
He had stayed resolutely in the background from the moment his son became a presidential candidate.
The proud old man practiced self-abnegation with sensitivity and grace.
Smith reported the conversation to Robert Kennedy, who listened carefully and thanked him.
Their father developed pneumonia, pulled through, then began a long invalidism.
He could not control his speech but did not know it and, since he continued to understand what was said to him, continued to speak.
Ann Gargan became his eternal companion, in perennial contention with the professional nurse, Rita Dallas, over the best mode of treatment.
Time and again | would see them stand outside his door and actually seem to screw up courage from deep inside before entering the sickroom.
Each one radiated confidence to him, and always, when his children were around, Mr Kennedy took on a new vigor.
But the evening was movingly gay, because the old man’s gallantry shows in his eyes and his crooked smile and the steel of his left hand.
And because his children involve him in their every thought and action.
The Kennedys are at their best ... when they are family, and forthright and demonstrative, and they were at their best tonight.
Robert Kennedy took the brunt of it, as he had when he was a small boy so many years before.
Once the presence of the President and the Attorney General stimulated the ambassador to rise from his wheelchair and try to walk without a brace.
In summers at Hyannis Port, Rita Dallas wrote, “it hurt me whenever Mr Kennedy treated him roughly.
Robert understood, never complained, cherished his father, exercised every day with him in the swimming pool.
Among strangers the Attorney General was still diffident and often uneasy.
On occasion people saw a veil fall over his eyes; they did not know where they stood with him or whether they were getting through or not.
On occasion he seemed imperious, too ready to override people in the determination to get things done, expecting too much too easily in the way of loyalty or service.
He now radiated a sense of power, derived from his own gifts and intensities as well as from his relationship to the President. | remember Marie Harriman’s birthday party in April 1963.
Randolph Churchill, who had come to Washington to accept his father’s honorary American citizenship, was there; also Franklin D Roosevelt, Jr., and Robert Kennedy—sons of the three great Anglo-American political dynasties of the twentieth century.
Bobby, with his innocent audacity, asked Marlene who was the most attractive man she had ever met.
We both met her the same night after she had sung “Happy Birthday, Mr President” at a Madison Square Garden celebration of John Kennedy’s forty-fifth birthday.
It was May 19, 1962, at a small party given by that loyal Democrat Arthur Krim of United Artists.
But one felt a terrible unreality about her—as if talking to someone under water.
Bobby and | engaged in mock competition for her; she was most agreeable to him and pleasant to me—but then she receded into her own glittering mist.
Robert Kennedy, with his curiosity, his sympathy, his absolute directness of response to distress, in some way got through the glittering mist as few did.
One feels that Robert Kennedy came to inhabit the fantasies of her last summer.
Weatherby of the Manchester Guardian that she might get married again; someone in politics, in Washington; no name vouchsafed.
Another friend, Robert Slatzer, claims she said Robert Kennedy had promised to marry her.
She killed herself through an overdose of sleeping pills, probably by accident, perhaps by intent, on the night of August 4.
This was less than three months after they met. | doubt whether they had seen each other more than half a dozen times.
At last he was fulfilling his mother’s dream of selfimprovement—and perhaps exciting new maternal dreams.
Returning from a fortnight of Aspen seminars in the summer of 1961, Robert and Ethel asked me whether | would organize a series of evening meetings in Washington at which heavy thinkers might remind leading members of the administration that a world of ideas existed beyond government. | stalled for a time, trusting they would forget.
Not a chance; and the first Hickory Hill seminar convened on November 27, 1961.
The lecturers ranged from Isaiah Berlin to Al Capp; the audience from McNamara and Dillon to Alice Roosevelt Longworth.
Except for the summers, we managed, under the Attorney General’s gentle pressure, a meeting every month or so.
Longworth, her cynicism well honed by sixty years of life in Washington, became a devotee.
But he was a very rapt and eager prosecutor of the positions; you had the feeling that if you were shabby on any important point you could pretty well count on Bobby to come in and press you on it.
This was matched in some degree by the eagerness of the questioning that Ethel put.
When he recruited me for the White House in 1960, we had little more than an amiable acquaintance.
Nor would |—a liberal, intellectual, professor, writer, agnostic; a non-hiker, nonskier, non-touch football player, nonmountain climber, whose only athletic pleasure was indifferent tennis —have seemed especially his type.
We got along. | served some purpose in the White House in his considerably more synoptic view of the administration.
He called me from time to time to ask me to look into this or that problem; no special pattern emerged.
Sometimes he asked me to bring up things with his brother. | wondered why he did not call his brother directly but rarely questioned and supposed | had some minor role in a larger stratagem.
He was very funny in a sardonic throwaway style, and also keenly appreciative of humor in others.
When a remark entertained him, he had the most engaging habit of clapping two or three times.
Once Senator Hugh Scott of Pennsylvania attacked me; | replied suitably.
In connection with your letter to Senator Scott ori whether you’re a communist or something.
Underneath the teasing, one felt that he was deeply protective of friends.
The impressions of the fifties —his father, the McCarthy committee, the Rackets Committee, the pursuit of Hoffa—had not died.
They now received influential restatement at the hands of the writer Gore Vidal.
Vidal was a talented man, a writer of lucid and graceful prose, an authentic wit, excellent historical novelist, adept playwright, brilliant essayist, litigious citizen, always filled with charm and malice.
He and Jacqueline Kennedy both had had, in successive periods, Hugh D Auchincloss as a stepfather.
Robert Kennedy came into Dutchess County to speak on his behalf but, when they met, failed to recognize him.
As the evening passed, he gave the strong impression of having drunk far too much.
Someone, | forget who, perhaps Jacqueline Kennedy, asked me whether | would get him out of there. | enlisted Kenneth Galbraith and George Plimpton.
Gore Vidal got into violent fights, first with Lem Billings, then with Bobby.
According to Gore, Bobby found him crouching by Jackie and steadying himself by putting his arm on her shoulder.
Jacqueline Kennedy, however, was irritated by his behavior and resolved not to have him in the White House again.
Vidal genuinely admired the President—“an ironist in a profession where the prize usually goes to the apparent cornball,” he wrote as late as 1967.
For his part, Robert Kennedy, | imagine, regarded bisexuality with disapproval—he became more understanding of the varieties of human experience in later years—and mistrusted Gore’s destructive propensities. | surmise that, as awareness of his excommunication sank in, Vidal’s resentment concentrated on the Attorney General and boiled over in Esquire.
As civil rights increasingly absorbed his time and passion, he withdrew from foreign affairs.
Early in October, Kennedy authorized the sale of wheat to the Soviet Union.
While he was away from Moscow on a hunting trip in late October, the KGB arrested Professor Frederick Barghoorn of Yale as a spy.
They should be available in times other than deep crisis and emergencies as is now the case.
You talk to McNamara but mostly on Defense matters, you talk to Dillon but primarily on financial questions, Dave Bell on AID matters, etc.
These men should be sitting down and thinking of some of the problems facing us in a broader context. | think you could get a good deal more out of what is available in Government than you ate at the present time.
They talked kiddingly even about matters on which they felt seriously; and always talked in the cryptic half sentences that bespoke perfect understanding.
In 1963 Ben Bradlee asked John Kennedy why—“never mind the brother bit”—he thought Robert was so great.
At the same time, the Attorney General was John Kennedy’s Harry Hopkins, Lord Root of the Matter, the man on whom the President relied for penetrating questions, for follow-up, for the protection of the presidential interest and objectives.
Robert Kennedy, McNamara said, “recognized that his greatest contribution to the President would be to speak candidly, to contradict him if he felt he was wrong and to move him to the right course if he felt he was not on that course.
The President never hesitated to turn down Bobby’s advice, but many, many times he took it when, initially, he, the President, was in favor of an opposite course.
Jacqueline Kennedy once told me that he preferred not to see at night people who insisted on the problems of the day.
Bobby was his conscience, reminding him of perplexities he wished for a moment to put aside.
So Robert and Ethel were not often at the White House on purely informal occasions.
Alike in so many ways, united by so many indestructible bonds, the two brothers were still different men.
John Kennedy remained, as Paul Dever had said, the Brahmin; Robert, the Puritan.
John Kennedy was urbane, objective, analytical, controlled, contained, masterful, a man of perspective; Robert, while very bright and increasingly reflective, was more open, exposed, emotional, subjective, intense, a man of commitment.
One was a man for whom everything seemed easy; the other a man for whom everything had been difficult.
His very presence was exhilarating—more so than anyone | have ever known.
Robert himself was variable, moody; “the pendulum just swings wider for him than it does for most people,” as Lawrence O’Brien said.
Underneath the action and jokes there was a streak of brooding melancholy.
Friends wanted to protect the younger brother; they never thought the older brother required protection.
The sight of people living in squalor appalled John Kennedy but, like FDR before him, he saw it from without.
Robert had a growing intensity of personal identification with the victims of the social order.
Had he been President in the later 1960s, he might well have been as radical as his brother, though with the composure of FDR rather than with Robert’s rushing passion, and very likely more effective.
Robert Kennedy, ina more turbulent time, rebelled against institutional restraints.
Roy Wilkins of the NAACP felt that the President “invited you to commune with him.... | never got the impression you’re communing with Robert Kennedy.
Lord Longford, an English Catholic, once remarked to Eunice Shriver that a book should be written about President Kennedy and his faith.
He took his definition of happiness from Aristotle—the full use of your powers along lines of excellence.
He seemed to imply that man achieved salvation by meeting his own best standards rather than by receiving the grace of God.
The first two are beyond our comprehension So we must do what we can with the third.
But Ted Clifton, Kennedy’s military aide, recalls him writing down those words one spring morning, quickly and without reference to any book.
He acquired his perceptions of the complexity of things partly because his beloved older brother led him to broader views of society and life and partly because he himself possessed to an exceptional degree an experiencing nature.
John Kennedy was a realist brilliantly disguised as a romantic; Robert Kennedy, a romantic stubbornly disguised as a realist.
Corridors of Grief IN THE YEARS 1961 and 1962, opponents of the administration tended to separate the Kennedy brothers.
Robert was the villain who persecuted steel barons and enforced racial integration.
The lowering atmosphere, Robert feared, foretold a mean contest for reelection.
The man they yearned for was their old friend from the Rackets Committee, Barry Goldwater.
He did not mention Romney as a possible opponent lest this build him up.
The Attorney General was dissatisfied with the Democratic National Committee.
He thought John Bailey, the chairman, had become “almost a figurehead,”“ and he feared, from evidence adduced by Paul Corbin, that other committee officials were misusing their party positions.
Starting in the spring, Stephen Smith came to Washington several days each week to set up the campaign.
On November 13 the campaign group—the Attorney General, Smith, Theodore Sorensen, Kenneth O’Donnell, Lawrence O’Brien, John Bailey and Richard Maguire from the National Committee and Richard Scammon, director of the Census Bureau and an eminent psephologist—met with the President.
The President said that, if he and the Attorney General got into a public fight, it would make things more lively.
The absence of the Vice President or any representative, the activity of the Department of Justice in the Bobby Baker case, the desire for a good story in a dull week and, perhaps, the morbid suspicions of the Vice President himself led to a burst of talk that the Kennedys were planning to dump Johnson in 1964.
O’Donnell protested incredulously that, if Eunice had said anything at all, it was obviously a joke.
The President later suggested that his sisters reserve their jokes for less sensitive matters.
He told Kennedy the time had come for a book like his own They Hate Roosevelt of 1936.
This was October 31, 1963.48 On November 20, 1963, Robert Kennedy had his thirtyeighth birthday.
Ramsey Clark and John Douglas walked out together wondering about the Attorney General’s melancholy.
These parties were attended traditionally by judges and the top people at Justice.
The Attorney General had begun inviting long-time Justice employees—clerks, telephone operators, elevator operators.
The political problems in Texas—an angry feud between the populist Democrats led by Senator Ralph Yarborough and the oil Democrats led by the Vice President’s protégé Governor John Connally—made it the more interesting.
The President, his brother thought, “liked John Connally and liked Yarborough and he’s so used to people fighting and not liking each other in politics, it didn’t surprise him.
Soon Ethel bounded up from the reception and reminded her husband that he had a birthday party of his own at Hickory Hill.
It was a characteristic Hickory Hill party—large, loud, happy, with satiric toasts and heckling guests.
Instead of making her usual chaffing toast about her husband, she gravely asked the party to drink to the President of the United States.
Robert Kennedy sat up talking with Gene Kelly, the actor, in the library till two-thirty in the morning.
Ethel forgot to tell him about her birthday present—a sauna in the basement — till it was three and they were in bed.
Federal attorneys came from across the country to consider the next, phase in the campaign against the syndicates.
He took Robert Morgenthau and the chief of Morgenthau’s criminal division, Silvio Mollo, out to Hickory Hill for a swim and luncheon.
The three men sat with Ethel Kennedy around a table by the swimming pool, eating clam chowder and tuna fish sandwiches.
Shortly before quarter to two, the Attorney General said they had better get back.
Morgenthau abstractedly noticed one of them, a painter’s hat jammed over his ears, a transistor radio in his hand, run abruptly toward the pool.
He said, “I’ll call you back ... when | find out more."" | don’t remember anything more of that conversation.
Morgenthau saw Robert Kennedy turn away and clap his hand to his mouth.
Ethel led Morgenthau and Mollo to a television set in the living room, then accompanied Robert upstairs.
Then | talked to the Secret Service and | think | talked to Clint Hill [a Secret Service man with the party]... but | don’t know who it was... in the hospital down there and they said that ... it was very serious.
But | talked to Steve or talked to somebody to tell her to come down to Washington to stay with Jackie.... | talked to Sarge about trying to organize the funeral arrangements and he took charge of that and did a terrific job. | talked to Teddy and asked him to go up to tell my father and my mother.... | talked to my mother and we agreed to wait—not telling my father until the next morning.... | talked to Eunice and ... she decided that she would go up to my mother.
Jean was closest to Jackie so that made sense.... |had to stay here, so Teddy went up to tell my father.
Then he said ... this might be part of a worldwide plot, which | didn’t understand, and he said a lot of people down here think | should be sworn in right away.
And—well, | was sort of taken aback at the moment because it was just an hour after ... the President had been shot and | didn't think—see what the rush was.
He called Katzenbach, who said anyone could do it, including a district court judge.
David Hackett was soon there, and Byron White, and Edwin Guthman, and others.
Robert walked back and forth between the tennis court and the swimming pool.
The children came, and he embraced them, comforting them as he had tried to comfort his friends.
But Ethel, noticing his eyes rimmed with red, handed him a pair of dark glasses and joined his restless walk.
From there he would go by helicopter to Andrews Field and meet his brother’s body.
On the elevator to McNamara’s office he said to Guthman, “People just don’t realize how conservative Lyndon really is.
Arthur Goldberg got on the phone and said that this was something more than personal, this is the President of the United States, and | think we should all go.
And | said, if you want to go, go. | wasn’t going to get into an argument about it.
He arrived at Andrews half an hour before the plane was due from Dallas.
Then he made arrangements to get on the plane without running the gantlet of television cameras.
He boarded the plane by himself, hurried past the Johnson party and hugged Jackie.
Jessica Mitford’s sister, in the circularity of life and death, was the sister-in-law of Kathleen Kennedy’s husband Billy Hartington.
The casket arrived at the White House early in the morning of the twenty-third.
He walked down the hall and came in on Jacqueline, sitting on her bed in a dressing gown, talking to the children.
His older sister, Caroline, said that Daddy was too big for his coffin.
They looked first at a site toward the bottom of the hill, next to Oliver Wendell Holmes.
He put his PT-boat tie clip, a silver rosary Ethel had given him and a cutting of his hair into the coffin. | wrote in my journal, “The ceremony at Arlington, against a background of wildly twittering birds, was solemn and heartrending.
On the day of the burial of your Godfather John Fitzgerald Kennedy THE WHITE HOUSE WASHINGTON Nov., 1963 Dear Joe, You are the oldest of all the male grandchildren.
You have a special and particular responsibility now which | know you will fulfill.
Remember all the things that Jack started—be kind to others that are less fortunate than we—and love our country.
He had put “his brother’s career absolutely first; and not anything about his own career whatsoever.
Douglas Dillon offered him his house in Hobe Sound, Florida, where Robert and Ethel went with a few friends at the end of the month.
John Bartlow Martin, retiring as ambassador to the Dominican Republic, went to say goodbye.
The little boy knew he had done something wrong, but he didn’t know what, so he started to cry.
Bobby stepped forward and picked him up, in kind of one motion, and held him very close for a moment, and he said, “That’s all right.
The children received presents, then trooped downstairs to the auditorium for a show.
Someone thought the clowns should go down too to entertain them as they waited.
The chief clown told Patrick Anderson of the Juvenile Delinquency Committee that they weren’t going anywhere until they had a smoke.
Our eyes met for a long moment and it seemed, incredibly, as if he wanted my agreement.
Then you figure, if it doesn’t hurt I'll be further away from what I’ve lost.
He “never really wanted any investigation,” Nicholas Katzenbach thought.
Almost better, Robert Kennedy seemed at times to feel, to close the book.
He left to Katzenbach all dealings with the Warren Commission, appointed by the new President on November 29 to ascertain the truth about Dallas.
The Chief Justice and his colleagues had perforce to depend greatly on the intelligence agencies.
They did not know that the agencies had their own secret reasons to fear a thorough inquiry.
If it came out that the putative killer might have had intelligence connections, domestic or foreign, that FBI agents should have had him under close surveillance, that CIA assassins might have provoked him to the terrible deed, the agencies would be in the deepest trouble.
But if Lee Harvey Oswald could be portrayed as a crazed loner acting on some solitary impulse of his own, they would be in the clear.
In CIA, James J Angleton, the counterespionage chief and CIA liaison with the Warren Commission, compiled a dragnet of names and called for information from all branches of the Agency.
Desmond FitzGerald decided to withhold from Angleton the story of CIA’s role in Cubela’s plot to murder Castro.
He even ordered any mention of the poison pen deleted from the report of the November 22 meeting.Nor did Allen Dulles, a member of the Warren Commission, repair the ignorance of his colleagues.
As Edward Jay Epstein has persuasively argued, the Bureau might well have suspected that Oswald had been involved with the KGB and actually believed he had met with a Soviet intelligence officer in Mexico City two months before Dallas.
Speculation about Oswald’s motivation ought to be cut off, and we should have some basis for rebutting thought that this was a Communist conspiracy or (as the lron Curtain press is saying) a right-wing conspiracy to blame it on the Communists.
Robert Kennedy, Katzenbach said later, knew nothing about this memorandum.
For reasons of bureaucratic self-preservation, the CIA and the FBI thus found themselves in the ironic position of denying any possibility of Cuban or Soviet implication.
Nor did the new administration wish to think about the unthinkable problems that would arise if there were indication of international conspiracy.
All the pressures in Washington were toward a quick and uncomplicated verdict.
He said that there could be no serious doubt that Oswald was guilty, but there was still argument if he had done it by himself or as part of a larger plot, whether organized by Castro or by gangsters.
A Teamster leader in Puerto Rico soon wrote Robert Kennedy that he planned to solicit donations from union brothers to “clean, beautify and supply with flowers the grave of Lee Harvey Oswald.
He thought Garrison might be onto something; NBC, he added, had sent Walter Sheridan to New Orleans to find out what Garrison had.
He came to believe the Warren Commission had done an inadequate job; but he had no conviction—though his mind was not sealed against the idea of conspiracy—that an adequate inquiry would necessarily have reached a different conclusion.
At times his view was, | believe, close to that expressed by his friend Anthony Lewis in 1975.
For an agnostic the murder of John Kennedy seemed one more expression of the ultimate fortuity of things.
But for those who believed in a universe infused by the Almighty with pattern and purpose—as the Kennedys did—Dallas brought on a philosophical as well as an emotional crisis.
Robert Kennedy in particular had to come to terms with his brother’s death before he could truly resume his own existence.
The innocent suffer—how can that be possible and God be just. and All things are to be examined & called into question— There are no limits set to thought.
Over Easter in 1964 he went with Jacqueline, her sister and brother-in-law, the Radziwills, and Charles Spalding to Paul Mellon’s house in Antigua.
Jacqueline, who had been seeking her own consolation, showed him Edith Hamilton’s The Greek Way.“\'d read it quite a lot before and | brought it with me.
Robert Kennedy’s underlinings suggest themes that spoke to his anguish.
He understood with Aeschylus “the antagonism at the heart of the world,” mankind fast bound to calamity, life a perilous adventure; but then “men are not made for safe havens.
This was not swashbuckling defiance; rather it was the perception that the mystery of suffering underlay the knowledge of life.
Euripides wrote of “the giant agony of the world”—a world made up of a myriad of individuals, each endowed with a terrible power to suffer, an “awful sum of pain” to which no individual could be indifferent save at the price of his humanity.
As John Kennedy’s sense of the Greeks was colored by his own innate joy in existence, Robert’s was directed by an abiding melancholy.
Three Greek Plays—a well-thumbed volume, with pages loose and falling out—and asked me to read two passages from ‘The Trojan Women,’ one describing the horrors of war, the other the importance of friendship and loyalty.
Still, at the time of truth, Catholic writers did not give him precisely what he needed.
Next to the Greeks, he read Albert Camus most intently— The Notebooks; Resistance, Rebellion and Death; The Myth of Sisyphus; The Plague.
His commonplace book of these years is filled with Camus; But sometimes in the middle of the night their wound would open afresh.
And suddenly awakened, they would finger its painful edges, they would recover their suffering anew and with it the stricken face of their love.
No solution, but constantly exercising an authority over myself that | know is useless.
The essential thing is not to lose oneself, and not to lose that part of oneself that lies sleeping in the world.
Perhaps we cannot prevent this world from being a world in which children are tortured.
At the same time he knew he was a child of fortune as well as of fatality—that he had enjoyed far more freedom and happiness than most people, far more opportunity to enlarge his choices and control his existence.
This made his obligation to help all who had been wronged the more acute and poignant.
Robert Kennedy at last traveled in that speculative area where doubt lived.
He returned from the dangerous journey, his faith intact, but deepened, enriched.
He supplemented the Greek image of man against fate with the existentialist proposition that man, defining himself by his choices, remakes himself each day and therefore can never rest.
He made his way through the haze of pain—and in doing so brought other sufferers insight and relief.
With his father stricken, his older brothers dead, he was accountable to himself.
The qualities he had so long subordinated in the interest of others—the concern under the combativeness, the gentleness under the carapace, the idealism, at once wistful and passionate, under the toughness—could rise freely to the surface.
Stranger in a Strange Land JOHN KENNEDY ALWAYS HAD a Certain fondness for Lyndon Johnson.
He saw his Vice President, with perhaps the merest touch of condescension, as an American original, a figure out of Mark Twain, not as a threat but as a character.
But, with the best will in the world, the relationship between President and Vice President is doomed—a generalization almost without historical exception.
For the Vice President has no serious duty save to wait around for the President to die.
Reedy commented, “Historically, Arthur is absolutely correct. | thought, myself, that President Kennedy was rather generous to Vice-President Johnson.
He nagged Evelyn Lincoln to make sure he would be invited to all White House meetings.
Failing to find his name on the list for a private White House dinner, he even asked Mrs.
In the Senate he had been accustomed to the exercise of personality and power.
His role was suddenly one of selfabnegation, and he played it with impeccable public loyalty.
He had his disagreements with Kennedy, but there was never a whiff of discord, complaint or self-pity to newspapermen or even to old friends on the Hill.
Evelyn Lincoln calculated that in 1961 he had spent ten hours and nineteen minutes in private conferences with the President, in 1963 one hour and fifty-three minutes.
Johnson was seventeen years older, six inches taller, expansive in manner, coarse in language, emotions near the surface.
It was southwestern exaggeration against Yankee understatement; frontier tall tales, marvelously but lengthily told, against laconic irony.
Robert Kennedy, in the New England manner, liked people to keep their physical distance.
Johnson, in the Texas manner, was all over everybody—always the grip on the shoulder, tug at the lapel, nudge in the ribs, squeeze of the knee.
He was a crowder, who set his great face within a few inches of the object of his attention and, as the more diffident retreated, backed them across the room in the course of monologue.
One night, after a White House dance for General Gavin, they scrambled eggs in an upstairs kitchen.
Those reports were all false.... | never did attack your father and | wouldn’t and | always liked you and admired you.
The next morning Kennedy repeated the conversation to John Seigenthaler.
The younger brother had begun by trying to deny him the vice presidential nomination.
In Doris Kearns’s view, he had been torn in childhood between competing self-images—the masculinity demanded by his father, the intellectuality dreamed of by his mother.
Despairing of satisfying both ideals, he chose masculinity and told himself that intellectuals were destined to impotence; a man had to be virile to be effective.
But Robert Kennedy, it appeared, combined the qualities that Johnson had convinced himself were incompatible.
Johnson, Kearns noted, liked to impose tests of manhood, of which the most notorious was bringing politicians to his ranch and insisting that they kill deer.
John Kennedy, filled with deep distaste, had killed his deer after the 1960 election. | never heard that Robert Kennedy killed deer at the LBJ ranch.
Above all, Robert Kennedy became the outlet for the unconscious resentment Johnson felt toward the President— a resentment he would not acknowledge, for he really liked John Kennedy, but could not altogether repress.
To the surprise of the Post people, a Johnson aide set up a recording machine in the corner.
Johnson, explaining the degeneration of the Diem regime, said the situation was much like that in Washington —a President with a “very strong” brother.
For all his towering ego, his devastating instinct for the weaknesses of others, his unlimited capacity for self pity, he was at the same time a man of brilliant intelligence, authentic social passion and deep seriousness about his new responsibilities.
He was now filled with apprehension about the nation, grief for the Kennedys and a consuming determination to restore confidence in the American government in the shortest possible time.
His insistence on presidential prerogative during that ghastly flight from Dallas came, not from unseemly haste to grab the perquisites of office, but from compelling desire to calm a frantic people and reassure a shocked world.
For the stricken Kennedys, however, and for Robert in particular, it was too much too soon.
Stunned and despairing, they thought only of the dead President; the living President had all the future in which to establish himself.
And, though Johnson comprehended, even to a degree shared, their misery and sought in his sometimes awkward way to alleviate it, his inordinate sensitivity compounded misunderstandings.
But a man more secure than Johnson would have sympathized with the terrible urgency carrying him to his murdered brother’s wife.
Driving from Andrews Field to the Bethesda Naval Hospital, Godfrey McHugh, President Kennedy’s loyal and emotional Air Force aide, described to the Attorney General the inexplicable delay before the plane took off from Dallas and the sad confusion once they were airborne.
Afterwards somebody told me ... how impressed Lyndon Johnson was with Dean Rusk because he's the only one who spoke up at the cabinet meeting.
So | thought ... wnat he wanted is declarations of loyalty, fidelity from all of us.
A few moments later, Johnson told a cabinet member with “real bitterness” in his voice (so recorded in the cabinet member's diary) that Kennedy had deliberately arrived late in order to spoil the meeting’s effect.
When Manchester later passed on this story, Kennedy expressed amazement first, then amusement.
When Bundy reiterated that Johnson wanted Tuesday, “I said, well, the hell with it.
Don’t ask me about what you want done—you’ll tell me what it’s going to be anyway.
It was an excellent address, delivered with dignity and force. | watched from Mrs.
RESPECTFULLY ROBERT F, KENNEDY22 IV No one acted more expeditiously to emphasize Robert Kennedy’s change of fortune than J Edgar Hoover.
Hoover and Johnson had been Washington neighbors and friends for many years.
Shortly after the assassination, the direct line from the Attorney General that Kennedy in another age had instructed Hoover to answer personally rang on the director’s desk.
Walter Jenkins, a Johnson special assistant , replaced O'Donnell as the FBI contact.
Kennedy never forgot the coldness with which Hoover had broken the news from Dallas.
In his talk with Johnson after the address to Congress, Kennedy had warned that the FBI was operating once again as an independent agency.
However, if he did, “it would be considered that | was getting out fora different reason.
Johnson repeated that “that wasn’t really the situation that existed, that J Edgar Hoover never came to him directly.
McNamara used to tell me that Hoover used to send over all this material on me and that Lyndon Johnson would read it to him.
Lyndon Johnson told me that he never received an adverse report from J Edgar Hoover on me.
Hoover sent a report in to Lyndon Johnson that there was a meeting—I think | was supposed to have been there—at this house in which we were discussing the overthrow of Lyndon Johnson, to take the nomination from him.
Earlier in the day | had found Averell Harriman “in a state of considerable distress and wrath” over the new President’s rumored decision to place Thomas Mann in charge of western hemisphere affairs.
Mann, assistant secretary when Kennedy took over and thereafter ambassador to Mexico, was able, hard-boiled, opinionated, a colonialist by mentality and a free enterprise zealot.
He was also a Texan, though not, | believe, a particular friend of Johnson’s.
But they both had the Tex-Mex attitude toward Latin America, well delineated by Johnson himself soon after assuming the Presidency.
And the next day they’Il be right on your porch, barefoot and weighing one hundred and thirty pounds and they'll take that too.
But if you say to ’em right at the start, “hold on, just wait a minute,” they’ll know they're dealing with somebody who’ll stand up.
There are a hundred men scattered through the government who are devoted to the purposes for which we came to Washington.
We must all stay in close touch and not let them pick us off one by one. | haven’t the answer in detail yet, but | am sure that the fundamental principle now is collective action.
We worked hard to get where we are, and we can’t let it all go to waste.
My brother barely had a chance to get started—and there is sO much now to be done—for the Negroes and the unemployed and the school kids and everyone else who is not getting a decent break in our society.
He knows all about politics and nothing about human beings.... | haven’t talked to him yet. | don’t feel mentally or physically prepared to do so yet.
They didn’t come here just to work for John Kennedy, an individual, but for ideas, things we wanted to do.
It’s one thing if you’ve got personal reasons for leaving, like you may want to leave, Arthur.
He has understood that the only sanctions we have are resignation and/or revolt— and that both sanctions are meaningless, and will seem sour grapes, unless they are provoked by a really understandable issue—and this LBJ will do his best to deny us.
Johnson would have to consult the Kennedy people about the Vice Presidency, he said, and we would exert some influence on the choice of Secretary of State in the next Cabinet. | said it was hard to impose a deal on Presidents.
He said, “Yes, but there is a considerable difference between a nominal role and a real role.
Lyndon Johnson unquestionably surmised, if he did not know, that such discussions were going on.
As for myself, believing the new President had the right to his own men in the White House, | had submitted my resignation the day after Dallas, received the Johnson treatment (“I need you more than President Kennedy needed you”), agreed to stay for the transition and in January 1964 resigned again.
For Robert his brother’s Washington evoked rather Periclean Athens and high ideals of civic commitment—ideals he feared might now fall before a rabble of wheeler-dealers.
Then his old acquaintance Sukarno provided a new crisis in Southeast Asia.
The formation under British sponsorship of the Federation of Malaysia in September 1963 had given deep offense to the Indonesian leader.
And, if the British Commonwealth went to war, the United States might be dragged in as a result of obligations under the ANZUS treaty of 1951.
When Jones returned to see President Kennedy in mid-November 1963, he had requested authorization to say that, if Sukarno settled the Malaysian dispute, the United States would resume economic aid, now somewhat cut back, and that President Kennedy himself would visit Indonesia the next spring.
Harriman, Roger Hilsman and Michael Forrestal backed this recommendation.
Indonesia, it thereafter developed, had been one more point of foreign policy disagreement between Kennedy and Johnson.
The new President refused to sign a determination that aid to Indonesia was in the national interest.
He agreed, however, to one more try at getting negotiations under way between Sukarno and Tunku Abdul Rahman, the Malaysian Prime Minister.
Harriman proposed Robert Kennedy as a presidential emissary—both on the merits and in the hope that the mission might rouse him from his depression.
Thus it is Sukarno’s own policy which is producing the British reactions to which he is objecting.
The atmosphere on the plane across the Pacific, with Robert and Ethel answering letters of condolence, was melancholy.
Thousands more, standing outside in a soft rain, listened over loudspeakers.
Responding to Kennedy’s frank presentation, Sukarno said he would agree to a ceasefire if the Malaysians agreed also.
The Tunku protested that Sukarno would use a cease-fire to build up his guerrilla forces but eventually yielded to the Attorney General’s persuasion.
On January 22 Kennedy arrived in Indonesia, where the Communists had unleashed a clamor against a cease-fire.
That afternoon, looking “utterly beat,"" he unburdened himself to his American biographer, Cindy Adams.
Instead of reporting to the new President in private, Kennedy found himself on January 28 at a mass meeting with Johnson and ranking members of the Senate Foreign Relations and Armed Services Committee.
The President displayed little interest then and none thereafter in Kennedy’s trip.
Though the conferences Kennedy had set up between the Indonesians and the Malaysians took place, the parties failed to agree on the terms in which the cease-fire should continue.
His feeling grew that the President did not, and the State Department dared not, give a damn about his effort.
The mek episode left him, said Guthman, with “a bitter taste.”Vil Still, it restored him to activity.
It was, however, almost his last involvement as Attorney General in world affairs.
Johnson's first foreign crisis had erupted before the trip— over the Panama Canal Zone.
He could hardly be kept out of the next crisis, however, for it involved Cuba.
The Cuban crisis of February arose when the Coast Guard seized four Cuban fishing boats two miles off the Florida Keys.
Thomas Mann encouraged Johnson to view the incident as a critical Soviet “test” of the new American President.
The Attorney General had what he subsequently described as a “rather violent” argument with Mann at a National Security Council meeting.
Kennedy’s demand for information to substantiate the Mann-Johnson thesis caused an adjournment.
When the NSC reassembled that afternoon, McCone conceded that “maybe the fishing vessels just arrived there.
So then | said that this whole business about the fishing vessels was foolish ... like a speeding, parking ticket.
Castro, protesting the seizure of the fishing boats, had turned off the water supply to the American naval base at Guantanamo.
Mann now proposed to discharge two thousand Cubans who worked on the base.
This was, Kennedy said later, “the last meeting on any substantive matter” of foreign affairs to which he was invited.
Muste, the aged pacifist, began a peace march from Quebec to Guantanamo.
The White House, unduly agitated, sought an injunction to prevent Mus’te from getting on a boat in Florida.
The letter of authorization required the signature of the Attorney General.
Jimmy Hoffa went on trial in Chattanooga in January 1964 on the charge of conspiring to fix the jury in the Test Fleet case.
In April he went on trial again, this time in Chicago on charges of diverting a million dollars from the Teamster pension funds for his own use.
He now unexpectedly found himself in a position to help carry forward that wish.
David Hackett now proposed that the antipoverty program base itself on a community-action approach, in which local institutions would coordinate federal programs within the community and be accountable to (and funded by) a single responsive instrument in Washington.
By establishing a method rather than imposing substantive solutions, the community-action approach both acknowledged that no one knew how to cure poverty and guaranteed adaptability to local circumstance.
Strongly backed by the Bureau of the Budget and the Council of Economic Advisers, the community-action approach won the initial sympathy of the new President.
Johnson, moreover, wanted visible results well before the 1964 election.
So Hackett, Cannon and Richard Boone inserted the mystic words—“maximum feasible participation of the residents of the areas”—into the law.
Their belief was that “poor people themselves could render most effective help to the poor”; their hope, that in the process communities could develop their own competencies.
When the bill came before Congress in the spring of 1964, the single administration witness to speak about community action was Robert Kennedy.
His testimony Summed up the lessons he had drawn from the Juvenile Delinquency Committee; The institutions which affect the poor—education, welfare, recreation, business, labor—are huge, complex structures, operating far outside their control.
The community action programs must basically change these organizations by building into the program real representation for the poor ... giving them a real voice in their institutions.
Beck and Hoffa had taught him long before how essential it was for union members to have the power to challenge hierarchies.
Community action, he hoped, would give the poor a way of exerting leverage on the structures that ruled their lives.
The ideal of participation remained close to his heart for the rest of his days.
IX The racial question was more than ever Robert Kennedy’s primary concern.
In the spring of 1964 the Attorney General carried the campaign to Georgia.
A black southerner could die for his country, Kennedy told them at West Georgia College; but, if his widow wanted to travel north to visit his grave at Arlington Cemetery, “she doesn’t know what hotel she can stay at.
Mississippi and Alabama, Kennedy replied, had not dealt justly on racial matters.
The question John Lewis had tried to ask during the March on Washington—“Which side is the federal government on?""—still echoed.
Young people, black and white, were flocking south to work for racial justice over Freedom Summer.
The Klan organized klaverns in twenty-nine Mississippi counties between February and June.
There is a need to know what is going on in conspiratorial racist circles.
They have used against us.... brought home against any organization against which we were targeted.
In January 1961 Hoover informed Robert Kennedy even more generally about a “program of counterattack against the CPUSA which keeps it off balance.
The only techniques mentioned were the use of informants and the exposure of Communist infiltration of other organizations.
When the Kennedy White House requested a formal report on “Internal Security Programs,” Hoover mentioned the Bureau’s “investigative programs” and said nothing at all of disruptive activities.
The Bureau was able to initiate an extensive, risky, and highly questionable operation without consulting the Attorney General.
Sullivan had seen fiery crosses burning on the hills of central Massachusetts as a boy.
But, after the Klan COINTELPRO began in September 1964, Rowe’s FBI case officers told him, “The bureau is declaring war on the Klan.
Their first inspiration was that he sleep with the wives of fellow Klansmen.
Their second was that he stir up personal trouble inside the Klan, spread rumors of other infidelities, for example.
As for strong-arm activities, “Well, you'll have to do what you have to do.
In another state the FBI subsidized a runaway klavern critical of the regular Klan.
At one point the Bureau even considered installing an informer as the Klan’s imperial wizard.
In the first year of the Klan COINTELPRO, informers accounted for 70 percent of the new membership and, at the end of the year, for about one sixth of the total—2000 out of 12,000-13,000.
Gary Rowe ended his long masquerade by testifying against the murderers of another civil rights worker, Viola Liuzzo.
Flagrant excesses led some civil libertarians to attack counterespionage per se as a violation of the Bill of Rights.
When the Klan bombed a school bus in Michigan, the testimony of an FBI informer convicted the bombers.
Critics dwelt on the moral corruption of informing, the psychological instability of persons predisposed to inform, the tendency of informers to become agents provocateurs, the historical role of informers as agents of despotism.
He admired the courage of rank-and-file trade unionists who, at enormous risk and small benefit, ‘informed’ against corruption and tyranny—men like Terry Malloy as written by Budd Schulberg and played by Marlon Brando in On the Waterfront.
There was the veteran labor organizer Sam Baron, who had started out with the International Ladies’ Garment Workers, fought with the Loyalists in Spain and organized Sears, Roebuck and Montgomery Ward for the Teamsters.
Baron, who detested the labor racketeers, provided evidence against Hoffa.
The court decisions, however, assumed that the work of informers was informing.
But informers in organizations engaged in criminal activity, like the Klan or the mob, often behaved criminally themselves in order to maintain cover.
King and other black leaders advocated FBI penetration of the Klan for urgent reasons.
The Kennedy and Johnson administrations turned to counterespionage as the best means of federal protection at their command.
Refusal of FBI infiltration would have left civil rights workers in the deep south at the mercy of hooded terrorists.
It was done... by bribery, by payments to informers, by whatever eavesdropping was then permitted under the bureau's rules, by the sowing of suspicion among Klan members so that none knew who was an informer and who not, by infiltration and deception, and in at least one incident by the participation of a bureau informer in the planning and attempted execution of a murder.
It did not appear to those involved at the time, and it does not appear to me now, that the criminal conspiracy of violence that existed in the State of Mississippi then could have been handled by less drastic measures.
Johnson, Kennedy replied, did not see how the bill could pass the Senate.
And, if the bill failed, Johnson, Kennedy thought, did not want sole responsibility.
By late April the minority leader, no one quite knew why, appeared ready to accept the bill with minor modifications.
On July 2, Johnson signed the Civil Rights Act of 1964, thereby outlawing discrimination in voting, employment, public education and public accommodations and facilities.
It was a stronger and better bill than the one the Kennedy administration had given Congress a year earlier.
The Reuther brothers noticed Robert Kennedy in the rear of the room, staring at the floor.
The Vice Presidency THE SCENE AT THE SIGNING Of the civil rights bill was one more grim moment in a grim spring. | do not think that either man can be held responsible for the failure of the relationship.
The record of JohnsonKennedy meetings shows, apart from the cabinet (which Kennedy infrequently attended), only two meetings in January, one before Kennedy left for the Far East and the other on his return; two meetings on February 7 about Cuba; a meeting on February 11 about civil rights; telephone calls on January 31, February 1, 4, 10 and 26—and then, if the compilation is complete, no further calls until April 22, no further meetings until the late spring.
Johnson, haunted by the circumstances that had brought him to power, was both sorrowing and vulnerable.
He felt an immense need, psychological as well as political, for the Kennedys.
But he could not control his diverse resentments —over popular comparisons with his predecessor, over glib journalistic comment about his alleged lack of culture and polish, over the failure of the Kennedys to fall in with his plans; at bottom over their reluctance to love him.
He was “bitter,” recalled Pierre Salinger, who stayed on fora few distracted months as Johnson’s press secretary, “about his inability to get Mrs.
Then Kennedy was killed and | became the custodian of his will. | became the President.
Yet he saw himself as yoked with Johnson in the execution of a legacy and the preservation of a party.
If the new President, enveloped in insecurity, was preternaturally sensitive to comparisons with his predecessor, Robert Kennedy, enveloped in grief, was preternaturally sensitive to slights to his brother.
Walter Heller sent him a copy of a memorandum to Johnson saying that “under your budget and tax program” the net fiscal stimulus to the economy would be the greatest in peacetime history.
Johnson retained Bundy, O’Donnell, O’Brien, Dungan and brought Goodwin back to the White House.
Though Eric Goldman recalls unnamed Johnson men calling Kennedy “the perfect model of the liberal fascist” and the like,244 my own clear impression is that Johnson’s top assistants liked Robert Kennedy. | know he liked them.
They’re all scared, of course, of Lyndon. | guess Valenti’s a nice fellow.
But the meeting had in fact been instigated by Johnson, who had charged Rose with a message for me to pass on to Kennedy.
But, though neither wanted to see the other, neither wanted the responsibility for a break.
What made the gulf ultimately impassable was a remark Johnson made that spring to Salinger—a remark so guileful a man could hardly have made without intending it to get back to Kennedy.
To O’Donnell, who never heard him express the slightest doubt about running, he candidly defined his intention on the Vice Presidency three weeks after John Kennedy’s death.
His brother Sam Houston Johnson thought that the President never “for a single moment” considered Kennedy as his running mate.
As early as December 3, 1963, Joseph Dolan told him that the Democratic National Committeewoman from Michigan and, oddly, Senator Thomas J Dodd of Connecticut favored him for Vice President.
After ascertaining that Kennedy had not sent him, Dunfey chased him out of the state.
Dunfey’s annoyance was nothing, however, compared to Lyndon Johnson's rage.
Lyndon Johnson himself told Kennedy after a cabinet meeting that he wanted Corbin out of both New Hampshire and the national committee.
According to O’Donnell, Johnson told Kennedy, “If he is such a good fellow, you pay him.
He’s around town knocking my head off ... and has been for three years, and | never met the bum in my life.
Kennedy said he did not know that Corbin was in New Hampshire, adding, “He was loyal to President Kennedy.
He had sent Kennedy to Indonesia, he explained, only because he “had to keep things equal” among those under consideration for the second place.
A few days before the primary the Attorney General put out a disclaimer.
Early drafts contained statements that he was not seeking the vice presidential nomination.
The final version said simply that the President “should be free to select his own running mate” and therefore Kennedy wanted to discourage efforts on his own behalf.
Walter Reuther told me, as | noted at the time, that he was “waiting for Bobby to say the word—that he would not move until he knew what Bobby wanted. | mentioned Hubert’s claims.
No one could quite tell how much, or even if, he wanted the nomination; or whether he was simply demonstrating popularity and keeping options open.
The argument for was that, as Vice President, he might assure the Kennedy outlook and constituency a role in national policy; in any event, the Vice Presidency had the political advantage, not to be prudently relinquished to someone else, of establishing its occupant as a quasiheir apparent.
As the historian in his circle, | should have warned far more stringently than | did that the idea was hopeless; but | had not yet studied the Vice Presidency as carefully as | would later.
Nonetheless, Kennedy, having observed Lyndon Johnson, well understood the impotence of the Vice Presidency.
And on top of the incurable deficiencies of the office, there were the extraordinary demands that Johnson redivivus was bound to make on its holder.
Searching through the oral histories, one finds that Nicholas Katzenbach, McGeorge Bundy, Richard Goodwin, Robert McNamara, Donald Wilson, Joseph Alsop, Rowland Evans, Joseph Kraft, Ben Bradlee, supposed Robert Kennedy wanted the nomination.
Kenneth O’Donnell, Charles Spalding and Charles Bartlett thought he did not. | was never sure either way.
The most extended statement | have found by Kennedy himself came in an oral history interview with John Bartlow Martin in mid-May.
Johnson’s explained quite clearly that it’s not the Democratic party any more, it’s an all-American party, and the businessmen like it.
Martin suggested that Kennedy, with his powerful constituency, would be in a different position from other Vice Presidents.
Martin said Johnson would have to pay attention; he could not afford to break with the Kennedys.
But he’s not going to pay any attention to me. | can't go out and speak against... what he’s doing in South America, what he’s doing in Southeast Asia, as Vice President.... | make one speech like that and you’ve broken the—” Martin, interrupting, thought he could do it quietly, short of a speech.
He’s mean, bitter, vicious— animal in many ways.... | think his reactions on a lot of things are correct.... but | think he’s got this other side of him and his relationship with human beings which makes it difficult unless you want to ‘kiss his behind’ all the time.
That night Edward Kennedy, flying to a political dinner in Springfield, Massachusetts, crashed in thunderstorms over the Connecticut Valley.
Edward Kennedy suffered horribly—damaged vertebrae in his lower back, a punctured lung, broken ribs, uncontrollable internal hemorrhaging.
The Polish government had declined to invite Kennedy, consenting only to a “nonofficial” visit.
When the Kennedys went to mass the day after their arrival, a crowd surged around the Cabot limousine.
After a moment, Kennedy lifted Ethel to the car’s roof, climbed up himself and began waving.
Bringing presents to an orphanage, Robert and Ethel discovered that the children had been spirited away.
That evening Kennedy lectured Foreign Minister Adam Rapacki about the incident.
The next morning they went to Cracow, where another throng besieged their car in the Cloth Market Square.
An hour late in getting back for an embassy dinner, Kennedy climbed on the cartop and spoke to still another crowd in front of Cabot’s residence.
When they shouted yes, he pretended to consult with Cabot over the wall and then said, “The ambassador says you can’t come”— a lighthearted moment that amused Kennedy more than it did Cabot.
Jozef Winiewicz, the deputy foreign minister and ranking guest, was furious.
Wysznski told Kennedy that “the best thing that had happened to the Catholic Church in Poland was that it had been deprived of its wealth.
Kennedy was followed by huge crowds wherever he went, but he got the Polish government practically livid with some of the things he did.
But he and the Kennedy people wanted it now.... | simply couldn’t let it happen.
The President explored diversionary action—mollifying the Kennedys and the Catholic vote, for example, by putting Sargent Shriver on the ticket.
Moyers reported to the President that Shriver was willing and that Bobby would not complain if his brother-in-law were Johnson’s running mate.
In due course, Shriver gave way to Eugene McCarthy in Johnson’s shell game.
The Kennedy people believed that, if it was not to be Bobby, the nomination should go to Hubert Humphrey.
Kennedy went over to a dying woman, rubbed her hand, talked softly to her.
In mid-July he was still talking to O’Donnell and O’Brien about putting a Catholic on the ticket.
The prospective nomination of the conservative hero gave Johnson a free ride in the north, where Kennedy was strong, and created difficulties in the south and southwest, where Kennedy would be a handicap.
By June his polls showed that no running mate, Kennedy included, would make more than 2 percent difference to his presidential vote.
O’Donnell begged him to wait; once Kennedy was out of the running, liberal Democrats would lose their power to force Johnson to accept Humphrey.
O'Donnell set to work with Reuther and others to build support for Humphrey.
Instead of taking his visitor in the usual manner to the sofa by the fireplace, Johnson sat formally at the presidential desk.
The memorandum went on to mention Kennedy’s “unique and promising future,” to solicit his aid in the campaign and to raise the possibility of his succeeding Adlai Stevenson at the United Nations.
If | was interested in another Cabinet position or in going to Paris, London or Moscow, he would be glad to help.
He could not give me a job that someone else held right now but he was sure something could be arranged. | said that | wasn't interested in any other position.
He said that if he were me he would stay over in the Department of Justice.
He said in comparison to the staff he had at the White House the group | had selected were unusually competent.
The people that contributed in the White House, he said, were the group that was selected by President Kennedy.
He said he really could not count on his own people—jJenkins, Valenti, Reedy.
He said Bill Moyers was good but his most useful function was rewriting what other people did. | was shocked to hear him being so critical to me of people who had been so loyal to him.
Number 1, because | felt an Attorney General should be above active political life, and secondly, because | had thought, coming just out of the campaign, | would be doing nothing else once | got started.
Therefore, | said, | was reluctant to take on both of these jobs.... | then brought up the subject of Bobby Baker. | said that we had an active case and we had to make a judgment how to proceed. | said | felt he should be advised and | would like to have someone’s outside judgment on what we proposed to do. | suggested Jim Rowe.
He countered that with Abe Fortas and Clark Clifford. | said | didn’t think Abe Fortas would be proper because he had been Bobby Baker’s lawyer.
He said these are the two people in his judgment on whom he really relied.
He said he was against President Kennedy’s action in dismissing Fred Korth. | said | knew that because | was on the other side.
But Clark Clifford was also for retaining Korth but after reviewing the material (and also, incidentally, arguing with us at the Department of Justice) he came to the conclusion that Korth should be relieved.
He said God must have been watching over him because he did not have financial dealings with Bobby.
He said the only business deal that he had had with Bobby Baker was in connection with the purchase of some insurance.
The insurance company then placed $1500 worth of advertising with his television station.
He said this really didn’t mean anything because the competitor company was willing to place twice as much.
He said Bobby Baker went with power and when he left the Senate he latched on to other people.
In any case, he said, if there was any corruption in this case it was the Republicans.
Incidentally, the whole conversation with Johnson was recorded. | saw the buttons on while | was sitting talking to him and later on in a conversation with Kenny and Larry he inadvertently and virtually admitted as much.
Both principals were calm when they parted;Z® both, | suspect, relieved.
O’Donnell, who had lunched with Kennedy directly after the meeting, said Kennedy had told him just the opposite.
One wondered whether Johnson’s offer was not repayment, conscious or unconscious, for Kennedy’s suggestion in the heat of Los Angeles four years before that Johnson forgo the Vice Presidency and become chairman of the national committee.
His solution was to direct Bundy to get Kennedy to announce that he had withdrawn on his own.
The President used Bundy partly because Bundy had served from time to time as a liaison with Kennedy, partly as a brutal and characteristic Johnson loyalty test.
Kennedy vigorously rejected the proposal, telling Bundy “first, it wasn’t true; secondly ... a large part of the reason that | was at all interested in the Vice Presidency was because of the interest of others.
If | suddenly withdraw my name without discussing it with them it would be impossible for them to understand.
Bundy honestly believed this; Kennedy as honestly believed that Bundy’s intervention was an act of inexplicable disloyalty.
Within forty-eight hours, word of Johnson's table talk was all over Washington.
When Kennedy protested, Johnson denied he had discussed their meeting with anyone.
Johnson said he would check his schedule to see whether there might have been some conversation he had forgotten.
He just doesn’t recognize truth or falsehood.”84 | spent that weekend at Hyannis Port.
Kennedy was, | thought, “very matter-of-fact” about the Johnson meeting and “quite funny” about the subsequent stages.
Johnson had it moved back to Thursday, by which time the nominations would be completed.
He took other precautions, the most extraordinary of which was to send Cartha DeLoach and an FBI team of thirty snoops and wiretappers to Atlantic City.
Although Atlantic City lay outside his division, Barry went nevertheless.
Johnson ordered Jenkins to tell Hoover that “the job the Bureau had done in Atlantic City was one of the finest the President had ever seen,”24 This unprecedented effort—no previous chief executive had ever used the FBI at a party convention—was hardly necessary.
It is true that his appearance excited the emotions of delegates and the dreams of friends.
He was there to thank Democrats for supporting his brother, not to win them for himself.
With no signs of a Kennedy insurrection, Johnson sustained his vice presidential tease to the end.
On the second day of the convention, he summoned Humphrey —along, improbably, with Thomas J Dodd—to Washington.
After keeping poor Humphrey waiting in a limousine outside the south entrance to the White House, Johnson finally relented and had him in.
They were led through the darkness into a small dressing room under the platform.
We can’t hear anything back here.... | think | yndon may just have put us back here with orders to forget us.
Jackie, he told Seigenthaler, had given him a quotation from Romeo and Juliet.
Soon they were taken to a runway behind the platform where other dignitaries had already assembled.
Kennedy looked through his manuscript again, took out a pencil, made small changes.
Finally Senator Henry Jackson, who was presiding, motioned him to the rostrum.
It just went on and on and on.”22 | stood on the floor in the midst of the thunderous ovation. | had never seen anything like it.
Ordinarily an organ in the background controls the pandemonium of a convention.
But the demonstration roared on, reaching a new intensity every time that Robert Kennedy, standing with a wistful half-smile on his face, tried to bring it to an end.
Then, after Edward Kennedy’s plane crash in June, Robert briefly considered leaving politics altogether.
His reception later that month in Europe persuaded him he could not thus abandon John Kennedy’s legacy.
At the end of July Averell Harriman, David Hackett and | were at Hyannis Port for the weekend.
He thinks that he might be able to organize a bloc of New Frontier senators —Joe Tydings, George McGovern, Birch Bayh, Pierre Salinger [recently appointed to fill a Senate vacancy from California] and some others — and have some impact on the administration.
We had breakfast a couple of days later at his usual table in the old Astor Hotel on Times Square.
So long as Stevenson was in the picture, Rose added, he could not commit himself to Kennedy.
Harriman, Stephen Smith and Jack English, the Democratic leader in Nassau County, were meanwhile tackling the regulars.
The newcomer had to appear to be responding to an invitation, not conducting an invasion.
Kenneth Keating was a silver-haired, pink-faced gentleman of sixty-four.
A rather conservative congressman from Rochester in the 1950s, he had as senator after 1958 gained a vaguely liberal reputation, enhanced now by his refusal to back Barry Goldwater.
His benign appearance, ingratiating personality and passable record made him a tough opponent, especially for a contender vulnerable on grounds of carpetbagging.
In fact, Robert Kennedy was less a carpetbagger than his older brother had been in Massachusetts in 1946.
Except for schools and summers, he had really never lived in Massachusetts.
But he had always voted in Hyannis Port and was indelibly identified with his brother’s state.
Its first senator, Rufus King, had begun by representing Massachusetts in the Continental Congress—a point | tried, as an historian, to make during the campaign to absolutely no effect.
Of the two senators succeeding to Robert Kennedy’s seat, the first lived in Connecticut, the second in Massachusetts.
Gore Vidal and Lisa Howard organized a Democrats for Keating Committee.
Two eager young lawyers, Adam Walinsky and Peter Edelman, resigned from the Justice Department and inserted themselves into the campaign.
Bill Barry spent his vacation from the FBI traveling with the candidate in the last fortnight.
Paul Corbin installed himself in a hotel across the river in New Jersey until he demanded so many telephones that they ejected him, suspecting he was a bookie.
At the start, enthusiasm, especially among the young, was unrestrained.
The week after Labor Day he concluded an upstate tour by flying to the placid little town of Glens Falls.
To his astonishment a band struck up, and a thousand people surged around the plane.
As they drove into town, men, women and children in pajamas and bathrobes waved and cheered along the road.
Four thousand people, a quarter of the population, were patiently waiting in the town square.
Every time you make a statement like that you are cutting your own throat.
On October 5 in Rochester, Richard M Nixon, righteously denouncing what he called “a cloud of corruption” over the Johnson White House, forecast a big Keating victory.
But his chief political adviser was Herbert Brownell, an aggressive veteran of political wars.
As Kennedy fell in the polls, Brownell smelled an opportunity to administer the coup de grace.
Keating had an excellent civil rights record and solid relations with black leadership.
Charles Evers, who had taken his brother Medgar’s place as head of the NAACP in Mississippi, addressed the convention the same day.
Mario Biaggi, a police lieutenant and president of the Grand Council of Columbia Associations, denounced the Valachi hearing as a “one-man show produced, staged, directed and prompted” by Kennedy.
If this kind of charge were true, | wouldn’t deserve to be elected to any public office.
The charge isn’t true.... | lost my brother and brother-in-law to the Germans.
The dead President had been “the existential hero”; “Bobby!—the Irish equivalent of Roy Cohn on the good old McCarthy team; Bobby!—with the face of a Wid-mark gunsel, that prepschool arrogance which makes good manual laborers think of smashing a fist through a wall; Bobby!—” etc., etc.
But Keating, with his face “like the plastic dough children play with,” seemed even worse.
As between “a neutron” and “an active principle,” Mailer announced for the active principle.
He still read prepared speeches ina monotone but was increasingly effective in extemporaneous delivery.
They showed him a brochure with a photograph in which he was displayed Shaking hands with a labor leader.
Clips of the candidate surrounded by apparently demented teenagers did not give the desired impression of statesmanship.
His strongest television piece emerged from a session with antagonistic students at Columbia.
In mid-October Johnson and Kennedy Campaigned together for two days from Buffalo to Brooklyn.
At the end of two crowded days, Kennedy asked Johnson whether he had enjoyed it.
A speechwriter, revising a draft from the research staff, had sharpened a considerably more qualified statement portraying Keating’s early misgivings about the test ban.
Kennedy, indignant over what he regarded as unwarranted overkill, submitted documentation of Keating’s test ban equivocations and personally telephoned members of the FCPC board of directors.
In September, Keating, when he was running behind, had proposed a debate.
Kennedy, after evading the challenge, accepted it in early October when he was behind.
At the end of October, Keating bought a half-hour of prime television time and called on Kennedy to appear with him.
When he arrived without warning just before the telecast, studio guards turned him back.
Edward Kennedy, leaning heavily on a cane, his smashed back enclosed in a steel brace, gaunt after months in the hospital, took the oath with him.
That evening the Women’s National Press Club threw its annual soiree for new senators.
When Edwin Guthman left in April to resume his newspaper career, Wes Barthelmes, a former paratrooper and reporter who had been working for Congresswoman Edith Green, became press secretary.
Walinsky had gone to Yale Law School, Edelman to Harvard; Walinsky had clerked for a judge in the Court of Appeals, Edelman for Arthur Goldberg on the Supreme Court; both had been junior attorneys at Justice, who, when they forced their way into the senatorial campaign, brought fresh ideas and enthusiasm at a midpoint of fatigue.
They were one of those teams, like Tom Corcoran and Ben Cohen in the New Deal, that materialize around secure patrician reformers.
Only a secure man could absorb so much needling brilliance without feeling threatened thereby; only a reformer would wish it.
Walinsky writing speeches, Edelman drafting bills; one the eloquent salesman, the other the careful researcher; one ostentatiously arrogant, the other deceptively gentle; both passionate, obstinate, heroworshiping, exasperating, engaging.
The sixties were breaking open, and they, far more than his New Frontier friends, could tell him what it was all about.
At the start he intended to live within the official allowance, but by the end, in order to keep abreast of business, he was adding a hundred thousand dollars of his own for salaries.
He just sort of indicated that he thought something should be done in an area and then he expected you to grab hold and go do it.
And he excited because of the feeling—again Barthelmes—that he carried “a hidden agenda with him.
They took an apartment high in United Nations Plaza with a startling view of the East River and delighted in the gaieties, the theater, ballet, restaurants, museums, of the most spirited of cities.
From his apartment he could see two huge Consolidated Edison stacks belching smoke into the air across the East River; it infuriated him that no one was doing anything about it.
He methodically visited mayors, city councils and regional development groups in places that had never seen a Democratic senator.
He worried about the poisoning of Lake Erie, the pulpwood scum on Lake Champlain, the wetlands of Long Island, the preservation of parks and forests.
In the summer of 1965 he received distraught letters from parents with children in state institutions for the mentally retarded.
Javits, a sensitive and talented man too liberal for his party, was sometimes driven to bouts of equivocation in order to maintain Republican credentials.
He had, in addition, minor vanities, especially on the question of newspaper publicity.
Riding back to his office afterward, Kennedy told Barthelmes, “Javits is so facile.
Kennedy came to appreciate Javits’s solid qualities—his acute intelligence, his breadth of informed interest, the genuine conscientiousness underneath his sensitivities.
They became collaborators and in the end friends. | remember chatting with Kennedy in 1967 about Javits’s reelection contest in 1968.
Vil After his election Robert had visited his brother Edward in the Boston hospital.
But in the Senate it was Ted who knew the ropes, who was amiable, courteous and popular, whose return after his accident was greeted by other senators with genuine pleasure as compared to the visible skepticism with which they received the former Attorney General.
They called each other “Robbie” and “Eddie” and teased back and forth endlessly.
At hearings senators asked questions in order of seniority, and Robert was almost at the bottom of the list.
Another member said he would help vote out one of Robert’s bills if Robert accepted an invitation to speak in his state.
All | want to know—when | shake my head from side to side and you nod your head up and down.
In other words when | wanted to vote no | should have nodded my head up and down—you would have shaken your head from side to side—then | would have known just how to vote.
They consulted constantly, occasionally differing on inconsequential matters, but, for all the playful competition to top the other, Robert remained the head of the family.
Kennedy’s daily chums were the three freshmen with whom he shared a new fifth row, installed in the back of the chamber to accommodate Democratic gains in the Goldwater election—Walter Mondale of Minnesota, Fred Harris of Oklahoma, Joseph Tydings of Maryland.
Harris was drawn to him by his earnestness, his commitment, his “insatiable” curiosity about things, people and issues.
McGovern too was struck anew by his continued “hunger to learn” and by his ready cooperation.
The next day your relationship would be just as though it never happened.
WE NEED YOU BACK HERE TO PUT United States ON THE RIGHT TRACK.2& A few, like Edward Long of Missouri, whom he regarded as the Teamsters’ senator, and Carl Curtis of Nebraska, whom he had detested since the Rackets Committee, he could not abide.
Ralph Nader, beginning his career as consumer ombudsman, tried to testify, over Curtis’s interruptions, about the dangers in automobiles.
First, you admit you haven’t read the book ; and, secondly, you haven't heard his testimony.
In addition to Labor and Public Welfare, he went on Government Operations, where a decade earlier he had been a subcommittee counsel, and on the District of Columbia Committee.
The committees offered ample scope for his concerns with education, civil rights, welfare, poverty, juvenile delinquency.
He was generally accounted a more effective senator than his older brother but much less a ‘senator’s senator’ than his younger brother.
Critics found too much sudden, isolated attack in his performance, too many eye-catching amendments, too little detailed follow-through.
Robert Kennedy’s manner was also on occasion more brusque than senatorial tradition approved.
Whether he was in a committee room or on the Senate floor, observed David Burke, his younger brother’s chief aide, “you always had the feeling that Robert was ready to explode.
Asked whether any of their colleagues hated Kennedy, Javits said, “They feared him.
They thought he was a dangerous opponent, or they had a certain reverence about him and his history, or they were fascinated by the loner aspect of him and his boldness and something of a touch of arrogance because of his boldness.
This was the problem John Kennedy had so long postponed, the only thing his father had ever asked of him, the appointment of the old retainer Francis X Morrissey to the federal district court in Massachusetts.
Morrissey’s qualifications were no more apparent in 1965 than they had been in 1961.
But, with their father hopelessly disabled, his last request hung on his sons’ consciences.
But Johnson must have noted that the Attorney General had not fought for the appointment himself.
Then, with what can only be assumed as unrestrained internal glee, Johnson sent Morrissey’s name to the Senate.
The Kennedys would suffer the obloquy for the nomination; further, it would place them under obligation to him while at the same time exposing their own pious pretensions.
In Boston Judge Charles Wyzanski, who was presiding judge of the district bench, the Boston Globe and the respectable bar denounced it.
He was also exasperated by what seemed to him establishment snobbery toward a poor Irish lad who had not been able to afford an Ivy League law school.
The Judiciary Committee, if with nearly half its members abstaining, sent the nomination to the floor.
But Morrissey’s own testimony had shown troubling discrepancies in his account of his legal education— discrepancies soon widened by the investigative reporting of the Boston Globe.
Senator Tydings, a Kennedy friend but also a guardian of the judiciary, told the Kennedys he would have to vote against confirmation.
Robert Kennedy had made him a federal attorney and helped him become a senator.
In his way Morrissey was violating it too—by insisting on the fight in face of the mounting embarrassment he was causing his patrons.
It had been mainly Edward’s problem so far, but Robert now became more involved.
After counting the votes, the brothers saw they could not win and decided to send the nomination back to the Judiciary Committee.
When either sought to embarrass the other, it was done under the cloak of solicitude.
Dear Mr President, You were most courteous to me today at the signing of the Voting Bill— | wanted you to know how much | appreciate your thoughtfulness.
Lady Bird and | join in congratulating you on this, your first birthday in Congress.
The celebration of Chirstmas is a holy time, a time of renewal and hope.
It is a time for families and friends, neighbors and colleagues to join in the goodness of God.... | could not let this Christmas pass without telling you that Mrs.
He saw Kennedy as his only rival within the party and naturally wanted to weaken him as much as possible short of open provocation.
He did this without consulting Kennedy, who soon rejoiced to discover that Weisl was not even a registered Democrat.
But his own people knew the eyes of Texas were on them if they spent the evening at Hickory Hill.
Once, when Fred Harris and his wife were at Hyannis Port, the phone rang during dinner.
He was well aware of the widespread impression that he regarded the White House as Kennedy property and Johnson as a uSurper.
Nothing inhibited Kennedy more than the conviction that policy disagreements with Johnson would be inexorably attributed to a personal vendetta.
He saw Johnson more than ever as a formidable but flawed man, powerful and dangerous.
The President, he confided to Barrett Prettyman, “does not know how to use people’s talents, to find the very best in them and put the best to work.
Privately he resented the popular explanations of Johnson’s legislative success.
The Goldwater debacle in 1964 had given Johnson nearly 40 new Democrats in the House.
This made him the first Democratic President since Roosevelt before 1938 with a working progressive majority in Congress.
The newspapers ascribed the result not to parliamentary arithmetic but to presidential genius and contrasted his accomplishments with his predecessor’s failures.
Latin America ROBERT KENNEDY’S FIRST POLICY disagreements with the Johnson administration arose in foreign affairs.
The snuffing out of negotiations with Castro, the Thomas Mann appointment and the controversies over Panama and Cuba were followed in April 1964 by a generals' coup against the Goulart regime in Brazil.
But he thought that Johnson embraced the new military dictatorship with unbecoming alacrity.
He was still in the cabinet, however, if now shut out of foreign policy, and he held his peace.
The Alliance for Progress, in the hands of Johnson and Mann, was undergoing a basic transformation — so much so that the historian must talk of two Alliances for Progress.
Another program by the same name now struggled on after the political and social components of Kennedy's Alliance —e., its heart — had been removed.
In 1961-63 the fear of Castro had given urgency and legitimacy to pressure from Washington for social change.
When this fear diminished — as it had after the missile crisis and after the success of counterinsurgency in Venezuela — interest in social change diminished too.
This encouraged Mann to liquidate two of the three goals of Kennedy’s Alliance—structural reform and political democratization—and to convert much of what remained into an instrumentality for North American corporations.
As usual, he doubted that criticism of Johnson would be received on its merits.
The target was the ineffectual authoritarian regime installed by the Dominican military in September 1963 after the overthrow of Bosch’s ineffectual democratic regime.
The rebels were a mixed group of Boschists, disgruntled officers and romantic leftists.
A panic-stricken American ambassador in Santo Domingo sent out hysterical cables about bloodbaths and the capture of the revolt by the Communists.
An inexperienced CIA director in Washington, seven hours in office and zealous to prove his anti-Communist credentials, relayed unverified messages from secret operatives in Santo Domingo about decapitations in the streets and provided dubious lists of the Dominican Communists who were supposedly taking everything over.
He did this with minimal attention to the Organization of American States, an institution of which he once said, “It couldn’t pour piss out of a boot if the instructions were written on the heel.”2 | was in Buffalo at the end of a lecture tour on April 30 when Bill Moyers tracked me down and asked me to come at once to Washington.
Briefed to the teeth by the CIA and foolishly believing its absurd reports, | agreed to go.
Then | discovered that Romulo Betancourt was in Washington. | strongly urged on Moyers and Bundy that Johnson call in Betancourt at once.
Since no one in the White House, given their master’s attitude, would talk to Betancourt, | decided to see him myself.
Ever since Trujillo had sent his thugs to kill Betancourt, the Venezuelans had maintained a top-flight intelligence operation in the Dominican Republic.
To my astonishment, | found Venezuelan intelligence entirely skeptical of the CIA thesis.
Betancourt told me he had every confidence that the United States could work with the nonCommunist leaders among the rebels and swiftly isolate the few Communists. | begged off the Central American mission. | had several talks during this time with Kennedy.
He thought the American military intervention an “outrage” and asked me to put something on paper for him.
He criticized the policy of driving “the genuine democrats in the Dominican revolution into association with the Communists by blanket characterizations and condemnations” and called for assurances to “all honest Dominican democrats, including those who took part in the revolution,” of a future role in their country.
In the United States, apprehension spilled over to Johnson's foreign policy in general.
Reluctant as he was to praise John Kennedy, Stevenson nonetheless contrasted Johnson’s impulsive and extreme reaction with the methodical exploration of alternatives during the missile crisis.
Johnson, it appeared, was the aficionado of overkill in foreign as well as in personal relations.
In any event, the Dominican intervention irretrievably shattered his foreign policy consensus.
On June 23, 1965, Robert Kennedy made his formal maiden speech in the Senate.
He chose the subject that had most consumed his brother in the last year of his life—the spread of nuclear weapons.
Should nuclear weapons become generally available, the planet would be at the mercy of irresponsible military commanders, internal dissidents, anonymous madmen.
He called on the American government to extend the test ban treaty of 1963 to underground tests and to seek a new treaty covering nonproliferation.
Both superpowers must set an example to mankind by cutting back their own nuclear forces or, at the minimum, by freezing these forces at their present level.
He also said that “we should vigorously pursue negotiations on this subject with China,” then regarded as the most fanatic of Marxist states.t4 Seventeen senators rose to praise his remarks.
The speech, though not expressly critical of the administration, was filled with somber quotations from John F Kennedy about nuclear proliferation and carried the inescapable implication that Johnson was not doing enough to stop it.
Johnson was so annoyed that he struck the disarmament proposals from his own pending address to the United Nations lest someone think he was following Robert Kennedy’s lead.
The nuclear proliferation soeech deepened mutual Suspicions over foreign policy.
He had been there only once—the overnight mission to Goulart in 1962—since the jaunt with Lem Billings after his discharge from the Navy in 1946.
Receiving an invitation to speak in Brazil, he decided to take advantage of the November recess and revisit the subcontinent.
In September Jack Valenti asked Johnson for guidance about the Kennedy trip.
Jack Hood Vaughn had become assistant secretary for inter-American affairs when in 1965 Mann was promoted to the more powerful job of under secretary for economic affairs; and Bundy had proposed that he brief Kennedy.
When Kennedy arrived for the briefing, he and Walinsky were placed on one side of a long table.
Kennedy began by wondering what he should say about the Dominican intervention.
Vaughn said, “In the first place, nobody will ask you about it because they don’t care about that issue.
He offered to bet that it would be one of his first three questions in Latin America.
Vaughn, after fumbling a moment, mentioned the statement that the United States would not tolerate communism in the western hemisphere.
Mankiewicz, who had been Peace Corps director in Peru at the time, agreed.
Kennedy questioned the punitive suspension of aid to a democratic regime.
A Brazil desk officer read off a prepared statement in departmentese expressing regret that a great power had seen fit to curtail certain freedoms temporarily, etc.
You’re saying that what the Alliance for Progress has come down to is that if you have a military takeover, outlaw political parties, close down the congress, put your political opponents in jail, and take away the basic freedoms of the people, you can get all the American aid you want.
But, if you mess around with an American oil company, we'll cut you off without a penny.
American-owned factories and a white-tie reception for the King of Belgium.
Kennedy said that there had been too much American aid to right-wing regimes but pointed out that left-wing countries— Yugoslavia, Poland, Ghana—had received aid too.
It reminded Tom Johnston of a meeting of reform Democrats on the West Side of Manhattan.
To Kennedy’s irritation, they showed no concern about their own problems —the barriadas of Lima or the desperately poor Andean Indians—but complained endlessly about American imperialism and the International Petroleum Company.
The United States government isn’t going to send destroyers or anything like that.
They were appalled; the Rockefellers ran United States policy; the Rockefellers wouldn’t permit it.
A reporter in Buenos Aires asked Kennedy later whether it was true that he had breakfast every morning with the Rockefellers.
Kennedy cut his right cheek in the melee but declined a tetanus shot and wore a ripped suit for the rest of the day.
He talked to Indians and Peace Corps volunteers and on November 13 flew to Chile, to be inundated by more crowds and more headlines.
It was the first day on the trip, someone noted, that Kennedy had failed to visit a slum.
He had luncheon and a meeting of minds the next day with Eduardo Frei, the Christian Democratic President of Chile and, along with Betancourt, the emblem of the Latin American democratic left.
The day after, he went to Concepcion, Chile’s third largest city and a center of Communist enthusiasm.
The student leader said, “We do not condemn you personally, but as a representative of a government whose hands are stained with blood.
If | don’t answer the questions satisfactorily, then, hell, your position is much stronger.
Universities were off limits to police by Latin American tradition, and the rector could not guarantee Kennedy’s safety.
That night he entered a gymnasium packed with students screaming “Kennedy—paredon"" and throwing eggs and garbage.
Eggs splattered over vanden Heuvel and others, but Kennedy walked along, never looking back, and was untouched.
Even as they shouted “Kennedy—paredon,""some had leaned across the rails to shake his hand; and now he went toward them and shook hands with the Marxist leader he had met in the afternoon.
The embassy had kept the mine off Kennedy’s schedule, and mine officials now begged him not to go down the shaft.
Ethel had arranged a party at the Sao Paulo house of Mildred Sage, who was handling the Brazil schedule.
Displaying a toy airplane, Ethel explained that it was a U-2 sent by Lyndon Johnson to report on Bobby’s activities.
He gathered barefoot children around him in a forlorn community center named for John Kennedy.
More than a hundred thousand people turned out later in the day in Natal.
They spent the night at Recife, in the heart of the horribly poor northeast, and the next morning walked the sugar cane fields where cutters worked for less than a dollar a day.
Discovering that the wage was below the legal level, Kennedy became a zealous advocate of the Brazilian minimum wage law.
They did not like the military regime anyway and were not minding their manners.
Mildred Sage found Kennedy himself, however weary, entirely cooperative.
He lectured business leaders, argued angrily with Roberto Campos at the American embassy and harassed Castello Branco, the military President, about the minimum wage.
Sitting in a cafe in front of a Rio hotel on November 24, he heard the crackle of shots.
They flew to Manaus, deep in the interior, where they made their way up the Amazon in a paddle-wheel steamboat.
Determined to go even farther, Kennedy boarded an ancient single-engine seaplane.
An interlude of reckless adventure and misadventure culminated in a dash down foaming rapids in a dugout canoe and swims in piranha-infested waters.
V An unsigned report to Lyndon Johnson from an American in Latin America speculated that Kennedy’s trip was meant to launch his campaign for the presidency.
Without actually saying so, he disassociated himself from the Johnson Administration.
Embassy aides in the countries he visited shuddered at some of the things he said and did.
Americans closest to the scene ... resented the way he and the group acted.
They were cocky and overbearing and made themselves as much at home as if they were in Massachusetts.
The theory that he had gone south in order to dish Lyndon Johnson was one more expression of the reductionism that so exasperated Kennedy in these years.
In fact, Martin Arnold said, “he did z good job for President Johnson, really, in the sense that he used to tell these people that Lyndon Johnson had come from the soil and that he would understand their type of problems.
So | came to get myself educated;”44 The sense of legacy was the essential reason.
His hope was to remind the Latin Americans that there was more to the United States than the International Petroleum Company.
Robert Kennedy came to revive the message of liberal revolution that made the United States an exemplary nation, a revolution forgotten by those that today intend to transform a great democratic country into a protector of tyrannies.
He felt an obligation to do what one man could to help defenseless people in other parts of the world.
He did not in the end suppose it could be done by governments; certainly not by intervention in the Dominican fashion.
His idea was to help awaken the people and enlighten the oligarchies in the hope that countries might be moved to solve their own problems.
It was a quixotic venture uncommon in history, a premonition perhaps of the world society someday to come.
The Latin American trip, the response of the students, the outpouring of crowds, strengthened the feeling that it might be possible to rouse other countries to humanize their policies.
Frank Mankiewicz helped too; and, when Barthelmes left the Kennedy office in the spring of 1966, Mankiewicz replaced him.
Son of the Herman Mankiewicz who had written Citizen Kane and nephew of Joseph L Mankiewicz, author and director of other notable films, he sprang from an alert and witty tradition and quickly became an intimate.
Vietnam Legacy WHEN JOHN AND RoBerT Kennedy visited Vietnam in 1951, they had been greatly “impressed,” Robert recalled in 1964, by “the toughness of the French soldiers.
The new leader in Saigon was Ngo Dinh Diem, a robust nationalist opposed to the French and Ho Chi Minh’s Communists alike and sponsored in the United States by such exemplary men as William O Douglas and Mike Mansfield.
Having argued for Vietnamese nationhood, John Kennedy felt a responsibility for the new nation.
When Kennedy came to office in 1961, no revolution had been offered or undertaken.
It is hard to believe that the canny Eisenhower would himself ever have gone it alone with American troops in Laos.
Whatever Eisenhower’s motives, Kennedy had no desire to follow his advice.
But he had no desire either to be denounced by the national military hero.
He therefore enlisted Eisenhower's wartime friend Harold Macmillan to argue the case against intervention.
So | would hope that in anything which you felt it necessary to say about Laos you would not encourage those who think that a military solution in Laos is the only way of stopping the Communists in that area.
It was after Cuba that he began inquiring intimately into the situation in Laos.
It was then that he found out that the Communists could send five men into Laos for every one that we sent in.
Therefore, in order to preserve Laos, for instance, we had to be prepared to engage in a major atomic war both with China and with Russia.Z After hearing the generals pursue their scenario to its apocalyptic conclusion, the President instructed Averell Harriman to negotiate the neutralization of Laos with the Russians.
Though the neutralization accord worked out at Geneva in July 1962 did not stop the fighting, it succeeded at least in removing Laos from the area of great-power conflict.
Kennedy, compromising, sent a hundred military advisers and four hundred Green Berets.
But because he later had to struggle with his brother’s Vietnam legacy, it is essential to understand what that legacy was.
He was stalling the military, he said, by sending Maxwell Taylor and Walt Rostow to look at South Vietnam.
No doubt Kennedy supposed him to be, along with MacArthur, Matthew B Ridgway and James Gavin, a charter member of the Army’s ‘never again’ club on the question of an American expeditionary force in Asia.
Rostow, the high priest of counterinsurgency, would presumably oppose the use of conventional force in a guerrilla war.
Above all, the United States must make a formal and total commitment to prevent the fall of South Vietnam to communism.
Nor did he suppose that limited assistance would weaken his control of the situation.
When George Ball warned that it would finally lead to 300,000 American troops on the Asian mainland, Kennedy said, “You’re crazy as hell; it can’t happen”—not so long as he was President.
Kennedy feared that, if Congress and the newspapers learned the Pentagon wanted to send ground troops, his own hand might be forced.
Accordingly, the White House disingenuously let the impression seep out that Taslor opposed combat units.
Though the policy disagreement was thus concealed, the subsequent increase in military assistance was not.
Three days before Christmas, Specialist Fourth Class James Thomas Davis of Livingston, Tennessee, became the first American soldier to die in Vietnam.
But his compromises, minor as they seemed at the time, were storing up trouble for the future.
The establishment in February 1962 of the Military Assistance Command Vietnam under General Paul Harkins gave the Pentagon a new stake in the war.
Reporters soon described American helicopters ferrying South Vietnamese troops to the front and American pilots strafing Viet Cong territory.
While accepting the strategic importance of South Vietnam, these men saw the problem as one of civil war rather than external aggression.
The remedy, they believed, had to be at least as much political and economic as military.
The introduction of American troops, they believed, would hand the nationalist issue altogether to the Viet Cong.
It would also strengthen Diem’s authoritarianism at the expense of the reforms essential for his survival.
As for counterinsurgency, it was never really tried in Vietnam.Taylor and Rostow, for all their counterinsurgency enthusiasm in Washington, roared home from Saigon dreaming of big battalions.
Edward G Lansdale, the one American with counterinsurgency experience in South Asia, accompanied their mission.
But Taylor gave him the task of assessing the feasibility of building a fence along the northern frontier—a concept Lansdale considered preposterous.
Thereafter, though State repeatedly recommended Lansdale’s assignment to Vietnam, the Pentagon as repeatedly vetoed him.
Diem handed the strategic hamlet program over to his creepy brother Ngo Dinh Nhu, who used it as a means of police control.
Their own vision of a counterinsurgency alternative was, however, fantasy.
He thought and said in 1961 that the United States had been “overcommitted” in Southeast Asia.
Still, we were there, and he was willing to give restricted aid to a South Vietnamese government prepared to rally its own people and fight its own war.
Diem, if he used the aid well, had the numerical superiority to put down the Viet Cong.
Nor did he accept the Truman-Eisenhower-Pentagon view that a President had inherent authority to send an expeditionary force into battle.
As against both win-the-war factions, Kennedy, | believe, was vaguely searching for a nonmilitary solution—vaguely because Vietnam was still a side show.
In April 1962 Galbraith proposed that the United States offer “phased withdrawal” as an element in a larger deal with the Soviet Union, which in return might get Hanoi to call off the Viet Cong.
But they had thus far failed in their efforts to force it on the President.
Kennedy, disturbed, asked Bundy how Ball’s disquisition had slipped by.
The assumption was that South Vietnamese troops would take up the slack as their capabilities improved under American training.
After several tries, the military produced an acceptable plan in May 1963.42 The generals saw the withdrawal plan as a means of putting pressure on Diem to accelerate the training of Vietnamese troops.
Kennedy, however, saw it at the very least as a means of setting a limit to demands from the national-security bureaucracy for escalation.
Mansfield, who had served forty years before with the Marines in the Far East and thirty years before as a professor of Far Eastern history, was no novice in the area.
But his public statements, while they improved morale in Saigon, also misled Americans about the national stake in Vietnam and thereby narrowed choices in Washington.
Instead of controlling the situation, the situation was beginning to control him.
He grew uncharacteristically snappish about pessimistic newspaper dispatches from Saigon, not, | believe, because he thought they would lead to demands for withdrawal—that was not the national mood in 1963, or for long years after—but because they might lead to demands for escalation.
The evidence suggests that, underneath his uncertainties, withdrawal, which had begun for him in 1962 as a precaution, was turning in 1963 into a preference.
He asked his good friend Lester Pearson what the United States should do.
When Mansfield left, Kennedy remarked to O’Donnell, who had been present, “If | tried to pull out completely now from Vietnam, we would have another Joe McCarthy red scare on our hands, but | can do it after I’m reelected.
After two years of intensified American aid, he was starting to conclude that they could not win it for themselves.
He commenced to prepare the American people for the idea that the United States must limit its involvement.
Kennedy still playing out his public hand while secretly wondering how to get out; his two schools of advisers, united in perceiving an American responsibility to win the war but bitterly antagonistic to each other.
The Harriman group had reached the conclusion that Diem and more immediately his brother Nhu and the serpentine Madame Nhu were disasters.
In the new ambassador to Saigon, Henry Cabot Lodge, who replaced the complaisant Frederick Nolting, the anti-Diem school at last had a purposeful, even highhanded, ally in Saigon.
Everyone knows the story of the cable of August 24, drafted by Harriman, Hilsman and Forrestal and cleared loosely around town on a summer weekend, authorizing Lodge to tell a camarilla of anti-Diem generals that, if they overthrew Diem, the United States would recognize their new regime.
In February 1962, he had stopped over for two hours in Saigon on his way from Indonesia to Siam.
He did not leave the heavily guarded airport but held forth boldly on the war.
The reports we get indicate that the political problem is growing relatively worse.
There has been very little indication to date that Diem’s Government has been able to follow up the military operations with the type of social and economic programs which would convince the people whose security has been assured that they are better off with Diem than with the Viet Cong.
But in the spring and summer of 1963 the struggle for racial justice left the Attorney General little time for anything else.
Now American policy in Vietnam was in crisis, and John Kennedy wanted his brother at his side.
Gilpatric could not remember when anyone in the presence of a President “took the tongue-lashing that Nolting did from Harriman.
Vill In Saigon Lodge was determined to overthrow Diem,THERE IS NO TURNING BACK, he had cabled Washington on August 29.
TIME HAS ARRIVED FOR THE United States TO USE WHAT EFFECTIVE SANCTIONS IT HAS TO BRING ABOUT THE FALL OF THE EXISTING GOVERNMENT AND THE INSTALLATION OF ANOTHER.2® He had no doubt in his mind and ample Brahmin confidence in his judgment.
The Attorney General, who had questioned Lodge’s appointment, was not surprised.
Robert Kennedy had warned his brother, he later recalled, “that Henry Cabot Lodge in Vietnam would cause him a lot of difficulty in six months, and | brought that up, and he said it was terrific about me because | could always remember when | was right.
On the other hand, his Washington instructions were hardly clear or firm —a reflection both of the continuing quarrel in Washington and of the President’s own uncertainties.
In the television interview on September 2 the President himself had said that, if Diem did not make changes in personnel and policy, his chances of winning the war would not be good.
Thereafter he signed cables laying down a checklist of reforms to which Diem would not conceivably accede—from the exile of the Nhus to a free press and free elections.
It’s bad policy to get into for us to run a coup out there and replace somebody we don't like with somebody we do because it would just make every other country nervous as can be that we were running coups in and out.
Here Robert Kennedy adopted the win-the-war perspective shared by supporters as well as by opponents of the coup.
But, if John Kennedy had withdrawal in mind, there was all the more reason to take care.
For a coup encouraged by Washington would drag the United States ever more irrevocably into responsibility for the fate of South Vietnam.
And disengagement was increasingly, | believe, the presidential purpose.
At the end of September the President dispatched McNamara and Taylor on one more reconnaissance.
The political school, however, regarded the recall of 1000 advisers with consternation.
William Sullivan, the State Department representative on the McNamara-laylor mission, threatened a minority report.
Chester Cooper of McGeorge Bundy’s staff, much agitated, rushed to Bundy, who was closeted with his brother.
Troop withdrawal, Cooper said, would destroy any credibility the McNamara-Taylor mission could have had.
McGeorge Bundy called McNamara but could not persuade him to change his mind.
Kennedy had fought off a total commitment for three years and was not about to capitulate now.
The President called an all-agency conference in Honolulu to consider, as he somewhat confusedly told his press conference on November 14, “how we can intensify the struggle, how we can bring Americans out of there.
O’Donnell once inquired how he could pull out without damaging American prestige.
The Ngo brothers were, in their anachronistic fashion, authentic Vietnamese nationalists.
They were reluctant about American troops and resistant to American interference.
In the spring of 1963 Roger Lalouette, the French ambassador in Saigon, asked Maneli to serve as an intermediary between the Ngo brothers and Hanoi.
De Gaulle’s interest was plain enough—to show up the blundering Americans, to rescue the west from a hopeless predicament, to restore French influence in Indochina.
He pressed Ho Chi Minh and Phan Van Dong, the North Vietnamese Premier, about their peace terms.
They replied that Hanoi would settle for a coalition government in a neutralized South Vietnam.
The North Vietnamese added that, if the Americans withdrew, Hanoi would give the south guarantees, including perhaps American participation in a supervisory process.
As American pressure mounted against the Diem regime, Hanoi refrained from exploiting the confusion as by a new Viet Cong offensive.
The anti-Diem faction was quite willing to believe that Nhu and de Gaulle were up to some deviltry.
The State Department was already furious at de Gaulle for European reasons.
On August 30 a Hilsman memorandum suggested that, if Diem were in fact negotiating with Ho, Washington should “encourage the generals to move promptly with a coup.
Later Madame Nhu informed a visitor that “the two brothers had sought to negotiate an end to the conflict, and that it was to prevent this that the coup was Carried out.
But | found no evidence that Kennedy was ever adequately informed on the matter.
The deal did not seem real enough to have been a major factor in American attitudes toward a coup.
Washington would have been hard put to save Diem from the generals in any case; nor was there any guarantee that Diem, once assured of American support, would have negotiated an end to the war.
Had he done so, a Diem-Ho deal followed by an American withdrawal would not have been applauded in the United States of 1963.
Still, a Diem-Ho deal could have been the means of an American exit from Vietnam in 1963, though the life expectancy of a Diem government in Saigon would have been minimal thereafter.
Whether it might have been seized later, if Kennedy had never gone to Dallas, is another question.
Robert Kennedy thought the situation no different from August, when the generals talked big and did nothing.
The President observed that, since the pro-Diem and antiDiem forces appeared about equal, any attempt to engineer a coup would be silly.
The coup was a Vietnamese and a popular affair, which we could neither manage nor stop after it got started and which we could only have influenced with great difficulty.
Kennedy said, “Wayne, | want you to Know you’re absolutely right in your criticism of my Vietnam policy.
He should have realized the cumulative momentum of the policy of small concessions.
Troops, once sent, could be withdrawn, as they were in Cuba and the Dominican Republic, as Kennedy already planned to do in Vietnam.
Kennedy had proved his manhood in the Solomon Islands and did not have to prove it again.
He was a prudent executive, not inclined to heavy investments in lost causes.
His whole Presidency was marked precisely by his capacity to refuse escalation—as in Laos, the Bay of Pigs, the Berlin Wall, the missile crisis.
Halberstam was a penetrating critic of the American performance in Vietnam.
We were caught in a quagmire and probably would not learn the lesson in time to save Vietnam.
He had left on the public record the impression of a major national stake in the defense of South Vietnam against communism.
He had left steadily enlarging programs of military and economic assistance.
He had left national security advisers who for three years had been urging an American expeditionary force and a total commitment to the salvation of South Vietnam.
On the other hand, he had consistently refused to send such a force or to make such a commitment.
He had left a formal plan, processed successfully through the Pentagon, for the withdrawal of American advisers by the end of 1965.
He had left a public campaign, belatedly begun, to instill the idea that American involvement must be limited in a war that only the South Vietnamese could win.
And he had left private opposition, repeatedly and emphatically stated, to the dispatch of American ground forces.
But it is not sufficient to say that Lyndon Johnson was carrying forward Kennedy’s policies.
The new President could choose the continuity of deepening involvement.
Or he could choose the continuity of absolute limitations—no combat troops, no heavy bombing—and planned withdrawal by 1965.
It was Johnson's of course within the framework of public illusion to which Kennedy had made significant contributions.
A generation of Ssuperpowership had persuaded most Americans that they had the power and the responsibility to work their will around the planet.
The strength of this national mood constrained Kennedy to defer disengagement till after the 1964 election.
He was a stout supporter of Diem, whom in 1961 he had hailed as the “Winston Churchill” of Southeast Asia.
On the day after Kennedy’s funeral, Johnson, showing Hubert Humphrey a portrait of Diem hanging in the hallway of his house, said, “We had a hand in killing him.
It was, in the words of the Pentagon history, “essentially an accounting exercise” and achieved no reduction in American strength.
Then Johnson's worries were unexpectedly eliminated by a second coup on January 30, 1964.
John Kennedy had not even found an occasion to discuss his deeper doubts and intentions with his brother; there always must have seemed a world of time to do that later.
Vietnam did not come up when he went to Indonesia and Malaysia in January 1964.
The fundamental questions he had tried to raise the previous September signified an instinct to get to the root of the matter on his brother’s behalf rather than a conclusion of his own that the United States should get out.
Insofar as Robert followed Vietnam policy in early 1964, he probably noted that Johnson stayed within the Kennedy guidelines—no combat troops, no heavy bombing—and assumed he was doing what had to be done.
One finds a flurry of Vietnam papers in his files—a CIA document doubting an immediate domino effect from the fall of Vietnam; a memorandum Mansfield had written to Johnson, restating his old doubts and saying that, if the President planned to pursue the war, he had better make a more persuasive case.
Dear Mr President: | just wanted to make sure you understood that if you wished me to go to Viet Nam in any capacity | would be glad to go.
It is obviously the most important problem facing the United States and if you felt | could help | am at your service. | have talked to both Bob and Mac about this and | believe they know my feelings. | realize some of the other complications but | am sure that if you reached the conclusion that this was the right thing to do then between us both or us all we could work it out satisfactorily.
Respectfully, Bob+8 | have never been sure why he wrote this letter—probably for reasons no more complicated than old-fashioned patriotism.
He could do it damn well, but | can’t trust the security there and someone or some group might want to do him in. | couldn’t live with that.
Asked for his “exact position” by the students at Columbia, he responded with considerable inexactitude that he had no easy solution, that we should continue, but that he remembered the French in 1951, that the political and social effort was vital and that “we're not going to win that war unless the government has the support of the people.
At the end of 1964, according to Chester Cooper, the careful participant-historian of the period, “the get-out option was by no means academic.
The President assured him, as Presidents do, that the idea was under consideration.
Almost at once, however, Johnson asked Congress for a supplemental $700 million for Vietnam, explaining that this was no “routine appropriation” but a vote of confidence in the whole policy.
The appropriation, as he told me, was not necessary; ample funds were already available.
What Johnson plainly wanted was congressional approval for further escalation.
Still, it would be hard to vote against the request without seeming to let down the boys at the front.
This was also the week of the Dominican intervention; and my speech for him touched on Vietnam as well.
To their eternal honor, Wayne Morse, Ernest Gruening and Gaylord Nelson voted no.
In his speech on May 6, 1965, Kennedy discussed three possible courses in Vietnam.
He was voting for the resolution, he said, in the understanding that it was no “blank check” for wider war but rather the necessary prelude for negotiations.
He accepted an invitation to give the commencement address at the International Police Academy in July.
The academy, AID’s contribution to the counterinsurgency program, was a part of Kennedy’s past.
He thought now to suggest how the Americanization of the war was departing from the theory of counterinsurgency.
Adam Walinsky worked with him on the speech, but Walinsky, as he said later, was not yet on fire about Vietnam.
Nobody pushed him to do tee The war, Kennedy said, was ultimately a contest for the allegiance of men.
The history of the last twenty years, Kennedy said, had demonstrated “beyond doubt that our approach to revolutionary war must be political—political first, political last, political always.
Also, framed as it was by quotations from John F Kennedy, it contained more than a hint that Johnson had abandoned his predecessor’s policies.
Counterinsurgency might have done it once, Kennedy seemed to say, but its day had passed.
Yet his reluctance to force the issue with Johnson showed the fear of misunderstanding that inhibited him throughout his senatorial years.
Joseph Kraft, the columnist, interested Kennedy in the case of Gustave Hertz, an AID official kidnapped by the Viet Cong.
The National Liberation Front, as the Viet Cong were formally known, had a diplomatic outpost in Algeria.
Kraft took Kennedy to Cherif Guellal, the Algerian ambassador, who asked Ben Bella, the Algerian chief of state, to intercede with the NLF and soon went to Algiers himself to press the negotiation.
The NLF agreed to exchange Hertz for one of their own men under sentence of death in Saigon.
It was Guellal’s impression that the NLF saw an opportunity to open larger contact with the Americans.
Once the exchange was made, they would release Hertz—personally to Senator Kennedy in Algiers if he wished.
Kennedy took the proposal to Maxwell Taylor, who rejected it on the ground that the arrangement would upset the Saigon government.
The effort, Kraft later suggested, made Kennedy understand that the Viet Cong were not roving bands of terrorists but truly a National Liberation Front with a political structure and legitimacy of its own.
If counterinsurgency were dead, then negotiations with the NLF might offer the best exit from Vietnam.
Guellal thought that the “persistency and consistency” with which Kennedy pursued the Hertz matter was “because he saw there was a possibility, an opening” that might lead to broader negotiations.
Professor Eugene Genovese, a Rutgers historian, said that he hoped the Viet Cong would win.
It was the year of teach-ins, the first antiwar turbulence on the campuses, the first bonfires of draft cards.
In the same month the Defense Department denied burial in Arlington Cemetery to the American Communist leader Robert Thompson.
He had also won the Distinguished Service Cross for heroism in New Guinea in 1943.
Rusk took a fortnight to acknowledge Fanfani’s report and then, after various cavils, asked Fanfani to check back with Hanoi for clarification.
On December 15, before Hanoi responded to Rusk's inquiry, Johnson ordered the bombing of Haiphong.
If, on Friday night, we had asked the Soviet government for an explanation of their message instead of just agreeing to our own interpretation of it, it might have been chaos. “| don’t believe in pulling out the troops.
If we can hold them for about 20 years, maybe they will change the way Russia has.
With the casualty lists growing, the decision to send more troops will be critical.
We may have reached the point of no return once that decision has been made.
I’m upset over our policy in Vietnam. | don’t think we’ve shown an open approach. | really think Johnson wants negotiations.
Fifty percent of the government is probably for them; fifty percent against them.
But if | broke with the administration it might be disastrous for the country.
He said that if we had accepted the four points a year ago, or even last week, in a short while, possibly 14 days, a Gallup Poll would show most of the American people favoring it.
McNamara, the most ardent supporter of negotiations in the cabinet, had argued since early November for a bombing pause.
So were Cabot Lodge, who had returned to Saigon as ambassador, and General William Westmoreland, the new commander in Vietnam.
So were Clark Clifford and Abe Fortas, Johnson’s closest unofficial advisers.
But Ball supported the pause, and Rusk and Bundy dropped their earlier opposition.
The pause began with a Christmas truce and ran through the month of January 1966.
About this time McNamara asked me to arrange a private meeting with New Frontier friends.
Galbraith, Richard Goodwin, who had by now left the Johnson White House, and Carl Kaysen dined at my house in Georgetown on January 6.
McNamara told us that he did not regard a military solution as possible.
His objective, he said, was “withdrawal with honor.” | noted, “He seemed deeply oppressed and concerned at the prospect of indefinite escalation.
In closing let me say how impressed | have been with the most recent efforts to find a peaceful solution to Viet Nam.
It was one of those hours when | felt alone, prayerfully alone. | remembered so well how President Kennedy had to face, by himself, the agony of the Cuba missile crisis. | read the paragraph in Catton’s book that you had marked, and then | went to a meeting in the Cabinet Room with the Congressional leaders of both parties. | read them that passage where Lincoln told a friend that all the responsibilities of the administration “belong to that unhappy wretch called Abraham Lincoln.” | knew exactly how Lincoln felt.
In the past, bombing has not proved a decisive weapon against a rural economy—or against a guerrilla army.
And the temptation will now be to argue that if limited bombing does not produce a solution, that further bombing, more extended military action, is the answer.
The danger is that the decision to resume may become the first in a series of steps on a road from which there is no turning back—a road which leads to catastrophe for all mankind.
V On February 4 the Senate Foreign Relations Committee opened public hearings on Vietnam.
No one seemed to have thought through the detail of a negotiated settlement.
He tried to think it through himself and concluded that the price of settlement was taking the National Liberation Front into the political process.
When this point did not emerge before the Foreign Relations Committee, he decided to make it on his own.
He put out his statement on February 19 before going off to ski in Vermont.
The United States was insisting that South Vietnam should not be turned over to the North.
North Vietnam was insisting that South Vietnam should not be a hostile state dedicated to the extermination of Communists.
The United States had to recognize that many people in South Vietnam wanted change.
His statement mentioned “a compromise government” as only one of the possible forms acceptance of the NLF might take.
But his language was imprecise, and he was immediately denounced as the advocate of coalition with the Communists.
Vice President Humphrey led the counterattack from the far Pacific, where he was touting the war for the administration.
To Kennedy’s particular irritation, Bundy quoted John Kennedy in opposition to united front governments.
Actually, Bundy had planned to quote Robert himself, but Johnson, in one of his flashes of solicitude, warned him not to do so if he valued his friendship with the senator.
Bundy said that Kennedy might equally have called before he took out against the administration.
Kennedy replied that he had in fact discussed the statement with Moyers the day before he put it out.
Maxwell Taylor saw no serious divergence, assuming that Kennedy had not implied the establishment of a coalition government in advance of free elections.
If the people of South Vietnam themselves brought the fox into the chicken coop, Taylor agreed, the administration would abide by the result.
Moyers, who was laboring to keep Johnson and Kennedy together, made this point in a Tuesday press briefing, adding that NLF participation in an interim government would be negotiable.
Two days later, Johnson defended his Vietnam course at a Freedom House dinner.
Impersonating an interrogator, | challenged him about John Kennedy’s responsibility for the trouble we were in in Vietnam.
It iS not part of any ruthless scheme to open and read all your mail before it goes to your office.
However | am somewhat shocked and surprised at the close working and social relationships you are establishing with some people.
Needless to say | shall breathe no word about any of this to Clarence Mitchell or Martin Luther King or anyone like that.
The public remained confused. “| made some mistakes in handling it,” Kennedy said later. “1 think it was unpopular politically.
Mostly the old fear that disagreement would be ascribed to a personal vendetta held him back.
Johnson, Goodwin said, was a man possessed, wholly impervious to argument.
Galbraith wrote How to Control the Military. | wrote The Bitter Heritage.
We also discussed the formation of a national committee against the widening of the war.
When we raised this latter idea with Kennedy on July 20, he seemed skeptical.
A mass movement against escalation, he said, “would have to tie itself to an issue or to a man.
LBJ could always justify each specific step on the ground that it was necessary to save the lives of American troops and that it would shorten the war.
The polls were already showing him the leader of the Democratic opposition.
Goodwin observed that the more an anti-escalation movement seemed a pro-Kennedy movement, the less likely it would be that Johnson would respond to it.
The next weekend | resumed the discussion with Galbraith and George McGovern at Galbraith’s farm in Vermont.
He had kept up his relations with the city bosses like Daley of Chicago.
He added that he thought Johnson had a “great yellow streak” and might conceivably be bluffed out of running again.
A fortnight later | was at Hyannis Port. | did not bring up 1968, but we talked about the establishment of a Vietnam information center in Washington.
Third, there is the question of our turning prisoners over to the South Vietnamese and becoming accomplices in torture.
George Ball, the most persevering critic of the war among his advisers, found him unfailingly courteous.
Chester Bowles, on home leave from India where he was now ambassador, met with him in the summer of 1966.
They control the three major networks, you know, and the forty major outlets of communication.
Reedy left in July 1965, thereafter to write in The Twilight of the Presidency the classic account of the way the isolations of power withdrew Presidents from reality.
Goodwin left in September 1965, Bundy in February 1966, Valenti in May.
Had there been no escalation in Vietnam, there would be Robert Kennedy out in front leading the fight against me, telling everyone that | had betrayed John Kennedy's commitment to South Vietnam.
Every night when | fell asleep | would see myself tied to the ground in the middle of a long, open space.
The language, Doris Kearns noted, betrayed unconscious concerns —“coward,” “unmanly,” “without a spine”—along with his envy for Kennedy, whose manliness no one questioned.
The sense of Kennedy as “the enemy,” she believed, only hardened his determination not to change course in Vietnam.
Robert Kennedy had already carried his Campaign, as the exasperated White House saw it, to Latin America.
In the autumn of 1965 the anti-apartheid National Union of South African Students invited him to speak at its annual Day of Affirmation.
As Attorney General, Kennedy had supported independence movements in black Africa.
William Loeb begged the South African government from his New Hampshire eyrie.
He told Fredericks he preferred now to wait until after the fall elections.
The week before he left, Lyndon Johnson delivered a speech on Africa, his first as President.
The South African government was even less enthusiastic than the White House.
When Kennedy asked the South African embassy for advice on his itinerary, the ambassador responded that he had nothing to say, that his government disapproved of NUSAS and that no ministers would receive him.
Then it denied visas to forty American newspaper and television correspondents assigned to cover the trip.
The party—Robert and Ethel, Angie Novello, Adam Walinsky —arrived in Johannesburg just before midnight on June 4, 1966.
Kennedy made his way through a screaming crowd, his cuff links torn from his sleeves in the process, and climbed on top of the automobile waiting outside.
It showed both the hunger for a liberal voice and the emotionalism of the family argument into which he was entering.
Hendrik Verwoerd, declined to see him or to permit other ministers to do so.
They could not understand, they told him, why the United States did not embrace South Africa, which was after all the most staunchly anti-Communist of nations.
Here and for the rest of his stay he tried to explain that anticommunism was not enough.
He was two hours late, but three thousand people waited at the airport.
He promptly called on lan Robertson and gave him a copy of Profiles in Courage, inscribed by Jacqueline Kennedy.
When he emerged from Robertson's apartment, the street was filled with people and resounded with applause.
Allard Lowenstein, the young liberal activist who had traveled in South Africa, thought it too cautious; you really had to go full tilt, he said.
Few will have the greatness to bend history itself; but each of us can work to change a small portion of events, and in the total of all those acts will be written the history of this generation.
It is from numberless diverse acts of courage and belief that human history is shaped.
Each time a man stands up for an ideal, or acts to improve the lot of others, or strikes out against injustice, he sends a tiny ripple of hope, and crossing each other from a million different centres of energy and daring those ripples build a current which can sweep down the mightiest walls of oppression and resistance.
Denis Hurley, the Roman Catholic archbishop; two Zulu chiefs; and Alan Paton, whose novels he so much admired.
There was a tour of Soweto, the steaming ghetto where half a million blacks lived behind wire fences, passing in and out with identity cards.
He made speeches from the roof of the automobile, from the steps of the Catholic cathedral, from a chair in the middle of a school playground.
Later the inhabitants papered their shacks with Kennedy photographs cut from the newspapers.
Hope lay in “the most fragile and the most powerful of human gifts—the gift of reason.
We are growing militarily stronger every day and we could eat any other African state for breakfast.
Kennedy, through tact, directness and simplicity, came over to a surprising degree not as meddling intruder but as honest friend, recognizing white South Africa’s kinship with as well as its estrangement from the great traditions of western civilization.
It was well to leave, he decided, before he began to have more influence than he wanted to have.
There was a common humanity, he insisted, which went beyond all superficial differences of race and culture.
And among all there might be people with extraordinary capabilities—“Why, among the black schoolchildren | saw today there might be an Einstein— or a Dr.
With him a great shaft of outer daylight was let into the air-conditioned comfort and concrete corridors of the bastion that nearly everybody believed, or feared, or hoped was shut tight against such natural illumination.
Senator Robert Kennedy’s visit is the best thing that has happened to South Africa for years.
It is as if a window has been flung open and a gust of fresh air has swept into a room in which the atmosphere has become stale and foetid.
This younger Kennedy ... has taken the youth of the country by storm through his message of confident, unashamed idealism.
The black leaders gave him the kind of reception usually accorded visiting chiefs of state.
He found Nyerere lucid and forceful; Kenyatta, who gravely toasted the President of the United States, John F Kennedy, seemed ancient, bemused and out of it; Haile Selassie had presence and dignity but appeared a relic of another age.
In Dar es Salaam, Kennedy met with Eduardo Mondlane, still fighting for a free Mozambique.
Mondlane’s account of the guerrilla war against the Portuguese gave the Americans a chastening sense of how the Vietnam War must look to the Viet Cong.
When Kennedy was discussing South Africa, the Pope said, “‘We took an interest in African art in North Africa’ as if this were a satisfactory response.
He thought the International Control Commission could be helpful in opening a dialogue between the North and South.
The trouble Kennedy was encountering in South Africa, wrote Joseph Kraft while he was still away, “is apt to look like child’s play when he comes home.
He was, in addition, as his perceptive friend John Burns, the state chairman, said, “bored” with politics.
The clubhouse politicians, Kennedy told Richard Goodwin, were not interested in issues; he was not interested in communion breakfasts and county dinners.
He felt an obligation too to the public-spirited young men and women whom the Kennedys had made a business of encouraging to enter politics.
He wanted to restore the traditions of Smith, Roosevelt and Lehman, to raise the quality of candidates, to make the party an instrument of progressive government.
And he of course wanted to secure his base against the depredations of Lyndon Johnson, who was still withholding patronage and by 1966 would have liked to sneak the state party (and the 1968 delegation to the presidential convention) away from Kennedy.
But, except for his West Side friends, like Ronnie Eldridge, the reformers seemed to him to be divided between opportunists trying to get into the organization and emotionalists with what James Wechsler of the Post called an “insistent and possibly incurable” will to lose.
As for the Liberals, he admired Alex Rose’s talents in political maneuver but did not warm to him as a person.
J Raymond Jones, the Manhattan Democratic leader and a power in Harlem, had made a deal with the Republican county leader by which Arthur Klein, the candidate of the Democratic organization, would get Republican endorsement in exchange for Democratic endorsement of a Republican candidate for the state supreme court.
Wechsler reprinted excerpts from a twenty-year-old wiretap showing that Klein, wittingly or not, had once nominated a judicial candidate selected by the mobster Frank Costello.
The astute Liberal leader threw in the thought that John Lindsay, the dashing Republican congressman elected mayor the previous November, believed nothing could be done.
Kennedy’s face changed for several reasons, of which only one was disgust over the intrusion of the underworld into politics.
Its function was the probating of wills, in the course of which favored lawyers received large fees out of the estates of deceased citizens.
The reform of the surrogate court was a way of protecting poor people who often saw inheritances draining away in surrogate fees.
It was also a way of denying the party organizations their most lucrative source of patronage.
And it was a way to consolidate his own relations with the Liberals and the reformers; a way to dish Ray Jones, whom Kennedy regarded as an unedifying practitioner of the old politics and who had, in addition, worked for Johnson in Los Angeles in 1960; a way, as Kennedy said, to “stick it to John Lindsay,”24 who had shunned the fight.
He asked Stephen Smith and William vanden Heuvel to come up with a candidate.
V Silverman, a justice of the state supreme court, had been a partner in Paul, Weiss, Rifkind, Wharton and Garrison, the city’s leading liberal law firm.
He had participated in Robert Oppenheimer’s defense against security charges brought by the Atomic Energy Commission.
If Silverman would stand for surrogate, this would be an example to others.
Silverman, who was happy on the Supreme court, said he saw the risks Kennedy ran, but the only risk he could see for himself was that he might be elected.
Kennedy said he would talk to the reform leaders and, unless they were willing to get off their asses and work, it wasn’t worth doing.
They were almost resentful to find him urging them on to the barricades.
Ray Jones was fighting for political survival, and Kennedy feared that in his desperation he might raise the race issue.
Turning the campaign over to Stephen Smith, who described it as “two unknowns running against each other for a job nobody understood,”©2 Kennedy went off to Africa.
It was a rollicking few days. | accompanied the Kennedy motorcade on one suffocatingly hot June evening.
At each street-corner rally Silverman would make four crisp points about the surrogate court, and James Farmer would boom away, and then Kennedy would speak.
He would put his hands to his head in mock pain and say, “No, no. | don’t think you have the right idea,” and the marimba band would strike up and the motorcade move on to the next rally.
Kennedy sat, as he customarily did, in the front seat of the car to the right of the driver.
Kennedy liked him well enough but hardly considered him a model of the new spirit with which he hoped to infuse the party, a feeling that O’Connor, a realist, accepted.
Among other aspirants, Franklin Roosevelt, Jr, had claims on Kennedy’s support.
His preference was Eugene Nickerson, county executive of Nassau County, able, informed, honorable, with a tested appeal to the suburbs.
Nickerson was little known upstate, however, and not a stirring campaigner.
After O’Connor agreed to let him pick the delegation in 1968 and to keep Burns as state chairman,“ he put out a statement saying he would abide by the wishes of the convention.
Three years had passed since the radical reporter had glared with hatred at the hardfaced Attorney General shouting to demonstrators before the Justice Department.
The previous February Newfield had described Kennedy on a television show as an existential man, preoccupied by suffering, who could understand himself only in action and to whom Dallas had given a unique sense of the absurdity of life.
Kennedy, chancing to see the show, had asked Newfield for lunch. “| was not fully prepared for the changes,” Newfield wrote.
Instead of the military crew cut, his graying, ginger hair now lapped over his earlobes in the shaggy style of the alienated young.
Kennedy was the first national politician | had met who had human reactions.
Newfield had grown up in Bedford-Stuyvesant, the only white kid on the block, helped found Students for a Democratic Society, joined SNCC, went to Mississippi and saw the world from an angle Kennedy wanted more than ever to understand.
Shaking hands as he walked with Carey and Newfield along crowded sidewalks, he noticed a ten-year-old girl wearing glasses.
Lost for a moment to the world, he rubbed the back of her neck, then turned to shaking hands again.
He was telling me the Church was such a problem. | wonder why the kids who come out of parochial school are so conservative.
Kennedy completed the schedule, then invited Newfield to his apartment in United Nations Plaza.
When he finished, Kennedy peered out the window at the barges making their way along the East River.
Robert Kennedy spent election night with a small group ranging from John Steinbeck and Yevgeny Yevtushenko, the Soviet poet, to Sam Silverman.
Time of Troubles IN THE LAST MONTHS Of 1966 Robert Kennedy moved dramatically ahead of Lyndon Johnson when public opinion polls asked whom Democrats and independents favored for 1968.
The voters, he told me, probably agreed 80 percent with Johnson on the issues between them; it was just that people did not believe Johnson any longer.
There had been premonitions in the summer of 1966 when Katzenbach as Attorney General told Kennedy the Justice Department was filing a brief with the Supreme Court confessing that the FBI had engaged in illegal electronic eavesdropping in 1963.
Kennedy asked Katzenbach to state in the brief that the Attorney General at the time had no knowledge of the FBI’s bugging habits either in the case at hand or in general.
Katzenbach refused, not because he disbelieved Kennedy but because he thought the addition irrelevant.
I’m getting too old | guess. | can’t write you as many memos as J Edgar Hoover.
Then Senator Edward Long of Missouri, a friend of Roy Cohn and of the Teamsters, proposed an investigation of wiretapping and bugging.
Of course, he bugged me now and then’”8—but he knew that damage had been done.
After Dallas, Jacqueline and Robert Kennedy had resolved to spare the dead President the indignity of having a book written about his last days by Jim Bishop, whom Jacqueline thought a hack and Robert distrusted because of a pro-Hoffa series Bishop had written in 1959.
They therefore approached —or, as Jacqueline later inaccurately and infelicitously put it—“hired” William Manchester to do the book.
Manchester, a skilled writer and a decent but highly emotional man, had written novels, an excellent biography of Mencken and a deft and admiring sketch of John Kennedy.
On March 28, 1964, Manchester signed a contract providing that “the final text shall not be published unless and until approved” by Jacqueline and Robert Kennedy.
A provision requiring family approval of the use of materials made uniquely available by the family -—letters, oral history transcripts and the like— would have been proper.
A provision requiring family approval of the entire text compromised Manchester’s freedom as a writer and made the Kennedys responsible for Manchester’s independent research and interpretation.
But in the aftermath of the assassination the Kennedys were in an unduly protective mood.
When John Kennedy’s old friend Paul Fay wrote his bouncy memoir The Pleasure of His Company, Robert Kennedy landed on him as if it were the only book through which posterity would ever know his brother.
Galbraith, reading the manuscript at Jacqueline’s behest, thought it harmless.
Fay published it with some excisions in 1966, and an old friendship lapsed.
In early 1966 Manchester, after prodigious research, turned over a long, deeply felt, greatly overwritten manuscript.
The draft opened, for example, with a hunting scene in which a boorish Johnson pressed a reluctant John Kennedy to shoot a deer on the Johnson ranch.
It was rather the impression the manuscript left that the Kennedys had never given Johnson a fair chance.
In my own case, | recommended the elimination of the mythodrama depicting Johnson as monster-usurper, but felt that Evan Thomas had gone too far in deleting strictly factual references to Johnson.
He observed to Manchester of one chapter that it “will injure both Johnson and me, but apparently it’s factually correct and a contribution to history.
The contract probably should have been rewritten to release the Kennedys from responsibility; but | cannot remember anyone’s suggesting that.
It was probably supposed that no one would believe Manchester was truly a free agent.
Manchester’s use of material derived from his interviews with Jacqueline Kennedy.
The proposition that an oral history interview became the private property of the interviewer was indefensible.
If the person interviewed lost all rights over the transcript, the oral history program, which promised so much to the historian of the future, would be dead.
With regard to Johnson, Manchester subdued most of his mythodrama and retained most of his history.
But he was unwilling to surrender personal detail that Jacqueline Kennedy, increasingly agitated, regarded as an inexcusable violation of her privacy.
Robert Kennedy, who had other things on his mind, became increasingly weary of the business.
At one point he impulsively wired Thomas that publication should be canceled.
Fifteen months before, the press had almost unitedly risen to denounce a writer for reproducing in A Thousand Days comment about public officials acting in their public capacities.
The historical truth of the comment was not under challenge; but editorial writers then brusquely dismissed the claims of history.
Now with almost equal unanimity they invoked historical truth as an absolute in order to rebuke the widow of a murdered President for guarding her grief against a writer who sought to use her confidences without her permission.
The Kennedys had won their case but, as Robert perfectly understood, at a fearful cost.
The stereotype of ruthless, arrogant Bobby Kennedy, riding roughshod over everybody, had received a tremendous infusion of new life.
There wasn’t very much time anyway and | certainly didn’t want to spend it on that.
One day, as Ethel Kennedy was riding with her children near Hickory Hill, she noticed a cadaverous horse standing miserably in a chicken coop.
She told her groom to bring the horse to Hickory Hill where, despite maternal care, it died five days later.
The trial, in January 1967, lasted a long two days, and the jury deliberated for a longer two and a half hours.
Ethel began to tease Louis Oberdorfer, her lawyer, about what would happen if they lost when, to popular applause, the jury came back with an acquittal.
While generally avoiding the war during the autumn campaign, he had called for an end to the bombing in a question period after a speech in California, adding that the people of South Vietnam had a right to determine their own destiny.
This irreverence, at a moment when Johnson was meeting the new leader of South Vietnam in Manila, scandalized the statesmen of the press.
If another soeech would do any good, Kennedy said, “| would make it tomorrow.
But the last time | spoke | didn’t have any influence on policy, and | was hurt politically.
He hates me so much that if | asked for snow, he would make rain, just because it was me.
DEMOCRATS REPUBLICANS AND INDEPENDENTS COMBINED KENNEDY 48 JOHNSON 39 NEITHER 13.
IF THIS KEEPS UP YOU JUST MAY HAVE TO DUMP OLD HUCKLEBERRY CAPONE LOVE AND KISSES AND GOOD woRK.22 Alas, the poll had been taken before the Manchester denouement.
Waiting for Prime Minister Harold Wilson, he wrote his father a letter on 10 Downing Street stationery, recalling the family’s stay in London nearly thirty years before.
Then to Oxford, where the first question after his address was about Vietnam.
Reluctant to attack his own government beyond the twelve-mile limit, Kennedy confined himself to expressing “grave reservations” about the bombing.
He evidently had in mind the impending visit of Aleksei Kosygin, the Soviet Premier, to London.
The questions went on for an hour, ranging from birth control, which he endorsed despite the deplorable example of his own family, to China.
The French, however much they disagreed on everything else, were united on Vietnam.
Saintény, recently back from Hanoi, talked about Ho Chi Minh’s determination to be independent of both Moscow and Peking.
Kissinger appeared to agree that further escalation would be folly and that negotiation was a possibility to be pursued.
There could be no peace until Washington stopped bombing and declared its intention to withdraw.
America, the general continued, had always presented the highest ideals to the world.
After seventy minutes de Gaulle concluded by offering Kennedy some remarkably bad counsel.
John Gunther Dean, the Vietnam expert at the American embassy, went with him.
Manac’h stressed Hanoi’s “complete mistrust” of American peace gestures.
The talk was in French, which he understood imperfectly and which Dean translated on the run.
But Dean, better versed in both the language and the negotiating nuances, got something more specific.
Up to this time Hanoi had conditioned negotiation on American acceptance of four prior { joints.
Now Manac’h said, citing a declaration made to him by the head of the North Vietnamese mission in Paris, Hanoi was waiving its preconditions and asking only that the bombing stop.
Hanoi, in short, was offering an important concession; and Manac’h evidently felt that, if he passed the message to an American diplomat in Kennedy’s presence, it could not be ignored in Washington.
Afterward Dean drafted a cable, showed it to Manac’h to make certain he had it right, heard Manac’h say again how important the new Hanoi position was and sent the cable off to the State Department.
Unable to find any leader on the continent who supported or even understood America’s Vietnam policy, Kennedy, his own misgivings redoubled, flew back to the United States.
V While Kennedy was still abroad, someone in the State Department showed Dean’s cable to Edward Weintal, the diplomatic correspondent of Newsweek.
The weekend of Kennedy’s return Johnson hardened his negotiating position, demanding that the North stop reinforcing its troops in the South as a condition precedent to the cessation of the bombing.It had been infuriating enough in Johnson’s view for Robert Kennedy to wander around Europe chatting with heads of state; but for him to try and force the President’s hand on negotiation, at a time when the war was going so well, was final proof of malevolence.
For Johnson was sure Kennedy had leaked the story to Newsweek in Paris —a suspicion presumably verified when the State Department, with customary efficiency, could find no Paris cable on the Kennedy-Manac’h talk.
He told Mankiewicz he did not have the “foggiest idea” what they were talking about.
Kennedy left no record of the meeting; Johnson published none (Kennedy was sure he had the meeting taped);22 and the others present—Katzenbach, who had become under secretary of state, and Rostow—have held their peace, except to agree that it was most unpleasant.
When he got back to his office, Kennedy described it all incredulously to Mankiewicz and Edelman, and the historian must rely on their recollections.
Kennedy replied that he had not leaked the story; he was not aware there had been a peace feeler and still was not sure there had been one.
After a time Kennedy asked whether Johnson would like to know what Kennedy thought he should do.
He outlined a series of possibilities—a cease-fire in stages, an expanded International Control Commission to deter further escalation, an international presence gradually replacing American forces, a political settlement allowing all major elements in South Vietnam to participate in the choice of a government.
Kennedy and his friends, he said, were responsible for prolonging the war and for killing Americans in Vietnam.
Kennedy said, “Look, | don’t have to take that from you,” and started to leave.
They asked Kennedy to tell the waiting press that there had been no peace feelers.
Kennedy refused, saying he did not know whether there had been peace feelers or not.
He finally agreed to say that he had not brought home any feelers—true enough, since the message had been transmitted to Washington by Dean.
Jime, rising to the occasion, announced that Kennedy had called Johnson a son of a bitch to his face, which he had not.
He appeared a publicity-seeking meddler in international relations, a compounder of trouble for an overburdened President and, as always, ruthless and arrogant.
A more legitimate criticism would have been of his failure to spot the negotiation feeler, but the press did not pursue this point.
Neither did Kosygin’s assurance to Harold Wilson in London in the second week of February that unconditional cessation of the bombing would bring negotiations.
On February 13 Wilson and Ambassador David Bruce urged Washington to continue the brief bombing pause over Tet, the Buddhist New Year, so that Kosygin might have time to persuade Hanoi to meet Johnson's insistence on reciprocal military deescalation in exchange for a bombing halt.
In its quest for reasons sufficiently dire to justify the growing fury of American intervention, the administration had evolved the thesis that the real enemy in Vietnam was China.
Kennedy took care to talk with McNamara, Taylor and Harriman to get the administration’s latest thoughts. | do not know what they told him; he always protected such confidences.
McNamara by this time had lost all faith in the efficacy of bombing. | do not imagine he gave Kennedy to understand that victory was imminent.
His misgivings about the war were deep but carefully buried because, | always thought, he wanted to conclude his distinguished career by negotiating a Vietnam settlement and feared that any hint of disloyalty would lead Johnson to give the job to someone less determined to make negotiations succeed.
On February 13 he asked Newfield to arrange a meeting with Tom Hayden and Staughton Lynd, two articulate radicals whose book The Other Side, an account of a trip to Hanoi, Kennedy had recently read.
The New Leftists, to Kennedy’s surprise, advocated not unilateral withdrawal but an unconditional bombing halt as a preliminary to negotiations, with which Kennedy of course agreed.
Hayden thought him superior to “Reuther or Rauh or any of those guys” and was reminded of Mendes-France.
Goodwin, along with Kennedy himself, had the largest hand in the result.
The valiant Morse and Gruening had gradually been joined by Fulbright, McGovern, Nelson, Clark, Church, Javits, Eugene McCarthy and a dozen more.
Johnson directed Westmoreland, “in anticipation” of the Kennedy speech, to denounce a bombing pause.
The Gallup poll that morning had said that only 24 percent of the country wanted a bombing halt. | had feared Kennedy might draw back.
He muttered that Sorensen had advised against the speech, but that he was sure it was the right thing to do and was determined to do it regardless of consequences.
He had been up till three-thirty working with Goodwin, Walinsky and Mankiewicz to put the speech into final final shape.
Bobby Jr., the animal collector, brought along a coatimundi which suddenly attacked Ethel, sinking sharp claws and teeth into her leg.
In the course of the day, determined to deny Kennedy the headlines, he made (in the computation by vanden Heuvel and Gwirtzman) two unscheduled speeches in Washington, held an unscheduled news conference to announce that Russian Premier Kosygin had agreed to talk on reducing the stockpile of nuclear weapons, announced he was inviting all the nation’s governors to the White House, had Senator Henry Jackson of Washington read on the floor of the Senate a predated letter from him, explaining why the bombing was necessary, and confirmed the rumor that his daughter Luci was pregnant.
One asked about Johnson’s charge that speeches like Kennedy’s were a disservice to the boys overseas.
His speech, like all respectable anti-escalation discourse of the time, began with a brief declaration of American determination to stay in Vietnam until commitments were fulfilled.
It was also said because it was still accepted by all except the New Left.
Unilateral withdrawal, we thought, would lead, not to negotiation, but to a Communist Vietnam.
In retrospect, | feel that, while we were right in our forecast of the consequences of withdrawal, the New Left was right in seeing these consequences, whatever they might be, as less ghastly than continuing the war. | wish that unilateral withdrawal rather than negotiation had been the dove objective in 1967.
But it wasn’t; and it would have done even less well than “negotiation now” in a country still a good deal more hawkish than dovish.
In any case, Kennedy rushed through the obligatory ritual in two sentences.
He himself had been involved, he said, in “many” of the decisions that had brought the United States into Vietnam.
He enjoined his countrymen to visualize the “horror” of this “distant and ferocious” conflict.
This horror, Kennedy said, was “not just a nation’s responsibility, but yours and mine.
It is our chemicals that scorch the children and our bombs that level the villages.
And now we were “steadily widening the war” at just the time when opportunities for settlement appeared to lie at hand.
He asked the administration to test Hanoi’s sincerity by halting the bombardment of the North and saying the United States was ready to negotiate within the week.
As for the idea that we must punish the North for its iniquity, “We are not in Vietnam to play the role of an avenging angel pouring death and destruction on the roads and factories and homes of a guilty land.
Kennedy’s proposals, Jackson said, put the United States into a position of weakness.
Fulbright, McGovern, Clark, Tydings, Claiborne Pell, Albert Gore, John Sherman Cooper, supported Kennedy.
Phil Ochs, the folk singer, who had come down to Washington to hear the speech, was with him.
Kennedy remembered that Bob Dylan was supposed to have changed his name to help his career and asked Ochs whether this was so.
He went on, said William Dunfey, the national committeeman from New Hampshire, in “an unbelievable tirade,” ending by reading aloud a letter to the sister of a soldier killed in Vietnam.
The letter, Johnson revealed with unconcealed relish, was signed John F Kennedy.
Undeterred, Robert Kennedy pursued his campaign to drive home the meaning of the war.
In the question period someone asked about student deferment from the draft.
Kennedy said he was against it; he could afford to send his children to college, but others couldn’t, and it was unfair.
There was, Said Fred Harris , a “giant gasp”; then stunned silence; then overwhelming applause.
In fact, so long as the Americans dying in Vietnam came from the other side of the tracks, the respectable middle class did not mind the war.
Only when the contraction of educational deferments late in 1967 exposed their own sons did community leaders begin to turn against further escalation.
In mid-April 1967, Joseph Rauh invited Vice President Humphrey to hear the views of long-time liberal friends.
He said gloomily that his Vietnam speech “had probably stiffened LBJ’s determination to pursue the opposite course.
At Rauh’s house an impassioned Humphrey gave us a defense of the war, at once voluble and pathetic.
He thought a physical barrier across northern South Vietnam—the same old fence Lansdale had derided in 1961—was a great idea. “| was most depressed of all,” | wrote afterward, “by the lack of the sense of the concrete human dimension of problems which had characterized the old Hubert.
Westmoreland denounced the doves for leading the enemy to believe “he can win politically” what he could not win militarily.
He condemned the policy of seeking peace “through military action which is really going to bring about the destruction of Vietnam and the people.”2& | spoke to McGovern and Kennedy the next day.
Both were a little melancholy, felt that the senatorial revolt could be no more than a gesture, and wondered what kind of national support they could get.
The irony is that all of us for years have been defending the presidential prerogative and regarding the Congress as a drag on policy.
It is evident now that this delight in a strong Presidency was based on the fact that, up to now, all strong Presidents in American history have pursued policies of which one had approved.
We are now confronted by the anomaly of a strong President using these arguments to pursue a course which so far as 1 can see, can lead only to disaster.
In May 1967, nearly half the college students described themselves as hawks, hardly more than a third as doves.
And, in a way, professions of support licensed a larger measure of opposition on issues by making it harder to charge politicalambition or personal resentment.
Sorensen handed him a hyperbolic paragraph as he rushed from the airport to the Americana Hotel.
At the end of the evening, he walked out with me into the soft spring night.
Tribune of the Underclass ROBERT KENNEDY SAW Vietnam not in abstractions but in images — a village smashed, children scorched, the mother clasping the baby while fire rained inexplicably from the sky.
This compulsion to be at one with individuals in extreme situations was increasingly the key to his politics.
From childhood he had, as an underdog, sympathized with underdogs; then Dallas, at once agony and liberation, had charged sympathy with almost despairing intensity.
His own experience of the waste and cruelty of life gave him access to the sufferings of others.
So long as the Great Society absorbed the President, there was strong reason for Kennedy, despite differences on foreign policy, not to break with the administration.
As the civil rights struggle moved north, poverty and racial inequality were more than ever intertwined.
In 1963 Kennedy had observed that race problems were “at least temporarily ... more easily resolved” in the south.
When segregation was based on law, repeal the law, “release a valve,” and the oppressed, for a time, were satisfied.
Here segregation had been abolished, political and legal equality affirmed, but inequality remained.
You could pass a law to permit a Negro to eat at Howard Johnson’s restaurant or stay at the Hilton Hotel.
Early in 1965 Martin Luther King began a campaign to register black voters in Selma, Alabama.
When local whites responded with tear gas and bull whips, Johnson in his eloquent “We Shall Overcome” speech in March asked Congress for new voting rights legislation.
The passage in August of the Voting Rights Act of 1965 started a far-reaching transformation of southern attitudes.
A Mississippi legislator of the old school compared Kennedy’s visit to a murderer returning to the scene of his crime.
When in the question period someone asked about Ross Barnett, Kennedy’s deadpan account of Barnett’s erratic behavior in 1962 produced, to his astonishment, gales of laughter.
The trip confirmed his conviction that the next battle for racial justice lay in the northern city.
But he was also concerned when white northerners rushed off to Selma forgetting their own problems at home.
Thousands do not flock to Harlem to protest these conditions—much less to change them.
In August 1965 violence broke out in Watts, the black ghetto in Los Angeles.
Beating, looting, burning, sniping, bombing, went on for six days, leaving 34 people dead, more than tooo injured.
That problem, Kennedy said in April 1966, would yield “only to other kinds of fundamental change—to the forces created by better education and better housing and better job opportunities.
The northern black, as Martin Luther King wrote in early 1965, sought “more significant participation in government, and the restructuring of his economic life to end ghetto existence.
His nonviolent demonstrations —the Southern Christian Leadership Conference’s first and last campaign in the north—ended in grisly riots.
Nonviolence appeared impotent before the despair of the ghetto, the obduracy of the white establishment and the anger of the black militants, who now claimed from King's failure further evidence that “burn, baby, burn” was the road to salvation.
Still, there remained “a strange attitude of both admiration and caution in Martin’s conversation about Bobby,” Andrew Young wrote the year after both men died.
Martin tended to feel overly humble about his own accomplishments and somewhat afraid of “power” ... and saw Bobby as a man of both moral courage and a keen sense of political timing.
He was clear on the moral issues, but anguished over their implementation.
He could remember only a casual chat during the hearings of a Senate committee.
Perhaps this distance was dictated by the attempts to link the statements and actions of these two great statesmen through some direct financial or political alliance.
Neither man could profit by such an overt relationship and both avoided any direct association.
Yet they continued down parallel paths of opposition to racism, poverty and war.
If there is an after life, and | have no doubt there is, | am sure they are together—finally able to share the much denied love that could never be fulfilled in a world such as ours.
Kennedy had been exploring city slums since the days of the Committee on Juvenile Delinquency and now did so more intently than ever.
Rats, filth, bad housing, bad schools, unemployment, segregation, powerlessness, alienation, hate, crime, violence, “burn, baby, burn”—all seemed interlocked in an endless chain to which no one had the key.
But, as Vietnam escalated, Johnson began to hold back domestic spending.
He thought it broke up families (the “man in the house” rule reduced payments for families that stayed together), destroyed self-respect and subjected the poor toa “orying” middle-class welfare bureaucracy.
We believed in land reform in Latin America because, you know, people ought to have land to work.
Employment for the poor was the centerpiece of the urban program he first presented ina series of speeches in January 1966.
With the administration otherwise engaged, Kennedy moved out on his own.
In July he introduced a bill calling for tax incentives to induce private enterprise to bring plants, shops and jobs into urban poverty areas.
His more basic proposal, introduced in the autumn with Joseph Clark of Pennsylvania, was to make the national government itself the employer of last resort.
The Kennedy-Clark bill contemplated the creation of two million new jobs through public service employment.
There remained the gnawing political problems —powerlessness and participation.
The slum clearance and public housing programs of the New and Fair Deals had perpetuated segregation.
Kennedy understood the Black Power point that black families, economically and psychologically unprepared for white neighborhoods, might better develop pride in their own culture and self before they attempted the adventure of integration.
Otherwise the multiracial society would be founded on the white man’s values.
He proposed in 1966 the establishment of community development corporations, owned and controlled by the residents of the area, mobilizing both local talent and resources and outside capital, private as well as public.
In 1965 Thomas Johnston, the soft-spoken Kentuckian from the Yale Drama School who headed his office in the metropolis, had worked up with HARYOU, the Urban League and other organizations a program providing some five thousand summer jobs in Harlem.
The program was a success, but investigations afterward revealed incompetence or worse in the handling of funds that baffled auditors from the Office of Economic Opportunity for months to come.
The experience showed too —as Kenneth Clark had already discovered in HARYOU—how hard it was to get things done in a locality dominated by powerful and selfish personalities like Adam Clayton Powell and J Raymond Jones.
Where Harlem was filled with large, crumbling tenements, Bedford-Stuyvesant had streets lined with brownstones.
Fifteen percent of the people owned their homes as against 2 percent in Harlem.
On February 4, 1966, Kennedy took a long walk through Bedford-Stuyvesant.
He met with a group of community activists, led by state supreme court judge Thomas R Jones, the leading black politician in the area.
One said, “You’re another white guy that’s out here for the day; you'll be gone and you'll never be seen again.
The Negro people are angry, Senator, and, judge that | am, I’m angry, too.
The Taconic Foundation, which had helped Kennedy on the black registration drive when he was Attorney General, was interested.
Soon McGeorge Bundy, now head of the Ford Foundation, was drawn in; later Mrs.
But money by itself was not a solution and could even create difficulties, as it had in Harlem the previous summer.
In September, Johnston suggested the possibility of enlisting white business leaders who might provide technical and managerial advice as well as capital.
And, with Vietnam consuming available federal money, social policy would require a larger infusion of private funds.
At the same time, he recognized that he would get nowhere if business saw Bedford-Stuyvesant as a Kennedy promotion.
So he accompanied his courtship of business leaders with an assuagement of Republican fears.
He saw at once the value of the idea, had come by now to like Kennedy and provided wholehearted cooperation.
Kennedy privately thought Lindsay a lightweight. | suspect he was also a little jealous of Lindsay, who was very tall, very handsome and filled with what girls called charm and journalists charisma.
But they agreed on most things, especially on the importance of racial justice, and each essentially respected the other.
He counted heavily on André Meyer of Lazard Freres, on whom Jacqueline Kennedy had come to rely for counsel.
Johnston stiffened, wondering what inordinate capitalist demand was about to come.
Kaplan of Welch Grape Juice, James Oates of Equitable Life Assurance and George Moore of the National City Bank came readily along.
André Meyer also suggested David Lilienthal, the old New Dealer who had carried his developmental genius from the Tennessee Valley to the far corners of the planet.
Schmidt said at once that he had voted for Nixon in 1960 and Keating in 1964.
V On December 10, 1966, ten months after his walk thrdugh the gloomy streets, Kennedy, with Lindsay and Javits by his side, unfolded the development plan to a thousand people gathered in the auditorium of a Bedford-Stuyvesant school.
John Doar was persuaded in 1967 to leave the Justice Department and run the Development and Services Corporation.
Lilienthal observed him at a meeting the next spring, “looking quite handsome in spite of the fact that his tie wasn’t fully pulled up, his suit was rumpled, his sox were droopy.
He had already, with Javits’s cosponsorship, amended the Economic Opportunity Act to provide for a “special impact” program intended to channel federal development aid into urban poverty areas.
Now they came out with this thing, and the first | hear about it is on television.
Black leaders liked Kennedy’s openness, his conviction that something could be done, even his occasional abruptness of challenge, proving, as it did, that he was treating them as equals.
Kenneth Clark, whose dismay over Kennedy at the Baldwin meeting in 1963 had been compounded by Kennedy’s surrender of HARYOU to Adam Clayton Powell in 1964, met him again in 1967.
This time, the longer they talked, “the more | came around to saying, ‘You know, it is possible for human beings to grow.
His work on the Migratory Labor Subcommittee of the Senate Labor Committee gave him a vivid understanding of the wretched conditions among itinerant farmworkers.
When a witness from the American Farm Bureau, after objecting to every specific proposal for the protection of migratory labor, admitted that his group of prosperous farmers had no program of its own, Kennedy was incredulous.
They were fresh from Delano, California, where the National Farm Workers Association was conducting a strike of migratory grape workers and urging a national boycott against grapes picked by nonunion labor.
Reuther strongly recommended that the subcommittee go to California and hold hearings on the situation in the grapefields.
He was trying to figure how to save the cities; he was digging his way out of the Vietnam chicken coop; and he was reluctant to leave Washington.
The local sheriff came before the committee to explain his manner of keeping the peace.
He took photographs, he said, to identify potential troublemakers; he had five thousand, he bragged, in his files.
Kennedy asked why he had arrested forty-four of Chavez’s men engaged in lawful picketing.
The two men had in fact met in 1960, when Chavez was running a drive to register Spanish-speaking voters.
And Bobby Kennedy was standing there; he was talking to a lot of people. | think he saw this wild-eyed looking person walking toward him, and he threw up his hands and he said, ‘| know.
He found three migrant families living in an old bus with the seats ripped out.
Inside he saw six small children, their bodies covered with running sores.
He made a face, shook his head and held her calloused hand for a moment.
Cardboard covered the windows of the next bus, where a child played forlornly on a filthy mattress.
Once back in the twentieth century, Kennedy demanded that Rockefeller investigate health conditions in the camps and called on labor leaders to organize the migrants.
As senator from the state eighth in the country in Indian population, Kennedy visited the remnants of the once mighty Five Nations in their upstate reservations.
He talked Indians with LaDonna Harris, the Indian wife of his Oklahoma colleague, and in March 1967 he addressed an organization she had founded called Oklahomans for Indian Opportunity.
He went into the schools on the reservations and asked if there were Indian teachers and whether they were teaching Indian culture and history.
He looked at library shelves to see what Indians could read about their own past.
At the Blackfoot reservation in Fort Hall, Idaho, they turned up only one book on Indians—Captive of the Delawares, its jacket showing an Indian scalping a blond child.
At one reservation he learned that a baby had died of starvation the same day.
Loving a public official for an Indian is almost unheard of, as history bears out.
Kennedy, Deloria concluded, “somehow validated obscure undefined feelings of Indian people which they had been unwilling to admit to themselves.
In March 1967 the Senate Labor Committee’s Subcommittee on Poverty held new hearings.
One of the witnesses was Marian Wright, a twenty-sevenyear-old black lawyer from South Carolina and Yale Law School, now in Mississippi for the NAACP’s Legal Defense Fund.
Marian Wright told the committee how mechanization and the reduction in cotton planting under the federal subsidy program had thrown thousands of blacks out of work in the Mississippi Delta.
At this point Mississippi counties had shifted from the program that gave surplus food to the poor to one that required the monthly purchase of food stamps in lump sums the poor did not have.
Joseph Clark, the chairman, thought the committee should go to Mississippi and see for itself.
Kennedy sent Edelman down a few days in advance to get a sense of the problem.
They dined that evening with a spectrum of Mississippians, from Oscar Carr to Charles Evers.
Kennedy, as usual, was not interested in the explanations of officials.
After the hearing Kennedy told Charles Evers, “I want to see it”28 The next day Kennedy and Clark toured the Delta.
This lady came out with hardly any clothes on, and we spoke to her and told her who he was.
Bobby looked down at the child, and then he picked him up and sat down on that dirty bed.
He tried, said Kotz, to evoke a response from the child, talking, caressing, tickling.
Freeman wondered whether conditions were really so bad as they thought.
Johnson asked Joseph Califano, his chief assistant on domestic affairs, what it was all about.
The Field Foundation sent down a team of doctors headed by Robert Coles, a psychiatrist who combined the concerns of a sociologist with the sensitivity of a literary artist.
If their efforts offended the southern conservatives on the Agriculture committees, the Johnson officials warned, there would be even less money for commodity distribution and food stamps.
In July, John Stennis, the conservative Mississippi senator, introduced an emergency food and medical bill.
But the administration remained hostile, and the Texas chairman of the House Agriculture Committee derailed the bill.
In October ani administration Nutrition Task Force recommended $300 million more for food programs.
Later Johnson learned that Freeman was planning to spend $145 million over the 1968 budget on food programs.
In his only known written criticism of Johnson in these years, he set forth the situation to Mrs.
Arthur Krim, who was professionally concerned about the effects of malnutrition on the mental development of small children and whose husband was the Democratic party’s chief fund raiser.
Perhaps he also feared to incite disorder by encouraging social protest.
A contagion of riots, marked by arson, looting and sniping, began in the south in May, spread to the north in June and reached an awful climax in July.
Twenty-six people were killed in Newark in disorders lasting from July 12 to July 17.
It was continuing two days later when | had dinner with Robert and Ethel Kennedy, Pete Hamill and José Torres, the gentle former world’s light heavyweight champion and a respected leader of his people.
After dinner we piled into Torres’s car and drove through the anxious streets of East Harlem, with buildings shuttered and knots of policemen on each corner.
YOU CROSS THIS LINE, YOU BE DEAD.22 That same night the greatest violence of all exploded in Detroit, where forty-three people died in the next four days.
He explained his decision over nationwide television in a cold statement, notably lacking any acknowledgment that human despair might possibly lie behind the explosion.
Kennedy said that, first, he would ask the heads of the three television networks to produce as rapidly as possible—and run in prime time—a two-hour documentary showing what it was like to live in a ghetto.
Let them show the sound, the feel, the hopelessness, and what it's like to think you'll never get out.
Show a black teenager, told by some radio jingle to stay in school, looking at his older brother—who stayed in school—and who’s out of a job.
Show the Mafia pushing narcotics; put a Candid Camera team in a ghetto school and watch what a rotten system of education it really is.
Then I’d ask people to watch it—and experience what it means to live in the most affluent society in history—without hope.
Next, Kennedy continued, he would put together the racial data on every major city.
He would call meetings at the White House—one a day if necessary—for each city on the danger list.
We could do it, he told Thomas Johnston, the way we did Bedford-Stuyvesant.
Let the local community define its problems and plans; let the government define the available resources; let us work it out together to save the cities.
It was their sense of him as a man who had “lived with tragedy himself, felt suffering and could Share that without speaking it.
When he went into Harlem or Watts, when he visited a sharecropper’s cabin or an Indian reservation, these were Ais children with bloated bellies, his parents wasting away in dreary old age, his miserable hovel, his wretched scraps for supper.
That is the wound about him which speaks to children he has never seen.
It is just below the surface; he can’t quite see it; he doesn’t know its size or Shape or worth or even what it’s called.
Among the grape-pickers on strike in central California, in Cloth Market Square in Cracow, on the Ole Miss Campus, in a Senate hearing room.
Perhaps the young know what it is; Kennedy spends an inordinate amount of time at schools and colleges talking with them.
In the predominant half of his nature he remained the realistic political leader.
He wanted to be President, he believed in constitutional democracy, he abhorred violence, he could not have been a revolutionary.
It was not giving the poor a fair break or the minorities an equal opportunity.
It appeared to be good only at keeping power arrangements as they were.
Because it seemed useless for change, the poor, the minorities, the young were losing faith in it.
He had mastered the textbook components of power in America—political organization, nominations, elections, legislatures, cabinets, courts, the unions, the press, television, academia.
The “enemy within” was wider and deeper than Kennedy himself had supposed a few years before.
Still his book, dismissed at that time as overwrought, read later, Lowenstein observed, less as fanatic than prophetic.
With all its faults, the old liberalism had at least arrayed itself against the immovable and impenetrable institutions.
Kennedy had overcome most of his former scorn for liberals, even called himself a liberal on occasion and cheerfully addressed liberal groups he would have disdained a decade before.
Bill Green’s father had been the cantankerous Democratic boss of Philadelphia in the days when the ADA, over his bitter opposition, helped elect Joseph Clark, Kennedy’s Mississippi companion, as reform mayor.
And its distinctive institutions tended to leave out those too poor or demoralized to form organizations of their own.
In September 1967 Daniel Patrick Moynihan urged the ADA to join with conservatives in protecting “the social fabric of the nation” against radical students and militant blacks.
The great forces for change—the civil rights movement, the antiwar movement, the nationalist movements of the Third World—represented direct action.
If new institutions of power could be built among the powerless, if the new movements could avoid violence —this was why he so greatly valued Martin Luther King and Cesar Chavez—change might come without tearing a fragile society apart.
He was too much a skeptic, or an Augustinean, to be altogether optimistic.
He sort of conveyed the futility of most means and the uncertain glory of most ends.
By November 1967 when Robert Kennedy had his fortysecond birthday, he was the most original, enigmatic and provocative figure in midcentury American politics.
He gave hope to some groups in the country, generally the weak; threatened others, generally the strong.
Some saw him as compassionate savior, some as ruthless opportunist, some as irresponsible demagogue plucking at the exposed nerves of the American polity—race, poverty, the war.
His movement beyond liberalism both fascinated and alarmed the young militants of the day.
Robert Scheer, a radical journalist before he became Playboy's expert on the mental lusts of Jimmy Carter, registered both reactions in an article for the New Left magazine Ramparts in 1967.
Kennedy, he said, was “undoubtedly a very charming and alive man for a politician” but “dangerous” because he provided “the illusion of dissent without its substance.
Hubert Humphrey is a bad joke to most young people, but Bobby is believable, and for that reason, much more serious.
After reading the Ramparts piece, which the author thought very tough, Kennedy merely told him he had some interesting points.
Kennedy cried out to Dorothy Schiff in 196524 and to others from time to time later.
The English journalist Margaret Laing told him she had met two people in the previous week who felt so strongly about him they wanted to hit him.
Averell Harriman said, “It was impossible for him not to tell the truth as he saw it. | think that is why some people thought he was ruthless.
There were more children —Matthew Maxwell Taylor Kennedy on January 11, 1965; Douglas Harriman Kennedy on March 24, 1967; homage to Taylor, Dillon and Harriman, three impeccable members of the American establishment.
And so | think people work out their own lives ... just as long as they understand that in the last analysis what is important that they give something to others, and not just turn in on themselves.
An overachiever himself since infancy, Kennedy was now more than ever the collector of overachievers.
One never knew whom to expect at Hickory Hill—novelists, entertainers, columnists, decathlon champions, astronauts, football stars, diplomats, politicians, mountain climbers, international beauties, appearing in every age, sex, size, color. | remember the party in November 1966 to celebrate Harriman’s seventy-fifth birthday.
Ethel directed the guests to come in costumes commemorating an aspect of Harriman’s life.
Art Buchwald, remembering Harriman and the Yale crew, was a coxswain roaring jokes through a megaphone.
Kennedy himself found somewhere the distinctive style of long black overcoat and creased felt hat that Harriman had worn as wartime ambassador to Moscow.
Hubert Humphrey was there (this was only a few months after the fox-in-the-chicken-coop crack, but Kennedy was not a feudist) and gave, | noted, the best toast of the evening; “he was witty, charming, relaxed and brief.
Outside the bay windows in life-size wax replica were Roosevelt, Churchill and Stalin as at Yalta.
There were the annual pet shows, with prizes for the longest nose, the shortest tail and other oddities, and Buchwald as chief judge and master of ceremonies.
Since the Kennedys had more pets than anyone else, they won more prizes.
Brumus, still monstrously in the picture, distinguished himself one year by lifting his leg and discharging on a nice old woman sitting placidly on the lawn.
Mr Buchwald has been ordered to take a complete rest by his physician until such time as he recovers from the traumatic neurosis from which he is suffering as a result of the attack.
Since Broomass is black, the case is fraught with civil rights’ undercurrents.
His father was no better, but Kennedy ministered to him whenever he could, in winters at Palm Beach, in summers at Hyannis Port.
One would find a group, small or large, and talk to the early morning, the conversation shifting easily from the light to the serious, propelled by Robert's endless curiosity, irreverent wit and acerbic honesty. | went often, too, to Hyannis Port for long, lazy, sundrenched summer days with the Kennedys or the Smiths.
For all one’s forebodings about the republic these were good and joyous times.
IV He had always been a taker of risks from that day, so many years before, when he had thrown himself off the yawl into Nantucket Sound in his determination to learn to swim, and John Kennedy had said he had shown either a lot of guts or no sense at all, depending on how you looked at it.
After Dallas the Canadian government named the tallest unclimbed peak in North America, 14,000 feet high, in honor of his brother.
The National Geographic Society proposed that the remaining Kennedy brothers join in the first assault on Mount Kennedy.
Robert reluctantly—he hated heights—decided in March 1965 that he would climb Mount Kennedy himself.
Two veterans of the successful Mount Everest expedition of 1963, James Whittaker and Barry Prather, came with him.
Whittaker asked Kennedy what he had been doing to get in shape for the climb.
They flew north to the Yukon Territory, Kennedy reading a book by Churchill.
They helicoptered to a base camp at 8700 feet; then roped themselves together, Kennedy in the middle, and set out across glaciers and crevasses to the summit.
After two days, they saw the final cone standing vertically against the sky.
Whittaker dug his ax into the steep ice ridge and began to pull himself, almost, it seemed to Kennedy, straight up.
After some minutes Kennedy managed to join Whittaker, Prather following.
When they reached the crest, Kennedy went ahead for the last two hundred feet.
He deposited Kennedy memorabilia, crossed himself, stood a moment in inscrutable silence and then, with immense relief and exhilaration, made his way down.
Professional climbers thought that, roped between Whittaker and Prather, Kennedy could hardly fail, and deprecated the achievement.
In September 1965, as the Kennedy schooner was buffeted by a thirty-knot wind off Long Island, a Coast Guard cutter hailed them to say that Kathleen Kennedy had received head injuries at a horse show.
Kennedy, deciding that the quickest way to reach the hospital would be via the Coast Guard, plunged into ten-foot waves and, while everyone held his breath, swam fifty yards to the cutter.
We all worried and speculated about this almost compulsive courtship of danger.
In September 1966 Dean Markham, his cherished friend from Harvard days, and Ethel’s brother George Skakel died ina plane crash in the mountains of western Idaho. | saw Robert and Ethel soon afterward at the Smiths.
The evening was spent in Irish-wake style with uproarious reminiscence of their dead friends.
If | had my choice, | would never have lived. | had no control over it.
V The paradoxes of Kennedy were a natural for the literary imagination.
But, unlike Europe, where culture and the state share the same capitals, politics has generally been remote from literature in the United States.
Except for an occasional Henry Adams, writers, journalists apart, have not often been stable-companions to statesmen.
Franklin Roosevelt acquired grand literary friends like Archibald MacLeish and Robert Emmet Sherwood, but this was after he became President.
Robert Kennedy as senator, however, sought out, interested, beguiled and sometimes repelled the writers of his day.
George Plimpton was an old friend, an overachiever of impressive versatility and the only writer Kennedy knew who kept up with him in the melodrama of physical risk.
He had been affectionately through labor racketeering and Watts with Budd Schulberg.
Irwin Shaw was always great fun when he made his annual descent from Switzerland.
Galbraith was a close counselor, John Bartlow Martin a loyal friend through the years.
He had a good Irish time with newspapermen like Jimmy Breslin and Pete Hamill, who made much of the fact that they, unlike Kennedy, had really Known what it meant to be poor.
He liked James Wechsler, the liberal, and Jack Newfield, the radical, and Murray Kempton, the anarchist, because they were bright and entertaining and passionate.
In the summers Kennedy, his brother and assorted friends often sailed from Hyannis Port to see William Styron or Art Buchwald on Martha’s Vineyard.
Richard Yates, the novelist, who worked at Justice in 1963, did not like Kennedy.
Nothing, even Kennedy’s affinity for the wounded of the world, could appease Gore Vidal.
Nor could James Baldwin, though in later years he acknowledged complexity in Kennedy, ever get over that stormy session in 1963.
Walking his dog early one morning, he saw Kennedy talking sternly to two small boys.
Kennedy made them promise to give up cigarettes, and they ran like maniacs down the street.
Reading the Newspaper”; “Sleeping on the Stones of Unknown Towns ”; “Gallery-going”— K looks at the immense, rather theoretical paintings.
The artist, who has been standing behind a dealer, regards K with hatred.
His hands beat the surface of the water which tears and rips about him.
The white foam, the green depths. | throw a line, the coils leaping out over the surface of the water.
His right hand grasps the line that | have thrown him.... | pull him out of the water.
Kennedy, Norman Mailer thought, was the sheriff who could have been an outlaw.
Oddly Mailer, who might have relished Kennedy most, even perhaps understood him best, met him only once.
Kennedy thought Stevenson was interesting too and began to like seeing him.
He abandons, piece by piece, the outside world—he puts away the magazines, the cigar is forgotten, the offer of gum is unheard, and he is utterly alone.
His face, close up, is structurally hard; there is no waste, nothing left over and not put to use; everything has been enlisted in the cause, whatever it may be.
His expression is tough, but the toughness seems largely directed toward himself, inward—a contempt for self-indulgence, for weakness.
The sadness in his face, by the same token, is not sentimental sadness, which would imply self-pity, but rather, at some level, a resident, melancholy bleakness.
Vi Kennedy read history and biography and an occasional novel but most of all he loved poetry.
The long day wanes: the slow moon climbs: the deep Moans round with many voices.
Come, my friends, Tis not too late to seek a newer world —and provided title and epigraph for a book he published at the end of 1967.
Kennedy was delighted once when he was able to finish a couplet that had slipped Burton’s memory.
They inhabit his face like two beings uninvolved in the general gaiety.
Yevtushenko proposed a toast—to Robert’s completion of his brother’s work.
He reminded Kennedy that, according to the Russian custom, the goblets must be emptied in a single gulp and smashed against the floor.
Kennedy, a little embarrassed, said these were Ethel’s heirlooms—“wives will be wives”—and produced instead some glasses from the kitchen.
Probably he, too, was superstitious.” | doubt it; he was more probably tired or bored.
Yevtushenko was the poet whom the Soviet authorities liked sending abroad.
The American Academy of Poets invited him to the United States in the spring of 1967, then received word that the authorities might not permit him to come.
It was thought that Kennedy’s intercession could help. | sooke to him, and he sent off a cable at once.
He and Kennedy talked about the frustrations of the young, about the Americans most read in the Soviet Union (“Salinger, Updike and Cheever,” Voznesensky said), about Pasternak, Saint-Exupéry and John Kennedy.
Allen Ginsberg, the bard of the counterculture, later chatted with Kennedy about the Soviet poets.
Ginsberg, as Peter Edelman, who was present, recalled, explained that, “when he appeared on a platform with both of them, Yevtushenko had embraced him; but Voznesensky was clearly the more open person because they had kissed deeply and soulfully.
Ginsberg, a sweet and obsessed man, had come to explain to Kennedy his intricate theories about drugs, the Narcotics Bureau and the Mafia.
Kennedy, who already knew about the syndicates, wanted to hear Ginsberg on the relations between the flower people, for whom Ginsberg was patron saint, and the young political militants.
He asked what were the serious possibilities of alliance between ‘hippy’ and ‘black’ groups. | was unsure. | asked if he’d ever tried grass.
Ginsberg asked whether he had two minutes to hear the Hare Krishna mantra.
Kennedy said, “You ought to sing it to the guy up the street,” gesturing toward the White House.
Then there are those wonderful statesmen, like Lincoln and Edmund Burke, who were also great writers.
Well, | do think you are putting into practice that kind of courage and ability that your Brother so subtly praised in his Profiles, and know how to be brave without becoming simple-minded.
Remembering that Thomas Johnston had begun at the Yale Drama School, Lowell once asked him where in Shakespeare he would cast Kennedy.
He had died young, leaving in France a son who was murdered and an expeditionary force that was destroyed.
He meant he had a very difficult career coming from this difficult but very elevated forebear who made it possible.
One was refreshed when you wisecracked through the guests, usually somewhat woodenly, hoarsely dry, pure Celt on the eastern seaboard.
While he thought it a “bad mistake” to shout down government officials, he could see ample reason for street demonstrations against the war.
In August, without clearing his testimony with the White House, McNamara told the Senate Military Affairs Committee that it was militarily pointless to keep on bombing the North.
The afternoon papers had McNamara leaving Defense to become head of the World Bank.
RFK said that Bob had not had any intimation that Johnson had sent his name up for the Bank.
He had had a general conversation with Johnson about it last spring ... but that was all.
Then suddenly he heard, not from the President but from a leak in London, that he was on his way out. | expressed incredulity at Bob’s apparent acquiescence in this.
He said that he thought that was what would finally happen—that Bob would not take the World Bank job and would instead quietly resign from government.
We all supposed that McNamara’s dismissal removed the last hope at the summit of government for restraint in the war—a supposition reinforced when Johnson soon announced a leading hawk, Clark Clifford, as the new Secretary of Defense.
Only McNamara, Kissinger told me in December, had kept negotiations alive.
Calling for a hand vote at a Catholic girls’ college in November, Kennedy was appalled when a majority wanted more, not less, bombing.
The United States, Kennedy replied, had originally gone into South Vietnam in order to permit the South Vietnamese to decide their own future.
Plainly the South Vietnamese did not like the future held out by the Saigon regime.
Those of us who stay here in the United States, we must feel it when we use napalm, when a village is destroyed and civilians are killed.
We love our country for what it can be and for the justice it stands for and what we’re going to mean to the next generation.
It is not just the land, it is not just the mountains, it is what this country stands for.
In the summer of 1967 Lowenstein had conceived the quixotic enterprise of organizing a movement to dump Johnson.
It was, as Jack Newfield observed, rather like Castro and a handful of guerrillas in the Sierra Maestre planning to dump Batista.
And it could not succeed without a presidential candidate determined to end the war.
When Lowenstein began his quest for a candidate, liberals had an alternative strategy, advocated by Joseph Rauh.
At first Robert Kennedy thought that this tactic would only make it easy for Johnson to sidetrack the doves by promising to let them help write the platform.
He added, as news from all over, that Jesse Unruh, the powerful organization Democrat in California, had turned against Johnson and that Mayor Daley in Chicago was “very deeply opposed” to the war, the son of his closest friend having recently been killed in Vietnam.
Around ten-thirty that evening Lowenstein, Newfield and James Loeb came by.
Lowenstein set forth in fervent language his certitude that Johnson could be beaten in the primaries. | brought up the peace plank.
Johnson, Lowenstein said, might even pull out if defeated in the early primaries.
Older, cautious and wrong, Loeb and | argued that Kennedy was too precious a commodity to be expended in a doomed effort.
No one would believe that | was doing it because of how | felt about Vietnam and poor people. | think Alis doing the right thing, but | think that someone else will have to be the first to run.
He dashed around the country, sought out like-minded Democrats, set up local committees, prosecuted the search for a challenger.
McGovern said he had been urging Kennedy since 1965 to run against Johnson.
As for himself, he was up for reelection in South Dakota and feared that his materialization as a peace candidate against the President might defeat him for the Senate in his still hawkish state.
McCarthy had held the dinner table with his eloquent denunciation of the war.
McCarthy, who had had a brilliant career in the House in the fifties, had been a disappointing senator, especially after the frustration of his vice presidential hopes in 1964.
He was immensely intelligent and attractive but had come to seem indolent, frivolous, cynical; also unduly responsive to the legislative requests of the Minneapolis-St.
His concern about the war, though now intense, had come distinctly later than Kennedy’s and far later than McGovern’s.
He had led the fight in the Senate that day for the abolition of the Subversive Activities Control Board.
In the course of conversation, | passed along McGovern’s arresting bulletin.
He said, “He’s going to get a lot of support. | can tell you right now, he’ll run very strong in these primaries.
The danger, of course, is that Gene will make himself the hero and leader of the anti-war movement and cast RFK as Johnny-come-lately.
The hope is that he may increase the fluidity of the situation and draw the Johnson fire, making it possible for RFK to emerge as a less divisive candidate.
On the other hand, they were not at that point particularly unfriendly.
The legend that the Kennedys had never forgiven McCarthy for his nomination of Adlai Stevenson in 1960 was a legend.
Actually John Kennedy thought McCarthy’s the best speech of the convention.
The two men, said O’Donnell, “were never soulmates, but the President was a very practical fellow.
In 1961 President Kennedy spoke at a fund-raising dinner in Minneapolis.
The next morning local Democratic dignitaries proposed to accompany him to mass.
Abigail McCarthy, an intelligent and strong-willed wife, later recalled, “He was interested in where F Scott Fitzgerald had lived and he was frank about his own casual Catholicism.
Perhaps for that reason, but probably more because he favored Humphrey, he would have declined, if asked, to nominate McCarthy for the Vice Presidency in 1964.22 But the two men did not know each other well, then or later.
He thought McCarthy was undependable and uninvolved, too often absent when needed for a debate or a vote, too cozy on the Finance Committee with special interests.
Moreover, McCarthy and John Kennedy, men of the same age, faith, party, heritage, had been inevitable rivals from the day in 1949 when they first met in the House of Representatives.
But Kennedy was rich, eastern, secular, glamorous, while Gene McCarthy was a small-town boy from the upper midwest who attended, and later taught at, a Benedictine college and spent the year in between ina monastery.
McCarthy had made it on his own and, as Galbraith said, simply thought he was intellectually “better qualified than the Kennedys.
Yet, for all this, McCarthy probably had no greater hostility for Robert Kennedy in 1967 than he had for the rest of the Senate.
In March he told James Wechsler that he would be glad to support Kennedy as the strongest candidate against Johnson.
Had Kennedy told McCarthy that he would go, | have little doubt that McCarthy at this point would have supported him.
But Kennedy, while he respected them on issues, discounted them on politics.
He believed them inexperienced, emotional and, like all staff people, institutionally committed to make their boss President.
The general feeling, put most forcefully by Theodore Sorensen, was that Kennedy should wait for 1972.
Kenneth O'Donnell, however, said that Johnson was a bully and a coward who would run away from a fight.
Though O’Donnell soon came privately to believe that Kennedy should run in 1968, he felt that only Kennedy could make the decision and that meetings about it were a waste of time.
He began, curiously, by saying that he would advise against his trying in 1968.
If Johnson were reelected, he would devote all his attention to making sure Kennedy did not succeed him.
When there was a tide in the affairs of men, it should be taken at the flood.
People can forgive mistakes, ambition, etc., but they never get over distrust.
On November 3, in another long letter, Fred Dutton, an equally valued adviser, took the opposite side.
The polls, said Dutton, proved Johnson’s weakness, not Kennedy’s strength.
In domestic politics | have never thought he is a fighter at all in a personal crunch—his toughness is of the locker room or cloakroom kind.
Of course, you might “decide LB] is so dangerous and Vietnam so bad that he must be defeated and a Democratic election blocked regardless of who the GOP nominee may be.
If you were to enter at some later point, there might well be serious resentment on the ground that you were a Johnny-come-lately trying to cash in after brave Eugene McCarthy had done the real fighting. | had done the real fighting.
As for the theory that Kennedy’s entry would split the Democrats and elect Nixon, this prospect, | argued, contained its own cure. “| think that you could beat LB] in the primaries,” and, if this led the Republicans to nominate Nixon, “so much the better.
He is the one Republican candidate who would reunite even a divided and embittered Democratic party.”22 | pressed the case at Hickory Hill over the first weekend in November.
Perhaps “as McCarthy beats LBJ in primaries,” state leaders might ask him to run in the interests of party unity.
Kennedy would have advised McCarthy to say that he did not expect to win in New Hampshire and that he was entering in order to give Democrats a chance to discuss the issues.
He should not talk about Vietnam very much, since he has all the peace votes anyway.
Kennedy doubted that Johnson would get more than 20,000 votes and thought McCarthy had a “good chance” of actually taking New Hampshire.
It was one of those hopeless encounters where two men meet, not much liking one another, one too proud to seek advice, the other too proud to volunteer it.
The meeting confirmed Kennedy’s belief that McCarthy would be no more serious as a Candidate than he had latterly been as a senator.
As for McCarthy, when he made his formal announcement on November 30, a reporter asked whether Kennedy might not take over his movement.
Present, in addition to Bobby and Bill, were Ted Kennedy, Ted Sorensen, Dick Goodwin, Fred Dutton, Pierre Salinger and myself.
The serious discussion began with my putting the case for his running in 1968. | said... that, if McCarthy did moderately well in the primaries, he might expose Johnson without establishing himself; that state leaders would understand that their own tickets would go down if LB) were at the head of the ticket; and that Bobby should then emerge as a candidate, rescue the party and end the war in Vietnam.
The dissension in the Democratic party, | said, would tempt the Republicans to nominate Nixon, who would be the easiest candidate to beat.
Dick Goodwin then argued a slightly different case for running at once—entering the primaries, assuming a McCarthy withdrawal, and carrying the fight through to the convention.
RFK then said that the talk up to this point had revolved around himself and the party.
He was not sure whether the country or the world could survive five more years of Johnson.
Ted Kennedy’s view was that LB] is sure of reelection and that Bobby is sure of nomination in 1972.
Dick suggested that LB], if reelected, would use all his wiles and powers to prevent RFK's nomination.
Ted felt that he would try this, but his capacity to do damage would be limited.
To do anything now, Ted said, would be to jeopardize, if not destroy, Bobby’s future.
It would be an unpopular step within the party; but no one should underestimate the amount of sentiment in the country, and this would still be there in 1972.
Ted Sorensen thought it would be futile to go into the primaries and impossible to buck up the McCarthy effort without implicating the Kennedys in his failure.
Pierre, who said afterward that he agreed philosophically with me and politically with Ted S., questioned the inevitability of LBJ’s reelection.
Bobby said that he was by no means sure he would be any stronger in 1972 than he is now.
He would have been around five years longer, taken more positions, estranged more interests, gained more enemies.
A series of primary victories, he said, would have an impact on other delegations and change the picture.
He would in a way like to get into the fight, and he also is deeply fearful of what another Johnson term might do to the world.
But he said that practically he did not Suppose he would have much chance of getting the nomination, though he thought, if he did, he could beat Nixon.
He added that people in whom he had confidence were strongly opposed to his doing anything, nor, so far as he could see, were many people in the party for it.
But he said no final decisions had to be made for a few more weeks, and in the meantime everyone should keep on brooding.
To date, however, he has kept it as ‘Phase I’—random guerrilla attacks.
He is an arrogant little schmuck , but nobody should underestimate his intelligence.
Vil For Kennedy the decision posed moral as well as political questions.
He deeply believed that Johnson's war, his growing neglect of poverty and racial justice and his violent personality were disasters for the republic.
If Kennedy does not run in 1968, the best side of his character will die.
He will kill it every time he butchers his conscience and makes a speech for Johnson next autumn.
It will die every time a stranger quotes his own words back to him on the value of courage.
Newfield was prepared for expostulation on his next meeting with Kennedy.
BAD BoBBY. | will back the Democratic candidate in 1968. | expect that will be President Johnson.
GOOD BoBBy. | think we’re going to have a difficult time explaining this to ourselves.
In the question period a student observed that the young people had come because they thought Kennedy a man of courage and integrity.
The professionals—from James Rowe to Fred Dutton and Edward Kennedy—thought his entry would be an act of hara-kiri.
The intellectuals who liked to pose as professionals—from John Roche to Theodore Sorensen—thought likewise.
If Robert Kennedy yielded to the temptation, Joseph Alsop wrote, as Alsop’s own cousin Theodore Roosevelt had yielded in 1912, “he will destroy himself.
Fortunately, Joe said, his “astute brother” Edward and his “wise adviser” Sorensen were providing counterpressures.— Only one professional—Unruh of California—was urging him on; and this, Kennedy recognized, was for Unruh’s reasons as much as for Kennedy’s.
McGovern called Gaylord Nelson, Frank Church, Quentin Burdick of North Dakota, and several midwestern governors, including Harold Hughes of lowa.
Kennedy knew the resources of the office, and he feared the desperation of the incumbent.
In the course of his ruminations he expressed a desire to consult Walter Lippmann. | took him to the Lippmann apartment for a drink on a cold January afternoon.
After some chat Kennedy said rather abrupdy that he had to decide about the Presidency.
He set forth his concern about the war, the cities, the poor, his sense that we were drifting toward disaster, his conviction that so many things might be done.
Four more years of Johnson, he said, would be a “catastrophe” for the country; so would four years of Nixon.
And he could not see in particular how he could overcome the advantage that Johnson had through his command of foreign policy.
Nothing, Kennedy thought, would restrain Johnson from manipulating the war in whatever way would help him politically—he could escalate, deescalate, pause, bomb, stall, negotiate, as the domestic political situation required.
On the way to the airport afterward, Kennedy said he had washed 1972 out of his calculations.
He could not make decisions now in terms of consequences four years from now.
Melina Mercouri, the Greek actress, swept down and asked him in her best histrionic style whether he wanted to go down in history as the senator who waited for a safer day.
And, as Kennedy hovered on the brink of challenge, the polls were turning against him too.
Kennedy observed bleakly to Dorothy Schiff that he had “a lot of enemies’— business, labor, the newspapers, even most of the politicians.
But the taciturn O’Donnell rarely offered advice to Kennedy unless directly asked; and my advice, while lavishly offered, lacked the professional imprimatur.
Against the massed professional judgment only amateurs—Ethel, Jean Smith, Goodwin, Schlesinger and a rabble of enthusiasts around the country —were telling Kennedy it could be put together.
Then, on January 23, the North Koreans seized the American intelligence ship Pueblo.
It was one of those rally-aroundthe-flag moments, and it renewed Kennedy’s apprehension about the power foreign affairs conferred on the Presidency.
That evening we dined with the Kennedys and the Benno Schmidts at the Caravelle.
Robert went through the familiar arguments— ruthlessness, personal vendetta, no political support, lack of popularity in the country, etc.
Ethel said, “Bob, you’ve got to get that idea out of your head; you're always talking as though people don’t like you.
But, when we arrived, we found him with one of his characteristic melanges—John Glenn, Mike Nichols, Rod Steiger, George and Elizabeth Stevens, heaven knows who else.
Obviously we were not about to settle anything. | imagine that he did not want to go over it all again with those he had prepared to disappoint.
Mankiewicz, hoping to salvage something from the wreckage, persuaded him to substitute “foreseeable” for “conceivable” before releasing the statement.
He had to do something about Johnson and the war, he told Kennedy, and, if Kennedy would not run, he was going to do it some other way.Z® Dolan said he could not vote for Johnson and requested sabbatical leave for the campaign.
Mankiewicz, regarding life as uncertain, put his trust in the unforeseeable.
Lowenstein said furiously that the honor and direction of the country were at stake.
A political leader, as Burke pointed out long ago, differed from a moral philosopher; “the latter has only the general view of society; the former, the statesman, has a number of circumstances to combine with those general ideas, and to take into his consideration.
A statesman, never losing sight of principles, is to be guided by circumstances.” | felt that Kennedy had not lost sight of principles and that circumstances were changing every day.
But around the country antiwar activists said to hell with it and set to work for Eugene McCarthy.
And in Vietnam, even while Robert Kennedy was breakfasting at the National Press Club, the Viet Cong and the North Vietnamese unleashed a surprise assault on South Vietnam, convulsing thirty provincial capitals and invading the American embassy in Saigon.
No doubt the attackers suffered grievous losses and failed in major objectives.
But they destroyed what remained of Lyndon Johnson's credit with millions of Americans.
Tet showed that the administration had deceived either the American people or itself about the military prospect.
And it led to a basic re-examination of Vietnam by the new Secretary of Defense, Clark Clifford, who turned out to be not such a hawk after all.
Here and there Richard Goodwin, who had done the original draft, and Walinsky had proposed alternate passages.
He put in nothing, as he had done so often in the past, to preserve his relations with the administration.
The new Gallup poll, taken before Tet had sunk in, showed 61 percent hawks as against 23 percent doves; 70 percent wanted to continue the bombing.
Kennedy said to me, “It’s just like Hitler—not a very, good comparison—but | mean the way people who think themselves good and decent become accomplices.
Escalation, he said, had been our invariable response to difficulty in Vietnam—and had invariably failed.
For the first time in public he struck directly, and bitingly, at Johnson.
The claim that we had to fight in Vietnam to protect our own security reminded him, he said, of the justifications the Germans and Russians made when they overran Poland and the Baltic states at the start of the Second World War.
In his most intense passage he returned to the question of moral responsibility.
He was willful, impervious to advice, scornful of associates, but he was also strong, cool, slashing and gallant.
His choices now were to endorse McCarthy, which he could not bring himself to do, to remain neutral, which he could not do either, or to enter himself.
Within a week of the National Press Club breakfast he was once again in palpable indecision.
Jacqueline Kennedy wrote out excerpts from William Graham Sumner’s scathing anti-imperialist essay “The Conquest of the United States by Spain” and sent them to him.
Even Robert McNamara concluded that Johnson was no longer capable of objective judgment.
After a long evening in Boston in mid-February, Goodwin and Edward Kennedy agreed that Robert’s chances of winning the nomination were about one in five.
They agreed too, Goodwin reported to Robert, that “clearly all your instincts push you in this direction.
At the end of February 1968 the Kerner Commission submitted a powerful report.
Kennedy, skeptical when the commission was established, was impressed by its report.
He spent the late evening with Hughes and the Democratic governors of Missouri, Kansas, and North Dakota.
The governors criticized Johnson and doubted whether he could carry their states.
Thus obliquely encouraged—no governor promised any support —Kennedy went on to California.
Cesar Chavez had been fasting in penance for violence provoked by his union’s struggle for survival.
Now the fast was ending, and his friends wanted Kennedy to be with him at the Mass of Thanksgiving.
A television Cameraman said, “Senator, this is perhaps the most ridiculous remark I’ve ever made in my life.
When we are really honest with ourselves, we must admit that our lives are all that really belong to us.
It is my deepest belief that only by giving our lives do we find life. | am convinced that the truest act of courage, the strongest act of manliness, is to sacrifice ourselves for others in a totally nonviolent struggle for justice.
He would definitely run if McCarthy could be persuaded to withdraw after New Hampshire.
IV He had already asked his brother to notify McCarthy of his intention.
Perhaps he feared McCarthy might somehow turn the news against his brother.
He then called Goodwin, who had joined McCarthy’s New Hampshire campaign.
Goodwin, who felt sufficiently under suspicion as a Kennedy man, was a reluctant intermediary.
When he finally transmitted the message on Monday, McCarthy said, “Tell him to support me. | only want one term as President.
Since Tet there had been a stunning rise in the intensity of his support, especially in the universities and in the liberal community.
My concern was to minimize an anti-Kennedy explosion among those who, in his season of vacillation, had turned to McCarthy and were now falling in love with a new hero. | consulted Joseph Rauh, who had already endorsed McCarthy but basically thought Kennedy would make a stronger candidate and better President.
If Kennedy came out for McCarthy in New Hampshire, Rauh said, this would make it easier for the pro-Kennedy people around McCarthy to urge his subsequent withdrawal.
Kennedy, who was speaking that night in the Bronx, asked me to meet him later in the evening at “21."" | went to a small dinner for Anthony Eden at Hamilton Fish Armstrong’s fine old house on West Tenth Street.
The President explained away all criticism as based on personal or political antagonism.
He is willing to take on people like Goldwater and Nixon, to whom he feels superior.
But he does not like confrontations when he does not feel superior.” | asked Moyers about Kennedy.
Moyers said firmly that he thought it would be a great mistake for him to go—that he could not win; that he would alienate the party; that, if he did nothing, he would be the inevitable successor.
McCarthy had won 42. percent of the New Hampshire vote and, because of oddities in the selection system, 20 of 24 delegates.
Kennedy said, “Of course he feels that he gave me my chance to make the try, that | didn’t and that he has earned the right to go ahead. | can’t blame him.
He has done a great job in opening the situation up.” | suggested that he might endorse McCarthy on the theory that McCarthy could not conceivably get the nomination but could, with Bobby’s support, show how vulnerable Johnson was.
Then, when McCarthy played out his hand, he would be obliged to endorse Kennedy; and with the professionals now persuaded Johnson was a loser, the nomination would inexorably go to Kennedy.
He was not impressed, citing again the hypocrisy of saying, or seeming to say, that he wanted McCarthy for President.
We departed, perplexed and rather dejected. | gave him McCarthy’s phone number in New Hampshire.
Later they had a conversation—friendly, he told me, but not productive.
The country is in such difficulty and | believe headed for even more that it almost fills one with despair.
But everyone who | respect with the exception of Dick Goodwin and Arthur Schlesinger have been against my running.
My basic inclination and reaction was to try, and let the future take care of itself.
However the prophecies of future doom if | took this course made to me by Bob McNamara and to a less extent Bill Moyers plus the politicians’ almost unanimous feeling that my running would bring about the election of Richard Nixon and many other Republican right wingers because | would so divide and split the party and that | could not possibly win—all this made me hesitate—I suppose even more than that.
But the last two days have seen Rusk before the Foreign Relations Committee, the New Hampshire primary—and in the last week it has been quite clear that Johnson is also going to do nothing about the riot panel report.
If | am not off in the California primary Ethel and | will be coming to Ireland at the end of May.
The Irish government is dedicating a memorial to President Kennedy on his birthday May 29th—you look a little Irish and it would be good for your black soul—and maybe mine also.
He had congratulated McCarthy on his success and told him he was reappraising his own situation.
McCarthy, Kennedy said, “had accepted that, said he had a perfect right to go ahead but that he did not intend to get out himself.
Ted Kennedy, looking a bit unhappy, crisply set forth various alternatives—from total inaction to total participation.
Sorensen proposed that Kennedy continue speaking on the issues but remain neutral as between McCarthy and Johnson.
Pierre Salinger said this would make Bobby look like a political opportunist. | suggested that Kennedy enter some primaries and support McCarthy in those he did not enter.
Burke Marshall felt that Kennedy had to enter all the primaries he could.
We turned on the evening news, knowing that Robert had taped an interview earlier that day with Walter Cronkite.
Discussing his reasons for reassessment, he stopped only a hairline short of a declaration.
Hell, maybe it would be better to wait for 1972, when a hundred thousand Americans will be killed in Vietnam; but | don’t think so.
He had told Mayor Daley, he added, that he had no choice but to challenge Johnson if there were no change in the war.
Daley had spoken of getting the President to appoint a commission of eminent outsiders to review Vietnam policy.
Kennedy was seeing Clark Clifford about this the next morning at eleven.
Daley was an unlikely progenitor, but he disliked the war and had mentioned the idea to Kennedy in Chicago on the day in February Kennedy had blasted the Vietnam policy.
On the Monday before the New Hampshire primary he had discussed it with the President.
During the meeting in the Smith apartment on Wednesday, Sorensen, to general amusement, received a message to call the White House.
Johnson, he was told, was interested and wanted a list of possible names.
What Kennedy really thought of it | do not know. | suppose he would have readily traded his candidacy fora guaranteed end to American involvement in Vietnam.
But it was inconceivable—or so Dutton, O’Donnell and | thought— that Johnson would surrender control over foreign policy to an outside group.
But he could not appear to reject an overture that purported both to unify the party and move toward peace.
One way to correct the policy would be for him to become a candidate; the other was to persuade Johnson to change the policy.
Clifford said at once that Johnson could not possibly announce that his Vietnam policy was a failure.
With his own Vietnam re-examination doubtless in mind, he added cryptically that, if Kennedy were counting on the war to get him the nomination, he might be “grievously disappointed” as events developed.
And, if Kennedy somehow got the nomination, it would so divide the party as to be valueless.
At the moment McGovern was host for one in a series of periodic luncheons held by a group of liberal Democrats who had served together in the House in the 1950s—Stewart Udall, Lee Metcalf, Frank Thompson, Eugene McCarthy and himself.
This time they had planned to celebrate McCarthy’s success in New Hampshire.
But McCarthy had not shown up; so, when Kennedy called, they invited him instead.
Thompson, Metcalf and Udall said he should Campaign for McCarthy in Wisconsin, the next primary.
Kennedy said, “Gene McCarthy’s not competent to be President”; if it were McGovern who had gone into New Hampshire, that would have been different.
Then, in “rather an impassioned way,” according to Udall, Kennedy launched into an account of the situation as he saw it—the war, the racial divisions, the cities.
They all agreed in rejecting the proposition because, “no matter how the arrangement was handled, it would still appear to bea political deal”; because the President’s other outside advisers —his own committee of Wise Men—would feel “completely ignored”; and because Johnson could not appoint Kennedy to such a commission without causing resentment on the Hill.
Clifford so informed Kennedy, who asked whether it would make any difference if he himself were not a member of the group.
Clifford thought, since the main objection was the appearance of a political deal, his removal from the list would make no difference.
Kennedy soon responded that the incident had made it “unmistakably clear to me that so long as Lyndon B Johnson was President our Vietnam policy would consist of only more war, more troops, more killing and more senseless destruction of the country we were supposedly there to save.
To many, however, it looked as if he were deciding to enter only after McCarthy had shown the way in New Hampshire.
Finally, around ten-thirty, Kennedy managed to pull a group of us—Sorensen, Dutton, George Stevens, Jr, Adam Walinsky and Jeff Greenfield of his senatorial staff, and Allard Lowenstein, the mystery guest—into a side room.
Both Sorensen and Walinsky had already written announcement statements.
Walinsky and Greenfield regarded the Sorensen draft as pontifical and righteous.
But the outraged reaction to the prospect of a Kennedy candidacy had made me more anxious than ever about conciliating the McCarthy people.
Indeed, as we talked, Edward Kennedy was on his way to meet McCarthy in Green Bay, Wisconsin, with a proposal for a joint KennedyMcCarthy effort.
Together Kennedy and McCarthy could obviously amass more anti-Johnson delegates than McCarthy could by himself.
With the blessing of Blair Clark, McCarthy’s Campaign manager, Goodwin, who was still with McCarthy, had pursued the idea with Edward Kennedy.
However McCarthy, who seemed to his wife “preoccupied and depressed,” told her nothing about any meeting with Ted Kennedy and went off to bed.
When Abigail McCarthy learned of Kennedy’s imminent arrival, she invaded her husband’s room.
She trusted neither Goodwin, whose attachment to the Kennedys was notorious, nor Clark, who had gone to Harvard with John Kennedy.
Kennedy started to open his briefcase and show the plan for a coordinated campaign.
He sardonically proposed that Robert Kennedy enter primaries in Louisiana, Florida and West Virginia.
It was Edward Kennedy looking for Sorensen. | asked how it had gone with McCarthy.
An hour or so later | was awakened again—this time by Robert Kennedy, wandering in rather gloomily in pajamas.
He can’t possibly win, so you will be the certain inheritor of his support.”He looked at me stonily and said, “I can’t do that.
He stayed a moment longer, then left the room. | dressed and went downstairs to find Edward Kennedy, Sorensen and vanden Heuvel at the breakfast table.
The morning sun was glinting through the French windows, and sounds of small children enlivened the house, but the atmosphere around the table was somber.
Vanden Heuvel and | proposed that, as an interim measure, he come out for McCarthy.
My impression was that both Teds thought this might be preferable to his declaring for himself.
He said, ""Look, fellows, | can’t do that. | can’t come out for McCarthy.
There must be some other course besides endorsing McCarthy or running himself.
If we discuss it any longer, it will shake his confidence and put him on the defensive.
But all | could think of was a conversation seven years before in the same house when Robert Kennedy asked me to stop worrying his brother about the Bay of Pigs.
We reviewed the statement as redrafted by Sorensen in light of the Green Bay fiasco.
The announcement took place in the caucus room in the Old Senate Office Building, where John Kennedy at the same age had announced his candidacy eight years before.
He was trusting his instincts at last, and those who loved him all felt freer.
Except for the scene of announcement, it bore no resemblance to John Kennedy’s carefully prepared quest eight years earlier.
Robert Kennedy had no campaign staff, no national organization, no delegates, almost no promises of support.
At the end, all the advisers around the breakfast table at Hickory Hill, even those who had favored his running, were against his going ahead at that particular moment and in that particular way.
If by any chance Kennedy got the nomination, ""We can beat that little S.0.
There are many who liked his brother — as Bobby will find out — but who don't like him.
We may find ourselves in a 1964 Goldwater situation if Bobby tears the party apart.
This iS particularly the view expressed by Wayne Morse and Abe Ribicoff.
Even Gruening, even Morse, the two brave originals of the anti-Vietnam fight, were unwilling in March 1968 to come out against Johnson.
Organization Democrats, like Mayor Daley, automatically rallied to the President.
Harold Hughes of lowa, so eloquently inveighing against Johnson only a few nights before, fell into a deep silence.
The angriest reaction came naturally enough from the supporters of McCarthy.
But they understood Kennedy’s problem and hoped to influence their own candidate toward a coordinated antiJohnnson campaign.
Kennedy understood their problem too—after all, he had caused it—and did not press.
The movement that has made Senator McCarthy its symbol exemplifies rationality, courage, morality.
In one day, he managed to confirm the worst things his enemies have ever said about him.
We can see him now working for Joe McCarthy, tapping the phones of tax dodgers, setting a spy on Adlai Stevenson at the UN, sending good loyal Arthur Schlesinger to fall upon William Manchester in the alleys of the American Historical Association.... | blame myself, not him, for all the years he fooled me. mek Even those of us who had anticipated an outburst were astonished by its virulence.
To this historian it seemed a curious doctrine that priority in entering a political competition conferred the moral right to be the only liberal candidate.
One recalled that sixteen years before a Democratic senator with stronger liberal credentials than McCarthy beat an incumbent Democratic President in New Hampshire and then went on to win every major primary.
He came to the convention as the certified people’s choice and led on the first two ballots.
If anyone had ever “earned” the right to exclusive liberal support, one supposed, it had been Estes Kefauver in 1952.
But at the convention the Democratic organization put across a candidate who had not entered a single primary.
Despite Kefauver’s priority, most liberals went to Adlai Stevenson without moral qualms.
Now Stevensonian liberals were complaining bitterly because Kennedy had missed a single primary.
Kennedy made one last attempt to explain himself on Meet the Press the day after his announcement.
Conservative Kansas presumably backed the war and detested the rebel young.
But, when he changed planes at Kansas City, Missouri, a cheering crowd broke through the barriers to get near him.
Later that night, at Topeka, “they tore at Robert Kennedy,” wrote Jimmy Breslin.
The stories about the Vietnam commission had misrepresented the differences between himself and Johnson.
He jabbed the air with clenched fist, his voice intense and controlled.
That evening on the plane east Kennedy said to Breslin, “You can hear the fabric ripping.
If we don’t get out of this war, | don’t know what these young people are going to do.
On television the tumultuous crowds frightened people for whom the pictures on the screen evoked the riots of the summer before.
Some were also repelled by what they regarded as mk Laughter; Kennedy’s playing on his audiences by rhetorical excess.
He had got it into his head that the Saigon government was not drafting its eighteen-year-olds and continued saying this after Saigon had changed its policy.
So perhaps was Kennedy. | wrote him after his Nashville attack on Johnson, “It is a little early in the campaign for that.
The press agitation over this phrase— unfairly blamed on Walinsky; it had actually come from material sent along by Goodwin—displayed the pomposity that on occasion afflicted even the most reasonable of newspapermen.
Of course Johnson and his Vietnam policy had called upon the darker impulses of the American spirit.
The very day Kennedy announced his candidacy Lieutenant William Calley and Company C had yielded to precisely such impulses in My Lai.
A candidate without organization or delegates had no choice but to demonstrate irresistible popular appeal.
A half hour of police pushing and the crowd pushing back and Kennedy trying to smile while they pulled his hair and scratched his face.
He had gone ahead that Saturday morning at Hickory Hill surrounded by advisers exuding gloom.
He had thereafter been savagely attacked, in many cases by people he respected and liked.
Let people seize his cuff links, grab his hands, reach out to touch him.
Two days later, addressing the National Foreign Policy Conference at the State Department, “We are the Number One Nation.
Democratic leaders across the country; the press; even, on March 26, most of his own private Vietnam commission, the Wise Men, Acheson, Dillon, McGeorge Bundy, Cyrus Vance—all now abandoning the war.
On the surface an unaccustomed benignity suddenly overtook the President.
He had been confiding to senior advisers since at least the previous October that he was “inclined” not to run in 1968.22 He talked about this a good deal more now.
In mid-March he asked McPherson to give three reasons why he should run.
When McPherson said that no one else could get a program through Congress, Johnson said, “Wrong.
Whenever | walked through the Red Room and saw the portrait of Woodrow Wilson hanging there, | thought of him stretched out upstairs in the White House, powerless to move, with the machinery of the American government in disarray around him.
Awakening in a cold sweat, he would take a flashlight, walk downstairs, touch Wilson’s portrait; then, soothed, he could sleep again.
He was alone on a vast plain, sitting in a tall, straight chair, cattle storming down on him.
He tried to move but could not.“1felt that | was being chased on all sides by a giant stampede,” he told Doris Kearns; ""...| was being forced over the edge by rioting blacks, demonstrating students, marching welfare mothers, squawking professors, and hysterical reporters.
The thing | feared from the first day of my Presidency was actually coming true.
Robert Kennedy had openly announced his intention to reclaim the throne in the memory of his brother.
He felt that the country would be divided and angry so long as he remained in the White House.
Lawrence O’Brien told him that McCarthy would beat him two to one in the Wisconsin primary on April 2.44 If he waited till after Wisconsin, he would be a repudiated President, driven from public life by the voters of his own party.
This was his last chance to make withdrawal appear his own decision rather than one forced upon him.
At nine o'clock on the evening of March 31, Lyndon Johnson went on television ostensibly to address the nation on the war.
V Robert Kennedy spent March 30 conducting a hearing of his Indian subcommittee in Flagstaff, Arizona.
Barry came up with Alone, Richard E Byrd’s memoir of a winter in Antarctica.
Sorensen was at work on a statement for Kennedy’s press conference the next morning; so, inevitably, was Walinsky.
He said angrily to reporters, in the style of Richard Nixon, “You fellows won’t have me to pick on any more.
Sorensen accompanied Kennedy; Walt Rostow and Charles Murphy were with Johnson.
Johnson delivered a monologue about Vietnam, the Middle East, the budget.
Johnson said he planned to stay out of it but would let Kennedy know if he changed his mind.
The President then began talking about John Kennedy, how well they had worked together, how he had tried to continue the Kennedy policies.
He did not ask Humphrey to run, though this assumption seemed to Humphrey to underlie the conversation.
Humphrey said he had considered the possibility of an immediate announcement but feared it might “demean” the President’s statement.
But, if Humphrey ran, “he must do a better job than he was able to get organized in Milwaukee”—a spiteful allusion to the Wisconsin result, for which the President evidently wished to hold Humphrey responsible.
Humphrey said he had been in preliminary contact with Daley, Governor Richard Hughes of New Jersey and other party leaders.
He repeated the line about John Kennedy’s putative approval as he looked down from heaven.
This, Johnson said, was where the credibility gap started, not over Vietnam.
One never quite believed them, but they were right, and now he was gone, a giant vanishing in a puff of smoke.
Kennedy and McCarthy, instead of running against Johnson, were left to run against each other.
Unwilling to work against Kennedy, Schell declined McCarthy’s invitation to join his staff and returned to graduate studies at Harvard.
But McCarthy’s “and I’m Jack” is, by this interpretation, total mystification.
Perhaps McCarthy meant that he had more of John Kennedy’s qualities—maturity, intellectuality, urbanity, control—than Robert had.
Edward Kennedy was his brother’s closest adviser, always resourceful, energetic and protective.
Stephen Smith, Robert told me, would be Campaign manager, Sorensen, campaign director, O’Donnell, director of organization. | asked what in the world the difference was between campaign manager, campaign director and director of organization.
They parted on friendly terms. “1 understood his motives and his loyalties,” McCarthy said later.
Hackett brought in Fraser Barron from the poverty program for ‘grassroots development’—the organization of the poor, of blacks, Mexican Americans, white Appalachians.
McCarthy’s strength, as Goodwin said a day or two after he rejoined us, lay in his understanding of the new politics of television and the kids; Goodwin thought that the Kennedy people greatly underrated McCarthy’s seriousness and his political acuity.
Dutton later thought that the prevailing disorganization caused no serious troubles in the primaries.£© | am sure he was right.
Kennedy himself arrived at a unique blend of the old and the new politics—and both, in fact, were necessary in 1968.
After California he intended to reorganize the campaign and place Stephen Smith in full charge.
One felt a certain letdown in Kennedy, though of course he was tired after his transcontinental fortnight.
He bridled a little and said, “1 know | look tired, but I’m all right. | know the limits of my strength very well.
Yet a theme remained—the theme that, along with the war, had absorbed him most in the Senate.
For, more than anyone else in American politics, he had become the tribune of the underclass, the leader determined “to show,” as he said, “that the individual does count in a society where he actually appears to count less and less,”©2 determined to overcome the alienations of American society, to bind the wounds of American life.
When Roy Reuther died in January 1968, Kennedy was the only one outside the family to sit with the Reuthers at the funeral.
Victor Reuther (whose wife was on the Kennedy delegation in the District of Columbia), Leonard Woodcock, Douglas Fraser, Jack Conway, Paul Schrade and other UAW leaders worked for Kennedy in Indiana, Michigan and California.
Walter Reuther delayed his decision because of an old friendship with Humphrey, but Victor was sure he would have supported Kennedy in the end.
Another crucial figure in any coalition of the disestablished was Martin Luther King.
Though Kennedy and King had kept their distance, events were bringing them closer together.
In the summer the two men began collaboration, through intermediaries, on a new drive for economic and racial justice.
The next week Marian Wright presented the idea to King ata Southern Christian Leadership Conference retreat.
The Kennedy office was now working closely with Marian Wright and the organizers.When Johnson pulled out, King said to Walter Fauntroy, head of the SCLC’s Washington office, “He’s just doing like a Baptist preacher... you know, trying to get a vote of confidence.
King, Fauntroy recalled, was “very hopeful” that Kennedy would make it.
He was scheduled in the evening to speak in the heart of the Indianapolis ghetto.
A few moments later, as they boarded the plane for Indianapolis, Pierre Salinger telephoned that Martin Luther King had been shot in Memphis.
Kennedy sent Ethel on to the hotel but was determined to keep his rendezvous.
People had been waiting in the street for an hour but \vere in a festive, political-rally mood.
Kennedy climbed onto a flatbed truck in a parking lot under a stand of oak trees.
Martin Luther King dedicated his life to love and to justice for his fellow human beings, and he died because of that effort.
In this difficult day, in this difficult time for the United States, it is perhaps well to ask what kind of a nation we are and what direction we want to move in.
For those of you who are black—considering the evidence there evidently is that there were white people who were responsible—you can be filled with bitterness, with hatred, and a desire for revenge.
We can move in that direction as a country, in great polarization—black people amongst black, white people amongst white, filled with hatred toward one another.
Or we can make an effort, as Martin Luther King did, to understand and to comprehend, and to replace that violence, that stain of bloodshed that has spread across our land, with an effort to understand with compassion and love.
For those of you who are black and are tempted to be filled with hatred and distrust at the injustice of such an act, against all white people, | can only say that | feel in my own heart the same kind of feeling. | had a member of my family killed, but he was killed by a white man.
But we have to make an effort in the United States, we have to make an effort to understand, to go beyond these rather difficult times.
It is not the end of violence; it is not the end of lawlessness; it is not the end of disorder.
But the vast majority of white people and the vast majority of black people in this country want to live together, want to improve the quality of our life, and want justice for all human beings who abide in our land.
Let us dedicate ourselves to that, and say a prayer for our country and for our people.
She remembered 1960, when Martin was in prison and John Kennedy was running for President.
Thinking of Dallas, perhaps also of Sophocles , he said to Jeff Greenfield that King’s death was not the worst thing that ever happened.
The first stories after Dallas, Greenfield remembered, had so miscalled Oswald.
Early in the morning, restlessly roaming the hotel, he found Greenfield asleep on top of his bed and threw a blanket over him.
The next morning Kennedy kept an engagement to speak at the City Club in Cleveland.
The Cleveland speech had contributions from Sorensen, from Walinsky, from Greenfield, all writing through the dreadful night.
We glorify killing on movie and television screens and call it entertainment.
This is the violence that afflicts the poor, that poisons relations between men because their skin has different colors.
He flew back to Washington, a city of smoke and flame, under curfew, patrolled by troops.
The troops saw us coming at a distance, and they put on gas masks and got the guns at ready, waiting for this horde of blacks coming up the street.
When they saw it was Bobby Kennedy, they took off their masks and let us through.
Humphrey, Nixon, Rockefeller, McCarthy—all were there, all save the President himself.
Afterward there was a straggling march, five miles under the fierce sun, from the church to Morehouse College.
Kennedy hung his jacket over his shoulder and walked with shirtsleeves rolled up.
Roy Jenkins, a friend from England, noted that the Kennedy party got most of the offers of water and Coca-Cola from the black crowd along the streets.
Kennedy observed, without bravado, that lack of physical courage kept him away.
One was with entertainers on the principle, verified in the reception accorded Sammy Davis, Jr., that they exerted great influence on the black community.
Julian Bond, a young Georgia political leader, observed it with disgust.
Bevel demanded to know whether Kennedy had a program for racial justice.
Katzenbach, now under secretary of state and obliged to support the war, had questioned a Vietnam quotation Kennedy used in Jo Seek a Newer World.
After vindicating his quotation, Kennedy had inquired sarcastically whether Katzenbach had noticed how “very kind and helpful” Ramsey Clark, now Attorney General, had recently been “in the renewed dispute with Hoover regarding the Department of Justice wiretapping.
Kennedy touched Katzenbach’s knee and said, “Forget about what happened and just erase the whole thing.
Eugene Pulliam’s farright Indianapolis Star, the most popular paper, assailed Kennedy brutally in daily cartoon and editorial.
State officeholders and the party leaders backed the Democratic governor Roger Branigan, who headed the administration slate as a stand-in for the yet undeclared Hubert Humphrey.
The assassination of Martin Luther King and the ensuing riots had sobered the nation.
Kennedy spoke, as usual, about the miseries of the underclass and the duty to reclaim the miserable for the national community.
He spoke too about the dangers of violence and the need for public order.
Wade, Martin told Kennedy, “reports that student petition circulators in Hammond encountered good response in both black ghetto and backlash areas and attributes it to the feeling that, although you are pro-civil rights, you also come through as a strong executive capable of controlling disorders.
Kennedy had made the point about public order often before, and he now made it more often in Indiana.
Meet the Conservative,” and the effect was to suggest an opportunist tailoring his politics to his audience.
In fact, as Martin noted, Kennedy never once failed to show the other side of the coin—i.e., he never denounced violence and let it go at that but instead always followed it by denouncing injustice.
Naturally in Negro areas he denounced injustice with great emphasis, and gave less emphasis to rioting; but he said both.
At least, this was true every time | heard him Speak, and | was watching for it carefully, because | knew the press would watch and | warned him to be sure and say both, and | would have picked him up quickly if he had missed a beat.
McCarthy also adjusted his campaign to Indiana, deleting references to “white racism” from his speeches.
But white voters were not led in either case to suppose that the candidates had weakened their stand on racial justice.
Charles Quinn, the television correspondent, interviewed Poles and Lithuanians after Kennedy’s Gary rally.
They were the main victims of riots, and in the end they voted overwhelmingly for Kennedy.
In retrospect the argument hardly appeared as earthshaking as it did at the time.
Kennedy saw no incompatibility between racial justice and the rule of law; rather he thought that each reinforced the other and that only someone absolutely committed to equal rights could hope to stop violence in the ghetto.
As for the blue-collar whites, they too felt government had forgotten them; they too were among the unrepresented.
In later years, after intellectuals discovered their existence and gave them the awful name of ‘ethnics,’ Kennedy’s effort to keep the black and white working class at peace with each other in Indiana no longer seemed so sinister.
IV “He always looked so alone,” wrote John Bartlow Martin, standing up by himself on the lid of the trunk of his convertible—so alone, so vulnerable, so fragile, you feared he might break.
He did not chop the air with his hands as his brother Jack had; instead he had a little gesture with his right hand, the fist closed, the thumb sticking up a little, and he would jab with it to make a point.
When he got applause, he did not smile at the crowd, pleased; instead he looked down, down at the ground or at his speech, and waited till they had finished, then went on.
He could take a bland generality and deliver it with such depth of feeling that it cut like a knife.
Someone asked where the money for Kennedy’s health program was coming from.
Let me say something about the tone of these questions. | look around this room and | don’t see many black faces who will become doctors.
You don’t see many people coming out of the ghettos or off the Indian reservations to medical school.
It’s our society, not just our government, that spends twice as much on pets as on the poverty program.
You sit here as white medical students, while black people carry the burden of the fighting in Vietnam.
Afterward, shaking his head incredulously, he said to Halberstam, “They were so comfortable, so comfortable.
He visited a day nursery a few steps away from James Whitcomb Riley’s house in old Indianapolis.
You can build an image with a lot of sharpsters around you with their computers and their press releases.
Kennedy also beat Hubert Humphrey 62. percent to 37. the same night in the District of Columbia.
McCarthy airily observed on television that it didn’t really matter who came in first, second or third.
He ended talking till early in the morning with two young McCarthy volunteers he found in the airport coffee shop.
He had spent the month after Johnson’s withdrawal assembling his troops.
Mondale owed his political career to Humphrey, and Kennedy understood his position.
But the Harrises had been frequent and happy guests at Hickory Hill and Hyannis Port.
Of course, Harris had earlier declared for Johnson and was, like Mondale, a hawk on Vietnam.
Yet Kennedy hoped that, after Johnson’s withdrawal, Harris would rally to the causes he and Kennedy had espoused—the Indians, the Kerner Commission report, of which Harris had been a leading author, the powerless in general.
Now he had representatives of every establishment in America for him— from George Meany to Henry Ford Il, from the segregationist governor of Louisiana to the black mayor of Cleveland—and all the campaign funds he needed.
It was perhaps small wonder that in his declaration he chirruped about “the politics of happiness ... the politics of joy.
But labor, the party regulars and the south brought Humphrey great strength.
One of his visitors said that, after the Six Day War, American Jews needed “continual reassurance” about Israel.
Kennedy wearily said he would make his position clear again on the west coast.
He rubs his hand over his face again, as if to tear away the exhaustion.
Rita Dallas noticed the deep lines in his face and thought he could hardly drag himself out of the plane.
But he ran to his father, kissed him, then drove him to the compound, laughing, talking, elaborately emphatic in his gestures.
They said goodbye, the old man holding his son’s hand with tight, lingering grip.
Kennedy always snapped back quickly from fatigue; and he was beginning to move with the rhythms of the Campaign.
Early in Indiana reporters had thought him uncomfortable on the hustings.
In fact what conventional judgment saw as defects may well have been strengths.
His many hidden dimensions appeared less on the rostrum than in his spontaneous excursions into the ghettos and in his easy rapport with the surging generosity of young hearts.
Some fellow from Massachusetts was in this state last week and pronounced it Indian-er.
Once someone asked Richard Tuck, the Campaign wit, why he was making such an effort over Freckles.
Trains had gone out of fashion in campaigns, but everyone—candidates, reporters, local politicians—missed whistle-stopping, and small Indiana towns, clustered around their depots, were ideal settings.
A banjo group played the old song “The Wabash Cannonball” at each stop.
Once he forgot to conclude with Shaw, and some reporters were left behind.
Thereafter, “as George Bernard Shaw once said...” became the signal for the dash to the press bus.
Now good clean Gene McCarthy came down the other track A thousand Radcliffe dropouts all massed for the attack, But Bobby’s bought the right-of-way from here back to St.
So here’s to Ruthless Robert, may his name forever stand, To be feared and genuflected at by pols across the land.
Old Ho Chi Minh is cheering, and though it may appall, He’s whizzing to the White House on The Ruthless Cannonball.
It went on too long—seven verses—and, after a time, some in the press wondered whether irreverence had gone too far.
During one speech a gust of wind blew a small piece of paper out of his hand.
He convulsed the press by saying in a conservative Indiana town, “Make like, not war.
When | was trying to make up my mind whether to run for President, | discussed it with my wife and she said | should, because then | would be able to get to Nebraska.
If you look at any regiment or division of paratroopers in Vietnam, forty-five percent of them are black.
Vil Between them, Kennedy and McCarthy polled over 80 percent of the Nebraska vote—a smashing repudiation, Kennedy said, of the Johnson-Humphrey administration.
Their Senate records were comparable—Kennedy’s better by ADA standards but McCarthy’s entirely respectable.
McCarthy was generally bolder in his attacks on the national security complex, continuing, as he had done since 1964, to accuse the CIA of having “taken on the character of an invisible government answering only to itself,”°8 and now promising, if elected, to fire J Edgar Hoover.
In foreign policy both denounced the idea of the United States as global policeman.
Though the war receded somewhat as an issue after Johnson's retreat from escalation, the killing went on, and both Kennedy and McCarthy continued to assail the hawks.
Whatever they may have thought privately, neither came out for unilateral withdrawal.
It was even Nixon’s year for ‘bringing us together’—but they conceived the task in very different terms.
The early primaries encouraged Kennedy in his quest for an alliance of the disestablished and unrepresented.
In April he took his Indian subcommittee to South Dakota—much to the irritation of his staff who thought it a waste of precious time.
He was in a campaign, Fred Dutton reminded him, and he should knock off the Injuns.
Richard Harwood of the Washington Post and other newspapermen began to change their minds about the clamorous crowds.
Many called hima ‘polarizer’ and scoffed at the idea of Robert Kennedy, of all people, taking on a mission of reconciliation.
So had Franklin Roosevelt; but by confronting problems Roosevelt had carried his nation farther toward reconciliation than a less ‘divisive’ President would have done.
Maybe so, but just Suppose he were to Say, ‘I’m the only man who can deal with these people. | know where to draw the line.
It was an undertaking that, as Kennedy conceived it, required not only specific programs but active leadership.
Kennedy had no doubt that Johnson had abused executive power in foreign affairs.
But a general recession of presidential leadership, he believed, would increase the nation’s impotence in the face of deep and angry national division.
Only an activist Presidency and an affirmative national government, as he saw it, could pull together a divided people in a stormy time.
Vill McCarthy had both a different constituency and a different theory of the Presidency.
In a February article in Look called “Why I’m Battling LBJ,” he had concentrated on the war and on constitutional questions.
He had said not a word about racial justice or the fate of the dispossessed.
But his speeches, Jack Newfield thought, revealed “a pattern of psychic distance from the poor.
The journalist Seymour Hersh resigned from his staff in Wisconsin because of the candidate’s reluctance to go into the ghettos.
Two weeks after King’s murder, McCarthy met with black leaders in Indianapolis.
The polls, he told an audience in Corvallis, showed Kennedy running best “among the less intelligent and less educated people in America.
The constituency was real enough, but, unlike Kennedy’s, it did not readily yield a campaign theme.
Lamer argued that McCarthy must “identify himself with a positive vision of America.
His staff worked up a document proposing “public participation” as the theme and specifying how governing institutions could be brought under popular control.
Johnson, McCarthy felt, had been “eroding and weakening” the other agencies of government.
He had taken the war-making power away from Congress, had diminished the Supreme Court by appointing its Chief Justice to head the commission investigating John Kennedy’s assassination, had politicized the Council of Economic Advisers, had enfeebled the Democratic National Committee and the national party.
Johnson had “done it defensively as things have got more and more out of control.
McCarthy, one felt, was the first liberal candidate in the century to run aga/nst the Presidency; doing this, moreover, in times of turbulence that seemed to call for a strong Presidency to hold the country together.
Some felt a debt to McCarthy for venturing ahead while Kennedy had lingered behind.
Others felt that Kennedy would be the stronger candidate against Humphrey and Nixon.
McCarthy attracted people by his detachment, his serenity, his very nonchalance.
Where Kennedy, wrote David Halberstam, had “the look of a man who intended to rock the boat,” McCarthy said radical things in a temperate way.
He was civilized, literate, quoted other people’s verse and wrote his own.
McCarthy... ‘meanders’ through his campaign; Kennedy drives on like a sprinter.
J Edgar Hoover would not have lasted thirty seconds in his administration, but he thought it cheap for McCarthy to seek easy cheers from academic audiences by promising to fire him. | think it fair to say that, the closer people were to them, the more they liked Kennedy and the less they liked McCarthy.
Richard Harwood could find “little camaraderie between McCarthy and those who enlisted in his campaign.
The reason, the aide explained, was the one thing Kennedy could not offer.
It was hard in later years, after McCarthy glided away as mysteriously as he had appeared, to recall the intensity of feeling on his behalf in 1968.
The rage among his supporters against Kennedy, far from subsiding, appeared to grow.
Kennedy with his high-powered machine, personal fortune, Irish Mafia, puffed-up names from the past (Sorensen, Salinger, Schlesinger), against McCarthy with his Children’s Crusade, youth and idealism, ministers and housewives, living on the land—the big battalions moving in on the guerrilla warriors.
George Plimpton, a strong if lonely Kennedy supporter, gave a party for McCarthy friends and invited me to present the case for our candidate.
McCarthy could have come out fot the auto-da-fe, one felt; this crowd would still prefer him to Kennedy. | finally asked what it was specifically they had against Kennedy.
Nat Hentoff, a jazz critic and a goodhearted civil libertarian, launched into an emotional discourse—Joe McCarthy, Hoffa, Manchester, the old litany.
A charisma suit is made of cloth and cardboard; at the touch of a feather, at the touch of the weakest admirer, it pulls apart.
In fact, across the country, the arts and letters divided evenly enough between the two candidates.
Elizabeth Hardwick Lowell later said of Kennedy, “I felt about him that he was one of the few people in public life who had truly changed and also that this possibility of change would continue.
Many people were stopped by an image of Bobby Kennedy formed in the past.
And actually at the end he had transcended his earlier self, whatever that was.
Among novelists McCarthy had William Styron, Mary McCarthy, Wilfrid Sheed.
Kennedy had Norman Mailer, James Jones, Alison Lurie, Joyce Carol Oates, Irwin Shaw, Wright Morris, Truman Capote, Budd Schulberg.
Among playwrights McCarthy had Arthur Miller; Kennedy, William Inge and Alan Jay Lerner.
McCarthy had Paul Newman and Joanne Woodward; Kennedy, Lauren Bacall, Henry Fonda, Shirley MacLaine, Warren Beatty.
Galbraith, Joseph Rauh, Allard Lowenstein, Barbara Tuchman, Erich Fromm; Kennedy had Archibald Cox, Paul Samuelson, Seymour Harris, Robert Coles, James Loeb.
It was interesting how many people who had tangled with Kennedy in the past rallied to him now.
J Edward Day, who as Postmaster General had had his troubles with Kennedy; G Robert Blakey, who had criticized his explanations of wiretapping; Joseph Mankiewicz, who had opposed him for the Senate— all endorsed him.
He used to say wistfully that McCarthy had the A students, and he envied McCarthy their devotion.
Come on, Bobby said, join the mystery battle against the television machine.
In Mississippi, Charles Evers and Oscar Carr, the enlightened planter, were cochairmen of the Kennedy committee.
Kennedy pulled the lapels of his coat against his face and headed back in the cold wind.
A shadow had fallen across the happy day of the Wabash Cannonball when the train stopped at Logansport, and someone saw on top of a building, etched against the sky, a man with a gun.
He turned out to be a policeman, but Thomas Congdon long remembered the “agonized” look on the face of Jerry Bruno, the advance man.24 One evening a group of reporters sat around over drinks.
Salinger froze, stared at Gary for a long moment, then said, “I live with that fear.
Barry tried surreptitious precautions, such as hiring off-duty policemen to stay in the hotel lobby.
He dared not risk Kennedy’s displeasure by putting them in corridors next to his room.
When Kennedy learned of such extracurricular arrangements, he canceled them.
On April 11, in Lansing, Michigan, a police lieutenant notified Barry that a man with a rifle had gone into a building across from the hotel.
Barry had Kennedy’s car driven into the basement garage, so he could enter it without going out on the street.
Don’t ever change whatever we’re doing until you talk to me, and | don’t ever want to change it because I’m not afraid of anybody.
He told Charles Quinn, yes, he had thought about it, but he wasn’t going to change his campaign because of it.
Then his eyes got a faraway look, and he said, “You know, if I’m ever elected President, I’m never going to ride in one of those Goddamned cars”; he meant one of those bulletproof, bubble-top cars.
There was the usual Kennedy surprise party, poems, gags, joke presents, balloons, champagne.
The back of his hand came up toward his face, which was frowning, and he held his hand there, his head bent, for perhaps a count of ten.
To Sail Beyond ... the Western Stars, Until I Die IN miID-May Kennedy paid a flying visit to South Dakota, where Hubert Humphrey, a native son, and Eugene McCarthy, from Minnesota across the border, had also entered the primary.
Afterward he asked whether McGovern really thought the quest impossible.
Even the working class was middle class, with boats on the lakes and weekend cabins in the mountains.
And he had in Oregon, he said later, “a better organization than we had in any other state.
McCarthy had grown increasingly bitter toward Kennedy, conspicuously refusing to congratulate him, for example, after Indiana and again after Nebraska.
Voting records are sometimes hard to interpret, and McCarthy’s own explanations for his ‘bad’ votes were complicated.
Salinger had promptly disclaimed this leaflet on behalf of Kennedy headquarters.
McCarthy was additionally angered by Kennedy’s repeated public assertions of a desire to work together.
He saw them as a way of channeling McCarthy delegates to Kennedy, not vice versa.
His analysis was not unreasonable. | do not think that Kennedy could conceivably have brought himself to come out for McCarthy.
Nor, after Indiana and Nebraska, was there any chance that McCarthy would come out for Kennedy.
Despite Vietnam and the politics of joy, each, | would guess, preferred Hubert Humphrey to the other.
Jeremy Larner and Paul Gorman soon drafted a speech for McCarthy to give at the Cow Palace in San Francisco assailing Humphrey and Kennedy equally.
Then he read the sentences on Humphrey, Larner wrote later, “in a subdued, rapid tone.
He criticized him for advocating federal gun control —a well-calculated criticism in a state that regarded gun ownership as one of the rights of man.
With mordant and condescending wit, McCarthy ridiculed Kennedy’s advisers, his astronaut, his dog.
This restraint signified no affection for McCarthy, rather a desire not to antagonize McCarthy’s supporters, especially the kids.
For the rest, he talked about the poor; he talked about jobs; he tried persiflage.
Congresswoman Edith Green had agreed to run his campaign on condition that her béte noire David Hackett be forbidden to enter the state.
On April 28, a month before the vote, the Kennedy headquarters consisted of two desks and three people.
The Teamsters, the strongest union in the state, had not forgotten the Rackets Committee investigations in Portland.
Doing what he had done so often around the world, he yielded, for example, on May 24 to the temptation to take a dip in the Pacific.
Minorities—blacks, Indians, Chicanos —were 2 percent of the population.
An observer watched him speak at an oscilloscope plant outside Portland.
He even dodged McCarthy personally when their schedules accidentally brought them together at the Portland Zoo.
No Kennedy had ever before lost an election, except for the Harvard Board of Overseers.
As the returns came in, Kennedy’s two student organizers avoided him; they thought they had let him down.
To a reporter he said that Humphrey, not McCarthy, was the real winner.
Kennedy’s California support, ranging from Jesse Unruh to Cesar Chavez, was multifarious and sometimes discordant.
Jack Conway and Walter Sheridan set up a parallel campaign for labor and the minorities.
In the last weeks, when Stephen Smith had taken charge in Los Angeles and John Seigenthaler in San Francisco, a measure of coherence emerged (except that Seigenthaler brought along Paul Corbin, who organized Salinas under an assumed name, claiming to be a former lieutenant commander in the Navy.
At some stops they were mostly Mexican American. | was enchanted by the mixture of banter and intensity with which he beguiled and exhorted his hearers.
At times he launched into wonderful travesties of stump speeches, pointing out how much more he could do for the local product, whatever it might be, because his family consumed more of it than any other family possibly could.
Then he would turn with great seriousness to poverty, racial injustice, the war in Vietnam.
The Olympic decathlon champion, Rafer Johnson, who loved Kennedy, stood up to apologize for his people.
He said he liked some, and some he did not like; also he liked some white people and some he did not like.
Seigenthaler said he was sorry, after such a long day, to have exposed Kennedy to this.
To the surprise of the Kennedy party Black Jesus was circulating cheerfully in the crowd.
When he finished, the crowd swarmed around the car, reaching out to touch him.
Kennedy was mobbed by admirers in Watts, spat on by haters at San Francisco State.
He was holding his constituency—the blacks, the Chicanos, the poor—but suburban Democrats were sharply divided.
The debate, scheduled at last for June 1 in San Francisco, promised to be decisive.
Kennedy knew he had to show both that he could handle McCarthy intellectually and, as ever, that he was not ruthless.
His staff prepared the customary black, loose-leaf books on the issues. | do not know how carefully Kennedy went through them.
But he did hold morning and afternoon briefing sessions that Saturday, meanwhile staring wistfully out the window at San Francisco sparkling in the sunlight below.
Around noon he went off to Fisherman’s Wharf to campaign a little and savor the air.
Kennedy had long believed that the only way to achieve integration was to give blacks the economic and psychological security that would enable them to become full members of a community.
If a choice had to be made, this argued for the use of public money to improve the ghetto.
Thomas Finney, Clark Clifford’s law partner, who had come west to run McCarthy’s California campaign, tried to get him to focus on the debate.
The managers were by now furious with their candidate’s personal coterie.
That Saturday morning Lowell, who thought that, if McCarthy lost, his people should support Kennedy and vice versa, had gone to see Kennedy.
McCarthy went into his sequence about the government officials he planned to fire.
It was not so demagogic as it sounded, however, because it had been Kennedy’s consistent position.
Kennedy, for some reason, did not understand there were to be sum-ups and was caught off guard, and McCarthy was at his most eloquent.
But a stand-off, in the context of expectations, was a Kennedy victory.
Hodding Carter, the old Mississippi editor, now nearly blind, joined us. | remember the marked consideration Kennedy, with so much else on his mind, showed him.
Later | took Ethel, who was carrying her eleventh child, back to the Fairmont.
He visited San Francisco’s Chinatown, where Abba Schwartz had organized the Chinese Americans.
Kennedy continued to stand and wave while motioning a friend toward Ethel, who, pale and stricken, had slumped down in her seat.
Impartially they visited the Japanese Cultural Center, where the Kennedys and Seigenthaler sang the Waseda song.
Robert flew back to Los Angeles, spoke in Long Beach, went on to San Diego.
By the end of the long day he was worn to the bone and near digestive collapse.
He took Ethel and six children for the night to the Malibu beach house of John Frankenheimer, the film director.
Kennedy played with his children on the beach; then plunged into the gray sea.
He found him by the pool, stretched out across two chairs, his lips slightly parted, motionless.
The candidate asked Dutton what could be done in the hours remaining to push it up to 50 percent.
Kennedy had more votes, he said, than Humphrey and McCarthy, the local boys, combined.
Stephen Smith scheduled a series of meetings to work out the campaign reorganization.
The objective by convention time was 1432% for Kennedy, 1152%% Humphrey.
Looking for a place to talk in the crowded suite, Kennedy finally took Goodwin into a bathroom.
I’ve got to spend that time going to the states, talking to delegates before it’s too late.
I’m not doing this in any order of importance, but | also want to thank my wife Ethel.
Then Kennedy left the room for a press conference, taking a short cut through the kitchen.
KKK | heard the California returns at Saul Bellow’s apartment in Chicago.
When it was evident that Kennedy had won, | went back to my hotel and tried to call him in Los Angeles, but the line was always busy. | went to sleep.
On Thursday evening | stood with many others in the soft summer night at La Guardia Airport waiting for the plane, as | had waited on a November night in Washington an eon before.
Ethel Kennedy, incredibly composed, told me to come to the United Nations Plaza apartment.
The rest of the time it’s often rather silly little men running around in their black suits.
I'll tell you who else understands death are the black churches. | remember at the funeral of Martin Luther King. | was looking at those faces, and | realized that they know death.
Through the night, friends of Robert Kennedy had stood honor guard by the casket.
George McGovern noticed Richard Daley, his head bowed, the cords of his neck standing out, crying uncontrollably.
Tom Hayden, the revolutionary, a green cap from Havana sticking out of his pocket, wept silently by himself in a back pew.
Mourners with twinkling candles followed the coffin into Arlington Cemetery.
The pallbearers, not sure where to place the coffin, walked on uncertainly in the night.
Then Smith said, “I distinctly heard a voice coming out of the coffin saying, ‘Damn it.
NOTES INDEX Notes See Acknowledgments for the location of manuscript collections and also for explanations of certain abbreviations.
When two or more oral history interviews were held the same day, they are designated by a roman numeral following the date.
Rose Fitzgerald Kennedy’s memoir, Times to Remember , is illuminating and indispensable; the verse from a Boston paper is on 10.
Kennedy wrote Roosevelt, October 24, 1936, that the speech had been partly written by a French journalist.
The second sentence is ordinarily given as “My children were born here,” but it makes much less sense that way.
Myra McPherson, “‘Losing Was Never Funny to Joseph P Kennedy,’” Washington Post, November 19, 1969.
Ralph Horton, Jr., in recorded interview by Joseph Dolan, June 1, 1964, 3-4, JFK Oral History Program.
Rose Kennedy, in recorded interview by Felicia Warburg, April 6, 1973, tape in possession of interviewer.
Charles Spalding, in recorded interview by John Stewart, March 14, 1968, 3-4, JFK Oral History Program.
As told by William vanden Heuvel in interview with author, May 1, 1975.
Arthur Krock, in recorded interview by Charles Bartlett, May 10, 1964, 3, JFK Oral History Program.
Personal and Secret Correspondence Between Franklin D Roosevelt and William C Bullitt , 437.
FDR to JPK, May 3, 1940, in Franklin D Roosevelt, His Personal Letters, 1928-1945, ed.
The review was of course unsigned in that benighted period. | make this confident attribution on the basis of internal evidence.
For more on Clem Norton, see my introduction to The Best and Last of Edwin O'Connor, ed.
David Hackett, in recorded interview by John Douglas, July 22, 1970, 4, RFK Oral History Program.
Cleveland Amory, “Curmudgeon-at-Large,"" Saturday Review, September 7, 1974.
The Caseys, who were political realists, understood the problem and were in later years good friends of John and Robert Kennedy’s.
General Lewis Hershey was, of course, director of the Selective Service System.
Kathleen Kennedy to JFK, July 29 , in Rose Kennedy, Times to Remember, 292.
Robert Kennedy, in recorded interview by John Stewart, July 20, 1967, 6-7, JFK Oral History Program.
John Knowles, in recorded interview by Roberta Greene, July 2, 1974, 5-7, RFK Oral History Program.
William J Brady, Jr., in recorded interview by Roberta Greene, November 5, 1974, 7, 23, RFK Oral History Program.
Eunice Kennedy Shriver, in interview by Roberta Greene, April 29, 1971, 8-9, and January 13, 1972, 24, RFK Oral History Program.
Joseph P Kennedy, “The United States and the World,” Life, March 18, 1946.
Kenneth O’Donnell, “Joseph Kennedy Felt the Generation Gap ""London Sunday Telegraph, November 23, 1969.
Robert Kennedy told me the story, but he evidently got the two occasions confused.
Subsequent RFK quotations about the trip, not otherwise identified, are from the diary.
Alastair Forbes, “Upper Classmates,” Times Literary Supplement, March 26, 1976; Forbes, ""Camelot Confidential,” Times Literary Supplement, June 13, 1975.
For the Bunche incident, | am indebted to Charles O Gregory for a letter of September 13, 1975, and to Hardy Dillard for an interview on October 20, 1975.
Eunice Kennedy Shriver, in Greene interview, 14, 33; Patricia Kennedy Lawford, in interview by author, July 2, 1975.
Kathleen, July 4, 1951; Joe, 111, September 24, 1952; Bobby, Jr., January 17, 1954; David, June 15, 1955, Courtney, September 9, 1956.
RFK, “ United States Must Deal with New Asia,” Boston Post, September 8, 1951.
Kenneth P O’Donnell and David F Powers with Joe McCarthy, ""Johnny, We Hardly Knew Ye"" , 81.
O'Donnell and Powers, “Johnny,"" 83; Stein and Plimpton, American Journey, 41.
O’Donnell, “Joseph Kennedy Felt the Generation Gap ""London Sunday Telegraph, November 23, 1969.
William O Douglas, in recorded interview by John Stewart, November 9, 1967, 14, JFK Oral History Program.
Jack Alexander, “The Senate’s Remarkable Upstart,” Saturday Evening Post, August 9, 1947.
Billings, in Stein interview; Billings, in interview by author, July 8, 1975.
A Jones to Louis B Nichols, “Robert Francis Kennedy, Request to Meet the Director,” July 20, 1955, RFK/FBI/FOIA release.
Secretary of the Army Robert T Stevens, John G Adams, H Struve Hensel and Senator Joe McCarthy, Roy M Cohn, and Francis P Carr.
Some writers— notably Victor Lasky and Ralph de Toledano—have also held Kennedy and the reconstituted committee responsible for a report of April 25, 1955, entitled Army Signal Corps — Subversion and Espionage, supporting the extravagant McCarthy theories about Fort Monmouth.
Sylvia Berkowitz to Joseph Starobin, February 7, 1976; Starobin to the author, October 1, 1975, and February 20,1976.
Walter Lippmann, “Kennedy Destroys False Hopes,” Boston Globe, April 12, 1954.
Charles Spalding, in interview by author, February 24, 1975; Jacqueline Onassis, in interview by author.
Douglas, in recorded interview by Roberta Greene, November 13, 1969, 1, 3, RFK Oral History Program.
RFK’s diary, letters and speech drafts in the RFK papers; W O Douglas, Russian Journey ; and the Flott and Eichholz interviews with the author.
Interview with Robert Kennedy, “A Look Behind the Russian Smiles,” United States News & World Report, October 21, 1955.
For good discussions, see John Hutchinson, The Imperfect Union , ch.; and Daniel Bell, “The Scandals in Union Welfare Funds,"" Fortune, April 1954.
This work, based in considerable part on interviews with Hoffa and Kennedy, is the paperback reprint of Martin’s indispensable series “The Struggle to Get Hoffa,” Saturday Evening Post, June 27August 8, 1959.
The paperback title was imposed by the publisher over the author’s vigorous protest.
For reasons of convenience | will cite the book—as Martin, Hoffa —rather than the magazine pieces.
Mr Martin has also made available to me the original manuscript of the Post series; this was considerably cut for publication.
RFK, Enemy Within, 15; Nathan W Shefferman, The Man in the Middle , 1-3.
Flannery, “The Other Kennedy,” Ave Maria, August 31, 1957; Martin, ""Hoffa,” 11.
There were 34 assistant counsels and investigators deployed on field investigations, reinforced by an average of 35 to 45 accountants and investigators from the General Accounting Office.
Senate Select Committee on Improper Activities in the Labor or Management Field, Fina/ Report, 86 Cong., 2 Sess. , 869.
Cheyfitz evidently denied the story; see RFK, Enemy Within, 64, though this reference does not explain in full lurid detail what Cheyfitz was denying.
In reconstructing this dinner, | have relied on Kennedy's own accounts in contemporaneous notes and in his book; on Martin , who interviewed both Kennedy and Hoffa shortly afterward; and on Mollenhoff , who interviewed Kennedy.
The account in the first of Hoffa’s autobiographies (Trials, 150) is exceedingly brief.
Hoffa, or his collaborator, describes an earlier meeting when, allegedly, Kennedy, Salinger and Bellino invaded Hoffa's Detroit office in the summer of 1956 and were humiliated by him.
This is wholly imagined, though it may have been inspired by the visit of Salinger and Bellino to Detroit in the summer of 1957.
Dedicated?— Depends on Whom You Ask,"" Boston Traveler, January 9, 1961.
J Edgar Hoover spoke of “Giancana's close relationship with Frank Sinatra” in a memorandum of May 10, 1962.
Alleged Assassination Plots Involving Foreign Leaders, 94 Cong., 1 Sess. , 133.
See also Peter Lawford with Steve Dunleavy, “Peter Lawford Tells,” Star , February 17, 1976.
Walter Lippmann, “The Underworld, Our Secret Servant,” Forum, January 1931.
It is interesting to note that the gangster films of the early thirties— Scarface and Little Caesar, for example—do not depict their Italian protagonists as inhabiting the sentimental mythic realm later celebrated by Mario Puzo and Francis Ford Coppola in The Godfather.
RFK, in recorded interview by Anthony Lewis, December 4, 1964, IV, 22, JFK Oral History Program.
Ronald W May, ""Organized Crime and Disorganized Cops,” Nation, June 27, 1959.
RFK, memorandum, February 22, 1958, 5, memorandum, March 1, 1958, 1-2; RFK, Enemy Within, 275276; Senate Select Committee, Hearings, 85 Cong., 2 Sess. , 8330.
John T Dunlop, “The Public Interest in International Affairs of Unions,” address before the American Bar Association, July 12, 1957 , 4-5.
Sheridan, Fal/ and Rise, 33, 50; Senate Select Committee, /nterim Report, 85 Cong., 2 Sess.
Hackman, April 18, 1970, 73, RFK Oral History Program; Salinger, /e suis un Américain (Paris, 1957), 158.
Donald R Larrabee, “Crooks Exposed, Not Prosecuted,” New Bedford Standarad-Times, October 4, 1959.
Felix Frankfurter, “Hands Off the Investigations,” New Republic, May 21, 1924.
Philip B Kurland, ""The Watergate Inquiry, 1973,” in Congress Investigates, 1972-1974, ed.
John Bartlow Martin, ""The Struggle to Get Hoffa,” uncut manuscript, 3-12; Carmine Bellino, in interview by author, February 3, 1976.
The Case Against Him for Attorney General,” New Republic, January 9, 1961.
Pierre Salinger, in recorded interview by Theodore H White, July 19, 1965, 28, JFK Oral History Program; Salinger, With Kennedy , 30.
Kenneth P O’Donnell and David Powers, ""Johnny, We Hardly Knew Ye , 151.
Joseph Alsop, in recorded interview by Roberta Greene, June 10, 1971, 55, RFK Oral History Program.
Remember Hubert,"" United Auto Workers Washington Report, January 16, 1978.
Koskoff, joseph P Kennedy (Englewood Cliffs, N.J., 1974), 399, 596; James MacGregor Burns, /ohn Kennedy , 196.
Theodore C Sorensen, “Election of 1960,” in History of American Presidential Election, ed.
Joseph Tydings, in recorded interview by Roberta Greene, May 3, 1971, 6, RFK Oral History Program.
These and subsequent RFK quotations are from RFK, in recorded interview by author, February 27, 1965, JFK Oral History Program.
RFK, in recorded interview by John Bartlow Martin, April 13, 1964, Il, 5, JFK Oral History Program.
Richard Wade, in recorded interview by Roberta Greene, December 13, 1973, 9-10, 20.
Stewart Alsop, “Kennedy’s Magic Formula,” Saturday Evening Post, August 13, 1960.
Author’s journal, July 11, 1960; Stein and Plimpton, American Journey, 90.
Wofford, Christmas letter; as amended by Theodore H White, in interview by author, February 8, 1978.
RFK, in recorded interview by John Bartlow Martin, February 29, 1964, 1, JFK Oral History Program.
John F Kennedy, A Compendium of Speeches, Statements, and Remarks Delivered During His Service in the Congress of the United States , 1108.
Robert A Lovett, in recorded interview by Dorothy Fosdick, July 20, 1964, 9, JFK Oral History Program.
RFK, in recorded interview by author, February 27, 1965, 53, JFK Oral History Program.
RFK, in recorded interview by Anthony Lewis, December 4, 1964, I, 14, JFK Oral History Program.
For a sketch, see Charlotte Hays, ""South of the Line of Succession,” Washington Post, December 30, 1973.
Louis Oberdorfer, in recorded interview by Roberta Greene, February 5, 1970, 18, RFK Oral History Program.
Nicholas Katzenbach, in recorded interview by Anthony Lewis, November 16, 1964, 42, JFK Oral History Program.
This brilliant if sometimes overschematic book is indispensable for an understanding of Robert Kennedy as Attorney General. | have drawn heavily on it.
Il, Inte/ligence Activities and the Rights of Americans, 94 Cong., 2 Sess. , 44.
See interview with Allen in Ovid Demaris, “The Private Life of J Edgar Hoover,” Esquire, September 1975.
Sullivan, in interview by Jack Nelson of the Los Angeles Times, May 15, 1973; Frank J Donner, “Hoover's Legacy,” Nation, June 1, 1974.
Dean Rusk, in testimony before the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, July 23, 1974; quoted in Church committee, Final Report, bk.
The situation changed, Sullivan added (in a letter to me of October 1, 1977), when Ramsey Clark became Attorney General.
Jackson to Congressman Hatton Sumners, March 19, 1941, in Church committee, Fina/ Report, bk.
Elsey to Truman, February 2, 1950, in Church committee, Final Report, bk.
Brownell to Hoover, May 22, 1954, in Church committee, Final Report, bk.
RFK, in recorded interview by Anthony Lewis, December 4, 1964, IV, 22, JFK Oral History Program; RFK, in recorded interview by John Bartlow Martin, February 29, 1964, 51, JFK Oral History Program.
Edwards to John P Mohr, “Attorney General’s Effort to Get Into Bureau Gymnasium,"" February 1, 1961, RFK/FBI/FOIA release.
William Barry, in recorded interview by Roberta Greene, October 22, 1969, 69, RFK Oral History Program.
RFK, in recorded interview by John Bartlow Martin, April 13, 1964, 1, 34, 36, JFK Oral History Program.
When Brandon subsequently quoted the Attorney General in the London Sunday Times as saying that half the membership of the CPUSA consisted of FBI agents, an outraged patriot sent the clipping to Hoover.
Nicholas, July 21, 1950; his instruction to the FBI Boston office, October 28, 1954; and his notation on a memorandum of June 15, 1962.
William C Sullivan, in interview by author, July 26, 1976; Navasky, Kennedy Justice, 44.
Gerald Goettel, “Why the Crime Syndicates Can’t Be Touched,"" Harper's, November 1960.
RFK, in Martin interview, |, 37; Theodore C Sorensen, The Kennedy Legacy , 242.
In 1968 the Omnibus Crime Control and Safe Streets Act attempted to establish standards for wiretapping.
Ill, Supplementary Detailed Staff Reports on Intelligence Activities and the Rights of Americans, 94 Cong., 2 Sess. , 301.
J Edgar Hoover, “The FBI’s War on Organized Crime,"" United States News & World Report, April 18, 1966.
Robert H Jackson, “The Federal Prosecutor,” Journal of the American Judicature Society, June 1940.
In congressional testimony in 1967, quoted by Herman Schwartz, “Six Years of Tapping and Bugging,” Civi/ Liberties Review, Summer 1974.
Martin Luther King, Jr, “It’s a Difficult Thing to Teach a President,” Look, November 17, 1964.
RFK, in recorded interview by Anthony Lewis, December 4, 1964, Il, 4, 9, JFK Oral History Program.
Burke Marshall also participated in the civil rights interviews on that date.
Hoover, in interview by Dean Fischer, Time, December 14, 1970; see also interview by Ken Clawson, Washington Post, November 17, 1970.
James Wechsler, “The FBI’s Failure in the South,"" Progressive, December 1963.
Pat Watters and Stephen Gillers , 184; Alan Lichtman, ""The Federal Assault Against Voting Discrimination in the Deep South, 1957-1967 ""Journal of Negro History, October 1969, 352.
Stein and Plimpton, American Journey, 96; Guthman, We Band of Brothers, 175.
Miriam Feingold, “Chronicling the ‘Movement,’"" Reviews in American History, March 1974, 155.
Samuel Lubell, “It’s Bobby Who Roils Dixie,"" Detroit Free Press, July 13, 1961.
RFK, in recorded interview by John Bartlow Martin, May 14, 1964, |, 10, JFK Oral History Program.
See “Judicial Performance in the Fifth Circuit,"" Yale Law Journal, November 1963, 87.
The Clarke County situation is well described by one of the government attorneys in Gerald M Stem, ""Judge William Harold Cox and the Right to Vote in Clarke County, Mississippi,” in Southern Justice, ed.
This Yale Ph.D. dissertation draws on confidential interviews and is available only in summary.
Brauer points out that Kennedy’s integrationist judges were largely appointed in the upper and western south, and that the somewhat rigid Curzan criteria had the curious result of classifying Judge Frank Johnson as a segregationist.
Archibald C Cox, address before the Associated Harvard Alumni, Harvard Today, June 1975.
Theodore M Hesburgh, in recorded interview by Joseph E O’Connor, March 27, 1966, 21, 23, JFK Oral History Program.
Martin Luther King, Jr., ""Fumbling on the New Frontier,"" Nation, March 3, 1962.
Robert C Weaver, in recorded interview by Daniel Patrick Moynihan, October 1, 1964, 210, JFK Oral History Program.
Bayard Rustin, “The Meaning of the March on Washington,” Liberation, October 1963.
On Meet the Press, May 26, 1963; James Meredith, Three Years in Mississippi , 294.
RFK, in recorded interview by Anthony Lewis, December 4, 1964, VII, 6, JFK Oral History Program.
Martin Luther King, Jr., “Bold Design for a New South,"" Nation, March 30, 1963.
RFK, in recorded interview by Anthony Lewis, December 22, 1964, 4, JFK Oral History Program.
Alan F Westin and Barry Mahoney, The Trial of Martin Luther King , 149.
Burke Marshall, in recorded interview by Jean Stein, October 6, 1968, 31.
Meet the Press, May 26, 1963; Meredith, Three Years in Mississippi, 299.
Author’s journal, May 27, 1963; RFK, in recorded interview by John Bartlow Martin, April 30, 1964, Ill, 35, JFK Oral History Program.
Hackman, April 11, 1972, 83, RFK Oral History Program; William V Shannon, The Heir Apparent , 49.
RFK, in recorded interview by Anthony Lewis, December 4, 1964, VIII, 25; and December 6, 1964, Il, 3, 5, JFK Oral History Program.
RFK, in Lewis interview, December 22, 1964, 4; December 4, 1964, VI, 19, VIII, 14.
RFK, in Lewis interview, December 4, 1964, VIII, 24; and December 6, I, 3.
For details, see Douglas, in Hackman interview, and Raywid, in Greene interview.
Bayard Rustin, “The Washington March—a 10-Year Perspective,"" Crisis, September 1973.
Don Oberdorfer, ""King Adviser Says FBI ‘Used’ Him,” Washington Post, December 15, 1975.
Victor Navasky, “The Government and Martin Luther King,” Atlantic Monthly, November 1970.
III, 132; Department of Justice, “Report of Task Force to Review King,"" 120, 176.
Hugh Sidey, “L.B.J., Hoover and Domestic Spying,"" Time, February 10, 1975.
Donald M Wilson, in recorded interview by James Greenfield, September 2, 1964, 31, JFK Oral History Program.
Milton Gwirtzman, in recorded interview by Roberta Greene, December 23, 1971, 6-9, RFK Oral History Program.
RFK, in Lewis interview, December 4, 1964, IV, 2; RFK, in Martin interview, April 13, 1964, I, 40.
Kenneth O’Donnell and David Powers with Joe McCarthy, “Johnny, We Hardly Knew Ye"" , 280.
Felix Frankfurter, in recorded interview by Charles McLaughlin, June 10, 1964, 52, JFK Oral History Program.
Clark Mollenhoff, Despoi/lers of Democracy (Garden City, N.Y, 1965), 21.
Ronald Goldfarb, ""Politics at the Justice Department,” in Conspiracy, ed.
John Kennedy, in whatever mood of truth or teasing, told such a story to Joseph Alsop.
No one then in the Department of Justice with whom | discussed the story had heard of it.
Justin Feldman, in recorded interview by Roberta Greene, October 23, 1969, 48, RFK Oral History Program.
For different language but the same points, see Navasky, Kennedy Justice, 389.
So Robert Kennedy told me on December 21, 1962; noted in my journal of that date.
Anthony Lewis, “A Tribute to Robert Francis Kennedy,” delivered at unveiling of RFK portrait, Justice Department, July 22,1975.
Abba Schwartz to author, memorandum,d. , with supporting material from 1963.
Anthony Lewis, ""Legislative Apportionment and the Federal Courts,"" Harvard Law Review, April 1958.
James Clayton in the Washington Post; see Navasky, Kennedy Justice, 277.
Archibald C Cox, The Role of the Supreme Court in American Government , 29.
Purposeful Pedagogy,” in Exhortation and Controls: The Search for a Wage-Price Policy, 19451971, ed.
David McDonald, in recorded interview by Charles T Morrissey, February 15, 1966, 15, JFK Oral History Program.
RFK, in Martin interview, April 13, 1964, Ill, 5, 7-8, JFK Oral History Program.
Department ofjustice release, “Text of Attorney General Robert F Kennedy's Statement,” April 6, 1961.
Antipoverty and the Community Action Program,” in American Political Institutions and Public Policy, ed.
Blumenthal's essay, derived from a Harvard honors thesis, draws extensively on unpublished interviews and is an essential source.
Social Reform Politics tn the Kennedy Administration , is based on the files of the President’s Committee on Juvenile Delinquency.
Kenneth P O’Donnell and David F Powers, “Johnny, We Hardly Knew Ye"" , 278.
The article was never published, perhaps because Joseph Kennedy feared to complicate his son’s political career.
Kennan, February 13, 1958; see George F Kennan, in recorded interview by Louis Fischer, March 23, 1965, 5-6, JFK Oral History Program.
John F Kennedy, review of Deterrent or Defense by B H Liddell Hart, Saturday Review, September 3, 1960.
Gardner, Arthur M Schlesinger, Jr., and Hans Morgenthau, The Origins of the Cold War (Lexington, Ky., 1970), 98.
Dean Acheson, in recorded interview by Lucius Battle, April 27, 1964, 12, 20, JFK Oral History Program.
It is pathetic that Soviet historians are denied any opportunity to write honest contemporary history.
In the absence of Soviet evidence, western historians have no alternative to speculation.
Philip Bonsai, “Open Letter to an Author,” Foreign Service Journal, February 1967.
Eric Hobsbawm, “Why America Lost the Vietnam War ""Listener, May 18, 1972.
RFK, in recorded interview by John Bartlow Martin, March 1, 1964, Il, 9, JFK Oral History Program.
Gilpatric, in O’Brien interview, June 30, 1970, 69, and August 12, 1970, 112, 116.
Howard Hunt, “The Azalea Trail Guide to CIA,"" National Review, April 29, 1977.
Robert Lovett, in recorded interview by Dorothy Fosdick, August 17, 1964, 5, JFK Oral History Program.
Rostow, “Guerrilla Warfare in Underdeveloped Areas,” in The Guerrilla — and How to Fight Him, ed.
For a good account, see Maurice Halperin, The Rise and Decline of Fidel Castro , chs.-29.
Since | had some harsh words about the author in A Thousand Days, may | say here that The Rise and Decline of Fidel Castro is a detached, incisive and valuable work.
Romulo Betancourt, “The Venezuelan Miracle,” Reporter, August 13, 1964.
Quoted by Eqbal Ahmad, “The Theory and Fallacies of Counterinsurgency,"" Nation, August 2, 1971.
RFK, in recorded interview by John Bartlow Martin, April 30, 1964, Ill, 17, JFK Oral History Program.
Richard M Nixon, ""Cuba, Castro and John F Kennedy,” Reader's Digest, November 1964.
The White House meeting was described by the assistant to the head of the CIA unit working on Cuban operations.
Bissell himself could not recall such a meeting, though he agreed in essence with the spirit of the instruction.
Fora useful, though incomplete and occasionally inaccurate, account of the Miami operation, see Taylor Branch and George Crile Ill, “The Kennedy Vendetta,"" Harper's, August 1975.
Ramon Barquin, review of Give Us This Day by E Howard Hunt, Society, July/August 1975.
Anson, “The CIA and the Mafia,” New Times, May 30, 1975; and Anson, “Jack, Judy, Sam & Johnny,” New Times, January 23, 1976.
For this and other evidence pointing to the thesis that Trafficante was a double agent, see George Crile Ill, “The Mafia, the CIA and Castro,” Washington Post, May 16, 1976.
George Lardner, Jr., “Fear of Retaliation Curbed AntiCastro Plots,"" Washington Post, July 21, 1975.
RFK, in recorded interview by John Bartlow Martin, March 1, 1964, |, 40, 47, JFK Oral History Program.
Llewellyn Thompson, in recorded interview by Elizabeth Donahue, March 25, 1964, 4, JFK Oral History Program.
Perhaps Sorensen, who put Kennedy's manuscript in final shape for publication, made the change in an excess of modesty.
RFK, in interview by author, February 27, 1965, 6, JFK Oral History Program.
No Yearning to be Loved—Dean Acheson talks to Kenneth Harris,” Listener, April 8, 1971.
Dean Acheson, “Dean Acheson's Version of Robert Kennedy's Version of the Cuban Missile Affair,” Esquire, February 1969.
Meeker, an able and incorruptible public servant, was later ambassador to Rumania.
U Alexis Johnson, in recorded interview by William Brubeck,d. , 45, JFK Oral History Program.
Robert McNamara, in interview for David Wolper’s television special on Robert Kennedy, October 23, 1969.
Kenneth O’Donnell and David F Powers, ""Johnny, We Hardly Knew Ye"" , 318.
Bohlen to JFK, October 18, 1962, in Charles E Bohlen, Witness to History, 1929-1969 , 491.
This passage, somewhat rewritten and polished, appeared in RFK, Thirteen Days, 4849.
So Dobrynin said to Averell Harriman in Hobe Sound, Florida, in the winter of 1969, as described by Harriman to me.
RFK, in recorded interview by John Bartlow Martin, May 14, 1964, Il, 1, RFK Oral History Program.
Fidel Castro, in interview with Claude Julien, Le Monde, March 22, 1963.
See Graham T Allison, “Cuban Missiles and Kennedy Macho,” Washington Monthly, October 1972.
Richard Nixon, “Cuba, Castro, and John F Kennedy,"" Reader's Digest, November 1964.
May 1975, report to the Committee on Foreign Relations, 94 Cong., 1 Sess. , 14.
John Nolan, in recorded interview by Frank DeRosa, April 25, 1967, 6, JFK Oral History Program.
Joseph Dolan, in recorded interview by Frank DeRosa, July 8, 1964, 2-3, JFK Oral History Program.
Lloyd N Cutler, in recorded interview by Frank DeRosa, June 22, 1964, 23, JFK Oral History Program.
Robert Hurwich, in recorded interview by John Plank, April 24-May 4, 1964, 151, JFK Oral History Program.
Sir Herbert Marchant, “Cuba on the Brink — Il,” London Sunday Telegraph, October 22, 1967.
His CIA experience deeply upset Ayers; it broke up his marriage, created an impassioned identification with the Cubans and led to his resignation from both the Agency and the Army when interest passed in 1964 from Cuba to Vietnam.
His book is at times highly emotional, though ordinarily prosaic when describing covert operations.
Dick Russell, “Litthe Havana’s Reign of Terror,” New Times, October 29, 1976.
Hugh Thomas, Cuba , 1286-1287; George Crile Ill, “The Riddle of Am LAsH,” Washington Post, May 2, 1976.
Church committee, Assassination of President Kennedy, 14; Johnson, Bay of Pigs, 354.
Statement from office of Senator George McGovern, July 30, 1975; Church committee, Assassination Plots, 71.
The FBI deleted the words “in place” before sending copies of Morgan's deposition to the Attorney General, the Secret Service and the White House.
For further detail, see Ronald Kessler and Laurence Stern, ""Slain Mobster Claimed Cuban Link to JFK Death,” Washington Post, August 22, 1976.
George Crile Ill, “The Mafia, the CIA and Castro,” Washington Post, May 16, 1976.
Jean Daniel, Le Temps qui reste , 149152; Jean Daniel, “Unofficial Envoy,"" New Republic, December 14, 1963.
McGeorge Bundy, memorandum re Attwood-Vallejo talks, November 12, 1963.
Attwood, Reds and Blacks, 144; Church committee, Assassination Plots, 174.
George Crile Ill, “Our Heritage—the Exile Cuban Terrorists,” Washington Post, November 7, 1976.
RFK, recorded interview by John Bartlow Martin, April 13, 1964, Il, 2, JFK Oral History Program.
A Retrospective,” in Latin America: The Search for a New International Role, ed.
The Roots of Latin American Underdevelopment,” in Readings in United States Imperialism, ed.
The Alliance That Lost Its Way,” Foreign Affairs, April 1967, 437438, 442.
John F Kennedy, foreword to Theodore C Sorensen, Decision-Making in the White House , xii.
Art Buchwald, in recorded interview by Roberta Greene, March 12, 1969, 11, RFK Oral History Program.
Adlai Stevenson to Mary Lasker, May 21, 1962, ina forthcoming volume of Stevenson’s letters, edited by Walter Johnson, to whose courtesy | am indebted for this letter.
John English, in recorded interview by Roberta Greene, November 3, 1969, 4, 6, RFK Oral History Program.
Nosenko, ""Under the Eye of the KGB — a Former Police Chief Looks Back,"" Listener, May 22, 1975.
Mansfield, UPI interview by Mike Feinsilber, Buffalo Evening News, September 16, 1976.
Stein and Plimpton, American Journey, 129; Spalding, in Stewart interview, 7-8.
Roy Wilkins, in recorded interview by Berl Bernhard, August 13, 1964, 14, JFK Oral History Program.
RFK, in Martin interview, April 30, 1964, 1, 21; RFK, in Lewis interview, December 4, 1964, I, 17.
RFK, in recorded interview by William Manchester, May 16, 1964, 4-5, 8.
John Bartlow Martin, Overtaken by Events (Garden City, N.Y, 1966), 632.
Senate Select Committee to Study Governmental Operations with respect to Intelligence Activities (Church committee), Final Report, bk.
Vivian Cadden, “The Murder of President Kennedy,"" McCall's, March 1977.
Walter Sheridan, in recorded interview by Roberta Greene, May 1, 1970, 3-4, RFK Oral History Program; Sheridan, The Fall and Riseof Jimmy Hoffa , 300, 356, 408.
The letter writer, Frank Chavez, SecretaryTreasurer of Local 901, was later murdered by one of his own bodyguards.
This was a loose-leaf volume, kept by Angie Novello under various headings and used by RFK for sustenance when he had to give a speech or write an article.
He used the last three sentences in the third Camus quote as the epigraph for his own book To Seek a Newer World , curiously omitting, however, the word believer in the last sentence.
American Bar Association, Special Committee on Election Reform, “Symposium on the Vice-Presidency,” Fordham Law Review, February 1977, 750.
For some reason the ABA, wrong again, insists on the usage Vice-President.
Bill Moyers, in television interview with David Susskind, October 13, 1974; Daniel Patrick Moynihan, interview, Playboy, March 1977.
Michael Janeway, “LBJ and the Kennedys,” Atlantic Monthly, February 1972.
Bishop and Robert Kennedy, it should be added, were old foes in consequence of pro-Hoffa articles Bishop had writtten in 1959.
RFK, in recorded interview by John Bartlow Martin, February 29, 1964, 30, JFK Oral History Program; RFK, in interview by author, 42.
RFK, in Martin interview, May 14, 1964, I, 30, JFK Oral History Program.
FBI’s Hoover Scores Ramsey Clark, RFK,” Washington Post, November 17, 1970.
Walter Sheridan, in recorded interview by Roberta Greene, May 1, 1970, 4, RFK Oral History Program.
McGeorge Bundy, in recorded interview by William W Moss, January 12, 1972, 23, RFK Oral History Program.
Guthman, We Band of Brothers, 251; Theodore H White, The Making of the President, 1964 , 261.
RFK, in Martin interviews, March 1, 1964, Il, 21, May 14, 1964, Il, 17.
Moynihan, Maximum Feasible Misunderstanding, 82; Adam Yarmolinsky, “The Beginnings of OEO,” in On Fighting Poverty, ed.
Haywood Burns, “The Federal Government and Civil Rights,” in Southern Justice, ed.
Martin Luther King, Jr., “Hammer of Civil Rights,” Nation, March 9, 1964.
James Weschsler, “The FBI’s Failure in the South,” Progressive, December 1963.
III, Supplementary Detailed Staff Reports on Intelligence Activities and the Rights of Americans, 94 Cong., 2 Sess. , 7-8.
Hoover to McGeorge Bundy, July 25, 1961, in Church committee, Final Report, bk.
Richard D Cotter, “Notes toward a Definition of National Security,” Washington Monthly, December 1975.
Sullivan, in interview by author, July *6, 1976; Ovid Demaris, The Director , 326.
For the case against informers, see Frank Donner, “Political Informers,” in Investigating the FBI, ed.
The Vice Presidency 1. | am indebted to the Johnson Library for searching its records to the above effect.
Kenneth P O’Donnell and David F Powers, “/ohnny, We Hardly Knew Ye"" , 391.
See Arthur M Schlesinger, Jr., “On the Presidential Succession,” Political Science Quarterly, Fall 1974.
Susan Wilson, “A Guide to Travelling with the Robert F Kennedys,” ms. in the author's possession, 4-5.
Moss, January 27, 1971, 22, JFK Oral History Program; William V Shannon, The Heir Apparent , 12.
Joseph Kraft, in recorded interview by Roberta Greene, March 7, 1970, 18, RFK Oral History Program; Shannon, Heir Apparent, 12.
Newsweek, July 6, 1964; Benjamin C Bradlee, Conversations with Kennedy , 24.
O'Donnell and Powers, “/ohnny,” 397; see Lawrence O’Brien, No Final Victories , 175.
Senate Select Committee to Study Governmental Operations with respect to Intelligence Activities , Fina/ Report, bk.
Jack English, in recorded interview by Roberta Greene, November 25, 1969, 13, RFK Oral History Program.
Stevenson to Marietta Tree, August 10, 1964, in John Bartlow Martin, Ad/ai Stevenson and the World (Garden City, N.Y, 1977), 812.
Justin Feldman, in recorded interview by Roberta Greene, November 36, 1969, 97, RFK Oral History Program.
Mailer wrote his endorsement “A Vote for Bobby K.” for the Village Voice.
Wes Barthelmes, in recorded interview by Roberta Greene, May 20, 1969, 6, RFK Oral History Program.
Adam Walinsky, in recorded interview by Thomas Johnston, November 29, 1969, 34, RFK Oral History Program.
Walinsky, in Johnston interview, November 29, 1969, 32; November 30, 1969 , 16, 25.
Jacob Javits, in recorded interview by William vanden Heuvel, June 19, 1970, 11, RFK Oral History Program.
Javits, in recorded interview by Roberta Greene, June 7,1973, 7, RFK Oral History Program.
Fred Harris, in recorded interview by Roberta Greene, July 29, 1970, 5, RFK Oral History Program.
Thus Meg Greenfield in the pro-Johnson Reporter, December 15, 1966, and elsewhere.
Actually Kennedy had considered Mansfield for judicial appointment when he was Attorney General and endorsed him now; Dolan, in Hackman interview, April 10, 1970, 37.
Walter Mondale, in recorded interview by Roberta Greene, May 17, 1973, 19, RFK Oral History Program.
Quoted by Richard Goodwin, “Our Stake in a Big Awakening,” Life, April 14, 1967.
Juseelino Kubitschek, ""L Alliance pour le progres,” Historia, hors série 33 , 151.
Since he had already cut another significant part of the draft because it had been leaked to Reston of the Times, the UN ended up with thin fare.
Hackman, June 26, 1969, 5-8; Frank Mankiewicz and Tom Braden, “ United States on Wrong Side in Dispute with Peru,” column released March 13, 1969.
Andrew J Glass, “The Compulsive Candidate,” Saturday Evening Post, April 23, 1966.
John Seigenthaler, in recorded interview by Jean Stein, May 15, 1970, 27.
Paulo de Castro, “Robert Kennedy,"" Correio da Manha , November 23, 1965.
Jann Wenner, in interview with Daniel Ellsberg, Rolling Stone, December 6, 1973.
JFK before the American Friends of Vietnam, Washington, June 1, 1956, Vital Soeeches, August 1, 1956.
William Bundy was the deputy assistant secretary of defense for international security affairs. | am indebted to Mr Bundy for letting me read his valuable unpublished manuscript on United States policy in East Asia during the Kennedy-Johnson years.
Directorate for Information Operations, Department of Defense, March 22, 1972.
Charles Maechling, Jr., review of Anatomy of Error by Henry Brandon, Foreign Service Journal, March 1970.
Gilpatric, in O’Brien interview, August 12, 1970, 1; Ellsberg, in Rolling Stone interview.
Report of Senator Mike Mansfield, Senator J Caleb Boggs, Senator Claiborne Pell, Senator Benjamin Smith to the Committee on Foreign Relations, 88 Cong., 1 Sess. , 8.
Roberts was the very well informed diplomatic correspondent of the Washington Post.
Washington Post, August 3, 1970; Jack Anderson, “The Roots of Our Vietnam Involvement,” Washington Post, May 4, 1975.
Ellsberg, Rolling Stone interview; see also William vanden Heuvel and Milton Gwirtzman, On His Own (Garden City, N.Y, 1970), 243.
Bui Kien Thanh, “Mandarins of Vietnam,” International History Magazine, January 1974.
James M Gavin, “We Can Get Out of Vietnam,” Saturday Evening Post, February 24, 1968.
Mieczyslaw Maneli, “Encounters with John F Kennedy and Discussions on ‘Democratic Socialism,' Polish Policy, and Vietnam"" , 24.
Scott and Reginald Zelnick, The Politics of Escalation in Vietnam , 26.
RFK, advance text of commencement address at International Police Academy, July 9, 1965.
Cherif Guellal, in recorded interview by Jean Stein, October 18, 1968, 1-7; Guellal, in interview by author, January 1, 1978.
Frank Taylor, “In South Africa, a Kennedy Turns Jeers to Cheers,” National Observer , June 13, 1966.
Anthony Delius, “Daylight from Outside World—Why Kennedy Visit Made Such a Stir,” Cape Times, June 10, 1966.
John Burns, in recorded interview by Roberta Greene, November 25, 1969-February 25, 1970, 19, 66, RFK Oral History Program.
Richard Goodwin, a 1967 jotting; in interview by author, June 11, 1977.
To Albert H Blumenthal, Ronnie Eldridge, Jack Newfield, Arthur M Schlesinger, Jr, and others.
Ronnie Eldridge, in recorded interview by Roberta Greene, April 21-July 13, 1970, 92, RFK Oral History Program.
Milton Gwirtzman, in recorded interview by Roberta Greene, February 10, 1972, 68, RFK Oral History Program.
Justin Feldman, in recorded interview by Roberta Greene, February 4, 1970, 190, RFK Oral History Program.
Frank O'Connor, in recorded interview by Roberta Greene, June 19, 1970, 34, RFK Oral History Program.
In a piece of September 1966, reprinted in Jack Newfield, Bread and Roses Too , 167, 169.
For further reflections on this theme, see Arthur M Schlesinger, Jr., “On the Writing of Contemporary History,” Atlantic Monthly, March 1967.
Peter Osnos, “Kennedy Acclaimed on Oxford Visit,"" Washington Post, January 29, 1967.
For Rostow’s categorical denial of the SOB story and its withdrawal by Hugh Sidey of Time, see Denis O’Brien, Murderers and Other Friendly People , 258, 262.
The quotation, unattributed in the commonplace book, is from Keats's Fall of Hyperion, canto 1, 1.147. lam indebted to Emily Morison Beck, the editor of Bartlett’s Familiar Quotations, for this identification.
Speech before National Council of Christians and Jews, April 28, 1965, in Ross, Robert F Kennedy, 78.
Martin Luther King, Jr, “Let Justice Roll Down,” Nation, March 15, 1965.
Robert F Kennedy, “Crisis in Our Cities,” Critic, October-November 1967.
Robert F Kennedy, Jo Seek a Newer World (Garden City, N.Y, 1967), 21, 37.
Hackman, January 21, 1970, esp.7-250, RFK Oral History Program; supplemented by my interview with Johnston, June 21,1977.
Edelman, in Hackman interview, July 15, 1969, 127; Edelman, in Stein interview, 8.
Edelman, in Stein interview, 12; vanden Heuvel and Gwirtzman, On His Own, 108.
Steve Bell on ABC, June 9, 1968, reprinted in An Honorable Profession, ed.
Gertrude Claflin to Ethel Kennedy, June 6, 1968, in Salinger, Honorable Profession, 71.
Hackman, August 12, 1969, 87; Frank Mankiewicz and Tom Braden, Washington Post, February 24, 1970; Johnston, in interview by author.
Quoted by Anthony Lewis, “A Tribute to Robert Francis Kennedy,” Washington, July 22, 1975.
Allard Lowenstein, memorandum on Robert Kennedy, d. , kindly made available to me by Mr Lowenstein.
Julius Duscha, “Kennedy Man of Hour at ADA Dinner in N.Y.,” Washington Post, January 28, 1966.
The Ellinger and Barthelmes quotations are from Viorst, “The Skeptics""; the Meany quotation is from Joseph C Goulden, Meany , 361.
Theodore H White, ""The Wearing Last Weeks and a Precious Last Day,” Life, June 21, 1968.
Excerpt from interview used in “The Journey of Robert F Kennedy,"" David Wolper television production, aired February 17, 1970.
Kennedy,” Life, April 9, 1965; Robert F Kennedy, “A Peak Worthy of the President,"" National Geographic, July 1965.
Hackman, March 22, 1969, 66, RFK Oral History Program; Lawford, Shining Hour, 216.
John Glenn, in recorded interview by Roberta Greene, June 26, 1969, 15, RFK Oral History Program.
The story of Lowenstein’s guerrilla movement, and indeed the whole political history of 1968, has been well told.
Newfield's account in Kennedy generally corresponds to my own notes and recollections.
He forgets, however, that he and Lowenstein arrived with Loeb and did not find him there on arrival (in fact, they all drove out in Loeb’s car); and he is incorrect in suggesting that Loeb was pro-Johnson.
Eugene McCarthy, Year of the People, 129; McCarthy, in interview with Boston Globe, December 22, 1968.
Benno Schmidt, in recorded interview by Roberta Greene, July 17, 1969, 31, RFK Ora/ History Program.
Jack English, in recorded interview by Roberta Greene, December 19, 1969, 19, RFK Oral History Program.
As he told Jack Anderson, “Daniel Ellsberg,” Washington Post, September 28, 1975.
Rowland Evans, in recorded interview by Roberta Greene, July 30, 1970, 61, RFK Oral History Program.
Thomas J Watson, Jr., in recorded interview by Roberta Greene, January 6, 1970, 21, RFK Oral History Program.
Quoted by Murray Kempton, “The Emperor’s Kid Brother,” Esquire, July 1968.
Everything in this section, unless otherwise specified, is from author's journal, March 16, 1968.
Richard Harwood, “Crowd Madness and Kennedy Strategy,” Washington Post, March 28, 1968.
Abigail McCarthy, Private Faces, Public Places (Curtis reprint, 1972), 257.
At Home with the Heir Apparent,” Saturday Evening Post, August 26, 1967.
Pierre Salinger, ed., An Honorable Profession (Garden City, N.Y, 1968), 125.
Walter Sheridan, in recorded interview by Roberta Greene, August 5, 1969, 6, RFK Oral History Program.
William Barry, in recorded interview by Roberta Greene, March 20, 1969, 39, RFK Oral History Program.
Remarks by Senator Robert F Kennedy on the death of the Reverend Martin Luther King, rally in Indianapolis, Indiana, April 4, 1968.
Thomas B Congdon, Jr., ""Robert F Kennedy, 19351968,” Saturday Evening Post, June 39, 1968.
Marshall McLuhan, “AH of the Candidates Are Asleep,"" Saturday Evening Post, August 10, 1968.
Hal Higon, “Kennedy in the Midwest,” Chicago Tribune Magazine, August 25, 1968.
Joseph Alsop, “Robert Kennedy on the Stump,” Washington Post, May 16, 1968.
Stewart Alsop, “Bobby's Red Guards,” Saturday Evening Post, May 4, 1968.
Eugene McCarthy, “Speaking Out,"" Saturday Evening Post, January 4, 1964.
Richard Harwood, remarks at RFK Journalism Award's luncheon, Washington, D.C., May 14, 1976.
The Implications of the Harrisburg Trial for the Democratic Tradition, ed.
Alexander M Bickel, “Robert Kennedy as History,"" Ainu Republic, July 5, 1969. , 76.
Eugene McCarthy, in interview with Boston Globe Washington staff, Boston Globe, December 24, 1968.
Abigail McCarthy, “The McCarthy Campaign,” Atlantic Monthly, August 1970.
Eugene J McCarthy, The Year of the People (Garden City, N.Y, 1969), 295.
Jacqueline Kennedy to William Manchester, June 17, 1968. | am indebted to Mr Manchester for this letter.
Eugene McCarthy, interview with Boston Globe Washington staff, Boston Globe, December 24, 1968.
Edith Green, in recorded interview by Roberta Greene, February 27, 1974, 2, RFK Oral History Program.
Joseph Kraft, in recorded interview by Roberta Greene, March 7, 1970, 72, RFK Oral History Program.
Devorkin, “Kennedy Campaigning in Primary States"" (B.S. thesis, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, June 1969), 114.
Walter Sheridan, in interview by Roberta Greene, August 13, 1969, 62, RFK Oral History Program; vanden Heuvel and Gwirtzman, On His Own, 104.
Theodore H White, “The Wearing Last Weeks and a Precious Last Day,” Life, June 21, 1968; Richard N Goodwin, ""A Day,” McCall's, June 1970.
Richard N Goodwin, ""A Sentimental Tribute”; | quote here the original version rather than the one published as “A Day” in McCall's.
Gloria Steinem, “Link between the New Politics and the Old,” Saturday Review, August 2, 1969.
See also specific countries Association of Catholic Trade Unionists, Association of Motion Picture Producers, Astor, Mrs.
See also Kennedy, Jacqueline Bowles, Chester, , -, , , , , ; as roving ambassador, -; and Cuba, ; as ambassador to India, ; and Vietnam War, Braden, Joan, Braden, Thomas, Bradlee, Benjamin C., , , , , , ; on Bolshakov, ; on JPK’s illness, ; on Kennedy brothers, ; Conversations with Kennedy, n, n; on possibility of RFK as Vice President, , Brady, William J., Jr, , Branch, Taylor, , ; “The Kennedy Vendetta,” Harper’s, n Branco, Castello, , Brandeis, Louis D., , Brando, Marlon, Brandon, Henry, , , , Brandt, Willy, , Branigan, Roger, , Brannack, Ann.
Wainwright, Gillers, Stephen , Investigating the FBI, n Gilpatric, Roswell, , , n, (21, (21, , , ; on RFK, , ; in Special Group, n; and Cuban missile crisis, , , , ; and Vietnam War, , , , ; and Bedford-Stuyvesant, ; and RFK presidential campaign, Gimbel, Bernard, Gimbel, Mary Bailey.
American Journey, n Plisetskaya, Maya, , , Pliven, Frances Fox, ; Regulating the Poor, n, n Poland, , , Poor People’s Campaign, Pope, Allen L., , Pope, Mrs.
His papers contain a garbled quotation from the autobiography of Charles Francis Adams, in which the tough old Yankee offered a view of Boston that the tough young Irish American obviously found sympathetic.
KKK * A quarter century later, William Manchester asked him what he meant.
This book is a splendid specimen of the heads-l-win-tails-you-lose school of psychohistory.
Whatever the Kennedys did—one thing or its opposite—was grist to the analytical mill.
If a Kennedy went up in a balloon, he would be an exhibitionist; if he refused to go up, he would be a coward.
The previous September, Kennedy told Hoover, Hitler had offered England peace through Sweden, guaranteeing the empire and the fleet.
Kennedy was probably referring to an approach through the president of the High Court of Sweden to the British minister in Stockholm at the request of Ludwig Weissauer, a Berlin lawyer who claimed to be an emissary of Hitler’s.
John Kennedy adopted a number of his father’s suggestions when he turned the paper into a book.
Kennedy gently deflected an evident attempt by Beaverbrook to enlist him in the campaign for a second front in Europe.
They had become stout friends and, as outsiders who had made it against the establishment, they had much in common.
Kennedy, it is true, could ina moment of exasperation call Beaverbrook a ""treacherous litde bastard"" (as reported in The London Journal of Raymond E Lee, 1940-1941, ed.
But then all of Beaverbrook's best friends thought this about him at one time or another.
His father was the poet George Cabot Lodge, about whom Henry Adams wrote a moving memoir.
The original Henry Cabot Lodge was his grandfather; but Henry Cabot Lodge II doubtless seemed an impractical name for practical politics.
Asa pre-Pearl Harbor interventionist who ended in the intelligence service, | fully accept the justice of Mr Kennedy’s strictures.
KKK * Among the witnesses of the midair explosion was Colonel Elliott Roosevelt, accompanying the mission in a Mosquito; the lives of the two families were curiously intertwined.
KKK t Or so Truman recalled over a quarter century laterina not very reliable set of conversations with Merle Miller.
The foreign policy of the business community is characteristically one of cowardice rationalized in terms of high morality.
In retrospect, | believe there was more force in Kennedy's position than | understood in 1947.
On the other hand, | still think he gravely overestimated the freedom that “disillusioned experimenters"" would have to abandon totalitarian experiments.
Given the economic chaos and political confusion in western Europe in the year before the Marshall Plan, the Kennedy prescription still seems to me unduly complacent, if my response to it seems unduly shrill.
We have lost the peace but it does not follow that we have lost also the opportunity to prevent a war.
KKK * In a draft he said, ""In criticizing the Yalta Agreement, | recognize that Franklin Roosevelt and his advisors were faced with immensely complicated problems, and that they were dealing with a dictator who did not share their sincere and generous hopex for the future.
As a member of Governor Stevenson's campaign staff that autumn,| can attest to Mr Kennedy’s eager interest in Stevenson.
He knew me as a friend of his older son’s and called me from time to time in Springfield to pass on his ideas about the tactics and strategy of the campaign.
He was commenting ona Times editorial of January 26 attacking the Bricker Amendment.
Without endorsing the amendment, Kennedy argued that “the United States Senate, if this matter had been put up to them, would have done a more thorough job” than Roosevelt, with Averell Harriman and Harry Hopkins as his ""sole advisers,” had done at Yalta.
In 1958 the Subversive Activities Control Board claimed that, according to Communist party records, Mrs.
Her listing on the rolls, if true, is hardly conclusive, given what we know now about the disposition both of CPUSA organizers and of FBI informants to pad membership lists in order to increase their prestige.
Moss was anything but the bewildered and harmless woman that Symington and Kennedy supposed her to be.
A prescient remark—though by the time, fifteen or so years later, the difficulty threatened the republic itself, Loeb was on the other side.
In 1971 Lyndon Johnson described a phone call from Joseph Kennedy in October 1955 saying that he and John wanted to support Johnson for President in 1956; if he was not interested, they would go for Stevenson.
KKK * Kennedy had met Williams as Joe McCarthy's counsel during the censure proceedings.
KKK * Riesel, a labor reporter, had been exposing underworld penetration of the labor movement.
KKK * Robert F Kennedy, “Hoffa’s Unholy Alliance,"" Look, September 2, 1958.
KKK * Kohler had an engine plant department, which made UAW involvement less incongruous.
KKK * “I did not organize these hearings. | did not arrange for the presentation of them, as | have others” (Senate Select Committee on Improper Activities in the Labor or Management Field, Hearings, 85 Cong., 2 Sess.
Humphrey said nothing about Stevenson money, of which he may have received a certain amount.
KKK Tt It was, Roosevelt said later, “the biggest political mistake” of his career.
Roosevelt, in recorded interview by Jean Stein, December 9, 1969, 6-8; Humphrey, Education of a Public Man, 475.
Humphrey writes that for the first time in his political career he saw his wife angry about an election.
When Bob arrived in our room, he moved quickly to her and kissed her on the cheek.
KKK * The day before, | had sent Kennedy a memorandum, now for some reason in Theodore H White's possession, arguing that Humphrey’s nomination would be the surest way of enlisting the Stevensonians in the campaign.
Carl Rowan, who served in the Kennedy and Johnson administrations, remembers Johnson crying in his presence as he told a story.
Out of nearly 69 million votes cast, Kennedy had a plurality of 120,000, but he had a lead of 84 votes in the electoral college.
A legend subsequently arose that Mayor Daley of Chicago put Kennedy over by stealing the election in Illinois.
The margin in Illinois was less than 9000, and the Cook County machine was unquestionably skilled in producing Democratic votes out of vacant lots and graveyards.
One can assume that in Illinois one party stole as many votes as the other.
While there were probably irregularities in Texas, Kennedy’s margin of 47,000 votes was too great to be reasonably attributed to fraud or acceptably reversed by a recount.
The more difficult question, applying, however, only to the popular vote, was raised by Alabama.
The Democratic slate consisted of six unpledged and five Kennedy-pledged electors.
The unpledged electors voted for Harry F Byrd in the electoral college.
It is impossible to determine what Kennedy's popular vote in Alabama was.
Nixon, 238,000; unpledged, 177,000; Kennedy, 147,000—and Nixon would have won the popular vote by 58,000.
The possibility of the popular-vote winner losing in the electoral college argues for a reform of the present system, though not, in my judgment, for a shift to direct popular election.
One hundred one legislators from the old Confederacy had signed it, Fulbright among them.
The southern senators who refused were Estes Kefauver and Albert Gore of Tennessee and Lyndon Johnson.
Implicit in tahe Times's attacks on Robert Kennedy’s appointment was the notion that nepotism was a wicked thing.
Robert Kennedy took sardonic pleasure in observing the retirement of Arthur Hays Sulzberger as publisher of the Times and his replacement by his son-in-law Orville Dryfoos, with Arthur Ochs Sulzberger standing next in line.
Sullivan told me on July 26, 1976, that the FBI aid program for McCarthy began very shortly after McCarthy's Wheeling speech in 1950 when McCarthy called Hoover in search of support.
KKK * Ovid Demaris, The Director , 147; William Hundley, in interview by author, August 4, 1976.
Another example of Hoover’s admonitory operation was provided by the disclosure in December 1977 of a memorandum from the FBI director to Robert Kennedy on June 5, 1963, containing assertions that Robert Kennedy in 1960 had settled out of court a breach-of-promise suit, going back to 1951, for $500,000.
The story was improbable on the face, for a decade-old breach-of-promise suit against a President-elect would have been generally discounted as publicity seeking.
In any event, the woman named, Alicia Darr Purdom Clark, promptly denied that she and John Kennedy had been lovers or that she had ever received a cent from the Kennedys.
Jack Anderson reported that Hoover told Herbert Jenkins, the Atlanta police chief and then president of the International Association of Police Chiefs, that the three enemies he hated most in the world were Kennedy, King and Quinn Tamm, a former FBI assistant director who had become executive director of the International Association.
Kennedy liked Schulberg’s script, but Wald, who, Schulberg said, “alone had the courage to produce it,” died suddenly.
A ""labor tough” warned Twentieth CenturyFox that, if the picture were made, the Teamsters would refuse to deliver the print to the theaters.
When Columbia, the distributor of On the Waterfront, showed a brief interest, William Bufalino, a Hoffa attorney, wrote a letter to the studio pointing out that Twentieth Century-Fox had wisely abandoned the project as soon as the possible consequences had been laid before it and that he felt confident Columbia would be intelligent enough to do likewise.
KKK * More sinister reasons have been proposed and will only be noted here. | have no reason to believe that they are true —or false.
According to Time ; “Hoover was reluctant to move against organized crime.
They tell stories of Hoover sometimes traveling to Manhattan to meet one of the Mafia’s top figures, Frank Costello.
The fact that Hoover met with Costello is confirmed by William Hundley and Edward Bennett Williams.
Hank Messick, author of several books on organized crime, points out that, according to the testimony of his fourth wife, Lewis S Rosenstiel of Schenley Industries and a good friend of Hoover’s was also a longtime friend of Meyer Lansky.
Other testimony suggests that Rosenstiel and Lansky had been in business together during prohibition.
Rosenstiel subsequently employed Louis B Nichols, formerly an assistant director of the FBI, and in 1969 set up the J Edgar Hoover Foundation.
KKK * Baldwin had written a story about photographic surveillance of Soviet missiles by United States satellites.
KKK * Senate Select Committee to Study Governmental Operations with respect to Intelligence Activities, Fina/ Report, bk.
Such wiretaps sometimes caught Americans, including members of Congress—e.g., Senator Thomas J Dodd, when the FBI tapped Michael Struelens, a Belgian who was operating in the United States as the agent for Moise Tshombe’s secessionist regime in Katanga.
Navasky surmises that Hoover did not use this memorandum in 1966 because it misrepresented the bugging authority Hoover claimed to have from the Brownell memorandum of 1954 and perhaps because White by this time was on the Supreme Court.
This was during the Indiana Campaign. | told him the story and he just laughed.
He said, ‘Well, the only mistake that Katzenbach made is when he told you that he had the best witness in the world.
The humorless English editor Anthony Howard, reviewing American Journey in the New Statesman , seized upon this remark as proof of Robert Kennedy’s callous determination to sacrifice everyone to the greater glory of the Kennedys.
Katzenbach responded with admirable restraint that, while Howard had made “manifestly clear his dislike for humour in tense moments, he does not make explicit the fact that the statement was made in jest to cover up a deep concern and affection.
KKK * Kennedy’s wiretapping reference was obviously to Levison’s phone.
KKK * The first FBI bug on King established by the Church committee was planted on January 5, 1964, also at the Willard (Church committee, Fina/ Report, bk.
KKK T It is a comment on both the caliber and the nonpartisanship of the Kennedy Department ofjustice that the Watergate crowd turned to so many of its members in their time of trouble — Nixon and Richard Kleindienst to Miller, John Mitchell to Hundley, John Dean to Charles Shaffer, Howard Hunt to William Bittmann.
Mark Howe, before his untimely death, became a friend and supporter of Edward Kennedy.
Professor Chase wanted to make a study of the way judges were appointed and asked Katzenbach, a college classmate, whether he could observe the Kennedy process firsthand.
Chase was set up in a conference room between the offices of Katzenbach and Joseph Dolan, who did the preliminary screening of judicial possibilities.
When Kennedy and Johnson discussed Bobby Baker in 1964, Johnson emphasized “that Bobby Baker got into all this difficulty after he, Lyndon, had left the Senate.
He said Bobby Baker wanted to go to Puerto Rico on one occasion when he was Vice President, when he, Johnson, was going down to the inauguration of Bosch.
He said for some reason Bobby's request concerned him and he didn't take him.
But he said he could have gotten into so much difficulty if he had taken him as pan of his official party.
Secondly, he said God must have been watching over him because he did not have financial dealings with Bobby.
He could very well have done so because if Bobby asked him to loan him $10,000 for the purchase of some stock he certainly would have done so.
He said the only business deal he had with Bobby Baker was in connection with the purchase of some insurance.
The insurance company then placed $1500 (I think that was the figure) worth of advertising with his television station.
Oesterle, December 9, 1970, 21, RFK Oral History Program; Hundley, in interview by author, August 4, 1976; Louis Oberdorfer, in interview by author, December 29, 1976.
According to this account, a federal grand jury was on the verge of indicting Eisenhower’s “former aide, ‘Mr Jones'” for income tax evasion.
JFK later cashed in his blank check by insisting that Eisenhower and Dirksen publicly endorse the test ban treaty of 1963.
Robert Coles attended the dedication in 1968 of the Robert F Kennedy Youth Center in Morgantown, West Virginia.
Though Frankfurter wrote the opinion of the Court, actually only two other justices agreed with him that representation was a political question and not justiciable.
Justice Rutledge concurred in the result on other grounds and was responsible for the 4-3 decision.
One, made to appease the ravenous appetite of Congressman Adam Clayton Powell in Harlem, involved a grant for his own welfare organization, set up as a rival of HARYOU, an action followed later by Powell’s capture of HARYOU and explusion of the stubbornly independent Kenneth Clark; the other was a program requested by Congressman Albert Thomas of Houston.
KKK * The major dissent in the party's intellectual ranks came from Thomas K Finletter and Stuart Symington—both of whom served as Secretary of the Air Force under Truman— and Roswell Gilpatric, who had served as under secretary.
Their protest was unwisely discounted as the view of otherwise intelligent men who had spent too much time with the air marshals.
The survival of Communism in North Korea, North Vietnam and China, Gilpatric said, suggested that “regardless of the amount of United States or United Nations force committed to a local war in the Far East, the odds are against the free world’s winning it by conventional arms.
Direct intervention by military means should be minimized or wholly avoided.
KKK * The legend has arisen that Khrushchev browbeat and bullied Kennedy at Vienna.
He felt perfectly confident to answer questions and make points on his own.
KKK * Rusk, on accepting the appointment, had told Kennedy that for financial reasons he could remain for only four years.
Restrictions on travel to Cuba, Vietnam, North Korea and Cambodia were finally removed fourteen years later by President Jimmy Carter, in March 1977.
KKK * RFK, in recorded interview by John Bartlow Martin, March 1, 1964, Il, 17, JFK Oral History Program.
When Eisenhower and Kennedy met the day before the inauguration, ""President Eisenhower said with reference to the guerrilla forces which are opposed to Castro,” as Clark Clifford, who accompanied Kennedy, recorded his words, “that it was the policy of this government to help such forces to the utmost.
At the present time we are helping train antiCastro forces in Guatemala.
And Arthur Schlesinger came to my house...and | remember having a conversation with him in which he said that he was opposed to it and | said | thought that everybody had made up their mind and that | thought he was performing a disservice to bring it back to the President.... | remember at the house telling him that once the President had made up his mind, once it seemed to have gone this far, that we should make all efforts to support him, and he should remain quiet.
For an extended account of the Bay of Pigs, see Arthur M Schlesinger, Jr.,A Thousand Days , chs.-11.
Richard Goodwin asked Bissell for CIA's evidence on the extent of disaffection in Cuba.
KKK * Actually the American ambassador to Cuba, Arthur Gardner, had proposed to Batista in1957that the CIA or FBI murder Castro.
The plot turns on Pyle’s support of General Trinh Minh Thé, the dissident chief of staff who was fighting both the French and the Viet Minh.
KKK * William J Lederer and Eugene Burdick, The Ugly American , 153, 233.
KKK * The regular Special Group—Taylor, McGeorge Bundy, Alexis Johnson, Gilpatric, Lemnitzer and McCone—would meet at two o’clock every Thursday afternoon.
KKK * Taylor Branch and George Crile Ill, “The Kennedy Vendetta,” Harper’s, August 1975.
The speaker was Eugenio Rolando Martinez, who learned the lesson of obedience so completely that, when Howard Hunt asked him a decade later to break into the Watergate, Martinez, still ona CIA retainer and supposing this to be a CIA operation, obliged without second thought.
KKK * An Air India plane on which Chou En-lai had booked passage to Bandung, Indonesia, for the Afro-Asian Conference in April 1955 blew up in midair.
Chou En-lai, who at the last minute flew instead to Rangoon to meet Nasser, was not on board.
The deputy chief of the special unit told the Church committee that the recommendation to murder Chou was disapproved in Washington and the CIA station was “strongly censured” (Church committee, Fina/ Report, bk.
Despite all this, though, someone apparently blew up a plane on which Chou would have traveled except for his lastminute change of plan.
Sheffield Edwards, Artichoke’s security officer, was the man who in 1960 proposed bringing in the mob to murder Castro.
The committee did not submit specific interrogatories about the Bay of Pigs.
In August 1976, Congressman Thomas Downing of Virginia released affidavits from Robert D Morrow, who said he was a CIA contract agent in 1960, and Mario Kohly, Jr., the son of a right-wing Cuban exile, now deceased.
In October 1963, Robert Morgenthau procured the indictment of the elder Kohly on charges of conspiracy to counterfeit Cuban pesos.
Warner reprint, 1976), Morrow claimed that he had discovered nuclear missile sites in Cuba in 1961 and that the Kennedys deliberately suppressed the evidence.
He described the CIA leadership as bitterly antagonistic toward the Kennedys.
Robert Kennedy was depicted as the nemesis of Kohly and his anti-Castro counterfeiting scheme.
Johnson apparently first learned of the CIA assassination plots from a column by Drew Pearson in the spring of 1967.
KKK * Williams repeated this statement to Hundley, who said it was ludicrous.
KKK * Bolshakov read the notes of his Moscow talk to Charles Bartlett on October 24.
Bolshakov's reaction contradicts the claim of some revisionist historians that Khrushchev was innocent of deception, that the Americans just misunderstood his messages.
Possibly he wanted to reassure the romantic Matthews that Cuba was its own master.
The answer was, of course, none; and Kennedy, who knew how much Latin Americans resented unilateral declarations from Washington, never mentioned the doctrine throughout the subsequent crisis.
KKK * On June 18, 1962, Bolshakov gave Robert Kennedy a message from Khrushchev.
KKK * Elie Abel has suggested that Khrushchev may have confused the Kennedy-Dobrynin meeting with the postcrisis negotiations over the removal of IL-28 bombers.
At one point Dobrynin said that of course the Soviet government would not publish the correspondence.
Tt Later the bargain was mentioned by Khrushchev and Anatoly Gromyko in their accounts of the crisis, though Gromyko, faithful to the agreement, based his account on Thirteen Days rather than on Dobrynin’s cables.
He said that he had the feeling that we were being too weak ... and that we should be stronger.
The United States told me that as soon as this system is set up they would make a public declaration, and if necessary in the Security Council, that they would relinquish any aggressive intentions against the Cuban government and would guarantee the territorial integrity of the nation.
However, since Castro chose to resist inspection to the end, the guarantee never went into formal effect.
According to Hervé Alphand, the French ambassador to Washington, “De Gaulle said there was really no risk.
KKK * Khrushchev told Norman Cousins in 1963, “When | asked the military advisers if they could assure me that holding fast would not result in the death of five hundred million human beings, they looked at me as though | was out of my mind or, what was worse, a traitor.
KKK * Fulbright's point was that a quarantine, by involving a direct confrontation with Soviet ships, would be more likely to provoke a nuclear war than an invasion that would pit Americans against Cubans.
The Reston column proves that the “secret war” was not much of a secret.
Miskovsky of the CIA and Miskovsky’s memorandum of April 13, 1963, to John McCone.
On August 17, 1961, after the Punta del Este conference, he had held a conversation in Montevideo with Richard Goodwin.
He then said, as Goodwin reported to President Kennedy, ""that they didn’t want an understanding with the United States, because they knew that was impossible.
That they could not give back the expropriated properties ... but they could pay for them in trade.
They could agree not to make any political alliance with the East —although this would not affect their natural sympathies.
Perhaps Guevara was following instructions from Castro, rationalizing this as a Leninist tactic in the tradition of Brest-Litovsk, or perhaps he was less radical then than he became by 1963.
There was no followup in Washington because, as Goodwin reminded me in 1977, the timing and psychology were wrong.
More important, Betancourt, Haya de la Torre, Frei and the democratic left in Latin America would have been appalled.
KKK * Church committee, Assassination Plots, esp.1-166, 175; Church committee, Fina/ Report, bk.
V, The Investigation of the Assassination of President John F Kennedy, 94 Cong., 2 Sess. , 37, 69.
Donovan and Nolan were much impressed by Castro’s security—the handling of the cars, for example, that made it impossible for any other car on the road to get into a shooting position.
KKK * The CIA told Cubela that Desmond FitzGerald had helped write the speech and that the passage about the “small band of conspirators” was meant as a green light for an anti-Castro coup (Church committee.
On its face the passage was obviously directed against Castro's extracontinental ties and signaled that, if these were ended, normalization was possible; it was meant in short as assistance to Attwood, not to FitzGerald.
This was the signal that Richard Goodwin, the chief author of the speech, intended to convey.
KKK * RFK, in interview by John Bartlow Martin, May 14, 1964, |, 5, JFK Oral History Program.
Bob Feller was the Cleveland Indians’ pitcher, renowned for his fast ball.
KKK * | suppose it is impossible to convince the Eric Hobsbawms of this world of it, though the Harold Geneens had no problem believing it; but preventing nationalization was for John Kennedy an issue of small interest.
Lincoln Gordon recalled Kennedy's reaction at a time, shortly before Goulart’s visit, when an ITT subsidiary in Porto Alegre was expropriated.
A State Department official put out a statement condemning the action and talking about the bad effects it would have on private investment and American aid.
When Jeddi Jagan, the Marxist Prime Minister of British Guiana, argued that only “socialism” could break the development bottlenecks in his country, Kennedy told him, “We are not engaged in a crusade to force private enterprise on parts of the world where it is not relevant.
If we are engaged in a crusade for anything, it is national independence.
The secondary purpose is to encourage individual freedom and political freedom.
But we can’t always get that; and we have often helped countries which have little personal freedom, like Yugoslavia, if they maintain their national independence.
The difference between Jagan and his rival Forbes Burnham, apart from the contest between Indians and Africans within Guyana, was not that Jagan was socialist and Burnham was not but that Jagan was pro-Soviet and Burnham was not.
The British government supported Jagan, though Hugh Gaitskell, the leader of the Labour opposition, preferred Burnham.
The CIA grew considerably exercised over Jagan, and the British felt—quite rightly, | think, in retrospect—that it was much ado about nothing.
The President’s old friend Hugh Fraser was handling the matter as a junior minister in the Tory government.
Washington finally persuaded the British to change the electoral system to proportional representation.
As Prime Minister of the Cooperative Republic of Guyana, Burnham subsequently pursued, without United States retaliation, a policy of nationalization, hostility to foreign investment and neutralism.
Churchill had had his ups and downs with the Kennedys, as he had had with everybody else.
On October 17, the Times carried a long and characteristically truculent reply from Randolph Churchill.
Reprinting it in 1962 in Rocking the Boat (Boston, 1962), 3-14, Vidal noted that the Bay of Pigs had rather undercut the portrait he had drawn for the British.
KKK Tt Gore Vidal, “The Holy Family,” Esquire, April 1967. | must perhaps declare an interest, because Vidal, whose company | continue to find entertaining, if problematic, described A Thousand Days in the same piece as “the best political novel since Coningsby""—though, as an admirer of Coningsby, | take this as a high compliment.
The nonexistence of any dump-Johnson plan is fully and emphatically confirmed by Stephen Smith.
Johnson became President on his predecessor’s death, not on the administration of the oath.
But, since Angleton in his quest, necessary but maniacal, for Soviet ‘moles' (penetration agents burrowing their way in the adversary system) at one time thought | might bea Soviet agent in the White House (after a Soviet official in Caracas came up with the date of the Bay of Pigs landing), | may perhaps be pardoned if | do not regard him with the reverence that pervades the Epstein book.
KKK * Walter Sheridan, in recorded interview by Roberta Greene, June is, 1970, 19, RFK Oral History Program.
In 1967 Marvin Watson of Lyndon Johnson’s White House staff told Cartha DeLoach of the FBI that Johnson “was now convinced there was a plot in connection with the assassination.
KKK * Hugh Sidey, “L.B.J., Hoover and Domestic Spying,"" 7ime, February 10, 1975.
This rumor persisted, later taking the form that the Attorney General had tapped the Johnson White House.
KKK * Nor has Jean Kennedy Smith any recollection of RFK’s killing deer.
He did go deeT hunting at the ranch and was disgusted by Johnson's practice of shooting deer from the comfort of an elevated concrete structure.
Harriman and Jones continued to argue that military aid to Malaysia would destroy what little influence the United States had left in Indonesia.
In July Johnson invited the Tunku to Washington, where they jointly announced a program of American military assistance to Malaysia.
Sukarno would no doubt have succumbed to irrevocable anti-Americanism anyway as he pursued his increasingly megalomaniac course.
Johnson's divine retribution thesis found new ammunition in March 1967 when he learned for the first time of the CIA’s attempts to murder Castro (Senate Select Committee to Study Governmental Operations with respect to Intelligence Activities Fina/ Report, bk.
Johnson assumed that, because the CIA had tried to murder Castro during the Kennedy administration, Kennedy must have authorized the plots and therefore had only himself to blame for the Dallas horror.
KKK * The Twenty-fifth Amendment, empowering the President to fill a vice presidential vacancy, was not ratified until February 10, 1967.
It was immersed in politics and even went so far as to conduct purely political investigations and inquiries.
At times it seemed that when we were not asked to perform politically we sought opportunities to do so. | was so concerned about this under Mr Johnson's administration that | wrote you a letter ... and urged that the FBI not be used politically.” | thank Mr Sullivan for making this letter available to me.
In 1972, in addition, the Democrats nominated Ramsey Clark, who had spent most of his life in Texas.
KKK * Edward Kennedy’s election to the Senate in 1962 was to complete an unfinished term.
KKK Tt Robert was, of course, the third Kennedy brother in the Senate in five years.
The Kennedys were still behind the Washburn brothers, three of whom served together in the 34th, 35th and 36th Congresses representing three different states while a fourth later represented still another state both in the House and Senate.
Washburn, 46th-48th Congresses and later senator (18891895) from Minnesota.
Like most contemporary politicians, Kennedy often called on professionals for jokes in speeches.
The always helpful Alan King provided the “ah... ah... ah"" gag; but, according to King, it was the Ethel-bird joke “which just broke up the place.
KKK * Also the Boston Globe, which received a Pulitzer Prize for its work.
Robert Kennedy was at the fiftieth anniversary dinner, where the award was made.
When the G/obe was announced, “those sitting dose to Bobby’s front-and-center table could not resist stealing furtive looks to catch his reaction.
William Rivkin, an able Chicago lawyer, had served as ambassador to Luxembourg in the Kennedy administration.
KKK * Johnson did work harder than John Kennedy at congressional cajolery, bargaining and arm-twisting.
But, when Johnson lost 48 Democratic House seats in the 1966 election, he found himself, despite his alleged wizardry, in the same condition of stalemate that had thwarted Kennedy and, indeed, every Democratic President since 1938.
Had the sequence been different, had Johnson been elected to the Presidency in 1960 with Kennedy as his Vice President, and had Johnson then offered the 87th Congress the same program actually offered by Kennedy, the probability is that he would have had no more success than Kennedy—perhaps even less because he appealed less effectively to public opinion.
And, if Johnson had died in 1963 and Kennedy had beaten Goldwater by a large margin in 1964, then Kennedy would have had those extra votes in the House of Representatives, and the pundits of the press would have contrasted his cool management of Congress with the frenetic and bumbling efforts of his predecessor.
It may be well to mention the discussion Kennedy held a few weeks later with another mystical general.
De Gaulle strongly supported Kennedy’s proposal of a neutral government under Souvanna Phouma.
The discussion of intervention arose when Kennedy said that the threat of intervention might be necessary to get Moscow to agree to neutralization.
Ambassador James Gavin, who was present, later wrote that he was “startled"" to read de Gaulle's account and that it “bore little relationship to what had been said.
It might be noted that on other occasions de Gaulle found it hard to resist the temptation to improve the record.
KKK * It is sometimes said that Vietnam was used as the ‘proving ground' of counterinsurgency.
Counterinsurgency doctrine contributed to the ‘pacification’ program of 1967-68; but this was as a supplement to, not as a substitute for, a military strategy resting on large units, high technology and attrition.
Bundy in retrospect finds it hard to resolve the contradiction between the report’s political pessimism and its withdrawal proposal.
No doubt the answer lies in Kennedy’s private determination to begin, at whatever cost, a strategy of extrication.
The Pentagon statement would have had Kennedy “adhere to the overriding objective ...""; but, since Kennedy had steadily vetoed persistent Pentagon attempts to slip by an unconditional commitment, there was nothing for him to adhere to; nor did he.
Maneli for permitting me to read his account of this meeting in an unpublished paper, “Encounters with John F Kennedy and Discussions on ‘Democratic Socialism,’ Polish Policy, and Vietnam,"" 4-11.
Nhu may also have been holding talks with NLF representatives, as stated in Bui Kien Thanh, “Mandarins of Vietnam,""/nternational History Magazine, January 1974.
The memorandum, Hilsman informs me, was a response to a request by Rusk that the Far Eastern Division list antiAmerican moves Diem might make and the whole range of possible responses.
An Action nan,” with no date or source but, from internal evidence, September 1963 and very likely also from Hilsman, listed as an American response to Nhu-Diem tactics: if ""we have sufficient hard evidence of GVN negotiations with any Communists, consider going to Moscow directly.
KKK * And indeed only 2000 more than Eisenhower sent to Lebanon in 1958.
Maneli'sconclusion was that neither of the immediate superpowers—America or China—wanted the war to end.
The Soviet Union alone, fearing a Hanoi victory would mean either a Chinese dependency or an Asian Titoism, was in favor of negotiated peace but in this period had limited influence in Hanoi.
George McGovern, however, describes a talk with Humphrey about Vietnam in the spring of 1965—“the first real argument Hubert and | had had in a decade as neighbors and friends.
Silverman served with distinction on the surrogate court and reformed everything within his power but, bored and frustrated, resigned in 1971 and returned to the state supreme court.
Kennedy told Newfield he had sent a copy of the piece to his father, first ripping it out of the girlie magazine because the rest of the contents were so obscene.
KKK * On April 28, 1966, after consultation with Seigenthaler in Nashville, | wrote Kennedy, “You will be under great pressure to tone down the LB] passages in the book.
KKK * There was much more to the Washington sabotage of the Wilson-Kosygin talks.
The bizarre story is well told in Chester L Cooper, The Lost Crusade , 350368.
KKK t He had lost 11 points from the poll Ethel had cabled so cheerily to London.
See also Mary McGrory, Washington Star, March 19, 1966, Robert E Baker in Washington Post, March 19, 1966, and Jack Nelson in Los Angeles Times, March 19, 1966.
In 1972 Javits and Edward Kennedy expanded the Original ‘special impact’ program by adding a new Title VII to the Economic Opportunity Act.
Kempton was more accurate than the Kennedy critics who charged that he cultivated the poor for political reasons.
Many of the poor were outside the political as well as the economic community.
They had no fixed place of abode or were too poor, too cynical, too apathetic, to get on the registration rolls.
The only ‘true’ thing in it was Kennedy’s remark about the painter. | happened to be in the gallery when he came in with a group; | think the artist was Kenneth Noland.
Kennedy made the remark quoted about the ruler— not the newest joke in the world.
The story was published in New American Review well before the assassination. | cannot account for the concluding impulse of the I-character to ‘save’ him other than by reference to John Kennedy’s death; still, a second assassination was unthinkable at that time.
Kennedy entered, and McCarthy in later years did suggest he had been tricked (see Eugene McCarthy, “Kennedy's Betrayal,” in The Sixties, ed.
They are all ridiculous by virtue of these pretensions, including ourselves"" Jacqueline Kennedy to RFK,d.
KKK * Kennedy’s list, according to Clifford, was Roswell Gilpatric, Carl Kaysen, Edwin Reischauer, Mike Mansfield, John Sherman Cooper, George Aiken, Generals Lauris Norstad and Matthew Ridgway, Kingman Brewster and himself.
KKK In an interview with the Boston Globe at the end of the year, McCarthy was asked what he thought would have happened if Kennedy had not gone into the primaries.
And the party wouldn't have gone for me. | don't think they would have.
Kennedy did not get the quotation (from “The American Scholar”) quite right.
But it was still pretty close for a tired man bumping along in a bus at three in the morning after a political dinner in Binghamton.
For | had forgotten, from being bitter about a temporary course of his, how much | liked Senator Kennedy and how much he needed to know he was liked.
Martha Raye had probably spent more time entertaining the troops in Vietnam than anyone except Bob Hope.
He had warned Kennedy that, if his notification arrived, he would refuse to go, supposing that Kennedy would say that, in the circumstances, he had better leave the staff.
Kennedy said instead, “Well, Jeff, you know if you go to jail, I’ll see that you get treated right""—after all, he had once had some influence over the prison system—“and besides, don’t worry about it.
KKK * Ethnic means, simply, pertaining to a religious, racial, national or linguistic group.
To confine this adjective, as current writers try to do, to people from eastern Europe is a gross solecism.
KKK tT Humphrey actually suggested that those who disagreed with Johnson and himself on the war were racists—an accusation he reiterated as late as 1976 in The Education of a Public Man , 486.
KKK * George McGovern, introduction of Robert Kennedy at Sioux Falls and Rapid City, South Dakota, April 16, 1968.
KKK * Eugene McCarthy, The Year of the People (Garden City, N.Y., 1969), 145.
In calling it the “best financed,” McCarthy explained that he meant not that the Oregon campaign had the most money but that it had the money long enough in advance to plan the spending effectively.
The final result was 46. percent for Kennedy and 41. percent for McCarthy.
The rest went to a Humphrey slate headed by the state attorney general.
