The announcement takes me by surprise, especially on this day, after a most memorable visit to a bomb shelter built for a president and his family in the aftermath of the failed Bay of Pigs invasion when all gates to Cuba were most definitely closed.
The Kennedy Bunker on Peanut Island in Palm Beach County, Florida This story is about my visit to the Kennedy Bunker, an underground fallout shelter in Florida.
The shelter was built in December 1961 before President John F Kennedy’s visit to Palm Beach for a Christmas holiday with his family.
I put together this brief, selective, timeline of the historical events surrounding this bunker’s construction.
There would be pandemonium amplified by a kazillion wireless communication devices.
The Bay of Pigs October 6, 1961: The President gave a speech urging all Americans to build a fallout shelter in their home because of the risk of a nuclear war with the Soviet Union.
Navy Seabees built Kennedy bunker under the direction of the Secret Service.
Soviet and Cuban leaders agreed to place nuclear missiles in Cuba and construction of missile launch facilities began.
The Bunker Tour The bunker entryway was built into the hillside and covered with twelve feet of bags of concrete mix and dirt.
It was meant to be a radiation proof safe haven for the President from which JFK and his entourage could lead the country.
As I walked into the dimly lit 40-foot long corrugated steel tunnel, I was immediately struck by a twilight zoney sense of the reality of a tense time in our geopolitical history.
I had a flashback to 1962 when as a kindergartner in Baltimore, only forty miles from Washington D.C., we practiced Duck and Cover drills in the classroom.
As children, we knew, sort of, what this sign on public buildings meant.
I’ve since learned the six black and gold triangles depicted in the sign stood for shielding from radiation, food and water, trained leadership, medical supplies, communication, radiological monitoring, all focused jobs of the Office of Civil Defense.
Before taking two 90-degree turns to get to the living quarters, one would do a radiation check.
If you tested positive, you rinsed off in the decontamination shower before proceeding.
I had a vague memory that radiation couldn’t turn corners, so entranceways to bomb shelters always include a maze of concrete walls through which to navigate.
If you had a bomb shelter in your home while growing up, please tell us about it in the comments section.
The artifacts, some original, some not quite accurate for the time period, instantly put the gravity of the Cold War into perspective.
Another view of this room from a fellow traveler, photographer Kay Ohto who kindly allowed me to use his photos for this post.
There was a direct line between Washington and the Kremlin, but it was through a teletype.
My husband and I just watched it and literally sat on the edge of our seats throughout most of the second half.
Bathroom stalls with portable plastic-lined commodes — barrels with toilet seats placed on top.
The escape tube pictured above was originally surrounded by bags of concrete similar to this cross-section of ground-fill that covered the bunker.
The President would have been flown by helicopter from his winter residence on Palm Beach Island to the helipad on this island.
To get onto the island today, you need to take a water taxi, private boat, or kayak.
We got to the island with a very safe kayaking outfit with excellent guides, arranged for us by our hotel concierge, through The Palm Beach Maritime Museum.
There is also a decommissioned United States Coast Guard Station on the Island.
During the Cold War, if locals asked about the bunker, they were told it was an ammunition depot for this Coast Guard station.
I’d also like to recommend a fabulous historical and cultural bike tour of Palm Beach Island with Leslie Diver of Island Living, Palm Beach.
Follow my photos of vegetables growing, backyard chickens hanging out, and dinner preparations on Instagram at JudysChickens.
I remember my father walking into my bedroom and telling me that if he came in the night to follow directions immediately and ask questions later.
I think there will be a lot of ladies sharing this one with their hubbies 🙂 Thank you for your always high-quality and always educational blog posts.
December 10, 2016 at 12:14 pm I have lived 45 minutes from there for 30 years and never knew it was there.
December 10, 2016 at 2:41 pm They’ve actually had trouble keeping it open– maybe that’s why it is not so well advertised. xo Reply Anne Carter Brothers says: December 10, 2016 at 2:02 pm Love this blog.
I also grew up in Baltimore, but my duck and cover was during the Suez Crisis.
I didn’t remember that Crisis until you mentioned it, nor did I know it was a situation requiring Duck and Cover drills for Americans at home.
Times have changed so much in the way information is disseminated, I know that is an understatement.
December 10, 2016 at 4:01 pm You should see the rusty metal spikes on a long rail road like iron pole along side the Cuban roads.
They were afraid the United States would sent airplanes to invade and land on the Highways so the spikes were there to be pulled across the roads to prevent any landings.
I went on two mission trips to Cuba and found the people very likable but leery of Americans from all the propaganda against us.
I was thinking it should be at The Smithsonian so more people could see it and to make the props more historically accurate.
Follow Blog via Email Email Address: Top Posts & PagesHow Local Canola Crops are GrownHow to Start Seeds in a Recycled Milk JugOven-Roasted Strawberry and Rosemary JamHomemade Grape JellyChicken Stock from Rotisserie Chicken BonesQuiche Lorraine with Bacon and KaleHow to Knit Fingerless Mittens on Straight NeedlesGroup Project: A Shibori Dyed QuiltInstagram Photos Momming.
You can buy year-old bare root plants — those take 3 or 4 years to mature and bear thick asparagus stalks.
Repeat annually. #asparagusseason #howtogrowasparagus Come on, open those petals.
A small jar was given as a party favor at a @thenashvillefoodproject fundraiser one year.
I make a couple batches every year because we HAVE to have it in the house at all times.
Recipe link in profile #strawberryjam #strawberrypreserves #reunitedanditfeelssogood @oscarfox_, when you come to water my garden tomorrow, I want you to pick this asparagus and enjoy it.
I want you to know the joy of picking asparagus and eating it fresh from the earth.
