The crisis culminated to the brink of nuclear war between both superpowers.
It can be said that it was the part of the Cold War Doctrine in which Cuba played a vital role.
The United States believed that it would be simple to remove Mr Castro from the political power through various means.
However, all the United States efforts to remove Castro from the Cuban government failed utterly.
Fidel Castro's popularity became more apparent when he sided with the Soviets Union.
His government challenged the United States and brought the Soviet Union close to pressurise Washington to get a good political deal.
This paper, therefore, is designed to understand the political situation of the three countries and their political leadership role in averting the nuclear disaster in the region.
Further, it is investigated that to what extent the installation of the Nuclear Missiles in Cuba succumbed to the political disturbance in Washington.
The crisis marked the unique place in the history of superpower relations during the cold war period.
After assuming the power of Cuba, Fidel Castro adopted more aggressive policies towards the United States.
In 1960, Castro nationalised United States property amounting to $850 million and started establishing relations with China and the Soviet Union.
He then became a thorn in the United States flesh as they wanted to get rid of him.
The tension that arises between Havana and Washington since 1959, then got a U-turn and became the Moscow versus Washington when Nikita Khrushchev supported Cuba.
Kennedy’s Policies The thirteen days crisis was not a product of the accident.
Immediately after assuming the power as the president of America in 1960, John F Kennedy, an Irish-American Catholic was staunch anti-communist from the very beginning , had continued confrontational cold war methods.
Soviet Motives The Soviet’s relations with the United States were not cordial as both countries were in a state of cold war.
Unlike Stalin Nikita Khrushchev the Soviet chairman in 1962 was a risk taker in foreign policy and during the sixties looking for a logical location in nearby America to place heavy weapons to achieve marvellous foreign policy victory over the United States.
He was also furious and formidable of United States Jupiter missiles and military bases in Turkey.
When informed of United States secret war against Fidel Castro in July 1962, by Raul Castro’s delegation during their Moscow visit, waiting for opportunities to come, Nikita made no mistake when offered to help Cuba against the United States which he accepted and started pumping robust military supply to Castro’s government.
These shipments intended 24 IRBMs and 36 MRBMs , 40 aircrafts, 33 IL-28 light bombers.
On the one hand, he was worried about the Soviet’s missiles buildup internationally, on other he was also facing difficult situation domestically as Congress elections were due on November 6.
He issued a policy statement and warned Khrushchev of creating trouble in the region which will result in a serious conflict.
The situation worsened too much extent when the U-2 flight's surveillance confirmed the medium-range-ballistic-missiles in Cuba on October 5.
Though the missiles were good at first attack, the Soviet was not capable of continuing the process of war for a long and United States was far ahead regarding arms, equipment, technology and economic stability.
There were many misperceptions and miscalculations from both sides during the crisis.
The United States came to know about the Soviets missiles seven months after the failed Bay of Pigs invasion which intended to overthrow Castro.
Armed forces went from peacetime to wartime alert position for the blockade.
He called for immediate withdrawal under the supervision of United Nations.
High alert forces waited only for orders of the President, but the crisis deescalated when Kennedy received the letter of Khrushchev on October 26, 1962 in which he agreed to dismantle the missiles from Cuba, only one condition; Cuba will not be invaded, and Fidel Castro's government will not be dismantled.
The massive tension of the Third World War was escalated but not removed as missiles were still in Cuba.
As the world has a sigh of relief of the nuclear war, another letter from Khrushchev reached Kennedy on 27th October calls for the withdrawal of the United States Jupiter missiles from Turkey.
While analysing Khrushchev’s both letters during the EXCOM meeting, news came that the U-2 plan had been shot down by Soviets in Cuba.
One officer reminds Kennedy of his orders that in the response of any aggressive move by the Soviets, United States president will issue final orders for the invasion of Cuba, which Kennedy strongly rejected.
However, he sent a letter to Khrushchev and assured of not invading Cuba.
For Americans, the 13 days crisis was the most turbulent period in their history as nuclear missiles were hanging over them from Cuban soil.
From Kennedy’s address to the nation on 22nd, there was a wave of despondency and desperation for Americans.
United States forces went from ""peace alert to Defcon 3 (war alert), and strategic air command Defcon 2"" , five divisions of armed strategic reserves were placed on alert.
Aircrafts with nuclear warheads remained ready for only just ‘command’ from the president.
If the orders had been issued millions of thousands would have lost their lives, and millions had been displaced almost there would have been a catastrophe.
It only dashed to the grounds when Khrushchev announced the dismissal of the missiles if promised that Cuba will not be attacked.
Though President was much compelled to issue the orders for final blow when the U-2 flight been shot, he utterly rejected and refused to issue orders instead accepted Khrushchev proposals.
Role of United Nations As Kennedy received the reports of installations of missiles on Cuban soil, he went on with enormous discussions and meeting with his Executive Council but never let the then UN secretary-Thant.
It was only on 20th October that U-Thant came to know about the crisis and two days later on 22nd he was informed about the Kennedy’s most important address to the nation about the debacle by his military adviser Maj.
There was a wave of tensions throughout the world about the start of the new world war.
Thant played a significant role in de-escalating the gravest nuclear problem between two superpowers.
His recognition of Thant that “he has put the world deeply in his debt” is the clear manifestation of his recognition.
From the time of quarantine to the withdrawal of missiles, he played a vital role.
Thant sent messages to both leaders urging for a moratorium of two to three weeks for suspension of weapon to Cuba and the quarantine methods.
The objective was to delay the process to get time so that it should dismantle the debacle peacefully.
Praising Thant’s initiatives, Khrushchev cabled on 25th October that “I appreciate your initiative and understand your concern over the situation which has arisen in the Caribbean, for the Soviet government to regards it as highly dangerous and as requiring immediate intervention by the United Nations.
Later, when the Soviets turned their ships to their shore, Kennedy then relied on the Thant.
Both raised quality as well as the quantity of the arms and ammunition.
Although the Soviet Union was far behind the United States regarding weapons and wealth, Khrushchev’s decision of placing the missiles had two strategic objectives.
Stationing a couple of Soviet intermediate-range ballistic missiles in Cuba.
Conclusion The philosophy behind installing the nuclear missiles was to show to the United States that Cuba is not alone in the political turmoil, the Soviet Union shall be there to protect her allies.
As he wanted to get rid of the 15 American Jupiter missiles from Turkey in which he became successful but the US never made it publically till 1968 and by that way showed the equal power of two states.
The CMC had great historical importance from which the world leaders can get the experience of politically resolving the nuclear issue.
The decision of not going to engage in the nuclear war can be considered as the greatest which benefited both countries and to the world as well.
The nuclear crisis averted, but it paved the way forward between both states.
Later in next year, both countries signed the Nuclear Test Ban Treaty, the first disarmament agreement of the nuclear age.
