These images, mushroom clouds and skies tainted with lethal streaks of orange, have a mesmerizing beauty that seems entirely detached from the destruction the bombs inevitably would wreak.
Director Roger Donaldson begins this competently told story by showing us what didn't happen, a nuclear holocaust.
After that, he settles into a play-by-play account of how it was averted, reminding us of a crisis that had the world trembling for two gut-churning weeks.
Don't be misled by early scenes that show presidential assistant Kenny O'Donnell reading the paper and preparing for work.
But the movie overcomes any inadvertent sense of parody and rather bravely refuses to allow Costner, who served as one of three producers, to hog the spotlight.
O'Donnell, a tough political operative, is one brain in the Hydra-headed Kennedy brain trust.
Some writers say the script exaggerates the role O'Donnell played during the crisis, but dramatically, a mild focus on O'Donnell makes sense.
Too many of us saw John and Robert Kennedy, and, ultimately, no actors can do justice to this pair of Irish titans.
Having said that, it must be noted that Bruce Greenwood makes a splendid John F Kennedy, selfassured and assertive without overplaying his hand.
Greenwood looks like JFK without straining to do so, and his quiet authority gives the movie its spine.
Steven Culp, who looks less like Bobby Kennedy, captures the younger brother's mercurial passions and intelligence.
There are terrific moments when the two Kennedy brothers, having finally attained the White House, express disbelief at the magnitude of events that have been thrust upon them.
They know that it's important to look confident even as they pick their way through a situation that's fraught with uncertainty.
Donaldson, who directed Costner in the fine 1987 thriller No Way Out, builds suspense around a story that contains no real surprises.
But the tension derives from watching different forces within the government jockey for position.
Donaldson deftly shows that united fronts often conceal a multitude of antagonisms.
Kennedy finds himself pushed by the military men who want to retaliate quickly.
He must outmaneuver opposition in his own government while making sure that the Soviets see no cracks in the United States armor.
As such dialogue suggests, many scenes consist of meetings and heated conversations.
Donaldson maintains a crisp storytelling style, as if he modeled his approach on the economical crew cut Costner sports.
For those who lived through the crisis, Thirteen Days will serve as a sobering reminder of past brinkmanship.
Those not yet born during those tense October days should gain a greater understanding of a time when leaders really did seem larger than life and the possibility of nuclear annihilation seemed all too real.
Rusk, the son of a poor Georgia farmer who became the nation's highest Cabinet officer in the Kennedy and Johnson administrations, died Tuesday night at his home in Athens.
He taught at the university's law school after leaving Washington in 1969.
Rusk was appointed secretary of state by President John F Kennedy in 1961, enforcing the young president's Cold War policy of containing communism.
After Kennedy was assassinated in 1963, President Lyndon Johnson insisted Rusk stay on, and Rusk remained secretary until the end of Johnson's term in 1969, despite criticism for Vietnam.
Rusk supported Johnson's policy on Vietnam so strongly that he became a favorite target of anti-war lawmakers and student protesters.
Rusk defended his role in the Vietnam War in his son's 1990 book, As I Saw It.
Early in his tenure in 1961, Rusk was at Kennedy's side when a group of Cuban exiles, supported by the CIA, tried to invade Cuba's Bay of Pigs to oust Fidel Castro.
Rusk was there when East Germany began building the Berlin Wall, and he was in the center of the Cuban missile encounter in 1962.
The opening session of a three-day conference on that Cold War drama underscored Cuban fears of a United States military attack, feelings that contributed to escalating tensions before the October 1962 crisis.
But around the same time, the United States Joint Chiefs of Staff were preparing ``cover and deception plans'' that called for creating a pretext for the United States to invade Cuba, according to another previously secret document made public at the conference.
One objective of the plan was to ``lure or provoke Castro, or an uncontrollable subordinate, into an overt hostile reaction against the United States,'' according to the Feb., 1962, memorandum signed by Brig.
SAVING THE WORLD Before the morning session, McNamara credited Castro, Kennedy and Khrushchev with saving the world from destruction.
Many of those historic papers are being released publicly during the gathering, including documents from the Cuban government, the CIA, the Pentagon, the White House and the Soviet Foreign Ministry.
A portion of the documents, made available to The Associated Press, demonstrate that the crisis did not end on Oct. with the Soviet Union's agreement to remove the offensive weapons, as is widely believed.
But Khrushchev was concerned that Castro would order his forces to shoot down the low-flying United States surveillance flights, which the Cuban leader saw as an intolerable intrusion on Cuban sovereignty.
The tense days of October 1962 invited dangerous speculation on each side about their adversary's intentions, as messages from Moscow and Washington took hours to be translated and delivered.
A letter from October 26, 1962, in which the Soviets laid out a possible way out of the confrontation, was received by the United States ambassador to Moscow at 9:42 am Washington time, but after being translated, transmitted and encrypted, it was after 9 pm by the time the note was in the hands of the State Department.
To speed up communication and reduce the risk of nuclear war, the two governments put in place a ""red phone"" on August 30, 1963.
In reality, it was neither red nor a telephone but a cable line that could transmit written messages.
In the 1970s, a satellite phone line was added, which also allowed for documents, maps or photos to be shared between the two governments.
The White House and the Pentagon have always kept secret exactly how many times the ""red phone"" has been used.
Leaders employed the hotline during the Arab-Israeli wars of 1967 and 1973, and again with the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan in 1979.
Other lines of direct communication were later installed between Moscow and European capitals.
In 1996, China established a ""red phone"" with Russia, then with the United States two years later.
In September 2011, the United States proposed opening a direct line with Iran to avoid a possible conflict erupting over the country's disputed nuclear program.
Gribkov, who was in Cuba at the time of the crisis, disclosed in a conference in Havana last week that the Soviets had given authority to the local commander in Cuba to fire these missiles in the event President John F Kennedy ordered an invasion.
Robert McNamara, Kennedy's defense secretary and a participant at the meeting, told his colleagues that Gribkov's disclosure had changed his assessment about how dangerous the missile crisis actually was, Brenner said.
McNamara told the gathering, Brenner said, that there was absolutely no question that Kennedy would have ordered nuclear retaliation on Cuba and perhaps the Soviet Union if United States forces had been fired on by nuclear weapons.
Former CIA Deputy Director Ray Cline, who also attended the conference, had felt the danger of nuclear war was overstated but revised his view after hearing Gribkov, Brenner said.
According to Brenner, the missiles described by Gribkov had a range of about 40 miles.
But, while both countries took some steps to implement the agreement, including Soviet removal of offensive missiles, attempts to reach a formal agreement ended in failure.
The disclosure sent the two superpowers closer to nuclear war than at any time in their 46-year Cold War rivalry.
The documents suggest it wasn't because there was no formal settlement.
And in early December, Kennedy was quoted as telling another NSC meeting that the United States was ""not going to rat on an agreement with the Russians but we were not going to tie on to a no-invasion pledge in a way which allowed Castro to operate from an invulnerable base.
Top United States officials who spent 5 1/2 hours with Soviet diplomats at the United Nations in early December wrote an ""eyes only"" memo to Secretary of State Dean Rusk saying the Soviets interpreted it as an effort to give the United States commitment a ""conditional character and hence is unacceptable.
Despite the passage of time, this distinctively terrifying crisis holds extremely important lessons for current foreign policy.
They include the exceptional difficulty of securing accurate intelligence, the uncertainty of events in a crisis, and the vital importance of strength at the top.
Slowly and fitfully improving relations between Cuba and the United States are welcome.
After United States U-2 aircraft reconnaissance photos revealed the Soviet Union was placing offensive nuclear missiles in Cuba, despite contrary assurances, President John F Kennedy and his advisers spent a week debating options.
On Oct., 1962, he addressed the nation and stated the missiles must be removed.
Until Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev agreed to withdraw the missiles on Oct., Armageddon was only a misstep away.
Senior Kennedy administration officials, with the exception of independent CIA director John Mc-Cone, had assumed Moscow would never put long-range missiles into Cuba.
They erroneously thought Khrushchev and associates calculated the move would be just too risky.
Earlier, reconnaissance flights over Cuba had been severely curtailed to avoid antagonizing Moscow, and were resumed only because McCone aggressively, adamantly pressed the matter.
Hard photographic evidence of the Soviet deception was received just before the missiles were to become operational.
However, there was already growing circumstantial evidence, including reports from reliable agents in Cuba, that something of this nature was underway.
As with the Bush administration regarding invading Iraq, senior officials chose the evidence they preferred to believe.
At the start of the crisis, there was strong sentiment among Kennedy advisers, including the Joint Chiefs of Staff, for an overwhelming conventional air attack followed by an invasion of Cuba.
JFK imaginatively decided instead on a naval quarantine, as the nation's first step in response to the Soviet move.
Years after the crisis, surviving policy makers from Cuba, the Soviet Union and the United States initiated a series of meetings, which have revealed important new dimensions and insights.
Soviet commanders already had shorter-range nuclear armed missiles in Cuba, and at least for a time, authority to use them in the event of an American invasion of the island.
The important book by Michael Dobbs, ""One Minute to Midnight,"" documents an occasion in which the commanding officer of a Soviet sub nearly launched one against the harassing United States Navy ships.
National security adviser McGeorge Bundy's history of the nuclear age, ""Danger and Survival,"" published a quarter century after the crisis, revealed JFK privately accepted while publicly rejecting a Soviet proposal for a Cuba-Turkey missile trade.
He assembled an informal group that freely debated a wide range of options.
When tensions mounted, the president would shrewdly suggest taking a break.
In 1961, an inexperienced JFK signed off on a flawed Cuba invasion plan strongly endorsed by the CIA and military, then mishandled developments.
Then and now, strong United States presidential leadership is essential.
As with the Bush administration on invading Iraq, senior officials chose the evidence they preferred to believe.
JFK imaginatively decided instead on a naval quarantine as the United States first step in response to the Soviet move.
Soviet commanders already had shorter-range nuclear armed missiles in Cuba and at least for a time had authority to use them in the event of an American invasion of the island.
Fifty-five years ago, the Cuban missile crisis during Oct.-28 of 1962 dominated global attention as Washington and Moscow sparred right on the edge of thermonuclear war.
National security adviser McGeorge Bundy's history of the nuclear age, ""Danger and Survival,"" published a quarter-century after the crisis, revealed JFK privately accepted while publicly rejected a Soviet proposal for a Cuba-Turkey missile trade.
On October 22, 1962, he addressed the nation and stated the missiles must be removed.
Until Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev agreed to withdraw the missiles on October 28, Armageddon was only a misstep away.
Slowly improving relations between Cuba and the United States are welcome.
Senior Kennedy administration officials, with the exception of nonconformist CIA director John McCone, had assumed Moscow would never put long-range missiles into Cuba.
They erroneously thought Khrushchev and associates felt the move would be just too risky.
As with the Bush White House regarding Iraq, senior decision-makers chose the evidence they preferred to believe.
JFK imaginatively decided instead on a naval blockade, as the United States first step in response to the Soviet move.
The important book by Michael Dobbs, “One Minute to Midnight,” documents at least one occasion in which the commanding officer of a Soviet sub nearly launched one against the harassing United States Navy ships.
He assembled an informal group which freely debated a wide range of options.
In 1961, an inexperienced JFK had signed off on a Cuba invasion plan strongly endorsed by the CIA and military – the experts.
Appropriately, Barack Obama and Mitt Romney's foreign policy debate will take place October 22 exactly 50 years after President John F Kennedy's most dramatic television address to the nation.
That frank talk ushered in a week of heightened anxiety, to put it mildly, around the world.
With the question of Iran's nuclear ambitions now on our minds, I hope Obama and Romney will take this opportunity to weigh in on the lessons we've learned since 1962.
In the aftermath of Cuba's 1959 revolution, the Kennedy administration was trying hard to topple Fidel Castro's government.
Washington imposed trade sanctions, experimented with sabotage, staged assassinations, and finally backed an ill-fated and poorly equipped guerrilla invasion in Cuba's Bay of Pigs.
Instead of bringing Havana back into the United States sphere of influence, Cuba turned to the USSR for support.
Premier Nikita Khrushchev, acutely aware of the United States nuclear missiles based close to Soviet territory in Turkey, approved sending military aid, troops, and nuclear weapons to Cuba.
Khrushchev sought to protect his new Caribbean ally and achieve nuclear deterrence on the cheap.
The crisis rapidly escalated after a United States spy plane discovered missile sites under construction on October 14, 1962.
When Kennedy addressed the nation eight days later, he demanded that Moscow remove the missiles.
Russian leaders incorrectly thought that Washington would accept missiles in Cuba since Uncle Sam had missiles in Turkey, on the USSR's doorstep.
Both sides thought they understood the situation and the other side's motives.
In retrospect, it's clear that JFK's top military advisers did him a disservice.
Secret White House tapes made during the crisis reveal that his Joint Chiefs of Staff unanimously pressed for war.
They hurled charges of ""appeasement"" in an effort to intimidate Kennedy into launching an attack on Cuba.
At one point, after the commander-in-chief left the room, they can be heard mocking him.
It later emerged that both sides had grossly misunderstood the situation.
Robert McNamara, Kennedy's Pentagon chief, later worked to abolish nuclear weapons worldwide.
What's perhaps most alarming about the crisis is that both United States and Soviet leaders behaved as if the addition of nuclear weapons to the mix had little impact on how they handled the crisis.
That's why they allowed a dispute over a transient tactical advantage to endanger the entire planet, including generations yet unborn.
So on this 50th anniversary of being more lucky than brilliant, let's make a commitment to rid the Earth of nuclear weapons.
He is now in Eureka, California helping the organization Veterans for Peace restore the Golden Rule, the first anti-nuclear sailing vessel.
McNamara made the statement after returning to Washington from a four-day closed-door meeting in Havana of former U.S., Soviet and Cuban officials investigating the circumstances of the historic U.S.Soviet showdown from the point of view of all the participants.
If such weapons had been fired at United States troops, the probability that the United States would have retaliated with nuclear weapons was ""99 percent,"" according to McNamara, who was secretary of defense at the time.
Even before the meeting, the missile crisis was widely acknowledged to have been the high point of danger that a nuclear war would erupt between the two nuclear superpowers.
Anatoly Gribkov, later chief of staff of Warsaw Pact military forces, that nine short-range rockets with nuclear warheads had been placed in Cuba.
Gribkov told the Havana meeting he had visited the island prior to the crisis with orders that, in case of a United States invasion of Cuba, the senior Soviet troop commander was authorized to use the short-range nuclear weapons without further approval from Moscow.
In contrast, the intermediate-range Soviet weapons that were the focus of the missile crisis and that could have wreaked devastation on much of the United States mainland, could have been fired only with the explicit authorization of Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev, Gribkov told the Havana meeting.
When faced with a United States naval blockade and the threat of a United States invasion of Cuba, Khrushchev agreed to remove the longer-range weapons.
The United States did not know of the existence of short-range nuclear weapons at the time, although there had been some intelligence reports they were present.
McNamara and other United States experts on the missile crisis said, in fact, they had not known of the short-range atom ic weapons until the recent Soviet statement.
Gribkov told participants in the Havana meeting that the short-range weapons were withdrawn after the 1962 crisis.
The short-range ""Luna"" rockets, known in the West as ""Frog"" artillery rockets, did not have sufficient range to reach Florida, 90 miles away, but could have been used against invading United States forces.
After the peak of the crisis had passed but while a United States invasion was still being considered, Adm.
Dennison, then commander in chief of the Atlantic Fleet, asked for permission to equip the potential U.S. invading force with battlefield atomic weapons, but this was denied by McNamara and the Joint Chiefs of Staff.
The atomic warheads on the Soviet short-range rockets had a yield of 6 to 12 kilotons (the equivalent of 6,000 to 12,000 tons of TNT), McNamara said.
This is only slightly smaller than the United States bomb that destroyed Hiroshima, Japan, in August 1945.
Cuban President Fidel Castro said at the conference that he would have approved use of the short-range nuclear weapons if the United States had attacked the island.
However, there is no indication he would have had any control over whether the atomic weapons were used, since this was solely at the discretion of the Soviet commander, Gen.
The Havana meeting, probably the last in a series of historical reconsiderations by participants in the missile crisis, also included candid admissions from Castro that Cuba has in the past furnished military aid to revolutionary movements around the globe.
While acknowledging past interventions, Castro said that no Cuban subversion is being carried out today and that Cuba will not take advantage of social and economic instability by supporting revolutionary movements in the future, McNamara, who headed the United States delegation to the conference, said.
In an interview with Interfax-AVN news agency, Mozgovoi said he researched unpublished documents related to the Cuban missile crisis.
According to Mozgovoi, the threat of a global catastrophe was far closer to unfolding than many thought.
The most intriguing episode of Mozgovoi's book tells about a Soviet submarine that allegedly sneaked into United States waters even before United States ships had blocked the way to four Soviet subs carrying weapons en route to Cuba.
Nikolai Natnenkov, sailed through unnoticed behind the American Navy's back and waited for further development of events unfolding with the four subs of the Northern Fleet's 69th brigade.
The maneuvers of the four vessels -classified as Foxtrots by NATO -during the crisis, inspired the title of Mozgovoi's book.
The sub was armed with two torpedoes bearing nuclear warheads,"" he said.
The writer failed to specify where exactly was the B-75 positioned at the time of crisis.
In Oct.62, United States intelligence reconnaissance flights verified reports that the Soviets were building launching sites for medium-range and intermediate-range missiles on Cuba.
On Oct., United States President John F Kennedy issued an ultimatum to Soviet leader Nikita Khruschev declaring a naval blockade of Cuba and demanding withdrawal of all offensive missiles.
