Twentieth century had already seen its share of world conflict by the time 1962 rolled around and the possibility of another catastrophe that could equate to World War III was far from the minds of the American public as they celebrated Columbus Day on October 9, 1969.
After all, World War II which began in 1939 and ended six years later and the Cold War, which started two years later, claimed the lives of more than 70 million people and drew sharp distinctions between the western world and NATO supporters against the communist world.
Certainly, Americans could not even fathom the grave danger that was already formulating just a short distance beyond their shores and a crisis that would send shockwaves around the nation.
The Berlin blockade in 1948 was considered by many as being the first major crisis of the period.
The soviets under Stalin’s dictatorship impeded the delivery of goods and supplies to West Berlin in an attempt to virtually starve the people.
As a response the United States and several other countries established the Berlin airlift, which enabled them to furnish essential items to West Berliners via aircraft.
Tensions between democratic and communist parties led to the outbreak of other wars such as the Chinese Civil War in 1949 and Korean War in 1950.
Changes in government leadership further exasperated the situation Nikita Khrushchev assumed the role of dictator upon the death of Stalin.
John F Kennedy became the president of the United States once Eisenhower’s term ended.
And Fidel Castro overthrew Batista’s administration declaring himself Cuba’s new leader.
By the beginning of 1961 all relations with Cuba and the United States had been extinguished.
As Castro begin to align himself with the Soviet government the United States grew increasingly wary with the creation of a communist state in the Western hemisphere especially one so close to its shores with a distance of only 90 miles from the southern coast of the nation.
Cuba also had reason to be concerned about its safety particularly after the failed CIA Bay of Pigs invasion in which the objective was to assassinate Castro and overthrow his regime.
After the Bay of Pigs the Cuban government amplified their efforts to build up their arsenal so they could be better prepared for another possible United States attempt to undermine their regime.
Messages intercepted from Soviet ships uncovered cargo manifest that were suspiciously blank.
Materials unloaded from these vessels at the Mariel ports were done so with utmost secrecy, with items removed at night completely concealed beneath black canvas and under heavy guard.
Cuban pilots were trained in Czechoslovakia by Soviet experts and numerous Soviet ships made trips to Cuba to deliver goods with over 57 voyages in August alone.
CIA surveillance of activities on the island in late August initially revealed locations that possibly contained ballistic missiles.
Navy pilots were instrumental in providing aerial inspections and photographs of missile sites scattered throughout Cuba.
This responsibility nicknamed, Project Blue Moon employed RF8 crusaders from Navy Light Photographic Squadron 62 to produce photos that confirmed missile locations in Cuba.
Though the presence of missiles posed a serious threat, the photographs captured provided assurance the United States was equipped with far more superior nuclear weapons and in larger quantities than those from the Soviets with a ratio of 17 to 1.
However, the fact that the United States outranked Soviet missiles was nothing to scoff at, Cuba possessed mid-range and intermediate range missiles that could easily reach over 1000 nautical miles, within striking distance of our nation’s capitol, areas in Canada and as far south as Peru.
These munitions were capable of impacting the United States on a grand level easily killing upwards of 80 million Americans.
The governments’ first response was to send in the United States Armed Forces to control the situation.
With the Navy playing a large role in protecting and defending her country b y air and sea.
Once United States officials provided evidence of Cuba’s intentions to the Organization of America States foreign ministers quickly reached a unanimous decision to support Kennedy’s quarantine of the island.
The term quarantine was officially adopted instead of blockade it was deemed a non-aggressive measure to gain control over the missile crisis in Cuba.
Once the definitive decision was made to proceed with the quarantine on October 22, 1962 it became affective two days later at 10m.
The task at hand was not for the faint or those incapable of carrying out superior level performance.
The United States Navy was adept to successfully carry out this urgent mission and would therefore serve as the first line of defense on the sea.
Many Navy ships were retained influential roles with the overall effectiveness to the quarantine.
Some of the vessels include USS Newport News, USS Leary, USS Enterprise and USS Independence.
Both the Leary and Newport News are credited with intercepting one of the first Soviet vessels attempting to enter Cuba.
Even after arrangements were already in place to begin removal of Soviet missiles.
As the labinsk approached the naval blockade that Friday November 9th, anticipation levels escalated as crews aboard both ships waited for the labinsk response.
The carrier successfully stopped the Soviet ship, photographed her content, and ordered her not to return.
Collectively, crews on all vessels inspected approximately 55 Cuba bound merchant ships during the four-week quarantine and steamed roughly 780,00 miles.
Be lair submarines maintained importance and overall success of the mission.
Whereas warships could be spotted by enemy forces due to their visibility on the oceans surface.
Be lair submarines were virtually invisible and invulnerable below the depths and could position themselves close to enemy lines to deploy the missiles they carried.
Supplied with an ASW carrier, two cruisers, 22 Destroyers, and two guided missiles frigates Navy crewmen contributed all hands on deck performance and dedication while serving as Americas defenders of the seas.
Additionally, naval aviators surveyed ships during the blockade to ensure foreign vessels did not transport medium or intermediate range ballistic missiles and IL28 light bombers to Cuba.
With more than 30 flights flown per day and totaling roughly 6 million miles of flight time during the quarantine, the Navy served as America’s watchful eyes in the sky.
The Cuban missile crisis was resolved almost two weeks after it begin officially terminating October 28, 1962 after Premier Khrushchev agreed to remove Soviet missiles from Cuba.
Subsequently the blockade eased on November 20th after the final Soviet missiles were removed and Cuba no longer posed a threat to the United States and neighboring countries.
Admiral Robert Lee Dennison served as the Command-in-Chief of the Atlantic Fleet, and Atlantic command, from February 28, 1960 – April 30, 1963.
He commanded all naval components involved in tactical operations during the 1962 conflict.
Of Admiral Dennison’s directorship, Kennedy stated, “…his superb leadership and professional skill were demonstrated by his direction of the military forces assigned to command.
Admiral Dennison has earned the respect, trust and confidence of all United States military services, the leaders of the Organization of American States and the leaders of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization with consequent improvement in allied solidarity.
True to his word, his supervision of the fleet helped to safeguard the Americas from the introduction of additional missiles into Cuba.
Willamy III, were part of a six-jet squadron that flew VFP-62 aircraft into high-risk, all or nothing missions during the height of the missile crisis.
The photographs they obtained were crucial in confirming the existence of missiles on more than 19 locations disbursed throughout Cuba.
These images served as concrete evidence that Soviet Premier Khrushchev’s denial of missiles in Cuba were false.
It allowed the United States time to develop measures that ensured the swift removal of weapons from the island.
Both Ecker and Willamy were awarded the distinguished Flying Cross and Presidential Unit citation by President Kennedy three months after the crisis ended.
Additionally, the President sent each one a Letter of Gratitude commending them for contributing to the security of the United States in the most important and significant way.
As the Navy continues to protect America skies and seas and support allied nations around the world it upholds the motto, a Global Force for Good.
We had just started with jet aircraft and he was a pioneer, one of a class of pioneers not just in aviation itself in near space but in outer space and the courage, the talent, the intellect it took to for gentlemen to be able to go and, and take us to the moon is just incredible.
I’ve been flying since I was 21 years old and she’s just old enough now that she’s able to understand what it is that daddy does and so if I were to explain to her that Neil Armstrong was the first man to walk on the moon he was also a naval aviator just like daddy I think she’d understand that there’s a connect there.
Eisenhower aircraft carrier and he came out as part of a USO tour with other astronauts.
He had because of his timing in the Navy and then starting in the astronaut program had never been awarded the Naval Astronaut wings.
While he was onboard it was a surprise to him but the captain of the ship, D Newborn and I was the Air Wing commander both got a chance to do the presentation for him and very much an honor.
Fast forward in Spring 2012 he’s coming to our headquarters here to do a reunion of the F51 reunion.
As he comes into the headquarters I greet him and he recognizes me so we talk for a bit.
Then he’s with the rest of the reunion group with their spouses he felt that he should get up and introduce me and I’m just humbled by the whole thing, here’s Neil Armstrong introducing little me to his group that he’s with and it was one of those times when you go, wow that’s pretty cool.
Knowing Neil Armstrong was a naval aviator is obviously a source of pride for a lot of other naval aviators that has followed him.
I can’t tell you how many of my friends were posting on Facebook the next day saying rest in peace Neil Armstrong.
We’re all indebted to him for the things that he did, for the risk that he took, for the risk that other naval aviators have taken in the space program.
I’ve done 4o missions in Iraq and Afghanistan that’s only half of what Neil Armstrong was able to accomplish.
And that was in early aircraft, early jets getting shot at pretty much every mission.
I been shot at once by triple A for someone like Neil Armstrong throughout 80 combat missions getting shot at a lot and yet he still went and did it and then when this country asked him to become an astronaut and he knew it was going to be a dangerous mission he was still willing to do it.
It feeds back to his life, his life and you look at what he accomplished and yet at the same time he was not interested in taking any of the credit he wanted to make sure the thousands of people that supported all of the efforts with NASA and with the space program were given the credit.
He was a pilot in VF51, which happen to be the first squadron to have jet aircraft, and they also were the first to take jet aircraft into combat.
I flew a VF154, which is the Black Knights we flew tomcats into combat in Iraq, and I can tell you it’s not an easy thing to do especially in his day and age being the first to do it in jet aircraft, it took a lot of courage.
The accomplishments of Mr Armstrong really make me proud to be a naval aviator.
The fact that he was a naval aviator selected for the astronaut program and then selected to go to the moon really show the talents that naval aviation brings to the ballgame.
Really shows what naval aviators can do and make me very proud to be part of that group.
Everybody’s career has things that they experience and highlights this will certainly be one of the highlights of my career and things I have had a chance to experience.
I only wish I could have been an astronaut but it’s a pretty amazing honor I’m just glad to have been a naval aviator to have shared that legacy with him.
It’s inspiring to know you are kind of walking in the footsteps of legends like that.
