A frightening period in which nuclear holocaust seemed imminent began to come to an end.
Since President John F Kennedy’s October 22 address warning the Soviets to cease their reckless program to put nuclear weapons in Cuba and announcing a naval “quarantine” against additional weapons shipments into Cuba, the world held its breath waiting to see whether the two superpowers would come to blows.
On October 24, millions waited to see whether Soviet ships bound for Cuba carrying additional missiles would try to break the United States naval blockade around the island.
Soviet ships bound for Cuba would “not carry any kind of armaments” if the United States vowed never to invade Cuba.
He followed this with another letter the next day offering to remove the missiles from Cuba if the United States would remove its nuclear missiles from Turkey.
Kennedy and his officials debated the proper United States response to these offers.
Nevertheless, behind the scenes, Russian diplomats were informed that the missiles in Turkey would be removed after the Soviet missiles in Cuba were taken away.
If the Cuban missiles were not removed in two days, the United States would resort to military action.
HISTORY reviews and updates its content regularly to ensure it is complete and accurate.ALSO ON THIS DAY1990s1994 United States prison population exceeds one millionThe United States Justice Department announces that the United States prison population has topped one million for the first time in American history.
The figure—1,012,851 men and women were in state and federal prisons—did not even include local prisons, where an estimated 500,000 prisoners were ...read moreReligion1659Quakers executed for religious beliefsWilliam Robinson and Marmaduke Stevenson, two Quakers who came from England in 1656 to escape religious persecution, are executed in the Massachusetts Bay Colony for their religious beliefs.
While London boasts the world’s oldest underground train network and Boston ...read moreSports2004Red Sox win first championship since 1918On October 27, 2004, the Boston Red Sox win the World Series for the first time since 1918, finally vanquishing the so-called “Curse of the Bambino” that had plagued them for 86 years.
In 1880, Roosevelt married ...read moreInventions & Science1873Joseph Glidden applies for a patent on his barbed wire designOn October 27, 1873, a De Kalb, Illinois, farmer named Joseph Glidden submits an application to the United States Patent Office for his clever new design for a fencing wire with sharp barbs, an invention that will forever change the face of the American West.
Hit shows like West Side Story, The Sound of Music and Funny Girl, among several others, all spun off ...read moreArt, Literature, and Film History1932Poet Sylvia Plath is bornOn October 27, 1932, poet Sylvia Plath is born in Boston.
Her father, a German immigrant, was a professor of biology and a leading expert on bumblebees.
An autocrat at home, he insisted his wife give up teaching to raise their two children.
Gotti, the grandson of Italian immigrants, was raised in a poor family with 13 ...read moreInventions & Science2006Chick-fil-A founder takes last Ford TaurusOn October 27, 2006, the last Ford Taurus rolls off the assembly line in Hapeville, Georgia.
