In February of 1945, the Yalta Conference was held to plan what would happen after Germany's defeat.
Despite their differences, the Big Three Stalin, Roosevelt, Churchill managed to agree on some important matters.
Stalin agreed to enter the war against Japan once Germany had surrendered; Germany, and Berlin would split into four zones; they would hunt down and punish war criminals; countries liberated from occupation would be able to hold free elections; the Big Three would join the UN; Eastern Europe should be seen as a 'Soviet sphere of influence' They disagreed about the border of USSR/Poland Stalin wanted it pushed westwards.
Churchill persuaded Roosevelt to accept Stalin's terms, provided that the USSR did not interfere in Greece. 3 of 64 Why did the USA-USSR alliance begin to break down In July 1945, the Potsdam Conference was held.
Stalin's army now occupied most of Eastern Europe Truman had become president after Roosevelt died on 12th April.
He was much more anti-communist than his predecessor On 16th July 1945, the Allies had tested an atomic bomb.
Stalin wanted to cripple Germany but Truman didn't want to repeat the mistake of the Treaty of Versailles Stalin wanted compensation from Germany but Truman was again determined not to repeat the mistakes of WW1 They disagreed over Soviet Policy in Eastern Europe It was clear, at this point, that the wartime alliance was running thin.
There were too many differences between the two powers for them to remain allies. 4 of 64 How had the USSR gained control of Eastern Europe After the Yalta Conference, when it was agreed that Eastern Europe would be seen as the Soviet Union's 'sphere of influence', Stalin's troops had liberated country after country in Eastern Europe, but instead of withdrawing his troops, he had left them there.
By July 1945, Stalin's troops had control of the Baltic states, Finland, Poland, Czechoslovakia, Hungary, Bulgaria and Romania, and refugees were fleeing these countries fearing a communist take over.
Stalin had set up a communist government in Poland, ignoring the wishes of the the majority of Poles.
The Potsdam Conference ended without agreement on many issues and over the following nine months, Stalin had implemented Communist governments in Poland, Hungary, Romania, Bulgaria and Albania.
In March 1946, Churchill described the border between Soviet controlled countries and the West as an 'iron curtain' 5 of 64 How had the USSR gained control of Eastern Europe In the following years, Stalin tightened his control over Eastern Europe.
The secret police imprisoned anyone who spoke out against the Communist rule, or might do in the future.
In October 1947, Stalin set up the Communist Information Bureau to co-ordinate the work of communist parties across eastern Europe.
Cominform regularly brought leaders of each communist party to Moscow to be briefed by Stalin and his ministers.
He spotted independently minded leaders and replaced them with those who were more loyal to him.
The only communist leader who escaped his control was Tito in Yugoslavia.
In the 1930s, other countries such as France and Britain had been as important in international affairs, but this changed after the war.
USA recognised the responsibility of being a 'superpower' and set itself firmly against the policy of 'isolation' that it had followed during the 1930s.
As such, American's reaction to Soviet expansion was strong while Roosevelt, Churchill and Truman had accepted that Soviet security needed 'a sphere of influence' they had not expected such complete Communist domination.
Stalin argued that he was just making himself secure, but Truman could only see the spread of communism.
After German retreat in 1944, there were two rival groups in Greece the monarchists and the Communists who wanted to rule the country.
The communists wanted Greece to be a Soviet republic; the monarchists wanted the return of the King of Greece.
In 1945, Churchill sent troops in order to 'restore order' but in fact the British supported the monarchists, and the King was returned to power.
In 1946, the USSR protested to the UN that British troops were a threat to peace in Greece.
The UN took no action so the communists tried to take control by force.
The British could not afford the cost of such a war and announced in February 1947 that they were withdrawing their troops.
Under this policy, the USA was prepared to send money, equipment and advice to any country threatened by a Communist take over.
Truman believed that Communism succeeded when people faced hardship and poverty.
In 1947, he sent General George Marshall to assess the economic state of Europe.
Marshall suggested about $17 billion would be need to rebuild Europe's prosperity.
Until 1948, Czechoslovakia had been ruled by a coalition government which, although including some communists, had tried to act independently of Moscow.
However, in March 1948, Communists came down hard, taking over the government.
Anti-Soviet leaders were purged and one pro-American leader, Jan Masaryk, was found dead below his open window.
The communists said that he had jumped; the Americans suspected that he had been pushed.
Immediately, Congress accepted the Marshall Plan and made $17 billion available over a period of four years.
While on the one hand, Marshall Aid was extremely generous, one the other, it was self motivated.
The Berlin Blockade of 1948 brought the two superpowers dangerously close to was key, in terms of the start of the Cold War.
As such, the USA and UK combined their zones of Germany into 'bizonia' and introduced a new currency.
Stalin felt that the USA's handling of Western Germany was provocative; that the new currency was trying to undermine his influence in the East.
He could do nothing about the reorganisation of their zones, or the new currency, but he could stamp his authority on Berlin.
It was deep in the Soviet zone and linked to the western zones of Germany by vital roads, railways and canals.
In June 1948 he blocked all these supply routes, cutting of the 2 million strong population of Western Berlin from Western help.
West Germany, or 'trizonia', formed by the combination of the zones of France, the UK and the USA in May 1949.
It was officially known as the Federal Republic of Germany East Germany, formed from the Soviet zone in October 1949.
Throughout that time it remained a powerful symbol of Cold War tensions From the American point of view, it was an oasis of democratic freedom in the middle of Communist repression From the Soviet point of view, it was an invasive cancer growing the workers paradise of East Germany.
More importantly, the Berlin Blockade set out a pattern for Cold War confrontations.
If they allowed Stalin to take control then the Western zones of Germany might be next.
Instead of backing down, in June 1948 the Allies began airlifting supplies into Berlin.
Now, if the USSR shot down one of the planes, the Soviets would have committed an act of war.
After the Berlin Blockade, the two superpowers realised more than before that they were in competition for world domination.
They began to build up their armies and weapons, and this eventually turned into a nuclear arms race.
This was the first time the United States had signed up to a peacetime military alliance.
It represented, perhaps, just how far America was prepared to go to prevent the spread of communism.
It also showed that Western powers believed war was a realistic and maybe even imminent possibility.
In 1955, the USSR created the Warsaw Pact an alliance of communist states. 14 of 64 Who was more to blame for the start of the Cold Wa Arguably, both sides were to blame for the Cold War it was based on mutual mistrust of the others intentions.
Often, one side unfairly interpreted the other's actions as provocative and aggressive, and what was seen by one side as a justified act of self-defence, was seen as a threat by the other.
Soviet expansionism / Western support for a prosperous Germany The Berlin Blockade The Marshall Plan/Cominform Furthermore, differences in their systems of government communism versus capitalism meant war, or conflict at the very least, was inevitable.
There was much mutual hostility between leaders notably Truman, Roosevelt and Churchill, and Stalin.
The countries had many natural disagreements which could not be resolved, such as how to deal with Germany. 15 of 64 Who was more to blame for the start of the Cold Wa However, blame could also be placed with either one of the superpowers.
Greece America shouldn't have got involved in such a war The atomic bomb Truman actively suspicious of Stalin, and unafraid to air his views publicly Truman Doctrine and Marshall Aid Interprets Soviet expansionism as trying to take over Europe, etc.
Control of eastern Europe takes over countries freed from German occupation, ruthlessly eliminates opposition, rigs elections etc.
During the late 1940s, most of Eastern Europe fell to the USSR In 1949, Communist forces, under Mao Zedong, took control of China Also, Stalin announced that the USSR had developed its own atomic bomb In 1950, Communist North Korea invaded the South, and after several years, United States troops were only able to push the Koreans back to the original border.
The USA, through the work of Secretary of State Dulles, established a network of anti-Communist alliances around the world NATO was formed in 1949, followed by the South East Asia Treaty Organisation in 1954 and the Central Treaty Organisation in 1955.
It felt threatened by the American alliances, and accused the USA of trying to encircle the Communist world.
The USA built up a large arsenal of nuclear weapons, and strengthened their conventional forces.
They kept soldiers and weapons constantly ready for action The American Strategic Air Command kept a fleet of 12 B52 bombers armed with nuclear weapons in the air 24 hours a day.
They supplied arms and soldiers to allies, and sited some of their own nuclear weapons in friendly countries.
The Soviet Union responded by building up its own conventional and nuclear forces.
Throughout the 1950s, the USA and USSR competed with each other to produce bigger, more powerful, quicker and cleverer nuclear weapons.
This became known as the Nuclear Arms Race 20 of 64 Background The Nuclear Arms Race The Nuclear Arms Race developed throughout the 1950s.
The Soviets took the lead in missile technology in the early 50s, building on the achievements of their successful space programme.
The success of the missile programmes helped Khrushchev to silence his critics.
The arms race strengthened fears of a nuclear war in both countries. 21 of 64 Background The Nuclear Arms Race The American public was alarmed by the idea of a 'Missile Gap', which was widely reported in the American media during the 1950s.
American military commanders were happy to play along, as it helped them to get funding from the government for new weapon systems.
Still, the United States carried on with its missile programme to 'narrow the Missile Gap' By 1959 the Americans had developed their own ICBM systems Atlas and Minuteman missiles were as fast to reach their target as Soviet missiles.
The USA developed Polaris missiles, fired undetectably from submarines The USA stationed missiles in Europe and Turkey which could reach the USSR in just a few minutes.
Americans owned most of the businesses on the island, and they had a huge naval base there.
The Americans also provided the Cuban ruler, General Baptista, with economic and military support Baptista was a corrupt dictator, very unpopular in Cuba.
There was plenty of opposition to Baptista, and in 1959 after a three year guerilla campaign, Fidel Castro overthrew Baptista.
Castro was a charming, clever but ruthless politician he had many of his political opponents killed, arrested or exiled and his vision for a better Cuba won over the majority of Cubans.
At first, the USA was taken by surprise by the revolution, and so decided to recognise Castro as the new leader of Cuba.
He took their land and shared it between his supporters in Cuba's peasant population.
As early as June 1960, Eisenhower authorised the United States Central Intelligence Agency to investigate ways of overthrowing Castro.
The Bay of Pigs Rather than a direct invasion, President Kennedy supplied arms, equipment and transport for 1400 anti-Castro Cuban exiles to invade Cuba and overthrow the Cuban leader.
The invasion failed disastrously all had been captured or killed within days The half hearted invasion suggested to Cuba and the Soviet Union that the USA was still unwilling to get directly involved in Cuba.
Soviet leader Khrushchev was particularly scornful of Kennedy's weak attempt to oust Communism from Cuba.
Historians argue that the fiasco further strengthened Castro's position in Cuba.
In May 1962, the Soviet Union announced publicly for the first time that it was supplying Cuba with arms.
By July 1962, Cuba had the best equipped army in Latin America By September, it had thousands of Soviet missiles, plus patrol tanks, radar vans, missile erectors, jet bombers, jet fighters and 5000 Soviet technicians to help maintain the weapons.
The USA seemed ready to tolerate the supply of conventional weapons, but the big question was whether the USSR would but nuclear missiles on Cuba.
Despite Khrushchev's claim, it was soon discovered that the USSR had been building nuclear missile sites in Cuba.
This confirmed that some were nearly finished but others were still being built.
Experts said that the most developed would be able to launch missiles in just seven days.
The USSR had supplied many of its allies with conventional weapons but this was the first time any Soviet leader had placed nuclear weapons outside Soviet soil.
The Missile Gap Khrushchev was acutely aware of the fact that the USA had more long range missiles than the USSR, as well as medium range missiles in Europe and Turkey.
Khrushchev probably hoped to strengthen his own position in the USSR by forcing Kennedy to allow the missiles or at least to get Kennedy to give some concessions.
Furthermore, the superiority of United States missiles undermined Khrushchev's credibility in the USSR he was the one who had urged the USSR to rely on nuclear missiles.
It was the only Communist state in the West, and had become willingly Communist rather than as a result of an invasion by the Red Army.
On Tuesday 16th October, President Kennedy was informed of the discovery.
The USA could still destroy the Soviet Union so the USSR would never use the missiles in Cuba.
To do nothing would be a sign of weakness Surgical air attack It would destroy the missiles before they were ready to use.
The attack would inevitably kill Soviet soldiers, and the USSR might retaliate at once.
Diplomatic pressures It would avoid conflict and the USSR might be forced to back down.
However, if the USA were forced to back down, it would be a sign of weakness.
Blockade It would show that the USA was serious, but it would not be a direct act of war.
The USA had a strong navy and could still take the other options if the blockade didn't work.
However, it would not solve the main problem the missiles were already on Cuba.
The Soviet Union might retaliate by blockading Berlin as it had done in 1948.
On Saturday 20th October, Kennedy decided on a blockade of Cuba This option wasn't as likely to result in an all out war as an alternative would have been.
On Monday 22nd October, Kennedy announced the blockade and called on the Soviet Union to withdraw its missiles.
On Tuesday 23rd October, Kennedy received a letter from Khrushchev saying that Soviet ships would not observe the blockade.
Then, suddenly, at 10.32am, the twenty nearest Soviet ships stop or turn around.
On Thursday 25th October, intensive aerial photography revealed work on the missile bases was still continuing rapidly.
In the morning, Khrushchev sent a second letter revising his proposals stating that the condition for the removal of the missiles is the removal of United States missiles from Turkey.
The president was advised to launch an immediate reprisal attack on Cuba.
He also decided to ignore Khrushchev's second letter, but accepted the terms suggested in the letter of the 26th October.
He said that if the Soviet Union does not withdraw, an attack will follow.
For the USA Kennedy came out of the crisis with a greatly improved reputation in the United States and the West.
Kennedy did have to remove the missiles from Turkey, though it was done in secret.
Kennedy also had to accept that Castro's Cuba would remain Communist in America's own backyard.
For the USSR In public Khrushchev was able to highlight his role as a peacemaker.
There was no question that keeping Cuba safe from American action was a major achievement for Soviets.
However, he could not use this victory for propaganda purposes as it was agreed that the removal would be kept secret The crisis exposed the USA to criticism among some allies, who thought it unreasonable of USA to have missiles in Turkey but object to those in Cuba However, there was no denying that Khrushchev had been forced to back down and remove the missiles.
The Soviet military was particularly upset about the terms of the withdrawal.
They were forced to put the missiles on the decks of their ships so that the Americans could count them.
Both leaders had seen how their game of brinksmanship had nearly ended in nuclear war Both were subsequently more willing to take steps to reduce the risk of nuclear war A permanent 'hot line' was set up between the White House and the Kremlin.
It did not stop the development of weapons but it limited tests and was an important step forward.
Although it was clear that the USSR could not match the USA in terms of weapons, it was also clear that it did not need to.
For Castro's Cuba Castro was upset by the deal that Khrushchev made with America, but he had little choice.
The nuclear missiles were removed by Cuba remained an important base for Communist supporters in South America.
Cuban forces also intervened to help the Communist side in a civil war in Angola in the 1970s Castro also kept control of the American companies and other economic resources that he had nationalised after the revolution.
Their rule gave rise to a strong resistance movement under the leadership of communist Ho Chi Minh.
When WW2 ended, the Viet Minh controlled the north of the country, and in 1945 they entered Hanoi and declare Vietnamese independence.
Between 1945 and 1954, France fought to take back control of Vietnam Ho was supported by China, who had turned Communist under Mao Zedong in 1949 France was supported by the USA, who poured $500 million into the war each year.
Under the terms of the ceasefire between the French and the Viet Minh, an election was to be held within two years to reunite the country.
In 1955, the USA helped Ngo Dinh Diem to set up the Republic of South Vietnam.
America supported him because he was bitterly anti-Communist and was prepared to imprison or exile Communists.
It also increased support for the Communist-led National Front for the Liberation of South Vietnam formed in December 1960 It included South Vietnam opponents of the government, but also large numbers of Communist North Vietnamese taking their orders from Ho Chi Minh.
Peasants who didn't support the Viet Cong faced intimidation/violence The Viet Cong started a guerilla war against the South Vietnamese government.
Using the Ho Chi Minh trail, the Viet Cong send reinforcements and ferried supplies to guerilla fighters.
The fighters attacked South Vietnamese government forces, officials and buildings, gradually making the countryside unsafe for government forces.
They also attacked American air forces and bases. 40 of 64 Why did the USA get increasingly involved in Vietn By 1962, President Kennedy was sending military personnel to fight the Viet Cong.
In 1963 and 1964 tension between North and South Vietnam increased and so did American involvement However, Kennedy said that the USA would not 'blunder into war, unclear about aims or how to get out again' In 1963, Kennedy was replaced by Johnson, who was more prepared to commit the USA to a full scale conflict to prevent the spread of Communism.
In August 1964, North Vietnamese patrol boats opened fire on United States ships in the Gulf of Tonkin.
Congress immediately passed the Tonkin Gulf Resolution, giving Johnson the power to 'take all necessary measures to prevent further aggression and achieve peace and security.
They supported France in Vietnam and opposed the Viet Cong and Viet Minh.
President Eisenhower and Secretary of State JF Dulles were convinced that China and the USSR were trying to spread Communism throughout Asia.
They believed that if Vietnam fell to Communism, then so would many other Asian countries.
American Politics In the 1950s and 1960s it was a sure vote winner for election candidates to talk tough about Communism, and a sure vote loser to look weak on Communism.
For example, in his 1960 campaign, JF Kennedy promised to continue the tough policies of President Eisenhower.
The Military-Industrial Complex A controversial view is that some powerful groups in the USA wanted a war.
The government gave huge budgets to military commanders, which were spent on weapon contracts with big businesses.
Thus, both the military and big businesses gained from conflict. 42 of 64 What were the different ways that the USA and the Vietcong Tactics In early 1965, the Viet Cong and North Vietnamese Army had about 17000 soldiers.
While they were well supplied with weapons and equipment from the USSR and China, they were outgunned and outnumbered by the South Vietnamese and United States forces.
For example, in November 1965 in La Dreng Valley, United States forces killed 2000 Viet Cong for the loss of just 300.
This didn't daunt Ho Chi Minh he believed superior forces could be defeated by guerilla tactics, which he had used successfully before against the Japanese and French.
Retreat when the enemy attacks Raid when the enemy camps Attack when the enemy tires Pursue when the enemy retreats 43 of 64 What were the different ways that the USA and the Guerilla warfare was a nightmare for the United States army: Guerillas didn't wear uniform and so were hard to tell apart from the peasants.
They worked in small groups with limited weapons They disappeared into the jungle, villages or tunnels after attacking.
Not only were the guerilla tactics effective at destroying United States forces and arms, but they were designed to wear down the United States soldiers and wreck their morale.
These booby traps could be as simple as trip wires or pits filled with sharpened bamboo sticks.
One of the least popular jobs was going 'on point' There were also more sophisticated traps, such as The Bouncing Betty land mine, which would be thrown into the air when triggered and then explode.
Overall, booby traps accounted for about 11% of United States casualties. 44 of 64 What were the different ways that the USA and the Another 51% of casualties were caused by 'firefights' The Viet Cong and NVA knew they could not compete with American firepower, so when they did attack they made sure fighting was at close quarters.
This meant that the Americans could not use their artillery or air power because of the danger of hitting their own troops.
This tactic was sometimes known as 'hanging on to American belts' Ho knew how important it was to keep the peasant population on his side.
They, after all, made up the majority of people in both North and South Vietnam.
As such, the VC fighters were expected to be courteous and respectful to peasants.
They often helped the peasants in the fields in busy periods. 45 of 64 What were the different ways that the USA and the However, the Viet Cong could also be ruthless.
They were prepared to kill any peasants who opposed them or stood in their way.
They also conducted a campaign of terror against the police, tax collectors, teachers and other employees of the South Vietnamese government.
Between 1966 and 1971, the Viet Cong killed an estimated 27000 civilians.
Arguably the greatest strength of the Viet Cong fighters was that they simply refused to give in.
The VC depended on supplies from North Vietnam that came along the Ho Chi Minh trail.
United States and South Vietnamese planes bombed this constantly, but 40000 Vietnamese worked tirelessly to keep it open whatever the cost.
The total of VC and North Vietnamese dead in the war has been estimated at 1 million, far higher than United States losses.
However, whatever the casualties, there were always replacement troops available. 46 of 64 What were the different ways that the USA and the US Tactics Extensive bombing was a key part of the United States strategy, and on 7th February 1967, the USA launched Operation Rolling Thunder, which involved the extensive and sustained bombing of military and industrial targets in North Vietnam.
It was the beginning of an air offensive that was to last until 1972 The lists of targets soon expanded to include towns and cities in North and South Vietnam, as well as sites in Laos and Cambodia along the Ho Chi Minh Trail.
More bombs were dropped on North Vietnam than were dropped in the whole of the second world war on Germany and Japan.
The Americans used 82 million litres of Agent Orange. 47 of 64 What were the different ways that the USA and the Napalm was another widely used chemical weapon, used to destroy jungles where guerillas might hide.
Bombing could not defeat a guerilla army, so United States commander General Westmoreland developed a policy of search and destroy.
He established secure and heavily defended bases in the South, from which United States and South Vietnamese forces could launch search and destroy raids from helicopters.
They would defend on a village and destroy any Viet Cong forces that they found.
Overall, the United States tactics throughout the conflict in Vietnam were much more conventional than those of the Communists, who largely employed a style of guerilla warfare.
The use of guerilla warfare suited the Vietnamese terrain, which was largely covered with forest/jungle.
Furthermore, it turned the Communists' superior knowledge of their surroundings into a significant advantage.
Guerilla attacks and booby traps succeeded to some extent in destroying United States forces and equipment.
More importantly, they wore down United States soldiers and contributed to their deteriorating morale.
Furthermore, close quarter attacks eliminated the United States advantage of advanced artillery and air power.
Guerilla fighter didn't wear uniform, meaning they were often unidentifiable.
This helped to turn United States public opinion against the war, which contributed to America's withdrawal.
It damaged North Vietnam's war effort and disrupted supply lines It enabled the USA to strike even when reducing their ground forces Strong campaigns against Hanoi and the port of Haiphong forced North Vietnam to negotiate.
The United States air power couldn't defeat the communists, only slow them down.
The United States had problems aside from fighting against a committed guerilla army.
Low morale and inexperience was a serious problem as the war progressed.
This was mainly due to the fact that, after 1967, an increasing number of troops were drafted; they had not volunteered for the forces as a career.
The soldiers knew very little about the country they were fighting for, and cared little for their cause, in contrast to the Viet Cong.
The majority of troops were from poor and immigrant backgrounds, as those privileged enough to be going to university could delay the draft.
Many soldiers turned to drugs, and sold drugs, food etc. on the black market, and around 18% of deaths were from factors other than combat.
To tackle these problems, General Westmoreland introduced a policy of giving troops just a one year service.
Vietnam's neighbours were another problem for the United States forces.
Neighbouring countries were sympathetic to the Viet Cong, and political considerations meant that the United States could not send its forces into Cambodia or Laos.
They could retreat to these other countries to reinforce their losses and get new equipment, ammo etc.
They also used these states to supply their forces along the Ho Chi Minh trail.
However, the United States tactics were based on attrition, and this inevitably led to large numbers of civilian casualties.
The My Lai Massacre marked a turning point in public opinion towards the war.
It deeply shocked the American public and was the clearest evidence that the war had gone deeply wrong.
In March 1968, a unit of young American soldiers started a search and destroy mission in the Quang Ngai region of South Vietnam.
They were told to destroy all houses, dwellings and livestock, and most were under the impression that they had been ordered to kill everyone they found in the village.
They were also told that most villagers would have left for the market as it was Saturday.
The commanding officers' report said that twenty non-combatants had been accidentally killed but the rest of the dead were recorded as Viet Cong The officers involved were praised; soldiers took the event as a normal and inevitable part of war. 12 months later, a letter arrived in the offices of thirty leading politicians and government officials.
It was written by Ronal Ridenhour, a soldier who had served in Vietnam and personally knew many of those who had taken part in the massacre.
He had evidence of something 'dark and bloody' that had occurred in My Lai , which he asked Congress to investigate Soon after 'Life' magazine published photos of the massacre from an official army photographer.
In 1971, he was found guilty of 22 counts of murder, and was sentenced to life imprisonment.
The Vietnam War was covered extensively by the media, especially in its latter stages.
The coverage undoubtedly contributed to the United States withdrawal from Vietnam, as it had a massive effect on public opinion towards the war.
In the early stages of the war, the media largely followed the official line of policy and on the whole, supported the government, though there was some disagreement when the media reported the Buddhist protests against Diem.
Even when the United States became directly involved in Vietnam, the media-government relationship remained good.
The United States Army created the Military Assistance Command, Vietnam to liaise with journalists.
Journalists could be accredited by the MACV and get transport to war areas, interviews, briefings with commanders etc.
In return, they agreed not to reveal any information that could help the enemy.
Editors in the United States rarely wanted to publish bad news stories about Vietnam, for fear of being accused of undermining the war effort.
Television was taking over from newspapers as the most important source of news.
Television gave a more raw account of war Also, improving technology meant cameras could be taken very close to conflict zones As early as 1965, United States TV network CBS had shown United States Marines using Zippo lighters to set fire to Vietnamese villagers' homes During the TET offensive TV viewers saw South Vietnamese police chief Colonel Nguyen Loan executing a Viet Cong suspect.
US Admiral Grant Sharp and General Westmoreland both claimed that the media undermined the war effort.
Many other commentators have put forward the view that media crippled the war effort in Vietnam.
Casualties and war weariness were the reasons why support for the war dropped, not the media.
Less than 25% of reports showed dead or wounded, and usually not in any detail.
Research shows that from 1965-70 only 76 out of 2300 TV reports showed heavy fighting.
As opinions turned against United States involvement in Vietnam, anti-war protests quickly gained momentum.
Civil rights campaigners were prominent in the movement The Vietnam war highlighted racial equality, as there weren't many African Americans in university so not many could escape the draft.
This meant that 30% of African Americans were drafted compared to only 19% of white Americans.
Furthermore, the money being spent on the Vietnam war couldn't be spent on improving social conditions in America.
Students were also powerful sources of opposition to the war Many did not want to be drafted into a war they did not believe in or found morally wrong To them, Vietnam became a symbol of defeat and moral corruption rather than a crusade against communism.
Frequently, the protest would involved the burning of an American flag.
A criminal offense in the USA, it was a powerful symbol of the students' rejection of their country's values.
In many ways it forced the United States leadership into a withdrawal from Vietnam, as it brought Johnson, and most of America, to the realisation that the war could not be won militarily From 1965-67, the official view was that the war was going well the United States was killing significant numbers of Viet Cong, despite struggling against guerilla tactics.
In 1968, this confidence was shattered by the Tet Offensive One Viet Cong commando unit tried to capture the United States embassy in Saigon, and United States forces had to fight to regain control room by room.
The people of South Vietnam did not rise up and help them, as had been hoped.
There were nearly 500000 troops in Vietnam and the USA was spending $20 billion a year on the war.
US and South Vietnamese forces quickly retook the towns captured in the offensive, but enormous amounts of artillery and air power were used, many civilians were killed and the ancient city of Hue was destroyed.
Until this point, media coverage of the war had been generally positive, although some journalists had been starting to ask difficult questions in 1967.
Following the Tet Offensive, President Johnson reduced the bombing campaign against North Vietnam and instructed his officials to begin peace negotiations with the Communists.
Johnson also announced that he would not be seeking re-election as President.
In the following election campaign, both Republican and Democrat candidates campaigned to end United States involvement in Vietnam.
The anti-Vietnam feeling was so strong that this was really their only choice if they had supported continuing the war they would have had no chance of being elected.
Richard Nixon was elected in November 1968 as President of the United States.
Between 1968 and 1973, he and his National Security Advisor, Henry Kissinger, worked tirelessly to end United States involvement in Vietnam.
This was not easy as the question of how to contain world communism, which had initially caused the USA to enter Vietnam, hadn't gone away.
From early 1969, Kissinger had regular meetings with the chief Vietnamese peace negotiator, Le Duc Tho.
In January 1973, in Paris, a peace agreement was signed by Nixon, Le Duc Tho, and Thieu.
In Vietnam, Nixon began the process of Vietnamisation building up South Vietnamese troops and withdrawing United States troops Bombing.
Nixon increased bombing campaigns against North Vietnam to show he was not weak.
It isn't clear whether Nixon really believed he had secured a lasting peace settlement.
By April 1975, Saigon, the capital of South Vietnam, had fallen to North Vietnamese Communists after a major military offensive launched in December 1974 Without United States funding or support, which had been refused by Congress under both Nixon and his successor Gerald Ford, the South Vietnamese government could not survive for long.
One of the bleakest symbols of the American failure in Vietnam was the televised news images of desperate men, women and children trying to clamber aboard American helicopters taking off from the United States embassy in Saigon.
After 30 years of constant conflict, the struggle of opposing groups for control of Vietnam had finally been settled.
Tweet Combine this resource with othersUse this set whenNearlyVisible { googletag.cmd.push { googletag.defineSlot.addService); }); googletag.cmd.push { googletag.display; }); }); Comments LauraReport Tue 31st May, 2011 @ 17:47Thank you so much! :) JamesMckReport Tue 31st May, 2011 @ 20:16cheers dude TrumanReport Sun 5th June, 2011 @ 14:39Really good notes.
The Cold War, 1945-1975 3. / 5 based on 3 ratings GCSE History OCR Cold War 1945-1975 3. / 5 based on 3 ratings The Cold War 1945-1975 0.
