The crisis began on October 14, 1962 and lasted for 38 days until November 20, 1962.
It is regarded as the moment when the Cold War was closest to becoming nuclear war, and which could have turned to world war three.
The Soviet government determined in 1959 that any future war would be largely nuclear and would likely be a world-wide war.
Under Khrushchev, the Soviet government focused increasingly on rockets and missiles instead of conventional military forces, in response to the new administration of Kennedy and his accompanying rearmament program.
The Soviets decided to install nuclear weapons, in the form of medium and short range ballistic missiles, in Cuba, a Caribbean nation off the coast of Florida with a Communist government under Fidel Castro.
Castro had sought Soviet support after the collapse of its relations with the United States due to the Cuban Revolution.
Soviet reasoning was two-fold — first, to defend this new Communist state from an American or American-sponsored invasion, and second, to shift the nuclear balance of power away from the United States by putting American cities directly within the range of Soviet missiles.
A U-2 flight in late August photographed a new series of SAM sites being constructed, but on September 4 Kennedy told Congress that there were no offensive missiles in Cuba.
On the night of September 8, the first consignment of SS-4 MRBMs was unloaded in Havana, and a second shipload arrived on September 16.
A number of unconnected problems meant that the missiles were not discovered by the Americans until a U-2 flight of October 14 clearly showed the construction of an SS-4 site near San Cristobal.
Initially, the United States government kept the information secret, telling only the fourteen key officials of the executive committee.
The word quarantine was used rather than blockade for reasons of international law and in keeping with the Quarantine Speech of 1937 by Franklin D Roosevelt.
The choice was reduced to either a naval blockade and an ultimatum, or full-scale invasion.
A blockade was finally chosen, although there were a number of hawks who kept pushing for tougher action.
Kennedy spoke to the United States people in a televised address on October 22.
The United States was surprised at the solid support from its European allies and also from much of the remaining international community.
When Kennedy openly publicized the crisis, the entire world was put in a state of terror.
People began talking and worrying openly about nuclear Armageddon, and drills for such an emergency happened almost daily in many cities.
The case was conclusively proved on October 25 at an emergency session of the UN, during which United States ambassador Adlai Stevenson showed photographs of Russian missile installations in Cuba, just after Soviet ambassador Valerian Zorin had denied their existence.
Khrushchev sent letters to Kennedy on October 23 and 24 claiming the deterrent nature of the missiles in Cuba and the peaceful intentions of the Soviet Union; however, the Soviets had delivered two different deals to the American government.
The second deal was broadcast on public radio on October 27, calling for the withdrawal of United States missiles from Turkey in addition to the demands of the 26th.
The crisis peaked on October 27, when a U-2 was shot down over Cuba and another U-2 flight over Russia was almost intercepted.
Kennedy responded by publicly accepting the first deal and sending Robert Kennedy to the Soviet embassy to accept the second in private the small number of Jupiter missiles near Izmir, Turkey would be removed.
The Soviet ships turned back and on October 28 Khrushchev announced that he had ordered the removal of the Soviet missiles in Cuba.
The compromise satisfied no one, though it was a particularly sharp diplomatic embarassment for Khrushchev and the Soviet Union, who were seen as backing down from a situation that they had created.
Khrushchev's fall from power a few years later can be partially linked to Politburo embarrassment at both Khrushchev's eventual concessions to the Americans and his ineptness in sparking the crisis in the first place.
Curtis LeMay told the President that it was ""the greatest defeat in our history"" and that the United States should invade immediately.
In early 1992 it was confirmed that Cuba had tactical nuclear missiles available , though General Anatoly Gribkov, part of the Soviet staff responsible for the operation, stated that the local Soviet commander, General Issa Pliyev, was prohibited from using them even if the United States had mounted a full-scale invasion of Cuba.
In the Essence of Decision, Graham T Allison and Philip Zelikow use the crisis to illustrate multiple approaches to analyzing the actions of the state.
The intensity and magnitude of the crisis also provides excellent material for drama, as illustrated by the movie Thirteen Days , directed by Roger Donaldson and starring Kevin Costner, Bruce Greenwood and Steven Culp.
