Suddenly, an aide enters the room wit word that there have been radar sightings of Soviet missiles heading fo the United States.
In less than five minutes the advisors must decide to launch a nuclear counterattack against the Soviet Union or to wait to see if there has been a technical error.
The president and his advisors glance nervously at the radio receiver that will transmit the latest update on the situation from NORAD command headquarters.
Hardliners argue that the nation must launch its missiles before United States defenses are weakened by a Soviet first strike.
Others insist that World War III should not be started on the basis of uncertain data.
The ""actor"" playing Kennedy breaks up and cannot return to the simulation until he has stopped laughing.
The important for the te program were intel motivated adolescen dard academic lectu tional ""carrots"" or Moreover, the temp and it often is diffic social and sexual pro on the distant, abstr It was clear that we needed an affective ""hook"" to draw the students into the process and to maintain their interest throughout the week.
A simulation seemed to be the most effective way to establish a link between the affective concerns of the students and the material we wished to present.
Game situations can provide a sense of power and competence that too often is lacking in adolescents' daily lives and can give them the opportunity to try out different approaches to life with minimal risk.
The desire to look good before their peers provides a strong additional incentive to play an active role in the simulation.
But, if a simulation is well designed and managed, this emotional substratum can be a powerful force bonding students to the learning situation.
We were also drawn to a simulation because it offered a more active form of learning.
In a simulation, the passive abstractions of textbo history are replaced by a decision-making process in which studen themselves must make immediate use of the knowledge they are gainin We wanted the students to encounter the events of October 1962 not as a list of inert facts or dates but rather as a complex of interlocking processes to which they themselves must respond.
To the extent that such a simulation is successful, students are forced to operate within the mentalit6 of the era and to recognize the differences between the world of the 1950s and early 1960s and that of the late 1980s.
Finally, the use of role playing was appealing because we believed it could help students develop the ability to see issues from multiple perspectives.
It was our hope that the process of embodying these perspectival differences would help the students move more rapidly through the kind of cognitive development described so effectively by William Perry.
This affective learning and the tolerance that it encourages would, we hoped, have a pedagogical value over and above any historical content that was absorbed in the simulation.
Fortunately, the Cuban missile crisis, like many diplomatic conflicts, lent itself readily to simulation construction.
There was a basic conflict with obvious gains and losses, a great variety of different roles, and opportunities to introduce a potentially limitless amount of nuance and complexity into the teaching situation.
The events and personalities involved in these events were extraordinarily dramatic, and the excitement of being personally involved in decisions of such historical importance naturally drew students into the process.
Thus, the Cuban missile crisis offered a richness of historical material, a natural game structure, and a means to draw the students into the kind of teaching situation we desired.
It w of a particular So Because the group each with a student team of fifteen on a side.
These teams would be decision makers a would meet together, under the leadership of a ""Kennedy"" or ""Khrushchev"" played by project leaders.
Early in the planning process we discarded the notion of giving t students grades, and there was to be no scoring system.
On the hand there was the competition between the United States and the So Union.
The students could be expected to identify quickly with their natio and to strive to protect its interests against the actions of the other.
On t other hand, we created the roles in such a manner that conflicts were sur to develop within the leadership elite of each nation.
Thus, the competitio between factions within each nation for control of foreign policy provide a further motivation for full participation in the simulation and fo learning.
We were relatively certain that the students on the American side would readily grasp the ideological differences between the Kennedy advisors.
We were less sure, however, that conflicts would develop among those playing the unfamiliar Soviet roles.
Therefore, we told all the Soviet players that a two-thirds vote by the Central Committee could temporarily depose and remove any member from voting status--even Khrushchev himself.
We knew that the students would have to be provided with a great deal of information if they were to make intelligent choices in the course of the simulation.
Several weeks before the simulation began, each ""Soviet"" participant received a general cover letter introducing the simulation, background readings on the history, politics, geography and international relations of Soviet Union, a chronology of relevant events, a list of terms, a ""Dear Comrade"" letter from ""Chairman Khrushchev"" asking the student to help him in the crucial decisions ahead, and a biography of the character the student was to play.
The biographical sketches provided crucial background information and served to orient the students toward a particular ideological and political position.
Some of the roles were specifically chosen and shaped to produce hardliners.
Others were more conciliatory, while a third group was left in the middle to be swayed by arguments from the two extremes.
Each character was given specific goals (for example, to build the prestige of Soviet rocket forces or to protect the political base of the Kennedy administration regardless of foreign policy considerations), and groups of characters were clearly linked as potential allies.
This background information was augmented by other materials presented during the simulation.
Early on we decided never to depart from the fictional frame of the Cuban missile crisis during the hours the students were with us.
We did everything possible to reinforce the illusion that the students really were Soviet or American leaders living in the early 1960s.
If it was necessary to lecture the students on the Berlin question or the military balance in 1962, an appropriate diplomatic or military ""specialist"" came to each group and briefed them on this material.
The illusion, of course, was not complete, and there were occasions when the same staff member had to play the role of several different experts.
But Soviet and United States military uniforms helped give a certain sense of reality to the event, and the students were willing to remain in their roles and to ask the appropriate questions.
We were determined from the beginning, however, that these briefinglectures should be complemented with a more active form of learning.
A magazines and from to sources of infor to the Martinsville, I a large body of mate use to support their This information p during the simulati might be asked to st anti-communism in about civil defense in geography texts to industries and milit These briefings an visual presentation losses in World War I ing that country's image of American at they were shown a strongly anti-Comm the H-Bomb,"" a civi bit of comic relief as Finally, to add an ex provide as many co the simulation.
Sovi music, ""Hero of Sov handed role playing helped to establish to sustain the simulation.
Everyone had to have a very clear idea who was supposed to be doing what, when, where, and with what materials at each moment in the five days of the simulation.
But we were faced with the problem of reconciling all this planning and structure with the freedom of choice that lies at the heart of the simulation experience.
The affective advantages of a simulation---motivation, active learning, and exploration of perspectives--all rest on the ability of the students to explore spontaneously the possibilities inherent in the historical situation.
The freedom to make choices meant that the precise direction of the simulation was unpredictable.
Yet, like all simulations, our project required a plan, a systematic introduction to the necessary background, a structure for decision making, an orderly unfolding of events, and some form of closure at the end.
The need for spontaneity always had to be balanced against the necessity of a certain level of predictability.
Moreover, the historical nature of the simulation created special problems, for the students' decisions could never be allowed to take them beyond the bounds of historical possibility.
If gross anachronisms and historically inappropriate options were allowed to enter the playing of the simulation, then its entire teaching function would have been thrown into doubt.
It was necessary, therefore, to distinguish carefully between the area of freedom, in which the student was allowed to make particular decisions, and the historical context, which allowed certain choices and excluded others.
We could allow the students to opt for policies different than those actually pursued by American and Soviet leaders in October 1962, but we had to be certain that these choices never departed too far from policies that might actually have been considered seriously at the time.
Thus, the functioning of the game and the maintenance of historical plausibility required limits on the directions the simulation might take.
But, since we could not dictate the precise choices made by the students without destroying the very mechanism that made the system work, the only option open to us was to remain prepared to improvise constantly and to intervene regularly in order to keep the simulation on track.
The ""Kennedys"" and ""Khrushchevs,"" who were staff leaders of the project, were our first line of defense.
All decisions by the student groups had to be discussed with these leaders before they could be implemented in order to discourage outrageously anachronistic policies and to nudge the group gently in the direction of greater historical accuracy.
To coordinate all of this activity, we established a ""control center"" in which the project director, the staff from the Gifted and Talented Program, and the teacher-interns were available to do basic research, to prepare and deliver oral briefings to the groups, or to compose whatever Papal pronouncements, CIA and KGB reports, or mythical events were needed to keep the simulation on track.
When some bit of background information, such as the size and composition of the Cuban navy in 1962, suddenly became important to the decision-making process of one of the groups, the teachers assisting the project could be counted on to find it quickly.
Both Southern and Underwood proved to be superb improvisational role players, and at crucial moments they assumed various identities and interacted with the American or Soviet groups.
At the end of each day the staff participants would meet to compare notes and coordinate plans for the next day.
But, during the daily sessions, we switched increasingly to a decentralized decision-making structure in which small staff teams responded to problems as they arose.
The value of this complex structure was clear when the students in our simulation proved to be far less willing to risk war and far more prepared to compromise than their counterparts a quarter-century ago.
Although this may be encouraging for the future of our species, it posed serious problems for the project.
On the practical level, the students threatened to solve the missile crisis, as well as a great number of other contemporary problems, on the third day of a five-day session.
But, more importantly, on the level of pedagogy, we felt it was necessary to give them a greater sense of the kind of obstacles that can intervene to make the maintenance of peace difficult.
Therefore, we introduced, not only those complications that actually threatened negotiations in 1962 (g., an accidental encounter of United States and Soviet jets over Alaska), but also other complications, which President Kennedy had dreaded, but which had not actually occurred.
Just at the moment when it appeared that the U.S.-Soviet groups had reached a compromise, we manufactured an incident in which a Soviet freighter was accidentally sunk by an American ship as it reached the blockade line.
Pounding his shoe on the table, our ""Khrushchev"" denounced the United States in flowery and dramatic language and led his delegation out of the negotiations.
We also wanted to give the students a sense of the difficulties of decision making under the tight time constraints of the nuclear age.
Each of the Soviet and American groups was at some point presented with reports of incoming enemy missiles.
The students were then forced to decide whether to launch an immediate counterattack while a military officer with a radio transmitter incessantly reminded them how many minutes remained before the expected explosions.
The result in three of the four groups was an intense experience, which we hope was later combined with the background information we provided on the arms race to produce a greater understanding of the problems of our era.
In the fourth case, the result was that described at the beginning of this article-an invasion of chance into our carefully constructed system that added nothing to our attempts to simulate reality, but did help bond that particular group of students to the project through humor.
Thus, the unfolding of the simulation required a real commitment to improvisation.
And yet, it is crucial to recognize that this flexibility was in no way antithetical to the careful planning that preceded the session.
The ability of the staff to depart from the initial plan rested on the clarity and thoroughness of that plan.
Having a clear idea of what was supposed to happen, we could easily change particular elements without fear that the entire structure would collapse.
The unfolding of the simulation across five days was an exhilaratingand exhausting-experience.
We were quite impressed with the ability of most of the students to re-create historical roles and to play them effectively.
They were able not only to repeat, but also to make active use of the information they had been taught and to function within the mentalit6 of the Soviet and American leaders.
Like the leaders of the period, they managed to avoid war, although as a group the American players were generally less willing to risk nuclear war than were their historical counterparts.
The expected ideological splits occurred in all the groups, although we found that the personalities of the students sometimes overpowered their roles.
And som within the ideological f But the adherence of the students to the basic structure did not inhibit their enthusiasm or creativity.
In fact, some of them threw themselves so thoroughly into their roles that we had to face unexpected difficulties.
Some students arrived so well versed in the period that the presence of Soviet missiles in Cuba was revealed well before we had intended.
One student, playing Soviet specialist Llewellyn Thompson, brought with hi an extremely impressive three-point plan for settling the Berlin questio which might have changed the course of history had it been seriousl considered at the time.
Another, playing General Maxwell Taylor, broug with him books written by the general in the late 1950s and quoted fro them with great effect, while a third played a hawkish general with su gusto that the staff and many of the other students began to feel unea around him.
At times, the playful side of adolescence came out, as whe the Soviets secretly distributed sheets denouncing Kennedy's indiscre tions with Marilyn Monroe or when a K.G.B. agent was caught hiding cassette recorder in a room to be used by one of the American teams.
One of the Soviet groups also made ample u of its ability to remove Khrushchev from voting status, twice ousting him from power and twice bringing him back when crises called for stro leadership.
But most of the time the students seemed to be playing the roles in a very productive manner, pouring over maps, studying back ground briefing papers, or defending the kinds of policies that would have been advocated by their historical counterparts.
In retrospect, there are several important changes that would have made the simulation more effective.
In our attempt to keep the illusion of t historical period as strong as possible, we did not provide sufficie ""debriefing"" periods in which the students could discuss the material from their own perspectives rather than from those of their characters.
This wa less important than it would have been in the context of a course in which students must be prepared for exams.
But the emotional and ideologica links with roles must be severed as the students leave the simulation each day to be certain that they do not carry the emotional strains of the conflict or the racism, sexism, or militarism of the historical situation back into their everyday lives.
If this simulation is repeated, the single long debriefing session at the end of the week would be supplemented with brief daily sessions in which students could put the events of the day in perspective.
The problem of gender roles posed by the simulation is less easily remedied.
Many of the women students were able to play the roles of their male characters quite effectively, but several observers noted that some of them were less engaged in the process than their male counterparts.
Debriefing sessions could have been used more effectively to give these women a voice outside the context of the simulation.
The very notion of historical simulation, however, poses questions concerning sexism, racism, and the desirability of social inequality, which instructors cannot afford to ignore.
Had this simulation been part of a regular course, it would also have been necessary to pay a great deal of attention to the relationship between the structure of the simulation and the broader structure of the course within which it was being used.
We could allow students to pursue different research projects without fear that some of them were being better prepared for a future exam than others.
If this simulation had been part of an academic course, it would have been necessary to have added special structures that would have synthesized the separate experiences of different students and avoided the possibility that some students would have easier access to course material than others.
But, despite these concerns, we believe that the project was a success.
The structure we had developed before the simulation began allowed the staff and the students the flexibility and spontaneity to make the sessions an exciting and, perhaps, even unforgettable experience.
The vast majority of the students seem to have learned a great deal about a crucial period in world history.
Although much of the information and some of the concepts they absorbed will disappear, the dramatic and active form in which they experienced this learning is apt to give it more staying power than material learned in less striking or more passive ways.
There was ample evidence in the policy debates and in the general discussion at the end of the simulation that many of the students grappled seriously with the moral and political issues raised by the simulation.
Many of them were disturbed by the kinds of decisions that had to be made when they were playing their character, and for these students the simulation raised some basic ethical questions about the nature of political action which may be important later in their lives.
The students also experienced the intricacies of group decision making and the moral complexities of struggles over ideology and power.
Some of the students left the simulation with their preexisting opinions confirmed, while others gained a better sense of the ambiguities of real historical decisions.
Whether they played with the American or the Soviet teams, most of them emerged with a greater awareness of fact that all moral right never rests with any nation, that real questions are never simple, and that individuals operating from very idealistic motives can threaten the existence of the world.
On the basis of the pedagogical literature and our own previous experience, we were convinced that simulations can encourage more active learning.
He had previously managed a team that had created a major simulation of social history from 1789 to 1912 for use in a freshman survey of modem European history and had a wide range of experience with the use of simulations and role playing exercises.
Roger Beck, a graduate student in African history, had taken part in that project, and had experience teaching junior high school students which would prove very useful in helping the other members of team to make the transition to dealing with younger students.
Bill Bishel, a graduate student in United States history, and Peter Holquist, an undergraduate preparing for graduate work in Russian history, had no previous experience in designing simulations, but their expertise in their areas of historical research provided a crucial dimension to the simulation.
It is impossible to overemphasize the contribution of all these individuals in the development and unfolding of the simulation.
Southern and Underwood, in particular, were extraordinarily effective at improvising and role playing during the course of the simulation, and their counsel was absolutely invaluable.
Keeping the groups down to fifteen allowed the students to interact within relatively small groups.
While one set of Soviet and American leaders was locked in combat in one area of the building, the other half of the students was engaged in a symmetrical stuggle in another area of the building.
At the beginning of the simulation there was no mention of the Cuban missile crisis, and the Soviet and American groups met in complete isolation from one another.
Each group was given crucial background information that it could use in the days ahead, but the groups were to be encouraged to expect that the focus of conflict would be Berlin, not Cuba.
This response was conveyed to the Soviet teams through diplomatic messages or intelligence reports, and then a process of spontaneous interaction began.
Of all these materials, the biographies were the most important and the most time consuming to produce.
Ranging from two to two-and-a-half single-spaced pages, these life histories rested on a good deal of historical research.
All of the American characters were real, and the details of their biographies were based on standard historical sources.
The Soviet characters were more difficult to draw, in part because biographical information concerning Soviet leaders is sketchy, and in part because the students' lack of familiarity with Soviet politics and society made it necessary to draw the differences between various ideological factions and interest groups very clearly.
Therefore, some of the Soviet characters were based on real figures, while others were composites of several leaders.
But, in all cases, the biographies conveyed the kinds of experiences Soviet leaders had had in the decades before 1962 and the basic conflicts and positions that underlay Soviet politics at the time.
A reference to American missiles in Greece somehow found its way into a treaty negotiated by one of the U.S.-Soviet pairs and could not be conveniently removed, despite the fact that no United States missiles were stationed there in 1962.
Only in the debriefing at the end of the simulation was it possible to correct this historical error.
