Days later, Castro wrote a scathing newspaper column condemning Obama&#039;s &amp;quot;honey-coated&amp;quot; words and reminding Cubans of the many United States efforts to overthrow and weaken the Communist government.The news of Castro&#039;s death spread slowly among Friday night revelers on the streets of Havana.
One famous club that was still open when word came in quickly closed.Some residents reacted with sadness to the news.&amp;quot;I&#039;m very upset.
Whatever you want to say, he is a public figure that the whole world respected and loved,&amp;quot; said Havana student Sariel Valdespino.But in Miami, where many exiles from Castro&#039;s Communist government live, a large crowd waving Cuban flags cheered, danced and banged on pots and pans.Castro&#039;s body will be cremated, according to his wishes.
He wrote newspaper commentaries on world affairs and occasionally met with foreign leaders but he lived in semi-seclusion.Still, the passing of the man known to most Cubans as &amp;quot;El Comandante&amp;quot; the commander or simply &amp;quot;Fidel&amp;quot; leaves a huge void in the country he dominated for so long.
The big test is handing the revolution over to the next generation and that will happen when Raul steps down,&amp;quot; Cuba expert Phil Peters of the Lexington Institute in Virginia said before Castro&#039;s death.A Jesuit-educated lawyer, Fidel Castro led the revolution that ousted U.S.-backed dictator Fulgencio Batista on Jan 1, 1959.
Some even trained in the Florida swamps for the disastrous Bay of Pigs invasion.But they could never dislodge him.Castro claimed he survived or evaded hundreds of assassination attempts, including some conjured up by the CIA.In 1962, the United States imposed a damaging trade embargo that Castro blamed for most of Cuba&#039;s ills, using it to his advantage to rally patriotic fury.Over the years, he expanded his influence by sending Cuban troops into far-away wars, including 350,000 to fight in Africa.
Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev and United States President John F Kennedy agreed the Soviets would withdraw the missiles in return for a United States promise never to invade Cuba.
Food, transport and basics such as soap were scarce and energy shortages led to frequent and long blackouts.Castro undertook a series of tentative economic reforms to get through the crisis, including opening up to foreign tourism.The economy improved when Venezuela&#039;s late socialist leader Hugo Chavez, who looked up to Castro as a hero, came to the rescue with cheap oil.
But others see him as an autocrat and feel he drove the country to ruin.Cubans earn on average the equivalent of $20 a month and struggle to make ends meet even in an economy where education and health care are free and many basic goods and services are heavily subsidized.It was never clear whether Fidel Castro fully backed his brother&#039;s reform efforts of recent years.
Castro had been in poor health since an intestinal ailment nearly killed him in 2006 and he formally ceded power to his younger brother two years later.
Expand Expand Expand Expand Expand Expand Previous Next Close Cuba's President Raul Castro announces the death of his brother, revolutionary leader Fidel Castro, in a still image from government television in Havana, Cuba November 26, 2016.
Cuban Television via Reuters TV Cuban leader Fidel Castro greeted by United Nations Secretary General Boutros Boutros Ghali on his arrival at Bella center conference hall in Copenhagen.
Fidel Castro died on November 26, 2016 according to a statement from the President of Cuba, Raul Castro.
Cuban revolutionary icon Fidel Castro died late on November 25, 2016 in Havana, his brother, President Raul Castro, announced on national television.
Cuban Television via Reuters TV Wearing an olive coloured military uniform, Raul Castro appeared on state television to announce his brother's death.
Castro's remains will be cremated on Saturday, according to his wishes.
Daily Digest Newsletter Get ahead of the day with the morning headlines at 7.30am and Fionnán Sheahan's exclusive take on the day's news every afternoon, with our free daily newsletter.
Enter email address This field is required Sign Up Although Raul Castro always glorified his older brother, he has changed Cuba since taking over by introducing market-style economic reforms and agreeing with the United States in December 2014 to re-establish diplomatic ties and end decades of hostility. {""displaybelow1024"":""true"",""adFormat"":""mediumrectangle"",""targeting"":{""pos"":}} Fidel Castro offered only lukewarm support for the deal, raising questions about whether he approved of ending hostilities with his longtime enemy.
AFP PHOTO / --/AFP/Getty Images Read More 'Castro is dead and Miami is alive' Crowds welcome Fidel's death with street celebrations He did not meet Barack Obama when he visited Havana earlier this year, the first time a United States president had stepped foot on Cuban soil since 1928.
Days later, Castro wrote a scathing newspaper column condemning Obama's ""honey-coated"" words and reminding Cubans of the many United States efforts to overthrow and weaken the Communist government.
The news of Castro's death spread slowly among Friday night revelers on the streets of Havana.
Whatever you want to say, he is a public figure that the whole world respected and loved,"" said Havana student Sariel Valdespino.
But in Miami, where many exiles from Castro's Communist government live, a large crowd waving Cuban flags cheered, danced and banged on pots and pans.
Ailing Cuban leader Castro said on February 19, 2008 that he will not return to lead the country, retiring as head of state 49 years after he seized power in an armed revolution.
Former President Fidel Castro, who led a rebel army to improbable victory in Cuba, embraced Soviet-style communism and defied the power of 10 United States presidents during his half century rule, has died at age 90.
The bearded revolutionary, who survived a crippling United States trade embargo as well as dozens, possibly hundreds, of assassination plots, died eight years after ill health forced him to formally hand power over to his younger brother Raul, who announced his death late Friday, Nov., 2016, on state television.
Cuban President Raul Castro has announced the death of his brother Fidel Castro at age 90 on Cuban state media on Friday, Nov., 2016.
Fidel Castro formally stepped down in 2008 after suffering gastrointestinal ailments and public appearances have been increasingly unusual in recent years.
He was demonized by the United States and its allies but admired by many leftists around the world, especially socialist revolutionaries in Latin America and Africa.
Read More Castro family torn by dysfunction and disagreements After Nelson Mandela was freed from prison in 1990, he repeatedly thanked Castro for his firm efforts to weaken apartheid.
Our turn comes to all of us, but the ideas of the Cuban communists will remain,"" he said.
Castro was last seen by ordinary Cubans in photos showing him engaged in conversation with the Vietnamese President Tran Dai Quang earlier this month.
Transforming Cuba from a playground for rich Americans into a symbol of resistance to Washington, Castro crossed swords with 10 United States presidents while in power and outlasted nine of them.
He fended off a CIA-backed invasion at the Bay of Pigs in 1961 as well as countless assassination attempts.
Expand Close Cuban former president Fidel Castro shaking hands with Pope Francis in Havana on September 20, 2015.
AFP PHOTO / CUBADEBATE / HOHO/AFP/Getty Images / Facebook Twitter Email Whatsapp {""displaybelow1024"":""true"",""adFormat"":""mediumrectangle"",""targeting"":{""pos"":},""onDemand"":true,""lazyload"":true} Cuban former president Fidel Castro shaking hands with Pope Francis in Havana on September 20, 2015.
AFP PHOTO / CUBADEBATE / HOHO/AFP/Getty Images Wearing green military fatigues and chomping on cigars for many of his years in power, Castro was famous for long, fist-pounding speeches filled with blistering rhetoric, often aimed at the United States.
At home, he swept away capitalism and won support for bringing schools and hospitals to the poor.
But he also created legions of enemies and critics, concentrated among the exiles in Miami who fled his rule and saw him as a ruthless tyrant.
However, it is not clear if United States President-Elect Donald Trump will continue to normalize relations with Cuba, or revive tensions and fulfill a campaign promise to close the United States embassy in Havana once again.
Castro's death which would once have thrown a question mark over Cuba's future seems unlikely to trigger a crisis as Raul Castro is firmly ensconced in power.
He wrote newspaper commentaries on world affairs and occasionally met with foreign leaders but he lived in semi-seclusion.
Still, the passing of the man known to most Cubans as ""El Comandante"" the commander or simply ""Fidel"" leaves a huge void in the country he dominated for so long.
It also underlines the generational change in Cuba's communist leadership.
Others in their 50s include Foreign Minister Bruno Rodriguez and economic reform czar Marino Murillo.
The big test is handing the revolution over to the next generation and that will happen when Raul steps down,"" Cuba expert Phil Peters of the Lexington Institute in Virginia said before Castro's death.
REVOLUTIONARY ICON A Jesuit-educated lawyer, Fidel Castro led the revolution that ousted U.S.-backed dictator Fulgencio Batista on Jan 1, 1959.
Aged 32, he quickly took control of Cuba and sought to transform it into an egalitarian society.
His government improved the living conditions of the very poor, achieved health and literacy levels on a par with rich countries and rid Cuba of a powerful Mafia presence.
But he also tolerated little dissent, jailed opponents, seized private businesses and monopolized the media.
Castro's opponents labeled him a dictator and hundreds of thousands fled the island.
Many dissidents settled in Florida, influencing United States policy toward Cuba and plotting Castro's demise.
Some even trained in the Florida swamps for the disastrous Bay of Pigs invasion.
In 1962, the United States imposed a damaging trade embargo that Castro blamed for most of Cuba's ills, using it to his advantage to rally patriotic fury.
Over the years, he expanded his influence by sending Cuban troops into far-away wars, including 350,000 to fight in Africa.
They provided critical support to a left-wing government in Angola and contributed to the independence of Namibia in a war that helped end apartheid in South Africa.
He also won friends by sending tens of thousands of Cuban doctors abroad to treat the poor and bringing young people from developing countries to train them as physicians 'HISTORY WILL ABSOLVE ME' Born on August 13, 1926 in Biran in eastern Cuba, Castro was the son of a Spanish immigrant who became a wealthy landowner.
Angry at social conditions and Batista's dictatorship, Fidel Castro launched his revolution on July 26, 1953, with a failed assault on the Moncada barracks in the eastern city of Santiago.
He was sentenced to 15 years in prison but was released in 1955 after a pardon that would come back to haunt Batista.
Castro went into exile in Mexico and prepared a small rebel army to fight Batista.
It included Argentine revolutionary Ernesto ""Che"" Guevara, who became his comrade-in-arms.
Only 12, including him, his brother and Guevara, escaped a government ambush when they landed in eastern Cuba.
Taking refuge in the rugged Sierra Maestra mountains, they built a guerrilla force of several thousand fighters who, along with urban rebel groups, defeated Batista's military in just over two years.
Early in his rule, at the height of the Cold War, Castro allied Cuba to the Soviet Union, which protected the Caribbean island and was its principal benefactor for three decades.
Convinced that the United States was about to invade Cuba, Castro urged the Soviets to launch a nuclear attack.
The United States also secretly agreed to remove its nuclear missiles from Turkey.
Food, transport and basics such as soap were scarce and energy shortages led to frequent and long blackouts.
Castro undertook a series of tentative economic reforms to get through the crisis, including opening up to foreign tourism.
The economy improved when Venezuela's late socialist leader Hugo Chavez, who looked up to Castro as a hero, came to the rescue with cheap oil.
Aid from communist-run China also helped, but an economic downturn in Venezuela since Chavez's death in 2013 have raised fears it will scale back its support for Cuba.
Plagued by chronic economic problems, Cuba's population of 11 million has endured years of hardship, although not the deep poverty, violent crime and government neglect of many other developing countries.
For most Cubans, Fidel Castro has been the ubiquitous figure of their entire life.
Many still love him and share his faith in a communist future, and even some who abandoned their political belief still view him with respect.
But others see him as an autocrat and feel he drove the country to ruin.
Cubans earn on average the equivalent of $20 a month and struggle to make ends meet even in an economy where education and health care are free and many basic goods and services are heavily subsidized.
It was never clear whether Fidel Castro fully backed his brother's reform efforts of recent years.
The Cuban revolutionary and president in his own words Fidel Castro, Cuba’s former president and leader of the Communist revolution, has died aged 90, state TV has announced.
Latin America Secrecy shrouded details of Fidel Castro's health Fidel Castro would always laugh off speculation about his health.
Play Latin America 'Castro is dead and Miami is alive' Crowds welcome Fidel's death with street celebrations Large crowds have gathered in Miami, Florida at the news of Fidel Castro's death.
Latin America Castro family torn by dysfunction and disagreements Fidel Castro's rule of nearly five decades split many a Cuban family between exile and solidarity with the communist revolution including his own.
