Batista is elected president and rules until 1959 May: The Cuban government enacts the Agrarian 1944, when he is constitutionally obligated to step down.
Reform Law which limits land ownership to 1,000 acres and expropriates all other land.
Former president Batista, supported by the draws a poster in favor of the Reform Law. army, seizes power.
Osvaldo Dorticós Torrado becomes President 1953 July: Fidel Castro launches an unsuccessful attack on of Cuba, replacing Manuel Urrutia who resigns over Batista’s armed forces.
After being imprisoned for almost disagreements with Fidel Castro. 2 years, he is pardoned and released, and flees to Mexico.
Other revolutionary leaders such as Huber 1956 November: Fidel Castro, with some 80 insurgents Matos and Camilo Cienfuegos are imprisoned or simply including Raúl Castro, Che Guevara, and Camilo disappear without a trace.
Soviet Deputy Prime Minister Anastas 1957 March: Student leader José Echevarría and a small Mikoyan visits Havana, sets up a trade agreement group take over a radio station in Havana.
Echevarría is between Cuba and the U.S.S.R. killed while retreating to the university.
Freedom of expression on the groups have defeated the army’s advance and captured a airwaves is stifled. huge amount of arms.
United States President Dwight Eisenhower orders CIA 1958 December: Castro and the other rebels capture director Allen Dulles to train Cuban exiles for a covert several towns in eastern and central Cuba.
All newspapers are seized by the Revolutionary government and the already limited freedom of press and 1959 January: President Batista resigns and flees the speech is virtually abolished. country on the same day that Fidel Castro’s column enters Santiago de Cuba.
Castro fights back, Carlos attends Castro’s “triumphal parade” and watches beginning the Escambray Revolt, or the War Against the his speech on television.
Che Guevara takes charge leaving Cuba, and Carlos and his brother switch schools. of the executions.
All United States businesses and commercial property in southwest Cuba fails.
Thousands of Cubans are arrested Cuba are nationalized at the direction of the Cuban and imprisoned.
Private schools are seized and education is his family lose all of their savings. nationalized.
Fidel Castro visits the United States and 1961 August: Currency is changed.
All personal bank embraces Soviet Premier Nikita Kruschev at the United accounts are seized by the government.
Committees for the Defense of the 1961 September: Outdoor religious processions are Revolution are established throughout Cuba.
Castro openly declares himself a 1960 October: Cuban-owned private enterprises are longtime “Marxist-Leninist.” nationalized and all rental properties seized, along with commercial bank accounts.
Kennedy is informed of the presence of surface-to-air missile batteries in Cuba.
The United States also threatens children will be taken from parents who are deemed to invade Cuba if the missile bases are not dismantled and “counterrevolutionary” and decides that her children warns that a nuclear attack launched from Cuba would be should leave Cuba as soon as possible. considered a Soviet attack requiring full retaliation.
Operation Peter Pan (Operación Pedro 1962 October: Khrushchev agrees to remove nuclear Pan), an operation transporting 14,000 children of parents weapons from Cuba and the United States agrees to remove opposed to the new government, begins.
United States ends Cuban blockade satisfied that airlifted out in this operation in 1962. all bases are gone and Soviet jets will leave the island by December 20.
The parents of over 10,000 Pedro literacy in the countryside, improve teacher quality, and Pan children are trapped in Cuba.
The United States breaks off official diplomatic 1965 November: Immigration to United States reinstated.
Che Guevara is executed in La Higuera, group, which is praised for its promotion of environmental Bolivia. responsibility, literacy, and other community value, but is also construed as a youth arm of Castro’s forces.
Cuba sends troops to Angola, beginning refuses to join and heckles the Pioneers who march on his a decade of revolutionary involvement in African wars. street.
Universal free healthcare is enshrined in the Cuban 1961 April: Bay of Pigs: The United States-planned and Constitution in Article 50.
Fidel Castro assumes the title of 2008 February: Raúl Castro takes over as president, days President of the State Council, and becomes Head of State, after Fidel announces his retirement.
Political prisoner Orlando Zapata Tamayo dies after 85 days on hunger strike.
President Castro agrees to free 52 dissidents *Including Carlos’ mother. under a deal brokered by the Church and Spain.
Mariel Boat Lift: Cuban Government announces that anyone wishing to leave Cuba may depart 2010 November: *Carlos Eire’s second memoir, Learning by boat from Mariel Port, prompting an exodus of up to to Die in Miami: Confessions of a Refugee Boy, is published 125,000 people to the United States by Free Press.
The Soviet Union collapses, ending 2011 January: United States President Barack Obama relaxes economic subsidies to Cuba worth approximately $6 restrictions on travel to Cuba. billion annually.
Pope John Paul II becomes the first Pope to visit the island.11 December: The authorities release 2,500 prisoners, including some convicted of political crimes, as part of an 1999 November: Christian activist Oscar Elías Biscet is amnesty ahead of a papal visit. detained by Cuban police for organizing meetings in Havana and Matanzas.
Pope Benedict visits, criticizing the United States trade pressure from human rights groups, but is arrested once embargo on Cuba and calling for greater rights on the again along with 75 other dissidents in 2003. island.
Cuba and United States reopen their foreign embassies in each other's capitals, officially restoring diplomatic 2000 April-August: *Carlos writes Waiting for Snow in relations after more than 50 years.
United States President Barack Obama visits Cuba to 2003 April: Cuban government arrests 78 writers, meet with President Raúl Castro.
All are declared guilty of treason United States president in almost 90 years. and sentenced to varying lengths of imprisonment.
