A United States reconnaissance plane takes photographs of a Soviet nuclear installation being built in Cuba On October 14, 1962, a U-2 spy plane took hundreds of photographs which, after being filtered and analyzed by the CIA, revealed the construction in San Cristobal, Pinar del Rio Province (Map 34) of a Soviet nuclear missile site for MRBMs that were capable of striking within a range of 2,000 kilometers, including Washington, D.C. and the whole southeastern United States.
Background After the unsuccessful Bay of Pigs Invasion in April 1961 (previous article), the United States government under President John F Kennedy focused on clandestine methods to oust or kill Cuban leader Fidel Castro and/or overthrow Cuba’s communist government.
In November 1961, a United States covert operation code-named Mongoose was prepared, which aimed at destabilizing Cuba’s political and economic infrastructures through various means, including espionage, sabotage, embargos, and psychological warfare.
Starting in March 1962, anti-Castro Cuban exiles in Florida, supported by American operatives, penetrated Cuba undetected and carried out attacks against farmlands and agricultural facilities, oil depots and refineries, and public infrastructures, as well as Cuban ships and foreign vessels operating inside Cuban maritime waters.
These actions, together with the United States Armed Forces’ carrying out military exercises in U.S.-friendly Caribbean countries, made Castro believe that the United States was preparing another invasion of Cuba.
From the time he seized power in Cuba in 1959, Castro had increased the size and strength of his armed forces with weapons provided by the Soviet Union.
In Moscow, Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev also believed that an American invasion was imminent, and increased Russian advisers, troops, and weapons to Cuba.
Castro’s revolution had provided communism with a toehold in the Western Hemisphere and Premier Khrushchev was determined not to lose this invaluable asset.
In the nuclear arms race between the two superpowers, the United States held a decisive edge over the Soviet Union, both in terms of the number of nuclear missiles and in the reliability of the systems required to deliver these weapons.
The American advantage was even more pronounced in long-range missiles, called ICBMs (Intercontinental Ballistic Missiles), where the Soviets possessed perhaps no more than a dozen missiles with a poor delivery system in contrast to the United States that had about 170, which when launched from the United States mainland could accurately hit specific targets in the Soviet Union.
In one stroke, such a deployment would serve Castro as a powerful deterrent against an American invasion; for the Soviets, they would have invoked their prerogative to install nuclear weapons in a friendly country, just as the Americans had done in Europe.
More important, the presence of Soviet nuclear weapons in the Western Hemisphere would radically alter the global nuclear weapons paradigm by posing as a direct threat to the United States.
In April 1962, Premier Khrushchev conceived of such a plan, and felt that the United States would respond to it with no more than a diplomatic protest, and certainly would not take military action.
Furthermore, Premier Khrushchev believed that President Kennedy was weak and indecisive, primarily because of the American president’s half-hearted decisions during the failed Bay of Pigs Invasion in April 1961, and President Kennedy’s weak response to the East German-Soviet building of the Berlin Wall in August 1961.
NATO’s deployment of nuclear missiles in Turkey and Italy was a major factor in the Soviet Union’s decision to install nuclear weapons in Cuba A Soviet delegation sent to Cuba met with Fidel Castro, who gave his consent to Khrushchev’s proposal.
Subsequently in July 1962, Cuba and the Soviet Union signed an agreement pertinent to the nuclear arms deployment.
The planning and implementation of the project was done in utmost secrecy, with only a few of the top Soviet and Cuban officials being informed.
In Cuba, Soviet technical and military teams secretly identified the locations for the nuclear missile sites.
More disturbing was the discovery of the S-75 Dvina surface-to-air missile batteries, which were known to be contingent to the deployment of nuclear missiles.
By late August, the U.S. government and Congress had raised the possibility that the Soviets were introducing nuclear missiles in Cuba.
By mid-September, the nuclear missiles had reached Cuba by Soviet vessels that also carried regular cargoes of conventional weapons.
About 40,000 Soviet soldiers posing as tourists also arrived to form part of Cuba’s defense for the missiles and against a United States invasion.
