Teheran Yalta Potsdam The attitudes of Stalin and Truman and the ideological differences between the Superpowers The division of Germany into zones of occupation and the joint occupation of Berlin The Soviet control of Eastern Europe, the establishment of satellite states Cominform the Truman Doctrine and the Marshall Plan Growing tension in Europe: Soviet control of satellite statesg.
The impact of Soviet rule on Hungary Rákosi, de-Stalinisation and optimism Nagy’s programme of reforms Soviet reaction and the uprising the death of Nagy, the reestablishment of Soviet control International reaction to the Hungarian uprising and the Soviet response Revision Notes CAUSES OF THE COLD WAR 1.
Russia was a Communist country, ruled by a dictator who cared little about human rights.
Britain and the USA wanted to help Germany recover/ to prevent large areas of Europe from coming under Communist control.
The USSR did not trust Britain and the USA – They had tried to destroy the Russian Revolution in 1918/ Stalin thought they had not helped the USSR enough in WW2.
Britain & USA did not trust USSR – Stalin had signed the Nazi-Soviet pact in 1939.
Yalta/ Potsdam/ Salami tactics/ Fulton/ Greece/ Truman Doctrine/ Marshall Plan/ Cominform/ Czechoslovakia YALTA CONFERENCE 1.
Churchill, Stalin and Roosevelt agreed to Divide Germany into 4 zones (France, Britain, USA, USSR)/ to hold free elections in Eastern European countries./ to set up the United Nations./ to set up a government of Communists and non Communists in Poland.
On the surface, everything seemed friendly, but there was tension behind the scenes POTSDAM CONFERENCE 1.
Stalin, Truman and Atlee agreed to bring Nazi war criminals to trial/ divide Germany into 4 occupied zones.
SALAMI TACTICS ‘Slice-by-slice’, Stalin ensured all E Eur.countries had Communist govts 1.
Albania – the Communists took power after the war without opposition 2.
Bulgaria – the Communists executed the leaders of all the other parties.
Hungary – Russian troops stayed / Stalin allowed elections (noncommunists won a big majority)/ Communists led by the pro-Russian Rakosi.
Czechoslovakia – the Communists banned all other parties/ killed their leaders.
East Germany – Russians turned their zone into German Democratic Republic.
GREECE • United States supplied arms and money to defeat the Communists.
TRUMAN DOCTRINE – The USA implemented a policy of ‘containment’ towards the USSR – to prevent Communism spreading any further.
MARSHALL PLAN – Marshall believed poverty was a breeding ground for Communism.
American introduced ‘Marshall Aid’ – $17 billion to get Europe’s economy going.
CZECHOSLOVAKIA – Communists took control Panicked the United States Senate into granting Marshall Aid THE BERLIN BLOCKADE 1.
Events – – Stalin closed rail + road links to Berlin / Lasted 11 months/ Allies airlifted supplies to Berlin – 275,000 flights, 1.5m tons/ In winter, Berliners lived on dried eggs and potatoes/ 4 hours of electricity a day.
It seemed he would bring a thaw in the Cold War – He advocated ‘Peaceful Coexistence’/ He met Western leaders at summit meetings/ He was friendly to Yugoslavia, telling Tito there were ‘different roads to Communism’/ He criticised Stalin, executed Beria, set free political prisoners and de-stalinised the eastern bloc countries.
In fact 1955–1963 was the time of greatest tension in the Cold War • Khrushchev used Russian troops when countries tried to leave Russian control.
Sputnik.61: Yuri Gagarin orbits the earth)/ Arms Race • Warsaw Pact – USSR/ Albania/ Bulgaria/ Czechoslovakia/ E Germany/ Hungary/ Poland/ Romania 3.
Events • 23 October – Student riots – attcks on AVH and Russian troops • 24 October – 3 November – Reforming government led by Imre Nagy (Democracy/ Freedom of speech/ Freedom of religion/ Aimed to withdraw from Warsaw Pact.
Results Janos Kadar put in control of Hungary/ 4,000 Hungarians killed/ Nagy shot.
BBC Bitesize Revision Notes Arms race Both sides are now organised into two major military alliances.
As a result each side felt more threatened, and so consequently they built even more weapons.
Timetable Year Event 1952 USA Hydrogen Bomb 1953 USSR Hydrogen Bomb 1957 USSR test Intercontinental Ballistic Missile 1958 USA Test ICBMs 1959 USA launches submarine loaded with nuclear weapons 1966 USSR builds Anti-Ballistic Missile to protect Moscow By the 1950s • The Cold War has become very serious as both sides focused on the development of the Hydrogen Bomb , 2500 times stronger that the Hiroshima bomb.
Three Cold War crises: Berlin, Cuba and Czechoslovakia c1957–69 Berlin: the refugee problem Khrushchev’s Berlin ultimatum Eisenhower and Camp David Khrushchev’s challenge to Kennedy summit conferences and growing tension,g.
U2 the construction of the Berlin Wall and its impact Kennedy’s visit to Berlin, 1963.
Events 13 August 1961– East Germans erected a barbed wire wall overnight (later stone)/ All East – West movement was stopped.
Causes • Superpower tension – U2 – Berlin Wall – Laos – Vietnam • Fidel Castro’s Cuba – only 90 miles off coast of America.
Results • Khrushchev seemed to have failed • Kennedy became the hero of the Western world • Telephone hot line set up between Moscow and Washington.
BBC Bitesize revision notes The Berlin Wall By the 1960s Berlin was still divided the USSR controlled the East and the USA guaranteed freedom in the West.
Thousands of refugees escaped to West Berlin each day much to the embarrassment of the USSR so in 1961 Khrushchev closed the border and ordered the construction of a wall to stop people leaving.
At the Vienna Summit of June 1961, therefore, Khrushchev demanded that the United States leave West Berlin within six months.
On 13 August, Khrushchev closed the border between East and West Berlin and started building the Berlin Wall.
At first, the Russians regarded it as a propaganda success, but as time went on, it became a propaganda disaster a symbol of all that was bad about Soviet rule.
President Kennedy, 1963 Revision tip Question To help you revise this section, try to think of three ways that the Berlin Wall was a symbol of the Cold War in the 1950s and 1960s.
It was concrete proof that capitalists could never work with communists.
What the Berlin Wall tells us about the nature of the Cold War in the 1960s.
Experts examining photographs of Cuba taken by U2 spy planes saw what they believed to be evidence that the Russians were building nuclear missile sites in Cuba.
It was the beginning of a confrontation that took the world to the brink of a nuclear holocaust.
Kennedy who had been elected because he promised to get tough with the Communists felt that Khrushchev had got one over on him at the Vienna Summit in 1961.
Also, in 1959, a rebel named Fidel Castro took power in Cuba, an island just 90 miles away from Florida.
Before Castro took over, the government led by Colonel Batista had been a corrupt and right-wing military dictatorship, but the Americans had many business interests in Cuba.
When Castro came to power, however, he nationalised American companies in Cuba.
In retaliation, the Americans stopped all aid to Cuba, and all imports of Cuban sugar.
This was a blow to Castro as sugar was the mainstay of the Cuban economy.
Castro was forced to look to the USSR for help, and, in 1960, the USSR signed an agreement to buy 1 million tonnes of Cuban sugar every year.
Castro, who had not been a Communist when he took power, became a Communist.
In April 1961, with Kennedy's knowledge, the CIA funded, trained, armed and transported 1,300 Cuban exiles to invade Cuba.
They landed at the Bay of Pigs and made an attempt to overthrow Castro.
A map showing the range of missiles fired from Cuba In September 1961, Castro asked for and Russia publicly promised weapons to defend Cuba against America.
Which is why on 14 October 1962, the Americans discovered the missile sites in Cuba.
These sites brought every town in the US within range of Soviet nuclear missiles.
President Kennedy called a meeting of the National Security Council and on 22 October went on TV to tell the American people that they were under threat.
Kennedy versus Khrushchev Revision tip and answer preparation Revision tip To help you remember these facts, identify six causes of the Cuban crisis and present them as a spider gram, showing the links between the different factors.
The 13 days and the effects of the crisis The threat of nuclear war became increasingly apparent.
It was vital that Kennedy and Khrushchev came to some sort of agreement the future of the world depended on it.
Crisis summary President Kennedy did not dare to invade Cuba, because that action could have started a world war yet he could not let the missile sites be completed.
With his advisers, he decided on a naval blockade to prevent Russian ships delivering the missiles for the Cuban sites.
Russian forces were put on alert; United States bombers were put in the air carrying nuclear bombs; preparations were made to invade Cuba.
Secretly, the Americans suggested a trade-off of missile bases United States bases in Turkey for Russian bases in Cuba.
The ships heading for Cuba turned back, and Khrushchev sent a telegram offering to dismantle the Cuban bases if Kennedy lifted the blockade and promised not to invade Cuba.
Then, as though having second thoughts, he sent a second letter demanding the dismantling of the Turkish bases.
However, Kennedy ignored the U2 attack and agreed publicly to the first letter, and secretly to the second.
One week in October 1962 Day Events Monday 22 Kennedy announces a naval blockade of Cuba.
B52 nuclear bombers October are deployed, so that one-eighth of them are airborne all the time.
Kennedy warns of a full retaliatory response, if any missile is launched from Cuba.
Secretly, the United States government floats the idea of removing the missiles in Turkey in exchange for those in Cuba.
But at 6pm, Kennedy gets a telegram from Khrushchev offering to dismantle the sites if Kennedy lifts the blockade and promises not to invade Cuba.
Saturday 27 However, at 11am Khrushchev sends a second letter, demanding that October Kennedy also dismantles American missile bases in Turkey.
October Tuesday 20 Russian bombers leave Cuba, and Kennedy lifts the naval blockade.
November Repercussions of the crisis Speaking many years later, Khrushchev claimed that he had won the Cuban missile crisis.
He had achieved both his aims America never bothered Cuba again (which is still a Communist country) and the United States missile sites in Turkey were dismantled in November 1962.
The world did not see it that way at the time, because the Turkey deal was kept secret, the West saw Kennedy as the hero who had faced down Communism.
China broke off relations with Russia and, in 1964, he was forced to resign as Soviet leader.
The message of the cartoon was clear the world had avoided a nuclear war, but it was time for reason.
Revision tip and answer preparation Revision tip Look back through the pages on the Cuban missile crisis, sorting the evidence to support the idea that Kennedy won the Cuban Missile crisis, and the evidence to suggest that Khrushchev won.
The Prague Spring For four months in 1968 Czechoslovakia broke free from Soviet rule, allowing freedom of speech and removing some state controls.
There were no riots or demonstrations but, during 1967, students and writers were complaining about the lack of freedom, and the poor performance of the Czechoslovak economy.
But when Antonin Novotny, the Czechoslovak president, asked Leonid Brezhnev, the Soviet leader, for help, Brezhnev did not support him.
In April 1968, Dubcek's government announced an Action Plan for what it called a new model of socialism it removed state controls over industry and allowed freedom of speech.
Dubcek announced that he was still committed to democratic communism, but other political parties were set up.
Also, Dubcek stressed that Czechoslovakia would stay in the Warsaw Pact, but in August, President Tito of Yugoslavia, a country not in the Warsaw Pact, visited Prague.
At a meeting in Bratislava on 3 August 1968, Brezhnev read out a letter from some Czechoslovakian Communists asking for help.
He announced the Brezhnev Doctrine the USSR would not allow any Eastern European country to reject Communism.
Instead, they stood in front of the tanks, and put flowers in the soldiers' hair.
Romania had also broken free of Russian control, and was improving relations with the West.
Czechoslovakia returned to communist control and Russian troops were stationed there.
Half the leadership of the KSC, along with the directors of many firms were sacked and 47 anti-communists were arrested.
People in the West were horrified and so were many communist countries, especially Romania and Yugoslavia.
Revision tip and answer preparation Revision tip Question To help you remember this story, compare its details with the story of the Hungarian Uprising of 1956, listing the similarities and differences.
Answer Similarities • Same causes hostility to Russian control, repression, poor economic performance/poverty.
Differences • Started with riots in Hungary, but not in Czechoslovakia.
NATO had 2. million, Warsaw Pact had 4 million Mutually Assured Destruction • Both sides knew that any attack upon the other would be suicide.
In November 1957, the Russian space dog Laika became the first animal to orbit the earth.
Laika means ""Barker"" in Russian, and her mission helped scientists understand whether people could survive in space.
By 1959 Both American and Russian scientists were in a race to get a spacecraft to the Moon; the Russians made it first.
On 12th April 1961, Russian Cosmonaut Yuri Gagarin became the first man in space.
Gagarin's spacecraft, Vostok 1, completed one orbit of the earth, and landed about two hours after launch.
After her 1963 mission, Valentina became an important member of the Russian Government, and has been awarded many honours and prizes for her achievements.
In 1963 United States President John F Kennedy promised the world that the United States would land men on the moon before 1970.
Before risking people's lives, NASA sent a robot spaceship, to make sure they could land safely.
It was called Surveyor 1, and it made the second soft landing on the Moon on 30th May 1966, a few months after Russian probe Luna 9 landed successfully.
On 20th July 1969, Neil Armstrong, and then Buzz Aldrin took ""one small step"" and became the first men on the moon.
Their spaceship, Apollo 11 worked perfectly, flying them 250,000 miles to the moon, and bringing them all the way back safely to earth.
Détente and SALT 1 Détente in the 1970s: SALT 1 Helsinki and SALT 2 BBC Bitesize Revision Notes Détente The policy of détente refers to the time in the 1960s-1970s when the two superpowers eased tension and tried to cooperate to avoid conflict in the Cold War.
A number of events happened during this time period that illustrate this new policy.
Achievements in détente Image Date Event 1968 Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty: powers with nuclear weapons agreed not to give any other countries nuclear technology.
Image Date Event 1975 The Helsinki Agreement recognised Soviet control over Eastern Europe, concluded a trade agreement, and Russia promised to respect human rights.
America was shocked by the Vietnam War and wanted to stay out of world affairs.
The price of oil rocketed in the 1970s, and both superpowers experienced economic problems.
Further talks were much less successful and a SALT2 Treaty in 1979 added little.
In the Arab-Israeli War of 1973, America supported Israel, and Russia supported Egypt and Syria.
The Helsinki Agreement achieved nothing it confirmed the Iron Curtain and Russia ignored its promises about human rights.
Whether there was any genuine détente between East and West in the 1970s.
It August 2nd was also agreed that the German capital Berlin would be divided into four zones.
The 1945 Russian Polish border was determined and Korea was to be divided into Soviet and American zones.
August 6th Hiroshima The United States dropped the first atomic bomb on Hiroshima 1945 August 8th Nagasaki The United States dropped the second atomic bomb on Nagasaki.
The plan was rejected outright by Stalin and any Eastern Bloc country considering accepting aid was reprimanded severely.
June 1948 Formation of West The French, USA and UK partitions of Germany were merged to form West Germany Germany June 24th Berlin Blockade Russia's response to the merger of the French, USA and UK partitions of Berlin was to 1948 cut all road and rail links to that sector.
This meant that those living in Western Berlin had no access to food supplies and faced starvation.
Food was brought to Western Berliners by United States and UK airplanes, an exercise known as the Berlin Airlift.
April 4th NATO formed The North Atlantic Treaty Organisation formed with member states Belgium, Canada, 1949 Denmark, France, Iceland, Italy, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, the United Kingdom, and the United States June 25th Korean War The Korean war began when North Korea invaded South Korea.
Summer Geneva Accords This set of documents ended the French war with the Vietminh and divided Vietnam 1954 into North and South states.
The communist leader of North Vietnam was Ho Chi Minh while the United States friendly south was led by Ngo Dinh Diem.
May 14th Warsaw Pact The Warsaw Pact was formed with member states East Germany, Czechoslovakia, 1955 Poland, Hungary, Romania, Albania, Bulgaria, and the Soviet Union.
October 23rd HungarianRevolution This began as a Hungarian protest against Communist rule in Budapest.
It quickly 1956 gathered momentum and on 24th October Soviet tanks entered Budapest.
The tanks withdrew on 28th October and a new government was formed which quickly moved to introduce democracy, freedom of speech, and freedom of religion.
The Prime Minister Imre Nagy made a World broadcast that Hungary was under attack from the Soviet Union and calling for aid.
October 30th Suez Crisis Following military bombardment by Israeli forces, a joint British and 1956 French force invaded Egypt to regain control of the Suez Canal which had been nationalised by the Egyptian leader Nasser.
The attack was heavily criticised by World leaders, especially America because Russia had offered support to Egypt.
The British and French were forced to withdraw and a UN peace keeping force was sent to establish order.
November Space Race USSR Sputnik II carried Laika the dog, the first living creature to go into space. 1st 1957 1960 Paris East/West talks Talks between Nikita Khrushchev and Dwight Eisenhower concerning the fate of Germany broke down when a USA U2 spy plane was shot down over Russian airspace.
April 12th Space Race Russian cosmonaut Yuri Alekseyvich Gagarin became the first human being in space.
August 13th Berlin Wall Berlin wall built and borders sealed between East and West Germany.
President Kennedy set up a naval blockade and demanded the removal of the missiles.
War was averted when the Russians agreed on 28th October to remove the weapons.
November JFK Assassination JF Kennedy was assassinated while on a visit to Dallas.
Lee Harvey Oswald was 22nd 1963 arrested for the murder but there has always been speculation that he was not a lone killer and that there may have been communist or CIA complicity.
August 20th Soviet invasion of Warsaw Pact forces entered Czechoslovakia in a bid to stop the reforms known as 1968 Czechoslovakia 'Prague Spring' instigated by Alexander Dubcek.
December Space Race United States launched Apollo 8 first manned orbit of the Moon. 21st 1968 20th July Space Race United States Apollo 11 landed on the Moon and Neil Armstrong became the first man on the 1969 Moon.
April 30th Vietnam War President Richard Nixon ordered United States troops to go to Cambodia.
