If necessary you may look at other publications for insight as well as any articles or news clippings pertaining to that period in history.
Written by the President’s brother from his unique personal perspective, this book offers insights which are not available in other accounts.
Examining a text like this with the benefit of hindsight might lead some people to question whether or not the President and his advisors acted as effectively as they might have during the Crisis.
However, after reviewing the facts I question whether other actions might have brought the conflict to a close any sooner.
In his book, Thirteen Days, Robert F Kennedy lays down his blow by blow coverage of the showdown between the United State and Soviet Union that took place over 13 days in October of 1962.
He outlines the ongoing interaction between the United States and Soviet representatives as the United States confronted the Soviet Union over their installation of missiles in Cuba.
Robert Kennedy served as an advisor at the time, part of a diverse group of advisors including Secretary McNamara and Secretary Rusk, seeking to counsel his brother, President John F Kennedy, regarding the best response to the Soviets deployment of nuclear warheads to Cuba.
Above all, this book shows how President Kennedy built a diverse group of advisors and drew from their varied perspectives and backgrounds to debate all the possible alternatives.
The text details the discussion and action taken and not taken, sometimes following conversation and movements hour to hour.
He vividly describes the massive pressure placed on the President and his advisory committee to seek an immediate resolution.
Robert was privy to the President’s personal thoughts and therefore was able to provide a more poignant unlike other cabinet members.
He succinctly outlines JFK’s resolution to find a peaceable, non-military alternative to the crisis and persuades the reader to agree that the actions taken were the right actions to take.
While the author is clearly partial towards supporting the actions taken by the President and his advisors, should be considered required reading on the subject.
The clear and concise text and down-to-earth style makes it accessible to the average reader.
Robert Kennedy’s unique perspective provides insight into the key players in this incident not available in most factual accounts.
The addition of clarifying primary source documents, such as correspondence between John F Kennedy and Khrushchev, declassified photos and speech transcripts also added to the usefulness of the otherwise brief text.
Granted, Robert Kennedy provided more in depth information on the blockade efforts which eventually were implemented and less depth on alternatives.
Military attack not an option as far as I am concerned; conflict rarely been quick, they had to avoid nuclear war at all cost.
If the blockade had not worked, or at least contributed in moving forward the peace talks process, then an alternative would have been employed.
Although some people supported a more aggressive military campaign, it seems likely that this would have blown up in the United States’ face.
Instead, the naval blockade allowed the President to more peaceably defuse the situation.
It is obvious that President Kennedy and his advisors struggled with their decision and attempt to find the best solution.
They clearly understood the widespread impact that their decision would have.
Is it possible that the group could have come up with a solution earlier.
It is possible that offering this opportunity would have hastened the resolution, but doubtful.
First of all, Kennedy would not have easily secured public favor for that approach.
Secondly, I think that perhaps the days we spent in limbo were essential to the process.
Forget public opinion, yes, we could have followed the advice of Stevenson earlier.
But that would have been giving in to a single opinion without deliberation.
Because Kennedy was open to alternatives, and was willing to give “every opportunity … to the Russians to find a peaceful settlement which would not diminish their national security or be a public humiliation”, he was able to take advantage of the Khrushchev’s willingness to save face without succumbing to the pressure to take military action.
Fidel Castro Fidel Castro research papers examine the revolutionary leader of Cuba that established a communist dictatorship, closely aligned with the Soviet Union. 1960′s 1960′s was a decade of unbelievable changes in all aspects of American society.
Iraq and the Cold War Iraq and the Cold War research papers account how the Soviet Union influenced the political leader Saddam Hussein.
Canada's Role in the Korean War The purpose of a Canada's Role in the Korean War research paper is to reveal the causes of a conflict as seemingly obvious as the Korean War cannot be easily boiled down.
End of Cold War End of Cold War research papers discuss the way the war ended with the collapse of the Soviet Union.
Cold War Timeline Cold War Time line research papers explain the events from the beginning and conclusion of the Cold War.
The War Powers Act of 1973 The War Powers Act of 1973 research papers explain the purpose of the Act which was designed to limit the authority of the President while running the United States.
Art Painting, sculpture, artist biographies, film essays and media topics.
Business and MBA Business case studies, business management topics, company profiles and industry specific research paper topics.
Take your MBA to the next level and use our creative business topic ideas.
Economics Economics topics from Adam Smith to OPEC and oil prices many great topic suggestions are available to give you a unique twist in any economics research paper.
Education We specialize in education research and have the most contemporary listing of topics available for the Education Major.
From curriculum standards to improving educational outcomes, there isn't an education topic that we don't offer you a unique perspective on with our sample term paper topics.
Geography Geography is sometimes difficult to introduce a unique topic to your research paper.
Medical Health Medical health research paper topics help nursing students, doctors, or medical administration professionals come up with unique presentations on common medical health topics such as obesity, ADHD, Euthanasia, Osteoporosis and more.
Military Military history, strategy, battles and general information is presented in a sample of research paper topics.
Nursing Topics written specifically for nursing students Nursing job market, nurse anesthetists, Betty Neuman, and the History of Nursing Education are just a few of the topics you can choose.
Philosophy Philosophy can be difficult to comprehend and even more difficult to write a term paper on.
Get well-thought-out philosophy topic suggestions from our vast array of ideas.
Topics such as the illusion of free will, justice in the City of God, Plato's Allegory of the Cave and many more.
Religion Hinduism, Buddhism, Christianity, Judaism and other world religion topic suggestions.
Science Science term paper topics that give you unique ideas for your research on anything from global warming, human genome, minerals, Neanderthals, and 100's more topic ideas.
Sociology Abortion, substance abuse, gay marriage, ethnic group research, poverty and crime, abuse, and other social topics relevant today.
Technology and Computer Net Neutrality, computer viruses, and advances in technology topic suggestions.
Get the complicated issues in technology and computer science explained through our topic suggestions.
United States History History term paper ideas vary from the Aztecs of New Mexico to Sitting Bull and early American History.
World History World History research paper topics that give students unique ideas on basic history topics such as Hitler, WWII, Afghanistan, Camp David and 100's more.
