Not only did the newspaper only report the obvious actions of the superpowers, the Times failed to report most of the political maneuvering the White House and Kremlin executed.
On October the 14, 1962, the United States Committee on Overhead Reconnaissance flew a United States Air Force U-2 high altitude spy plane over the inland nation of Cuba, ninety miles of the southern Atlantic tip of the United States.
The U-2 took pictures, as the missions always did, of the Communist nation and discovered what was determined to be missile launch sites capable of firing Intermediate-Range and Medium-Range Ballistic Missiles , which the Central Intelligence Agency analysis determined could fire upon almost any city in America except those in the Pacific Northwest region.
Senator Capehart had been calling on the President Kennedy to either invade or blockade Cuba, as part of the Senator’s campaign tour.
From May 1962, the United States had been expanding an IRBM base in Turkey.
Simultaneously, the USSR was attempting to establish a peace treaty with the Deutsche Demokratishe Republik which would have formally acknowledged that nation and created a politically problematic situation for NATO member nations, particularly the Second World War era Allies.
This action by the USSR would have meant that West Berlin would be contained within a sovereign and unfriendly nation, making all travel to and from West Berlin quite difficult if not completely impossible.
There was, however, no evidence of Soviet desire to use the developing crisis as a negotiating position, only our American perception of it.
Also, the USSR was involved in supplying Cuba with weapons, which as of the October 15, the United Nations believed to merely be for defense against an invasion force.
On the same day, Times staff writer Max Frankel noted that sources in Washington were reporting the Cuban Premier, Fidel Castro, was “adopting a cautious policy” by not resisting the CIA flyovers, or being caught attempting to subvert any governments of fellow Caribbean nations.
The reporter continued to write that the search for illegal arms, those considered by President Kennedy to be of offensive capability so close to America, being shipped to Cuba returned no success and that all Cuban forces were going out of their way to avoid intrusive United States surveillance.
Throughout, the UN General Assembly meeting the United States held onto an air of desire to control the proceedings for discussion of either West Berlin or a crisis arising in Cuba.
On the October 16, the Times merely reported that Cuban officials stated that three United States naval aircraft flew over Cuban territorial waters “provocatively and repeatedly” over three merchant vessels.
The Times offered no other reports of merit to the developing crisis over Soviet involvement in Cuban offensive weapons for October 16 or 17.
Meanwhile, in the White House on the morning of October 16, President Kennedy learned about the nearly launch-ready nuclear missiles in Cuba.
Quickly the President set up a group of senior national security advisors, established as the Executive Committee of the National Security Council , although it would not be officially signed into existence until October 22.
Munton and Welch note that at the beginning of the crisis ExComm was very active and influential to the President, yet as the period of crisis continued President Kennedy become more confident and relied less on a consensus from ExComm.
The Times, meanwhile, had no knowledge of the administration’s immediate discussions regarding photographs taken by the U-2.
The newspaper missed the irony of ExComm’s initial suggestions of launching a preemptive strike against the missile and Surface-to-Air Missile installations, where days before the President was, in the words of the Times’ reporter, “assailing” Senator Capehart for similar suggestions.
The Times wrote that the Kremlin warned the United States that any action taken against Cuba would mean a war with the Soviets, but that negotiations about Berlin were still welcomed.
The article continued to emphasize the significance of West Berlin in conjunction with the Soviet expansion into Cuba.
What the Times did not report was continued CIA discoveries on the United States’ southern island neighbor.
But what the Times and the reporter misunderstood was why the response took place.
The Times believed that the squadron’s move was to ensure air superiority against Cuban acquisition of Soviet MiGs.
The fact that Russian forces were amassed in Cuba to install nuclear weapons just over the horizon from the United States were not even implied.
But the accumulation was really in response to the Russian forces on the island.
October 20 and 21 finished the first week of the “Thirteen Days” and the Times had no pertinent news stories for either day clearly stated in conjunction with Cuba.
The newspaper of record printed fairly routine stories for the weekend edition, yet on Saturday , the entire National Security Council was briefed on the developing crisis in Cuba and ExComm’s suggestion to blockade the Communist country.
As the Sunday edition of the Times headlined a story which noted that President Kennedy had quit his three-day campaign tour early due to alleged sickness, the President returned to Washington, consulted with the Air Force Tactical Air Command and reached the conclusion that an air strike and naval blockade would not fully achieve the objectives of the United States However, even the stories that ran over the weekend could not interpret the data fully or correctly.
The first reported Latin American countries siding with the United States against Cuba, and the second denied any connection to war games off Puerto Rico.
Petersburg noted that as many as seventy-five strike aircraft had been transferred to Florida in a ready capacity.
Underneath that article the Times printed a story that “n undisclosed” number of United States Marines had accrued in Key West.
The newspaper noted Congress’ concern and authorization for the President to act in the Caribbean, albeit for the alleged war games taking place in Puerto Rico.But October 22 would be the day that the entire world unequivocally learned the American position regarding Soviet nuclear missiles in Cuba.
The speech highlighted the knowledge of United States officials of the weapons residing in Cuba, the decision to impose an air and naval blockade of Cuba and President Kennedy’s desire to bring Cuba, and its Soviet suppliers into compliance with American goals.
An article ran in the Times that offered a brief preview of what citizens could expect from the evening’s Presidential address, but no reader could have possibly anticipated the call for blockade.
The average American experienced a sensation unlike any other during the Cold War, when Americans learned the Soviet Union had reached the closest distance to the United States homeland ever and now flaunted nuclear armaments.
From October 14 to 22, the Times ran merely ten truly pertinent stories about the developing crisis in the small island country.
However, after President Kennedy’s national address the stories printed rose to twenty-seven, on the front page alone, from October 23 to 28.
However, the Times noted the USSR’s return verbal volley when the Soviets heralded the blockade as an “’Armed Fist’ Over Cuba”as the blockade formed around the small nation.
October 24 was a tense time as the blockade was actively in full effect.
The attitude of the Times reporter in his article, “Khrushchev’s Misjudgment on Cuba,” once again displayed the complete lack of information available, or failure to connect information by the newspaper.
The reporter writes that the Soviet Premier failed to anticipate the character of President Kennedy and did not understand the strength of American will.
A front page article declared the Unites States thought the Cuban blockade derailed Soviet intentions to force the President to acquiesce on West Berlin.
Instead, Soviet Premier Khrushchev felt the President had left him some breathing room in which he could maneuver.
The following day, October 25, was relatively tense but uneventful, as the first ship boarded did not occur until October 26.
The Kremlin had desired not to put fully to test the United States and its blockade, and expressed the desire by turning back several ships which were already in route to Cuba.
The front page of the next day’s edition of the Times, October 27, reported a warning from the Capitol to the Soviet Union not to continue testing the United States.
The United States was ready to escalate to armed conflict over Cuba, given the provocation.
On October 27, the Times finally noted that United States Jupiter missiles in Turkey could be exchanged in order to achieve removal of Soviet missiles in Cuba, instead of the long-held assumption for some type of deal regarding West Berlin.
The morning of October 27 showed a lack of reporting by the Times as it missed the opportunity to report on a missing United States U-2 spy plane shot down in Cuba by Castro’s forces.On October 28, a report heralded the crisis was over and now the nation could look toward partisan politics in the November midterm elections.
The front page looked to the protesters in front of the White House and how Midwestern votes would be affected by the crisis, the air of completion resounded throughout the newspaper.
The missiles were to leave Cuba and the blockade withdrawn, though patrols continued.
The world did not end that week and the United States felt it achieved a well deserved victory over the Soviet Union and its Communist ally, Cuba.
The reporters wrote their understanding of the crisis from October 21 to 28.
At no point did the reporters suggest the events could have begun on October 14.
Never did the Times imply the dismantling of missiles could take many months.
The reports of the Times careened through the frightening week and never offered an article truly fearful of a view other than of assured United States victory.
The Times had no knowledge from the Soviet Union or on the ground in Cuba, and that limited the information the Times could report to the American public.
Even when the Times had the information available to reporters, the paper often misunderstood it and, therefore, misreported the information.
The paper of record in America looked with too tight a focus at the events on the small Caribbean nation of Cuba, which caused the Times’ articles to report incompletely the events of October 14 to 28, 1962.
The United States, the United Kingdom and France, naturally excluding Russia.
There is a letter to the editor published on the 17th on page 38 from a political science professor, but it is only an opinion and thought exercise regarding US-Cuban relations.
No portion of this text may be used or reproduced in any manner without the express, written consent of the author.
