President John F Kennedy, in a TV address on October 22, 1962, notified Americans about the presence of the missiles, explained his decision to enact a naval blockade around Cuba and made it clear the United States was prepared to use military force if necessary to neutralize this perceived threat to national security.
Following this news, many people feared the world was on the brink of war, nuclear war.
Each side was fully prepared to retaliate, knowing fully that would result in total annihilation of both sides.
Complete the following table by identifying the actions of Castro, USA and Soviet Union that help led to the October Crisis in 1962.
When completing the table, makes sure you add the year to ensure that you can follow the causes chronologically to how it led to the crisis.Highlight YELLOW to indicate the actions taken by Castro that made the USA think he was a Communist.Highlight BLUE to indicate the actions taken by the USA to help push Castro into a relationship with the Soviet Union.
In early October , a U2 reconnaissance flight over Cuba spots sites installing nuclear missiles.
Rate each option from 1 to 5 and provide an explanation for each of your ratings using you background knowledge and the sources provided.Select two options, which you think are the best options for the President to follow and provide an explanation for your choice using you background knowledge and the sources provided.For each of the three options you did not choose, provide an explanation for your choice using you background knowledge and the sources provided.
The Cuban Missile crisis comes to an end when Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev agrees to remove Russian missiles from Cuba in exchange for a promise from the United States to respect Cuba's territorial sovereignty.
This ended nearly two weeks of anxiety and tensions between the United States and the Soviet Union that came close to provoking a nuclear conflict.
Topic 5 The Cold WarMay ExamsAnalyse the part played by Cuba in the development of the Cold War.
Compare and contrast the role of two leaders, each chosen from a different region, in the development of the Cold War between 1953 and 1964.
Compare and contrast the significance of leaders in two Cold War conflicts, each chosen from a different region, between 1950 and 1963.
