International events rarely have a profound impact on images of 40 percent of the population in most countries, people's likes or dislikes of otheT nations (Deutsch even within one or two decades.
This is the classic case of image inconUnited States and the U.S.S.R. following the Cuban confrontagruity, which sometimes gives rise to psychological tion. dissonance.
First, the affective dimension consists of pinion data from Britain, France and West Germany people's likes and dislikes of the nation in question. suggests that the Cuban missile confrontation served Second, the cognitive component consists of the inprimarily this function of compensation in its effect dividual's beliefs about the country.
The cognitive dion public images of the two superpowers. mension is sub-divided into beliefs about national capabilities and beliefs about national intentions.
THE EFFECTS OF EVENTS ON NATIONAL These distinctions are significant because prior to the IMAGES Cuban crisis, American military and scientific capabilities were believed by many of America's friendly The central issue to be addressed here is the frequen""foreign constituents"" to be well behind those of the cy and direction of attitude change that may have Soviet Union.
On the other hand, widely liked than the Soviet Union; in terms of intencertain aspects of people's images of foreign nations tions, more people believed that America fostered are exceptionally durable and are only altered under peace than believed that the Soviet Union did so; and conditions of extreme provocation.
ABRAVANEL But the picture regarding capabilities changed in With data combined for the three nations, it appears the early part of 1963, when the first survey followthat Cuba served to restore the balance in favor of ing the Cuban missile confrontation was conducted.
These shifts brought the direction of belief 60 RESPONDING "" United States AHEAD"" into line with the general level of feelings toward the two superpowers.
Let us examine more closely the effect of the Cuban crisis on public opinion.
CHANGES IN NATION AFFECT SPUTNIK / o cc To characterize public response to Cuba, we can focus a. on the relative ""gains"" or ""losses"" attributed to each of the two major powers by the citizens of other na20 tions.
In part this is accomplished by asking people whether the confrontation stimulated them to change their general opinions of the United States and the 10 Soviet Union.
Over threeFIGURE 1 Comparative evaluation of Soviet-American fifths of the British, French and West German respondmilitary strength.
Data are averaged for surveys conducted in Great Britain, France and West Germany.
In the first place, most of the people who claimed Using the previously-cited criteria employed by to have changed their opinions as a result of the CuDeutsch and Merritt, let us first take up the question ban crisis viewed only one of the two nations in a of the cumulative nature of events.
Because neither group modified between the United States and the Castro government its feelings for the second nation in a more unfavorable had been simmering since 1959, the crisis itself lasted direction, the aggregate figures reveal that both nations for approximately two weeks.
Furthermore, only gained from the confrontation. six days elapsed from the time that President KenBut this does not account for all of the change.
From the perspective of public visibility, then, underlying the opinion shifts were substantially differthe Cuban confrontation cannot be considered a cuent interpretations of the role of each disputant.
Most mulative event, for it did not ""take place over a long of the people who had altered their views of the Unitperiod of time, such as four years or more"" (Deutsch ed States said that they had done so because the U.S. and Merritt, 1965, 136). had shown strength and firmness in the crisis.
Most As a second characteristic of events likely to effect of the people who had modified their opinions of the changes in feelings toward nations, Deutsch and MerSoviet Union indicated that it was because the ritt point to shifts in governmental policy.
Since the United States government did its best to attitude change), our data do permit consideration of play down the victory, onlookers throughout the the problem of congruence or balance among some of world were not bombarded with symbols and mesthe attitudes that comprise a person's total image of a sages designed to bolster public regard for the United foreign nation.
Western Europeans who expressed genStates. erally favorable feelings about America or the Soviet That the crisis did not fulfill the third criterion, Union significantly more frequently said that their that of being spectacular, would seem more difficult opinions of that nation changed for the better as a reto assert.
Yet even on this point there is evidence sult of Cuba than did people with relatively unfavorconsistent with the finding that the event did not able feelings.
In short, the opinion changes that did stimulate substantial shifts in opinion.
Large numbers occur were basically consistent with the person's afof Europeans recognized that the Cuban crisis was fective orientation toward the two nations, an indiprecipitated when one nuclear power challenged ancation that the event did not serve to inject dissonant other, yet the Soviet decision to remove the missiles information into the attitude complex referred to as from Cuba was perceived by many as easing cold war national image. tensions and reducing the likelihood of war.
CHANGES IN JUDGMENTS OF NATIONAL outcome of the confrontation (and possibly the lack CAPABILITIES AND INTENTIONS of American boasting) diminished its potentially explosive qualities in the weeks that followed.
If the three European nations are considered as a unit, This atmosphere of relieved tension may also explain then the Cuban crisis resulted in increased congruity, why a significant number of onlookers had only at the aggregate level, between feelings about the two praise for the parties to the confrontation.
Of those rivals and beliefs about national capabilities, both scipeople who registered a change in viewpoint, the entific and military.
But after Cuba, public belief in American military and scientific leaderDramatic as it may have been, the Cuban confrontaship became the predominant sentiment, whereas tion did not result in large shifts in affectively-based before the crisis it had not been. orientations either toward the United States or toAlthough the credibility of American scientific and ward the Soviet Union, but it did stimulate some military strength benefitted from the crisis, national change in belief about capabilities—enough, at any differences can be discerned.
The mismissile crisis gave these people a reason for believing sile crisis had an impact on these beliefs also.
In Febthat which their feelings predisposed them to believe, ruary, 1963, the number of British, French and West that America was more powerful than the Soviet German citizens who believed that America did its Union.
Even so, the event did not bring about this rebest to promote peace was higher than the previous sponse uniformly.
In the first months of 1963 as average, but Soviet motives were also perceived to be well as in the next couple of years, a fairly significant more pacific than normal after its withdrawal of misnumber of West Europeans (especially in Britain and siles.
In fact, net increases in British and French beFrance) continued to like the United States, but also liefs about national peace intentions between June, continued to believe that it trailed the Soviet Union 1962, and February, 1963, were larger for the Soviet in critical areas of competition.
As long as this condition expact than the fact that the United States had not takisted, people were more or less free to come to their en military action when threatened by these missiles. own conclusions.
For each cognitive area-peace intentions; sciencommented that Cuba decreased the likelihood of tific achievements; and military might—a person who nuclear war for the near future.
If balance among attitudes is the most peaceful intentions; America is more advanced sciendesirable psychological state, there appeared to be littifically than the Soviet Union; and the United States tle in the Cuban situation working in opposition to is the stronger of the two superpowers.
With respect to United States military leadership, Cuba proved to be the turning point in European opinion.
Beginning with NOTES the missile crisis and throughout the latter part of the sixties, more British, French and West Germans (combined 1.
The data base for the present study consists of national total) believed in American military dominance than becross-sectional surveys of adults, conducted in Britain, lieved in Soviet superiority.
Although Cuba spurred a France and West Germany as part of the United States temporary shift in beliefs about the relative standing of Information Agency's program of research into public atthe two superpowers in science, it was not until the latter titudes toward international affairs.
Codepart of European public opinion. books and data for the USIA surveys are housed at the Roper Public Opinion Research Center, Williams College, 5.
The ""average"" includes data from all USIA surveys asking Williamstown, Massachusetts. this question prior to the Cuban missile confrontation, beginning in 1957.
The ""average"" includes data from all USIA surveys asking tabular data, can be obtained from the author upon rethis question, beginning in 1958 and ending in 1962, prior quest.
Address correspondence to Martin Abravanel, 1176 to the Cuban confrontation.
Public Opinion and the Developan Perspectives On International Affairs.
