HomeAbout Comments Policy RSS Feeds Getting to Know the Presidents from the Intelligence Community’s Perspective February 10, 2014 Presidents Day originated as a holiday to celebrate George Washington’s birthday on February 22nd.
As a result of the Uniform Monday Holiday Act of 1968, the holiday was changed to the third Monday in February.
While the holiday commemorates George Washington, it also honors Abraham Lincoln whose birthday is ten days before Washington’s on February 12th.
Let’s also give a shout out to two other Presidents whose birthdays fall in February – Ronald Reagan’s birthday on February 6th and William Henry Harrison on February 9th.
In recent years, the Central Intelligence Agency has been declassifying documents and releasing historical collections giving the public access to fascinating and relatively unknown United States history.
These collections have been made available through GPO’s bookstore and have been the topic of previous blog posts.
Crafting the United States Intelligence Community The CIA’s predecessor, the Central Intelligence Group, was created after World War II in response to the success and usefulness of intelligence gathering during the war.
Admiral Sidney W Souers, General Hoyt S Vandenberg, Admiral Roscoe H Hillenkoetter and General William Bedell Smith accepted President Harry S Truman’s challenge to craft an intelligence organization.
Each man marked his tenure with his unique brand of leadership that provided his successor with the foundation needed for the next step toward the Central Intelligence Agency of today.
They ran the gamut of choosing a secretary to responding to a Presidential question to an evening social event with various ambassadors and dignitaries.
The book is an historical account of the information sharing process between the intelligence community and Presidential candidates and Presidents-elect during campaigns and administration transitions.
The early chapters when this practice was not yet well-established provide the greatest insight to the briefing process.
An interesting anecdote from the book occurs during the period leading up to the 1960 election when then-Vice President Richard Nixon was running against then-Senator John F Kennedy.
At the time, there were concerns regarding the intelligence briefings on Cuba and the U.S.’s policy towards the Castro government.
The recent revolution in Cuba that led to a Soviet-supported communist government was a hot topic during the election and the Presidential debates.
Since Nixon was running for President while serving as Vice President, he was privy to information on the covert actions that had been underway in Cuba during the Eisenhower administration.
Vice President Nixon raised concerns over what information was shared with Kennedy by the DCI Allen Dulles and how it could affect Kennedy’s positions during the election and the success of the covert actions.
This was the first time the CIA was part of a political campaign raising questions on which topics and to what extent Presidential candidates should be briefed.
Well before the Cuba liberation issue came to a head in October, the outgoing Eisenhower administration had realized that covert action planning on Cuba could be a political bombshell.
Following one of Allen Dulles’s briefings of the National Security Council in early August, for example, the vice president pulled the DCI aside to ask him whether Kennedy and his running mate, Senator Lyndon Johnson, were being provided information on covert action projects, specifically those related to Cuba.
Dulles gave a carefully crafted answer to the effect that Kennedy was being told a little but not too much.
According to former Agency officials familiar with the exchange, Nixon reacted strongly to Dulles’s reply, saying, “Don’t tell anything.
This charge prompted a formal press release from the White House on 20 March 1962 denying that Kennedy had been told of any plans for “supporting an invasion of Cuba” before the election.
The White House denial was backed up by Dulles, by then a former DCI, who explained that Nixon’s comments were apparently based on a misunderstanding of what was included in the briefings he had given Kennedy.
Senator Kennedy with former DCI Allen Dulles heading to a press briefing on the information the CIA provided Kennedy and Johnson.
Our guest blogger is Emma Wojtowicz, Public Relations Specialist in GPO’s Office of Public Affairs.
Although the application of this reasoning technique to intelligence analysis is the focus of the book, the discussion of what critical thinking is, its advantages over either inductive or deductive reasoning, and its value in the analysis of a wide variety of problems and situations makes it a useful tool for academics, business people, or anyone else needing to analyze a particular scenario or set of evidence.
Because I’m not a heavily abstract thinker, I found the author’s case study very useful in getting a better handle on how the absence of critical thinking can result in a major intelligence failure.
Prior to the Cuban missile crisis of 1962, American intelligence analysts had received so much false or exaggerated information on Soviet military activities – including reports of Mongolian and Chinese troops – that they seemed to believe that any such reports had to be untrue.
Disinformation on the part of the Soviets added to the analysts’ disinclination to think critically about the intelligence they were receiving, so the discovery of offensive Soviet missiles was a total surprise to them.
The book also draws analogies to the failure of intelligence during the lead up to the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait and in the 2002 failure to detect the absence of weapons of mass destruction prior to the second United States war with Iraq.
