An American U-2, piloted by Major Rudolph Anderson, Jr., was detected over the eastern part of Cuba and a SAM site at Los Angeles, near Banes, in Oriente province, fired one or several antiaircraft missiles and shot it down.
Several conflicting interpretations have been advanced to explain the strange incident of the downing of the U-2.
According to Seymour Hersh, there is strong evidence that, on October 26, 1962, a Cuban army unit attacked and overran a Soviet-manned SAM base at Los Angeles, near Banes, in the Oriente province, killing many Soviets and seizing control of the site.
Hersh based his article on information partly drawn from an interview with former Department of Defense analyst Daniel Ellsberg, who was himself citing classified material from a post-crisis study of the event.
The speculation was based on an intercepted transmission from the Soviet base at Los Angeles indicating heavy fighting and casualties.
Adrián Montoro, former director of Radio Havana Cuba, and Juan Antonio Rodríguez Menier, a senior Cuban intelligence officer who defected in 1987 and was later living in the U.S., later confirmed Ellsberg’s information.
When the news that a U-2 had been shot down in Cuba reached the ExComm (Executive Committee of the National Security Council), most members thought that war was just around the corner.
In fact they had decided earlier that if a U-2 were shot down, the SAM battery responsible would be immediately knocked off.
Carlos Franqui, a journalist who at the time was close to Castro, wrote that Castro himself told him that he had given the order to shoot down the plane, to see if there was to be war or not.
Some years later, in his Memoirs, Khrushchev gave his own version of the event, which confirmed Franqui’s story.
Fortunately, cool heads prevailed and Castro’s second attempt to push the United States and the Soviet Union into a nuclear Armageddon failed.
The most important part of the letter is Castro’s efforts to convince Khrushchev that an American invasion of Cuba was imminent, and his request that, in case of such invasion, the Soviet Union should launch a preemptive nuclear attack against the United States.
A few days later, splitting semantic hairs, Castro emphatically denied that he had ever asked Khrushchev to launch a nuclear attack against the United States But Khrushchev was adamant.
The missiles had been installed to deter a United States invasion of the island.
The problem with that assertion is that, in the first place, Khrushchev didn’t want to protect Castro.
Actually, he wanted to get rid of him because Castro had become a liability, not an asset.
Secondly, the presence of Soviet medium-range strategic nuclear missiles in Cuba was never been confirmed.
In his memoirs Khrushchev claims that the main reason for sending strategic missiles to Cuba was because Castro feared an American invasion.
But it is very difficult to believe that Khrushchev planned to install missiles in Cuba to protect Castro.
In the first place, because Nikta Khrushchev would never had placed nuclear warheads near the hands of trigger-happy Castro.
Secondly, because in April of 1962, when he allegedly got the idea, Khrushchev himself had tried to overthrow the Cuban leader by force.
But Castro discovered the plot , neutralized it, and expelled from Cuba Soviet Ambassador Sergei Kudryatvsev (who also moonlighted as a senior GRU officer) and a group of his embassy thugs who, in coordination with some members of the pro-Soviet Cuban Communist party, were conspiring to overthrow Castro through a coup d’état.
Other sources, however, claim that actually Castro detained Kudryavtsev and placed him under military custody until he was embarked on a Moscow-bound Soviet plane.
Moreover, despite a mountain of books claiming the contrary, the presence of Soviet medium-range strategic missiles and their nuclear warheads on Cuban soil has never been proved.
According to current Cuban missile crisis mythology, in the morning of October 16, 1962, CIA photo interpreters showed president Kennedy U-2 photos confirming the presence of SS-4 Sandal Soviet nuclear missiles in Cuba.
This was the ultimate, incontrovertible proof that the Soviets had secretly deployed strategic missile bases in Cuba.
What the photos show, though, are long wooden crates covered by tarps, which the CIA believed contained the missiles.
The photos also show some concrete bunkers, which the CIA believed contained the nuclear warheads for the missiles.
There are also photos of Soviet ships sailing out of Cuba with long wooden crates covered with tarps on their decks, which the CIA believed contained the missiles.
As I mentioned above, the presence of Soviet strategic nuclear missiles in Cuba in 1962, much less their nuclear warheads, has never been proved.
In a session with newsmen in the Pentagon on the night of October 22, less than an hour after Kennedy’s speech telling the American people of the situation in Cuba, journalists asked Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara if the United States knew whether the nuclear warheads for the missiles were in Cuba too.
One of the undying myths about the U.S.’s inability to tame Castro for so many years is the existence of the secret Kennedy-Khrushchev Pact —or “agreement,” or “understanding,” as some people liked to call it.
With the world at the brink of nuclear war, he struck a deal with the Soviet premier, Nikita Khrushchev, in which he promised that the United States would never invade Cuba, thereby ensuring that the communists could maintain their outpost 90 miles away from American shores in perpetuity.
Contrary to popular belief, however, the famous Kennedy-Khrushchev Pact never existed.
The problem with the existence of such a document, or even with such an “agreement” or “understanding,” is that in any compromise both parties agree to do something.
According to the prevalent myth, Khrushchev agreed to remove the nuclear missiles from Cuba in exchange for the American promise not to invade Cuba.
But, as I have shown above, the available evidence shows that no Soviet nuclear missiles were ever on the island, and no one is going to believe that President Kennedy was so naïve as to exchange something for nothing.
Moreover, in 1970, Secretary of State Henry Kissinger, concerned over the submarine base the Soviets were building in Cienfuegos, a port on the Southern coast of Cuba, hunted through the State Department’s files looking for the written agreement he was sure President Kennedy had signed with Khrushchev.
He discovered, to his utter amazement, that there was none, either oral or in writing.
Furthermore, if the agreement ever existed, it has the dubious honor of being one of the few international agreements to have been applied a priori, long before it was signed, because the United States government’s harassment of the anti-Castro Cubans in the United States began a year and a half before the Cuban missile crisis, just after the Bay of Pigs invasion.
The non-existing Kennedy-Khrushchev pact is nothing but a concoction to justify the unjustifiable.
If, despite rhetoric on the contrary, American presidents from John F Kennedy to George W Bush have proved unwilling to get rid of Fidel Castro, it is not because a non-existent pact forbids them to do so, but because of some hidden motives unknown to the American people.
Actually, recent evidence points to the fact that not only the killing of Che Guevara, but also the killing of Salvador Allende, the assassination of Hugo Chávez and perhaps even the downing of the Cuban airliner in 1973 were CIA-Castro joint operations.
I could keep deconstructing one by one most assertions about Castro Hornberger wrote in his article, but that would made this one too long.
Since President Harry Truman signed the National Security Act in July 1947, which created the National Security Council, the Central Intelligence Agency and the Joint Chiefs of Staff, and effectively officialized the already-existing national security state, all key positions of these organizations, as well as the State Department, have been under the control of CFR members.
The national security state has been the tool these people have used to advance their spurious goals under a cover of patriotism.
As I mentioned above, the available evidence indicates that the Cuban missile crisis was a hoax.
There were never nuclear warheads in Cuba, among other reasons, because never before or after the crisis had the Soviets deployed nuclear warheads beyond their borders.
Nonetheless, dozens of books and hundreds of articles have been written, mostly by secret agents of the national security state, trying to scare us about how close we were to the brink of nuclear annihilation during the Cuban missile crisis.
But, if this is true, how can we explain that, at the most critical moment during the crisis, President Kennedy ordered the removal of the fuses and warheads from the Jupiter missiles in Turkey.
For these and other reasons it is difficult to avoid the conclusion that, except for Castro’s efforts, there was no great danger of a nuclear confrontation during the crisis, and that some people at the highest levels of the United States government knew it.
The bottom line is that the national security state is not a cause, but a symptom.
It is just the efficient tool some powerful people have been using to advance their evil plans of world domination and slavery, a plan they euphemistically call the New World Order.
These are the same people who put their secret agent Fidel Castro in power in Cuba in 1959 and have kept him there untouched for more than half a century.
These are the same people who currently are trying harder to keep Castroism alive and well in Cuba even after the death of Castro.
Jacob Hornberger, “The Evil of the National Security State,” LewRockwell.com, July 25, 2014.
The article originally appeared in several parts at Future of Freedom, a monthly journal of The Future of Freedom Foundation.
See, “Aznar exige el fin del embargo a Cuba para favorecer la democracia en la isla,” Público.es, April 11, 20103.
See, “Hillary Clinton scorns ‘entrenched’ Cuba,” BBBNews, April 10, 2010.4.
Fidel no le ve mucho valor a una iniciativa de EEUU,” Newsweek en Español, January 20, 1999, 17.
See also, AFP, “El régimen castrista rechaza las medidas de EEUU para flexibilizar el embargo,” La Razón, January 10, 1999.5.
Mark Falcoff, “How to Think about Cuban-American Relations,” in Irving Louis Horowitz, ed., Cuban Communism, Fifth Edition , 547.7.
See, Leuren Moret, “Kissinger, Eugenics and Depopulation,” Rense.com, November 20, 2013.
Jeanne Kirkpatrick, “Is a Stubborn Castro Testing United States Defenses?,” the Miami Herald, March 31, 1991, 3C.14.
The plot is also mentioned in Andres Oppenheimer, Castro’s Final Hour .16.
Rodríguez Menier in personal communication to the author, December 20, 1994.
Nikita S Khrushchev, Khrushchev Remembers, translated and edited by Strobe Talbot , 499.
According to Dariel Alarcón Ramírez , one of Ché’s trusted men who was part of his guerrilla in Bolivia, previous to Guevara’s departure for Bolivia, Castro held a secret meeting with Mario Monje in Havana on December, 1966.
Benigno is convinced that Monje was following Castro’s orders when he left Ché in the lurch.
Vida y muerte de la Revolución .30, Both Castro and the CIA collaborated in destabilizing the Allende government —the CIA by painting him as a radical leftist and Castro by openly criticizing him for not being radical enough.
Or download a .pdf copy of the book you can read on your computer, iPad, Nook, Kindle or any other tablet.
Servando's book La CIA, Fidel Castro, el Bogotazo y el Nuevo Orden Mundial, is available at Amazon.com and other bookstores online.
The Council on Foreign Relations and the Betrayal of the America, just appeared and is available at Amazon.com and other bookstores online.
A Study of the Misuse of the Swastika by the Nazis and the first issue of the political satire series OBSERVANDO: American Inventors.
