Across the globe, people anxiously awaited the outcome of a harrowing political, diplomatic and military confrontation that threatened to end in a nuclear exchange between the United States and the Soviet Union.
Luckily, thanks to two men, President John F Kennedy and Premier Nikita Khrushchev, war was averted.
Soviet missiles were only powerful enough to be launched against Europe.
United States missiles were capable of striking the entire Soviet Union.
In April 1962, Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev conceived the idea of placing intermediate-range missiles in Cuba.
In mid-July of 1962 the Soviet Union began its buildup of offensive weapons in Cuba.
That’s where the real tension lies in how the decisions were made, and how these young men handled the toughest dilemma anyone could face.
When you meet these people, who in some ways have come to seem larger than life, and you hear their fears in their own words, you get a very frightening sense of the incomprehensible fire power and military might that each side was marshalling.
The nuclear guns were loaded on both sides in a stare down of global proportions, and there’s never been anything like it.
Thirteen Days now joins that vast body of work as one view of the event.
It is drawn from the record, but narrowed and focused and dramatised to create a coherent, accessible and entertaining story.
We don’t offer this film as the final word or definitive document, but rather as a departure point to encourage conversation and exploration of leadership in the nuclear age whose awful spectre we all still live under.
Peter Almond stresses that the film should be seen as a departure point for conversation and exploration.
Yet the whole film revolves around the drama of the real possibility that war might break out during those days in 1962.
Roger Donaldson, the director, describes the film as a political thriller.
Look again at the key events which you used earlier to compare with the story told in Thirteen Days.
Just as we are shown the events unfolding in the White House, there must have been similar dramas occurring in the Kremlin and in Havana.
THE CRISIS The events that are shown in the film Thirteen Days reveal just how close the world came to nuclear war.
Key to the solution of the Crisis was the reaction of John F Kennedy, his brother Robert and Nikita Khruschev.
Thirteen Days only represents the American point of view of the Crisis.
We see the Crisis develop through the eyes of the president and his brother and also Ken O’Donnell, the presidential aide.
As you look through each site think about who created it and what their particular attitude to the events might be.
