Strange News Quiz Kim Kardashian Sign In Account Activating this button will toggle the display of additional content Account Sign out Slate homepage Submit search Enter query Activating this button will toggle the display of additional content Light Dark Auto News & Politics Culture Technology Business Human Interest Podcasts Menu Open menu Close menu Notable topics Dinosaurs Roe Wade Ukraine Elon Musk College Football Dr.
Castro didn’t let anybody copy the documents, but he did say that he would release them in time for next year’s 40th anniversary of the crisis.
If Castro follows through on that pledge, Slate will link to them here.
But I was able to read enough of the sheaf over the Commandante en Jefe’s shoulder to conclude that there’s probably something to Castro’s claim.
Let’s assume that the Cubans really did want to make public the missiles’ existence.
Castro and Aragones had mentioned this before, at a conference in 1992, but had never before brandished documents.
At a 1987 conference, a Soviet official had asked former Kennedy aides what the United States reaction might have been had the Soviet Union announced prior to the crisis that it would defend Cuba with nuclear missiles.
Even more than the presence of the missiles, it was the Soviets’ secrecy and lies that gave Kennedy the moral high ground during the crisis.
But the Soviet Union needed to have a balance of power against the U.S., against the similar United States missiles in Turkey and elsewhere, and we agreed, out of internationalist feeling, and because the Soviets had supported us against the American blockade.
They had beaten Hitler, they had entered Berlin, they had a revolution that already lasted 45 years.
Remember, the political pressures on Kennedy were already very great, and the Cold War was at its height.
Perhaps Kennedy would have moved more quickly to the secret Turkey-for-Cuba trade that resolved the missile crisis ultimately.
Then again, without the shock of discovery, neither Kennedy nor Khrushchev might have felt the sense of events spiraling out of control that led both to risk humiliation rather than Armageddon.
