Thereafter the Cold War entered a more stable phase, as the superpowers shifted from direct confrontation to a series of proxy wars fought over the ensuing generation throughout the developing world.
Washington and Moscow each recognized a need for diffusing their mutual tensions in the wake of the crisis, while their European and Asian counterparts generally developed a greater desire for an alternative to seemingly moribund Soviet and United States leadership.
THE CRISIS Cuba was the focus of the crisis, but the roots of this conflict lay in long-standing Soviet and United States antagonism and insecurities.
The country had become a thorn in the side of United States leaders following Fidel Castro's seizure of power in 1959.
Analysts in Washington debated Castro's faith in communism, but whatever his leanings, United States policy makers believed their reputation in Latin America could not tolerate a truly radical state only ninety miles from Florida.
President Dwight D Eisenhower endorsed Castro's overthrow as early as January 1960, a year before breaking diplomatic relations with his regime.
By the time John F Kennedy took office the following year vowing to ""oppose aggression or subversion anywhere in the Americas,"" plans for a U.S.-supported invasion by Cuban exiles were already advanced, and the new president approved the operation with minimal oversight.
The failed Bay of Pigs invasion of April 1961 proved one of Kennedy's greatest fiascos.
He publicly took full responsibility but swore thereafter to hold more tightly to the reins of power lest others drive his administration to ruin.
He appointed his most trusted advisors, including his brother, Attorney General Robert F Kennedy, to oversee Cuba policy, making Castro's removal one of his highest priorities.
Cuba's affect on United States security and prestige, the president believed, threatened to tilt the Cold War's delicate balance in communism's favor.
Correctly believing that United States leaders sought his fall from power, Castro sought Moscow's protection, a move the Soviets embraced.
Premier Nikita Khrushchev in particular sought greater parity in U.S.-Soviet relations by the early 1960s and believed Washington's greater nuclear strength, including its nuclear missiles stationed along the Soviet border in Turkey, ensured that the Americans held the better hand in any superpower clash.
The two communist leaders therefore decided in May 1962, for reasons both believed were defensive, to deploy to Cuba some eighty nuclear missiles, with range enough to place virtually the entire continental United States—including the newly constructed American missile fields in the Dakotas—within Moscow's sights.
Soviet missiles in Cuba offered the Kremlin a true first-strike capability, including the ability to destroy Washington without warning while decimating America's missile deterrent as well.
Surely the Kremlin would not risk this dangerous move, Kennedy's intelligence team incorrectly determined a full five months after Khrushchev ordered the missile deployment.
Kennedy was therefore infuriated to learn, on 16 October, that a United States spy plane had captured photos of Soviet missile-site construction in Cuba.
While his more hawkish advisors called for an immediate strike, on 22 October Kennedy announced a ""quarantine"" around Cuba.
Soviet ships eventually halted just short of the quarantine line two days later, but as missile-site construction continued in Cuba, each side continued to prepare for war.
Public blustering continued, but private discussions—including secret meetings between Robert Kennedy and the Soviet ambassador, Anatoly Dobrynin—eventually developed a usable compromise.
By 28 October full-scale war had been averted, though revelations during the late 1990s demonstrated that nuclear war was in fact closer than ever realized.
Unbeknownst to Washington, Soviet commanders in Cuba had full authorization to employ nuclear arms in defense against a United States invasion, and one can only imagine the consequences of United States landing forces in Cuba being met with nuclear fireballs.
It would take several years and millions in aid before he would trust the Soviets again.
THE AFTERMATH The ramifications of this near brush with disaster dramatically changed the course of the Cold War, and Europe's role in the conflict especially.
Kennedy proved shaken by the nearness of the conflict and resolved thereafter to limit the risk of nuclear warfare.
He authorized a direct ""hot line"" between the White House and the Kremlin so that leaders could communicate directly during any future crisis, and a U.S.-led ban on atmospheric nuclear tests followed.
In retrospect, a decreased United States emphasis on potential flash points of superpower conflict followed as well, replaced by low-scale responses to communist insurgencies throughout the formerly colonized world.
In areas such as Southeast Asia and Central America, subsequent United States policy makers would put this ""flexible response"" strategy to the test without fear of a nuclear exchange.
Soviet leaders drew similar and different conclusions from the conflict, shaped by their perception that they had lost the confrontation because of the very disparity of power that the missile deployment in Cuba had been designed to eliminate in the first place.
What was needed was a ""relaxation of tension,"" he told his United States counterpart.
By the mid-1970s neither side could be said to have had a real advantage in this arena, especially as each possessed the ability destroy the other numerous times over.
Khrushchev did not survive in power long enough to oversee this transformation, however, but was instead deposed in October 1964.
The great irony of Khrushchev's departure is that he ultimately left the Soviet Union with the very international stability, built on a foundation of nuclear parity, that he had long sought, though the burden of matching the wealthier Americans would eventually cripple the Soviet economy.
Chinese leaders forged ahead with their own nascent nuclear program in its wake, determined never again to let Moscow take the lead in the East–West conflict.
France's Charles de Gaulle would not have put the idea any differently.
He rejected the Limited Test Ban Treaty as a U.S.–Soviet ploy to limit France's ""right to possess its own arms,"" and within a year he removed his military from full participation in the North Atlantic Treaty Organization and vetoed Britain's application for entry into the European Common Market.
Cuba proved to de Gaulle that an independently strong France was needed for a true balance of powers, even if limits on French international cooperation followed.
Macmillan's government was particularly infuriated with Washington's public expectation of unwavering support during the Cuban crisis, but unlike de Gaulle, British analysts determined to work to reform superpower relations from within rather than to break outright with the Americans.
This faith in the special relationship was put to the test in December 1962, when Washington threatened cancellation of its promised Skybolt missile.
Britain's nuclear deterrent, its sole remaining claim to great power status, required this United States aid, and an irate Macmillan ultimately persuaded Kennedy to supply Polaris missiles in their place.
The damage to their relationship of these twin blows, Cuba and Skybolt, was immense, leading British leaders too to fear Washington's rising hegemony.
Not every state chose nuclear parity as the answer to the East–West divide.
German leaders in particular, whose history made development of this fearful weapon simply impossible, feared in particular their geographic peril.
Castro left the crisis the only real winner, while superpower bipolarity endured its death-blow.
The tense October days allowed the Cuban leader to solidify his tenuous hold on power, and for the remaining decades of the Cold War he remained a favorite ally in Moscow and notorious in Washington.
