The notion struck him while on a, visit to Bulgaria in May, 1962, and kept “churning” in his head throughout that visit.
I His purpose, Khrushchev insists, was not to make or threaten war against the United States but “to restrain the United States from precipitous military action” against Cuba.
He would be 1 talked to later, Khrushchev writes, and after the Soviet strategy was explained to him the Cuban government would go along.
Upon returning to Moscow from Bulgaria, Khrushchev says, he put the plan to his colleagues in the Kremlin.
I said that it would be foolish to expect the inevitable second invasion to be as badly planned and executed as the first.
Khrushchev does not tell us whether his missile ploy was questioned or challenged at the time by any other Soviet leader; only that it was HIS ploy and that its adoption led to “a triumph of Soviet foreign policy and a personal triumph in my own career as a statesman and as a member, of the collective leadership.” <no WE HAVE SINCE had reason to believe that the missile crisis, to say . the least, was not uniformly regarded in Moscow as any kind of Soviet triumph.
On the contrary, I there is evidence that it was one of several “harebrained schemes” chalked up to Khrushchev’s account by his Kremlin colleagues at the time of his overthrow in October, 1964.
In short, Khrushchev, now an unperson in his own country, is bent on vindicating his policies; note how subtly he reminds his former colleagues still in power that they shared in the decision to install Soviet missiles in Cuba.
All this is more understandable than the errors of fact that follow in his narrative.
For example, Khrushchev says it would not have made sense for the Russians tn -install,, surface-to-air antiaircraft missiles in Cuba before putting in ballistic missiles.
Whether or not Khrushchev knew it at the time — or whether an old man’s memory is playing tricks— the Russians DID install surface-to-air missiles at a number qf Cuban sites before ^gfimbjift^their medium-range missiles.
In fact it was the placement of , SAMs near San Cristobal, in a particular trapozoidal pattern, which prompted an American intelligence officer’s surmise that a missile base might be under construction.
That surmise, im turn, was checked out during a U-2 swoop over San Cristobal on October 14, 1962; the photographs it brought back amounted to the first hard evidence that Dallistic missiles were going up inside the J jerimeter protected by the SAMs.
Conceivably, the hindsight argument may have been made in the Kremlin that many more SAMs should have been dotI ted round the Cuban shoreline in order to keep the prying U-2 planes at a safe distance and to preserve the Russians’ guilty secret a few days longer.
But to argue, as Khrushchev appears to argue, that no SAMs were installed is plain nonsense.
The Khrushchev narrative takes other liberties with the truth as we know it.
The facts are ihat some 20 Cuba-bound Soviet ships stopped dead in the water and that a dozen or 14 of them later headed back to Europe rather than confront the blockade.
Khrushchev’s account of the informal but highly important crisis talks between Robert Kennedy and Ambassador Dobrynin suffers from the same disabilities.
Further, he said, I could assure the President that this military buildup was • not of any significance and that Khrushchev would do nothing to disrupt the relationship of our two countries during this period prior to the [1962 Congressional] election.
Robert Kennedy met again with Dobrynin at the Soviet Embassy on the evening of October 23.
This time the President’s brother knew that Khrushchev had lied even though he continued to believe that the Soviet ambassador himself was an honest man under f great strain who just possibly was being r duped by his own government.
Dobrynin * made no attempt to deny or disavow his September 4 assurances.
In fact, he confirmed them, repeating his pledge that the Russians would not install in Cuba any missiles capable of reaching the continental United States.
President Kennedy implores Chairman Khrushchev to take into consideration the peculiarities of the American system.
If the situation continues much longer, the President is not sure that the jmMary will not overthrow him and seizl^T>o fTlio Amovinan armv power. rtnt rtllf rtf 1 control.
Certainly it bears little resemblance to those reported in Thirteen Days.
We are dealing, after all, with tne dimming recollections of an old man, long since removed from power and from the documents that might jog his memory, whose words have been filtered through translators. t YET I am persuaded that the conversation jr something like it, occurred.
The actual conversation i involved not an appeal for help from a be1 leaguered President about to be overthrown I by a cabal of Pentagon hawks but a deliberI ate Kennedy gambit designed to hoodwink y the Russians into putting more pressure on c Qgstro.
Russian sea captains cheerfully pulled back the tarpaulins covering the outwardbound missiles while American destroyers alongside counted them, 42 all told.
Castro, however, refused to give up the Ilyushin-28 bombers the Russians had sent him.
These, * % unlike the missiles, had been formally handed over to Cuba and Castro was furious that the.
Ambassador Llewellyn Thompson, recently returned from Moscow, advised the President to keep the heat on.
It was his theory that once Khrushchev had backed down by removing the missiles, at considerable cost to his dignity, 'he was not likely to balk much longer over removing the bombers, no matter how loudly Castro protested.
Following Thompson’s advice, the President sent word to Moscow repeatedly, through one channel or another, that if the bombers were not promptly removed the United States Air Force would destroy them | i on the ground.
THE Kennedy gambit was, in fact, mentioned in my book, published almost five years ago.
Khrushchev, it now appears, was l one of those who believed it could happen.
The pity of it is that Khrushchev evi\ i deritly still believes he was justified in sneaking those missiles into Cuba at the risk i of a third world war.
If that was indeed his motive, rather than a significant alteration of the balance of terror in Russia’s favor, the Kremlin was poorly informed about President Kennedy s plans and priorities.
There is no persuasive evidence that I have been able to discover* suggesting an imminent invasion/ of Cuba at the time.
The Pentagon had itsj contingency plans,, of course, just as it certainly has plans to invade China or Russia itself, filing cabinets full.
But, having been badly burned by the Bay of Pigs experience, the President had developed a healthy skepticism about such ventures, as even the most gung-ho of United States military men had reason to understand.
Ironically, Khrushchev's shaky grasp of American realities may also have contributed to his decision that the missiles must, after all, be withdrawn.
If he could believe that, as the Duke of Wellington once said to a gentlemen who addressed him as Mr Smith, he would believe anything.
