Nonfiction » Biography » Cultural heritage, Nonfiction » History » Caribbean & West Indies / Cuba A synopsis of the socio-political, cultural, and spiritual aspects of Jamaican life.
It gives a snapshot of my childhood, family dynamics, and togetherness with vivid imagery and a colloquial feeling of post-colonial Jamaica.
Nonfiction » History » Caribbean & West Indies / Cuba It is no exaggeration to speak of Cuba as the key to the Western Hemisphere.
Her strategic position between North and South America, commanding the Gulf of Mexico and Caribbean Sea, her influence in the cause of Pan-Americanism, her extraordinary wealth of resources and products, in proportion to area and population, and her unique geographical position, support this description.
Essay » Political, Nonfiction » History » Caribbean & West Indies / Cuba La presente obra es un ensayo sobre una sociedad cubana distópica, habitada por rehenes comprometidos con el Estado cubano, que son reprimidos y discriminados por sus diferencias ideológicas y de creencias.
Es esta una historia épica, basada en hechos reales, que transporta a los lectores a la provincia de Camagüey, en el corazón de Cuba.
La trama se desarrolla durante el año 1955, cuando germinaba la semilla de la revolución de Fidel Castro.
This epic tale, based on true events, transports readers to the province of Camagüey, in the Cuban heartland.
In 1955, the seeds of Castro's revolution will lead a small town’s inhabitants to witness a radical change to their customs and their way of life.
Nonfiction » Travel » By region » North America, Nonfiction » History » Caribbean & West Indies / Cuba Puerto Rico.
One of the most famous resorts, the country is also rich in magnificent architectural landmarks, beautiful nature resorts and great choice of entertainment centers.
The best way to start your acquaintance with Puerto Rico is to visit Cordillera Central, where you will find several ancient cities hidden among mountains and green hills.
Nonfiction » Travel » By region » North America, Nonfiction » History » Caribbean & West Indies / Cuba Netherlands Antilles Travel Guide.
Nonfiction » History » Caribbean & West Indies / Cuba, Nonfiction » Politics & Current Affairs » World politics The United States and Cuba have long had a contentious relationship.
Following Fidel Castro's revolution, the antagonism was bolstered by the Soviet Union's support for Cuba.
After the collapse of the Soviet Union and the end of the Cold War, it was predicted by some that the end of Castro's regime was near and the United States would be there to help with democratization of Cuba.
Nonfiction » History » Caribbean & West Indies / Cuba, Nonfiction » Social Science » Immigration & Emigration American society conventionally expects immigrants to assimilate, yet contemporary views question whether Latin American immigrants are choosing to conform to this standard.
However, this perspective does not account for the structural constraints placed upon immigrants through the influence of United States foreign and immigration policy.
Nonfiction » History » Modern / 19th Century, Nonfiction » History » Caribbean & West Indies / Cuba Set in Havana during the Cuban Revolution and in the Deep South before and during the Civil Rights Movement, A Crowded Loneliness, is based on the true story of 9-year-old Bienvenida Catalina Miranda.
Catalina took part in Operation Peter Pan—a mass exodus of over 14,000 unaccompanied Cuban children to the United States It is a moving story about struggle, courage, and never letting go of your dreams.
Nonfiction » History » Caribbean & West Indies / Cuba, Nonfiction » Politics & Current Affairs » Biography A riveting biography about a Cuban rebel that joined covert operations, during the Cuban Revolution, attempting to stop the Castro Regime from taking over Cuba.
David Fuentes Martinez reveals the corruption that swept through Cuba during this time and he captivates readers as he describes the heartbreaking story that forced his harrowing escape as he ran for his life.
Nonfiction » History » Caribbean & West Indies / Cuba Este libro tiene la descripción más completa y detallada de los esfuerzos para anexionar Cuba a los Estados Unidos que ocurrieron entre el principio del siglo XIX y 1861.
Los cubanos y los norteamericanos, por motivos diferentes, deseaban esa unión pero España no compartía esos deseos y rechazó todas las generosas ofertas de los Estados Unidos para comprar la Isla de Cuba.
Nonfiction » Politics & Current Affairs » Communism & socialism, Nonfiction » History » Caribbean & West Indies / Cuba En una época en que Estados Unidos revisa su política restrictiva respecto a Cuba, es importante revisar los sucesos de octubre de 1962, que casi originan una guerra termonuclear de saldo imprevisible.
La reciente desclasificación de miles de documentos por parte de la Nacional Security Archive, y la de la KGB un par de décadas atrás, permiten reconstruir nuevos detalles de lo acaecido.
Nonfiction » History » Military » Military / United States, Nonfiction » History » Caribbean & West Indies / Cuba This monograph examines the evolution of United States Army deployment operations through the failures during the 1898 Santiago Expedition's mobilization through Tampa, Florida.
Nonfiction » History » Caribbean & West Indies / Cuba, Nonfiction » Religion & Spirituality » Religion & politics Entre los comentarios que circulan sobre Fidel, no sé de ninguno que mencione las profecías que hizo S.Juan Pablo II sobre Cuba durante su visita a la isla en enero de 1998.
Además de lo que dijo oficialmente, pronunció dos oráculos que, en la nueva situación post-Fidel, tal vez se cumplan y empiece para los cubanos un nuevo amanecer.
Nonfiction » History » Military » Military / Nuclear Warfare, Nonfiction » History » Caribbean & West Indies / Cuba Professionally converted for accurate flowing-text e-book format reproduction, this report examines the personal experiences and organizational factors which influenced General LeMay's advice to the president during this crucial time in American history, and relates the role the chief of staff's recommendation played as the crisis unfolded.
Nonfiction » History » Caribbean & West Indies / Cuba, Nonfiction » History » Military » Military / Nuclear Warfare Professionally converted for accurate flowing-text e-book format reproduction, this report provides comparative perspectives of the Cuban missile crisis of October 1962.
