Washington DC USA Date: 1962, October Duration: 5 min 15 sec Sound: Yes Color: Monochrome Clip Type: Edited Language: English Clip: 65675037573 Cuban revolution and international relations of Cuba under Fidel Castro, with Russia, China and United States.
Views of people from various countries of the world and of South America about the Cuban revolution and rule of Fidel Castro in Cuba.
A crowd carrying banners opposes landing of United States ambassador in Cuba.
Cuban Foreign Minister walks out of a meeting when asked about their military policies.
Castro addresses crowd about international relation with Russia and China.
Cuba Date: 1963 Duration: 5 min 58 sec Sound: Yes Color: Monochrome Clip Type: Edited Language: English Clip: 65675036871 Communist and anti-communist struggles, centered on Cuba, circa 1960.
Crowds gathered with signage against Fidel Castro and in support of Romulo Betancourt.
Scenes of protest and rioting in a Latin American or South American city.
Close up views of a newspaper ""La Prensa"" indicating Fidel Castro's support of the Communist party in Peru.
An inside headline from the same paper reads, ""La Embajada de Cuba Distribuye Propaganda Subversica en el Peru"" indicating that an Ambassador from Cuba distributed anti-government, subversive propaganda en Peru.
What follows are a series of images drawing parallels between Castro and other fascist historical leaders.
A scene with Hitler speaking and gesticulating wildly and forcefully, followed by a scene with Castro doing the same.
Prisoners in a German Nazi concentration camp, thin, weary, and huddled near a barb wire perimeter fence circa early 1945.
Nikita Khrushchev on a review stand waving his hat to Soviet Army forces marching below him carrying guns with bayonets fixed.
A group of Chinese workers digging ditches, including men and women Chinese workers.
Latin America Date: 1963 Duration: 2 min 55 sec Sound: No Color: Monochrome Clip Type: Unedited Language: None Clip: 65675031120 Views of expert from various nations about the Cuban revolution, rule and policies of Fidel Castro in Cuba.
Groups of people cheer after Fidel Castro comes to power overthrowing Dictator Fulgencio Batista on January 01, 1959.
A Venezuelan expert talks about Castro after the success of revolution.
Cuban communist leader and a judge sent to exile by Batista return to Cuba.
Cuba Date: 1963 Duration: 6 min 42 sec Sound: Yes Color: Monochrome Clip Type: Edited Language: English Clip: 65675036870 Cuban farmers, economic crises, refugees and civilians after three years of rule of Fidel Castro in Cuba.
Unskilled Cuban farmers in agricultural field after three years of rule of Fidel Castro.
Cuba Date: 1963 Duration: 1 min 56 sec Sound: Yes Color: Monochrome Clip Type: Edited Language: English Clip: 65675036873 Views of OAS meeting and discussion of arms discovered in Venezuela indicating an armed plot by Cuba, The OAS condemns Cuban aggression.
Views of the Organization of American States building in Washington DC with officials entering.
These were proven to be Cuban by the manufacturers' identification marks.
The young man who found the weapons is shown showing the police where they were.
