Presidential special counsel Theodore C Sorensen has similarly extolled the virtues of Kennedy's performance.
That John Kennedy's role in the events of October 1962 can and has been portrayed in such a favorable light is hardly surprising.
The cost of failing to resolve the Missile Crisis would have been staggering, and the stature of any leader who helped effect an escape from such a grave situation would inevitably assume heroic proportions.
But in assessing the American reaction to the Soviet deployment of offensive missiles in Cuba, it must always be recalled that the response was a collaborative endeavor involving many officials in the upper echelons of the administration.
Hence, it is important to differentiate, if a distinction can be made, between the contribution of John Kennedy himself and that made by his leading advisers.
An examination of Kennedy's initial reaction to the Soviet deployment in Cuba on 16 October 1962 helps frame answers to those questions.
Kennedy's Initial Reaction It was National Security Adviser McGeorge Bundy who first informed Kennedy that the Soviets had placed missiles in Cuba.
Kennedy's initial concern was that the intelligence information upon which that judgement had been based was sound.
He then decided to convoke a special meeting for 11.45 later that morning, and apprized Bundy of the personnel he wished to attend.
He devoted most of the morning to matters unrelated to the impending crisis over Cuba.
He greeted the astronaut Walter Schirra, Jr., his wife, and their children, and walked out with them on to the White House lawn.
In addition, he announced that storm-afflicted parts of Oregon were entitled to disaster assistance.
Kennedy did, though, take time to call his brother Robert and John J McCloy to inform them of the current situation in Cuba.
McCloy, a Republican with vast governmental experience whom Kennedy used intermittently as an ad hoc adviser, urged the President to do whatever was required to remove the missiles in Cuba, even if that entailed an American invasion or air strike.
For a half hour before the meeting with his advisers, Kennedy met with Charles E Bohlen, whom Kennedy had recently appointed ambassador to France.
Bohlen attended the first ExComm meeting on Cuba later that morning, and departed the next day for France.
At approximately 11.45 that morning JFK met with his leading advisers in the Cabinet Room to discuss the Cuban situation.
Belying his popular reputation for coolness and rationality, the response of Kennedy in those first two ExComm meetings to the news of Soviet missiles in Cuba was more rash than restrained, more impulsively hawkish than instinctively prudent.
It was left to his advisers to explore safer means of defusing the crisis.
A few important decisions and judgements were made in Washington on the opening day of the Missile Crisis.
By the evening, however, they were correctly adjudged to be the SS-4 type of MRBMs, which had a longer range.
In addition, the 32 JOURNAL OF STRATEGIC STUDIES President agreed to increase the number of U-2 reconnaissance aircraft flights to garner all the necessary information on the missile sites.
Most other decisions, though, particularly with respect to what the appropriate American response to the Soviet missiles in Cuba might be, would prove less clear-cut.
Kennedy's Disposition As for the disposition of the President on 16 October, Rusk has described Kennedy as being 'as cool as a block of ice' throughout the Missile Crisis.
It seems rather implausible, however, to think that anyone, including Kennedy, would have responded with this sort of unflappable calm to such dire news.
Roswell Gilpatric was probably more accurate when he recalled that at the outset Kennedy was 'very clipped, very tense.
I don't recall a time when I saw him more preoccupied and less given to any light touch at all.
They had promised on various occasions throughout the fall not to deploy offensive, ground-to-ground missiles in Cuba, and those pledges had now been clearly revealed as acts of mendacity.
Hence, Kennedy probably felt a sense of betrayal, a sense of being deceived even duped by the Soviet leadership.
Taylor, Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff , has suggested that this was in fact the case.
On 16 October Kennedy was, Taylor recalled, simultaneously composed and angry.
Jacobsen, who was known as 'Dr Feelgood', treated such luminaries as Winston Churchill, Marlene Dietrich, and Tennessee Williams.
From spring 1961 onward, Kennedy started to use Jacobsen's services at least once and sometimes as frequently as three or four times each week.
Jacobsen treated the President by injecting him with potent concentrations of amphetamines and steroids, which were designed to help him deal with stress and to alleviate his back pains.
Given that amphetamines and steroids can stimulate action, generate supreme confidence, and promote belligerence in the individual, Kennedy's drug-taking at the start of the Missile Crisis may have left him more inclined than he would have been otherwise to take forceful action in dealing with the Soviet missiles in Cuba.
Kennedy in the First Two ExComm Meetings If Kennedy did in fact feel angry (and perhaps simultaneously confident and assertive because of the drugs), this would help explain the initial policies he advocated at the outset.
For what was so very striking about Kennedy's comments during those first two ExComm meetings on 16 October was his unequivocal insistence that the United States had to respond militarily to the Soviet deployment in Cuba.
Kennedy made his first analysis of the viable United States policy options about half way through the first meeting, after Vice President Lyndon B Johnson had spoken forcefully in favor of military action.
Enumerating the alternatives, Kennedy stated that the first was an air strike limited to only the missile sites.
The second was a 'broader' strike aimed at not only those sites but also airfields, SAM sites, and the like.
The third involved carrying out both of the first two alternatives in conjunction with a blockade.
The fourth issue, Kennedy explained, was the extent to which the United States should brief its allies before taking action over Cuba.
Robert Kennedy then interjected that there was also a fifth option, namely invasion.
A little later in the first meeting, the President once again listed the feasible alternatives.
After calling for heightened surveillance over Cuba, Kennedy explained, 'We're certainly going to do number one; we're going to take out these, uh, missiles.
In the course of that discusión Kennedy again listed the three viable alternatives as being an air strike limited to the missile sites, a more general strike, and invasion.
He also argued that it should be assumed the general air strike 34 JOURNAL OF STRATEGIC STUDIES would be the preferred alternative, but there should be sufficient flexibility in the military preparation to permit a change to the limited strike option if deemed necessary.
In considering the relative merits of the limited and general strike options, Kennedy did note later in this meeting that the general strike was a less satisfactory alternative than the limited strike in the sense that it carried with it a greater risk of evolving into a dangerous, more generalized military conflict.
Despite that acknowledgement, Kennedy's predilection still seemed to be for the general strike.
During the middle of the first ExComm meeting, for example, Kennedy asked about the chances of success for an air strike on the missiles in Cuba.
When Taylor replied that one such strike would never be entirely successful and, hence, there would need to be a series of continuous air attacks, Kennedy proceeded to explore this possibility.
Later on in that meeting he also asked his advisers to ascertain how long it would take to organize a limited air strike on the missiles in Cuba.
The initial determination of Kennedy to undertake military action was also apparent from a conversation he had with his United Nations Ambassador Adlai E Stevenson outside the ExComm meetings.
After that luncheon, when the two had a moment alone, Kennedy showed Stevenson the photographic evidence.
Stevenson's counsel, however, JFK ON DAY 1 OF THE CUBAN MISSILE CRISIS 35 made no impact on Kennedy's thinking.
After his consultation with Stevenson, Kennedy continued in the evening session of ExComm to endorse military action as the most efficacious means of dealing with the missiles in Cuba.
In line with his preference for a military response, Kennedy also showed no interest on 16 October in avoiding an immediate military confrontation by imposing a blockade around the island to stop further deliveries of missiles by the Soviet Union.
General Taylor was the first person in the opening ExComm meeting to recommend a blockade, but only as an adjunct to a general air strike against Cuba.
It was Secretary of Defense Robert S McNamara who in the second meeting first prescribed the blockade strategy as a policy alternative independent of any direct military action.
Kennedy, on the other hand, never advocated the blockade as an independent course of action on the 16th.
He referred to it as a policy alternative on only one occasion when, during the first meeting, he said it could be a supplement to both the limited and general air strike.
When Kennedy enumerated United States policy options later on in that meeting and in the one later that day, he did not mention the blockade again, not even in this context as an appendage to forcible military action.
Kennedy was as equally disinterested in engaging in a diplomatic trade, arranging, for instance, the removal of Soviet missiles in Cuba in exchange for the withdrawal of American missiles in Turkey.
As with all his advisers on the 16th, he did not even broach this possibility.
Kennedy did raise the subject of missiles in Turkey in the second meeting, but not in the context of a possible diplomatic trade.
Speculating as to what conceivable reason lay behind the Soviet decision to deploy missiles in Cuba, Kennedy asserted, 'It's just as if we suddenly began to put a major number of MRBMs in Turkey.
As Kennedy himself had unwittingly pointed out, the emplacement of American missiles in Turkey was analogous to the installation of Soviet missiles in Cuba.
Indeed, it could be argued that the United States had less justification because the Soviet Union had made no systematic effort to undermine 36 JOURNAL OF STRATEGIC STUDIES the Turkish government such as the attempt made by the United States to emasculate Castro in 1960-62.
But the notion of trading the missiles in Turkey for those in Cuba occurred to neither Kennedy nor his advisers on the 16th.
Although he was uncertain as to which course he should pursue, his first preference seemed to be for the general strike, his second the limited strike, with invasion representing his third choice.
As for non-military responses to the Soviet deployment in Cuba, such as blockade or a diplomatic solution, Kennedy regarded them as falling outside the gamut of feasible policy options.
In his judgement, they did not merit consideration, not even as fourth or fifth alternatives.
What was equally disturbing about Kennedy's early thinking was the way in which his policy suggestions did not seem to be based upon his evaluation of the motives behind the Soviet decision to deploy missiles in Cuba, his assessment of the military threat posed by the missiles to the United States, or any thorough consideration of the possible consequences of American military action.
Clearly, any sagacious response to the Soviet deployment in Cuba had to be based to a considerable extent on an understanding of why Soviet leader Nikita S Khrushchev had taken this risk.
An especially important issue was whether Khrushchev's decision to furnish Cuba with the missiles was a defensive move, motivated by a genuine belief that failure to do so would result in the overthrow of Fidel Castro's government, or, alternatively, whether the decision to deploy derived from an aggressive desire to actually attack the USA or to threaten to do so in order to extract important United States concessions.
In this case, a more restrained and a less risky response from Kennedy would have been in order.
Yet although it was clear that any sensible American response to the Soviet deployment of missiles in Cuba had to be shaped by an assessment of the goals behind Khrushchev's gamble, Kennedy reached the conclusion on the 16th that the United States must respond militarily without making any clear judgement on the issue of Khrushchev's motivation.
At the second meeting Kennedy stated that Moscow would JFK ON DAY 1 OF THE CUBAN MISSILE CRISIS 37 use the threat of the missiles in Cuba to pressurize the Western position in Berlin.
But Kennedy's overall attitude toward the issue of Soviet motivation was one of bewilderment.
Towards the end of the second meeting he time and again stated that he did not understand why the Soviets had installed missiles in Cuba, especially in view of what he perceived to be the cautious, temperate attitude adopted by Moscow toward such recent issues as Laos and Berlin.
It was remarkable that Kennedy could have been so utterly clueless as to Soviet motivations and yet so simultaneously convinced of the need for an American air strike on or invasion of Cuba.
Not only did Kennedy's advocacy of a military response not relate to any clear view of Moscow's motivations, it also did not correspond to his perception of the threat posed militarily by the missiles in Cuba.
It was possible to take the position that the missiles were, militarily speaking, irrelevant because the Soviet Union was, prior to the deployment in Cuba, already capable of launching a nuclear attack on the USA with the ICBMs located on Soviet territory.
On the other hand, others, such as Maxwell Taylor and the rest of the JCS, disagreed with McNamara, arguing that the deployment of Soviet missiles in Cuba was in fact militarily significant.
Kennedy's own position at this point in the second meeting was that the missiles in Cuba were significant in the sense that they could be used as an implicit threat to soften up America on the question of Berlin.
This presumably was because Kennedy was aware that Khrushchev knew that Washington could and probably would respond in kind by attacking Soviet territory, and that the United States nuclear arsenal was far more extensive than the Soviet Union's.
It is again striking, therefore, that Kennedy unequivocally advocated a risky, military course of action on the 16th, even though he did not feel certain the missiles significantly altered the strategic balance of power between the superpowers, and he did not believe Khrushchev would use them.
Curiously, Kennedy also supported the use of military force against Cuba without vigorously exploring the possible consequences of such action.
One obvious problem with either a strike upon or an invasion of Cuba was that it would inevitably compel Khrushchev to consider some sort of retaliation to maintain his credibility, and then there would be pressure on the Kennedy administration to respond again for the same reason.
Hence, there was a grave danger that an American military response to the missiles in Cuba would spiral into a generalized military conflict between the superpowers.
Kennedy did at one point in the second meeting argue that the chances of the Missile Crisis escalating into a broader military conflict were greater with a general United States air strike than with a limited strike upon Cuba.
Apart from that, however, the concern JFK demonstrated over the possible consequences of American military action against Cuba was negligible.
Motives behind Kennedy's Advocacy of Military Action The central paradox of Kennedy's thinking on 16 October was, therefore, that he did not believe the missiles in Cuba changed the strategic balance of power between the superpowers, did not think Khrushchev would utilize the missiles to assail America, and was uncertain as to the reasons behind the Soviet deployment, and yet at the same time he was utterly convinced of the need for a military response to the Soviet challenge in Cuba.
Speculation on this issue is unavoidable because the President himself did not articulate the reasoning behind his arguments.
Perhaps the most plausible answer, though, is that Kennedy's eagerness for a military response flowed from the inveterate impulse he felt always to promote an image of toughness, decisiveness, resolution, and action, especially from the standpoint of domestic policies.
Having stated in September that he would not tolerate the deployment of offensive missiles in Cuba, Kennedy may well have considered his credibility with the American people to have been dependent upon his upholding that pledge in a swift and decisive manner.
He did indeed JFK ON DAY 1 OF THE CUBAN MISSILE CRISIS 39 refer on the opening day of the Missile Crisis to the public position he had adopted on Cuba in September.
It is true that his concern with image, credibility, and domestic policies was one Kennedy did not openly express in the first two ExComm meetings, but that perhaps was precisely because this consideration was so instinctive and deep-rooted with him.
A secondary factor behind Kennedy's initial preference for the military alternatives was the extensive contingency planning for military action against Cuba that had taken place within the Kennedy administration during the weeks and months immediately preceding the Missile Crisis.
Kennedy may well have felt that a military response was natural and logical given the fact that his administration had been seriously considering and planning for some such action anyway.
McNamara replied that 'the military planning has been carried on for a considerable period of time, is well under way.
To Kennedy, therefore, a military response to the Soviet deployment of missiles in Cuba probably made sense precisely because his administration was so well prepared to undertake such a course of action.
Hence, it could be argued, Kennedy's endorsement of military action on the 16th was not particularly significant.
Many other officials momentarily supported the notion 40 JOURNAL OF STRATEGIC STUDIES of a military response before rejecting it in favor of blockade, and Kennedy was no exception.
The flaw with that argument, though, is that there were still marked differences that day between Kennedy's thinking and those of many of his advisers.
Most of those who came to support the blockade at least showed some signs of moving toward that position in the first two ExComm meetings.
This they did by exploring various non-military alternatives for American policy, and also by expressing their fears about the possible consequences of United States military action.
This indicates that the President was far more committed on the 16th to military action than most officials who ultimately supported the blockade.
This further suggests that Kennedy's eventual decision not to resort to an air strike or invasion was more a matter of the President being persuaded from that line of action by his advisers than of he himself quickly and easily changing his own mind.
The Initial Reaction of Kennedy's Advisers SECRETARY OF DEFENSE ROBERT S McNAMARA McNamara, the most vocal of Kennedy's advisers in the first two ExComm meetings, focused less on United States military alternatives and more on the feasibility of the blockade as the hours passed on the 16th.
During the opening meeting McNamara seemed to be in favor of military action.
In his first lengthy discussion of how America might respond, he made a number of points.
McNamara also contended that any air strike should be made not just on the missile sites but also upon the airfields, aircraft not located in the airfields, and all possible nuclear storage sites.
This, he admitted, would probably involve the death of 2,000-3,000 Cubans.
McNamara further maintained that after any air strike, the United States should be prepared to invade Cuba.
Hence, the Secretary of Defense argued, Kennedy should mobilize America's military forces either during or after the air strike.
Later in that meeting McNamara again indicated his belief that invasion might ultimately be necessary.
Towards the end of the first ExComm meeting, McNamara still seemed to be making the assumption that the Kennedy administration would respond militarily.
He stated that when the ExComm group reconvened later that day, they should all be prepared to answer three questions.
At this point in the discussion, then, McNamara seemed to be interested in a military response.
By the evening ExComm meeting, however, McNamara had modified his position.
In the early stages of that second meeting, McNamara described three possible courses of action.
The first was political action, on the lines proposed by Rusk, such as the devising of diplomatic approaches to Castro or Khrushchev.
McNamara presumably made this argument on the grounds that a diplomatic approach would reveal the Kennedy administration's knowledge of the missiles in Cuba to the Soviets and Cubans and thus in effect forewarn Moscow and Havana of a likely military response.
The next alternative, McNamara averred, was a blockade of Cuba in tandem with a public declaration that America would, through reconnaissance missions, maintain constant surveillance over Cuba.
This, in essence, was the policy ultimately adopted by the Kennedy administration.
And the final option was one of the different forms of military action.
At this point McNamara appeared undecided between the second and third options.
He proceeded to argue that 'this is a domestic, political problem' because Kennedy had publicly pledged in September to act if evidence emerged indicating the presence of missiles 42 JOURNAL OF STRATEGIC STUDIES in Cuba.
McNamara clearly implied here that the failure to uphold this promise would seriously damage the credibility of both Kennedy and his administration in the eyes of the American public and that this was the key issue.
As the discussions on the 16th proceeded, McNamara also became increasingly concerned about the ramifications of American military action against Cuba.
After discussing both the limited and general air strike options during the middle of the second meeting, McNamara exhorted Kennedy and his advisers 'to consider the consequences.
I don't believe we have considered the consequences of any of these actions satisfactorily, and because we haven't considered the consequences, I'm not sure we're taking all the action we ought to take now to minimize those.
McNamara suggested, therefore, that the Defense and State Departments spend the night pondering the consequences of the various policy proposals.
Having now minimized the military threat posed by the missiles in Cuba to the United States and having expressed concern about the dangers of an American military strike, McNamara accordingly modified his position on the alternatives for United States policy.
As the second ExComm meeting neared its end, McNamara again outlined the possible courses of action.
By this point, however, his predilection appeared to be for the blockade strategy, combined with open surveillance of Cuba and an ultimatum to Khrushchev threatening both the Soviet Union and Cuba with a nuclear attack unless he removed the missiles from Cuba.
Although McNamara said he was not at this point endorsing the blockade strategy, he did seem to indicate his preference for it by arguing that 'this alternative doesn't seem to be a very acceptable one, but wait until you work on the others'.31 McNamara's comment on the feasibility of threatening Khrushchev with a nuclear attack was disturbing.
And his failure to analyze and reach conclusions on the important issue of the motives behind Khrushchev's decision to install missiles in Cuba was a major shortcoming in his analysis of the situation.
Nevertheless, his views had clearly changed during the course of the discussions, evolving from initial preference for a general air strike to be followed possibly by invasion, to tentative support for the blockade strategy.
That McNamara would come unequivocally to endorse the blockade approach in the following days was, therefore, not surprising given the development of his ideas during the JFK ON DAY 1 OF THE CUBAN MISSILE CRISIS 43 first two ExComm meetings.
Unlike McNamara, Kennedy exhibited no comparable evolution in his thinking that day.
Whereas the Secretary of Defense soon began to reconsider his support for the military option, Kennedy demonstrated nothing but unambiguous support for it.
In addition, McNamara's attitude towards a military response was shaped by his evaluation of both the actual military significance of the missiles in Cuba and the possible consequences of military action.
As McNamara began to suspect the missiles in Cuba did not particularly affect the strategic balance of power, and as he started to ponder the potentially dangerous consequences of a United States military response, his support for military action began to wane and his interest in the blockade began to increase.
Kennedy's view of the feasibility of military action, on the other hand, did not relate in the same logical fashion to his assessment of either the military significance of the missiles in Cuba or of the potentially dangerous ramifications of a military response by his administration.
After the second ExComm meeting, deliberations resumed at the State Department, and they finally ended after 11.00m. in Rusk's office.
During the discussions that day, Rusk was, compared to the likes of McNamara and Bundy, decidedly taciturn.
He tended to speak at length at the start of a meeting, but would then keep quiet.
He also had a proclivity to present alternatives for American policy without indicating his own, personal preference.
Rusk has subsequently claimed, however, that he did convey to Kennedy his precise views in private.
Even so, the influence exerted on the President's thinking by Rusk was probably limited.
Comments made by Kennedy to his aides during his White House years indicated the skepticism he felt toward his Secretary of State.
From JFK's perspective, Rusk seemed diffident and ineffective compared to a forceful and imposing adviser like McNamara.
Robert Kennedy later revealed that before his death his brother was seriously considering the replacement of Rusk as Secretary of State after the 1964 Presidential election with McNamara or possibly Bundy.
In the discussions on the 16th, Rusk, unlike many of his colleagues, 44 JOURNAL OF STRATEGIC STUDIES considered in depth the issue of why the Soviets deployed missiles in Cuba.
As for the United States response to the missiles in Cuba, Rusk did not unequivocally support military action, as Kennedy did.
He presented what he regarded as the two principal alternatives for American policy at the start of the first meeting.
The second was the initiation by Washington of various diplomatic ploys, designed to pressure Moscow and Havana into removing the missiles without any military intervention.
This approach would involve America prodding the OAS into action by having it issue a demand to send a team to inspect the missile sites in Cuba.
Rusk admitted that the request would inevitably be rejected, but implied that this increased pressure might conceivably lead Moscow and Havana into reconsidering their position.
Rusk also included as part of this second alternative an approach to Castro.
He maintained that the Kennedy administration could warn Castro, through either the Canadian Ambassador in Havana or the Cuban Ambassador to the United Nations, that the Soviet Union had installed the missiles in Cuba in order to achieve its own foreign policy objectives (such as the arrangement of some sort of superpower trade of Cuba for Berlin) and was willing to risk destruction of Cuba to achieve those ends.
Hence, Castro should be informed, it was in his best interests to break with Moscow and to ensure that the missiles in Cuba did not become operational.
He then had Assistant Secretary Martin describe a message to Castro that State Department officials had written during the afternooon.
Overall, Rusk's initial position was that a military strike against Cuba might well be required, but that the Kennedy administration should also consider the initiation of various diplomatic moves to arrest the Missile Crisis before it escalated into military conflict.
UNDER SECRETARY OF STATE GEORGE W BALL AND NATIONAL SECURITY ADVISER McGEORGE BUNDY Others in the ExComm group also expressed their reservations on 16 October about military action.
By this point in the discussion, Ball clearly found the blockade strategy more acceptable than the military alternatives.
Even McGeorge Bundy, who for much of the first two ExComm meetings had been strongly attached to the limited air strike option, was at least considering the value of the blockade approach by the end of the second meeting.
ATTORNEY GENERAL ROBERT F KENNEDY Robert Kennedy spoke little during the first two ExComm meetings.
When the Attorney General did speak, he did so in favor of an American invasion of Cuba.
During the first ExComm meeting he pointed out to his brother that invasion was one of the options for the administration, and he asked Taylor how long it would take to carry out such an invasion.
Explaining why the invasion was preferable to a general air strike, he warned that with such an air attack, 'You're going to kill an awful lot of people, and, uh, we're going to take an awful lot of heat on i t . . . you're going to announce the reason that you're doing it is because, uh, they're sending in these kind of missiles.
It is not clear why the Attorney General assumed that an American invasion of Cuba would not produce the same scenario.
In the second ExComm meeting, Robert Kennedy adopted the same position.
On the 16th, therefore, Robert Kennedy argued the case for invasion over the air strike options, and considered pretexts 46 JOURNAL OF STRATEGIC STUDIES which could be used to justify invasion.
Kahin has argued that most the responsibility should be placed on the shoulders of Lyndon Johnson's advisers rather than on Johnson himself.
Kahin contended that more than his advisers, Johnson was wary of becoming fully involved in a war in Vietnam.
The likes of Bundy, Taylor, and McNamara, however, cajoled the President into endorsing a policy of escalation he would not, of his own volition, have pursued.
Kennedy's performance on 16 October made clear that his own instincts led him unwaveringly down the path toward military action against Cuba.
In the Missile Crisis, it was left to Kennedy's advisers, especially McNamara and Robert Kennedy (as he modified his views after the 16th), to explore the alternatives to a military approach, and ultimately to convince the President that the blockade strategy was the most appropriate.
He initially embraced the military approach, especially the general air strike option, before supporting the blockade.
The key difference between the President's initial outlook and most of the leading officials who subsequently came to endorse the blockade was that the President was far more convinced than they of the need for a military response.
It is true that Robert Kennedy, who advocated an invasion of Cuba on the 16th, emerged in the following days as a leading proponent of the blockade.
But generally speaking, most of the leading advisers who came to support the blockade did express reservations toward the military options on that opening day.
McNamara and Rusk, for example, developed non-military alternatives for American policy.
And McNamara and Ball stated their concern over the consequences of United States military action against Cuba, suggesting that it might ignite a superpower war.
Given the reservations expressed by McNamara, Rusk, and Ball toward military action, it was not at all surprising that they would come to approve the blockade strategy.
Given the paucity of objections raised by John Kennedy to a military response on 16 October, it seems unlikely that he would, on his own initiative, have transferred his support from JFK ON DAY 1 OF THE CUBAN MISSILE CRISIS 47 the military options to the blockade.
NOTES The author would like to thank Lloyd Gardner for his help in the preparation of this article.
ExComm is a frequently used abbreviation for the Executive Committee of the National Security Council.
Technically speaking, Kennedy did not establish this group until 22 October.
Kennedy's faith in Jacobsen was such that he even named a ship after him and also tried to persuade him to live in the White House.
In 1975 the NY State Board of Regents deemed Jacobsen's treatments and practices to be dangerous and unethical, and thus rescinded his medical license.
In the first two ExComm meetings, Maxwell Taylor, Lyndon Johnson, and Secretary of the Treasury Douglas C Dillon also supported a military response to the Soviet missiles in Cuba.
See Alleged Assassination Plots Involving Foreign Leaders, an interim report of the Senate Select Committee to Study Governmental Operations with Respect to Intelligence Activities, S.Rept.-465, 94th Congress, 1st session,146.
It was fortunate that the two officials who emerged as leading proponents of blockade were Robert Kennedy and McNamara.
The Attorney General, because of the fraternal bond, exerted greater influence on the President than anyone else.
Kennedy had enormous respect for the competence of his Secretary of Defense, and even discussed with RFK how they could secure the 1968 Democratic Presidential nomination for McNamara in order to prevent Lyndon Johnson from getting it.
If officials for whom JFK had less respect than his brother and his Secretary of Defense had been the principal advocates of blockade, then the President may well have implemented as policy his initial preference for military action against Cuba.
