Because there is now more data available on high-level decisionmaking considerations in this crisis including', for the first time, inside information on Soviet and Cuban decisions — than for any other; and 1 can integrate these data-many of which have emerged only in the last two years, some in the past month--with hitherto-unrevealed findings from my participation in the crisis and iny own later official study of it.
Because the most authoritative current interpretations --still dominated by the foreign policy equivalents of nuclear power plant executives—are inadequate, mistaken or dangerously misleading, in particular misunderstanding and underestimating the risk both of non-nuclear and of nuclear war.
Already the resulting astonishing changes in East Europe and the Soviet Union have effectively eliminated the threat of a Soviet blitzkrieg in E u r ope, till now 11 1 e principal I e g i t i in a t i n g rational e for NATO reliance on nuclear first-use threat and thus for most United States nuclear weapons.
That this is not impossible (it is certainly not automatic, nor even likely short of major political effort) is shown by the fact that a former Secretary of Defense has espoused what amounts to a concise statement of ""the new way of thinking' as his own proposals.
Center Rev iew Fall 1989) Robert McNamara urged a code for an international peacekeeping organization that would provide that political interests be pursued through diplomacy, not military threats or use of force, that military forces reduce their arms and restructure themselves to be defensive, that the superpowers refrain from intervening in regional conflicts, and that politiccal disputes and other global problems are solved through international collaboration.
Despite the fact—revealed in recent testimony—that both United States and Soviet leaderships already, in 1962, felt strongly deterred not only from nuclear but from non-nuclear conflict with each other’s forces, we came as close to superpower armed conflict and possible nuclear launches that year, I believe, as Three ,.ile Island or Chernobyl came to a core meltdown of a nuclear reactor.
Far closer, as in those cases, than any experts had earlier imagined possible, or in this case, than most experts yet perceive.
I believe that the same defense and foreign policy experts correspondingly underestimate the lesser but significant risks in other nuclear crises, both past and easi1y-imaginable future ones.
On the preceding page he estimates that the risk of nuclear catastrophe in Cuba may have been ""one in one hundred."" 4 two years later—most of the findings from which have not yet become available to other analysts—and on my subsequent experience and study of escalation in Vietnam, as well as on information that has been newly revealed in the last two years.
I went into that crisis as a specialist in nuclear war planning—I had drafted the Kennedy Administration’s top secret guidance for the general nuclear war plans that became operational that year-and an expert on the procedures by which the execution of those plans might be ordered, either with or—as I had discovered to be possible— without the immediate authorization of the President.
I came out of the crisis feeling I had experienced the most likely way a thermonuclear war would come to pass, if it ever did.
The way in which the plans and procedures I had studied and helped design might actually come to be acted out.
A dress rehearsal for nuclear catastrophe, on the scale of a million Hiroshimas.
I determined to study that episode, and any others like it, with the best official access to information that could be achieved, to discover the faults in a system that had let us come this far along the path to a war that, surely, neither side had earlier intended or desired.
This does not mean that I set out to examine this incident -when I had found sponsorship for such a study within the government a year later—with the presupposition that nuclear war had been very close, highly probable, or missed by a very narrow margin.
On the contrary, I had believed during the height of the crisis—just as many authorities do today that the actual probability of a major war, let alone a nuclear war, erupting momentarily was extremely low.
As the blockade had tightened on Cuba, I thought then—like certain ""hawks” then and now—that Khrushchev, vastly outgunned both in the Caribbean and in strategic nuclear arms, ""had"" to back down and could be counted on to do so, almost surely before the threshhold of hot war was crossed.
Looking back just a few years latei after studying crises including this one, then participating in several that took us to war—I came to feel I had been very mistaken.
In 1964 I spent over six months studying this and other nuclear crises with interdepartmental access to highly-classified 5 information on this and other nuclear crises that was then virtually unprecedented and may still be so today.
A sponsoring committee of officials at the deputy secretary level in State, Defense, CIA and the Staff Directorate of the Joint Chiefs of Staff assured me access to closely—held documentation in each of their respective agencies.
As I put together information some of which the highest officials had not known at the time and no one had seen whole before, it began to be clear that the overall chance of the military equivalent of a nuclear ""meltdown” without being close to certain or even as likely as not had been significantly greater than I had supposed.
To my surprise, I discovered this inference of a near miss to be comparably strong in the case of at least one earlier episode, the Ouemoy Crisis of 1957, which was not commonly regarded by the public or scholars to have been a nuclear crisis.
Moreover, in looking at a larger number of crises, not all of which had a nuclear dimension, 1 found patterns and phenomena of decisionmaking in crises—including psychological reactions to events threatening humiliation, and failures in understanding, in communication and in control of forces—that suggested that the potential danger in Cuba or Quemoy was not peculiar to the particular personalities involved nor their particular strategic context.
After reporting orally my major findings to the committee of departmental planners in the fall of 1964, I accepted an invitation that came at that time to continue my study of crisis decisionmaking from even further inside, as a highest-1 eve 1 civil servant serving as Special Assistant to the Assistant Secretary of Defense observing, by participating in, the secret escalation of United States intervention in Vietnam.
That included two years as a field observer for the Embassy in Vietnam, two years helping write and analysing lessons from the top secret history of our decision-making and six years working to end our involvement, in particular by revealing what 1 knew about it.
THE NEW YORK TIMES, S The Day Castro Almost By Daniel Elisberg Kensington.
C«iif E arly Sunday morning 25 years ago this week, the Moscow radio began broadcasting f Nikita S Khrushchev’s full acceptance of John F Kennedy's proposal — received Just the night before — that the Soviet Union remove all offensive missiles from Cuba In return for nothing more than a conditional American pledge not to invade the island.
Thus the Cuban missile crisis was ended by Mr Khrushchev as abruptly, and for American officials as unexpectedly, as it began.
For the last quarter of a century, American analysts of the crisis have found the suddenness of Mr Khrushchev’s concession to American terms on OcL 28, 1962, inexplicable.
One hypothesis that has been missing from official and scholarly analyses > that the crisis provides an example ot how the superpowers can be placed at the mercy of third parties.
That is to say, they sent It by car, very fast; as a matter of fact, the car ran into some trouble on the way, an obstruction, which delayed it.
I learned about one of them from Robert F Kennedy in 1664 while studying communications between governments in nuclear crises.
Mr Kennedy said he impressed cm the Ambassador the serious implications of the atucks that day on American reconnaissance aircraft.
Cuban antiaircraft artillery had begun firing Saturday morning at low-flying planes, damaging at least one.
Moreover, a surface-to-air missile, presumed to be controlled by Soviet forces, had shot down a U-2 aircraft from an altitude higher than the artillery could reach, causing the first fatality of the crisis.
So both types of firing were interpreted, without doubts, as a deliberate escalation, a change of orders by Mr Khrushchev.
In particular, he said, the firing of the surfaceto-air missile that destroyed the American U-2 ""was done absolutely without the direction of Khrushchev and the Soviet high command.
Robert Kennedy's mission Saturday evening was in part to induce Mr Khrushchev to recognize the dangers of what Washington interpreted as his decision to escalate and to get him to refrain from further attacks on reconnaissance planes, suiting with flights scheduled for the next day.
The Ocl 27 White House transcript reveals that it conveyed accurately to the Russians the consensus of the White House discussions that afternoon.
But the warning almost surely had more impact than was intended, for a reason the President and his advisers did not know about and, as the transcript shows, had failed to discuss even as a possibility.
Even if he could expect to control future firings of surface-to-air missiles, Mr Khrushchev by this point hqd no influence over the Cuban antiaircraft artillerymen who threatened low-flying flights.
They had begun firing on Saturday morning on the orders of Fidel Castro, who was determined to defend the sovereignty of Cuban air space regardless of Soviet desires to avoid provoking American retaliation.
When he heard Mr Dobrynin's account of his meeting with Robert Kennedy, Mr Khrushchev could only have concluded that he was on the way to losing both his nuclear missiles and surface-to-air missiles, with heavy Soviet casualties and the likelihood of further escalation as soon as American reconnaissance planes entered Cuban air space, perhaps within 12 hours.
If there was any way to avert this, it could only be to announce his acceptance of President Kennedy’s Saturday night proposal and to start A Cuban finger was on the button. dismantling missiles before a shootdown and reprisal occurred.
The dismantling began at 5 A M The race to the radio station with the Soviet announcement, which bypassed even slower diplomatic channels, came a few hours later.
But it was the leaders of the two superpowers who had between them unwittingly contrived to put a trigger to World War III in the hands of Fidel Castro.
President Kennedy's estimate during the crisis of the odds of it erupting into general war — ""between one in three and even"" — does not seem too high.
Mr Khrushchev paid a heavy political price for withdrawing so abruptly from what he had discovered to be Cuban roulette; yet surely he was wise to do so, without awaiting one more day's spin of the chamber.
That warning scent drifts on the wind today, this time from the direction of the Persian Gulf. □ t Since this essay was published, a number of Soviet officials have added their voices to Burlatsky’s, confirming Khrushchev’s lack of control of Castro’s antiaircraft or, on the morning of October 27, 1962, the actions of his own Soviet-manned SAM-site.
In effect, Khrushchev had no more practical control over the gunners and missilemen firing from Cuba at American planes on Saturday, October 27, 1962 than Gorbachev had over the Chernobyl reactor crew.
It is almost painful, or frightening, to read this account in the present awareness that it was not by Khrushchev’s orders or desires that Major Anderson had been attacked.
Kennedy’s warning had been misdirected, as was his planned response to the next attacks.
Without realizing it, he was threatening, and planning, to kill Russians--at surface-to-air missile sites, and possibly at nuclear missile sites--if and when Cubans —under Cuban, not Soviet command--shot down another recon plane.
Unlimited escalation was not inevitable that Saturday night, but the fateful slide toward it, the launching of a cycle of 8 violence, was indeed but one move away.
It may well be, as Bundy says, that each leader ’’was determined not to let matters spin out of control” but matters were spinning out of control nevertheless, more than they knew.
In particular, the coincidence of the onset of Soviet glasnos t and the 25th anniversary of the crisis stimulated unprecedented symposia of former United States and Soviet officials.
Alongside these, a public television series, important Freedom of Information Act requests, and significant memoirs, have resulted in a flood of significant new data just in the last two years.
All this has reawakened intense scholarly interest, controversy and creativity.
Earlier research grants over the past several years have permitted me to benefit from reading nearly all of this material, which has reshaped many aspects of my understanding of the crisis.
But this reading has also made me aware that a great deal of the data made available to me in 1964 has still not publicly been released, 3 and that almost all current analyses and inferences published about the crisis suffer significantly from this lack.
I plan to spend at least the next six months doing this, with articles, research memoranda and a book as the eventual product.
Fortunately, I have not lost my own complete notes, from 1964, on Nitze’s notes, nor on the other study in question.
The argument in the Op-Ed essay reproduced above as to why Khrushchev ended the crisis so abruptly on American terms is one example of this.
This has not occurred wit h respect to the United States contribution to the making of a crisis, on which all published accounts, up through the latest ones, agree.
On the basis of interviews with former officials, all scholars have concluded — though with some puzzlement — that in the eyes of participants no ""decision"" seemed necessary or was consciously made on the issue .that Blight and Welch raise.
The ""intolerable"" nature of the secret Soviet deployment, hence the appropriateness of using all necessary military means to remove them, is reported to have been immediately self-evident and unproblematic to all American officials involved.
Blight and Welch summarize a number of recent interviews with participants and joint discussions among former officials and scholars in terms which which fully accord with every other published account over the last quarter-century.
The policymakers, Blight and Welch report, ""it appears, never seriously debated the issue.
For them, it was simply axiomatic that the missiles could not be tolerated.
Blight and Welch make clear their understanding, shared by all analysts, that the President’s reaction to the news was not determinative of the others’ but merely characteristic, a common judgment independently arrived at by every other official involved.
Thus the American contribution to the existence of the crisis, its perception as a ""national security crisis"" legitimating and requiring a military response, is not attributed to the President himself.
Now, President Kennedy, as it turned out, was not told of the photographs and their import by McGeorge Bundy till 8 AM Tuesday morning, October 16.
But nearly every official present at that meeting had been told the news on the evening before, October 15.
Curiously, although various accounts of the crisis have described the exact circumstances under which these dozen or so officials were given the information, there is not one line in the literature, reflecting interviews and memoirs, that describes the initial judgement of a single one of these men that first evening as to what the United States should or should not do.
No evidence has ever been published, and none seems to have been probed for, as to what any of these officials thought, or said to each other, in the 15 hours or so before they heard the President’s view of the situation.
It happens that my own interviews of several officials in 1964 did bear on this point, as does my copy of Paul Nitze’s notes on the ExComm meetings.
These data are in considerable contrast to the longstanding consensual account.
But Secretary of State Rusk was not the only cab i net -1 eve 1 officer whose first response--1ike Nitze’s—was that the missiles would have to be accepted, given the defects of military measures to remove them.
Secretary of Defense McNamara carried that attitude into the first meeting, and—contrary to the generalization reported by Blight and Welch above--he continued to argue for it in subsequent meetings, even after the President had expressed his contrary view.
He proceeds to lay out an approach he had presented to the President the day before, which does accept indefinitely the continued presence in Cuba of the missiles already there, while taking steps to prevent their being increased in number and to prevent their being used.
Thus, when McNamara launched his famous advocacy of a blockade, it was not to meet a goal of eventually eliminating the missiles that had just been discovered but simply to prevent further introduction of missiles into Cuba.
His proposal, to which he returned several times, presumed that the missiles already there would be allowed to remain.
He proposed aerial surveillance of the missiles already deployed, to be continued indefinitely into the future, with a warning to the Soviet Union that if there were ever signs that the 13 missiles were about to be launched, the United States would respond not only against the missiles in Cuba but against the Soviet Union.
The real purpose of the ” little package” he had outlined, McNamara explained, was to deal with the ""domestic political problem"" by fulfilling minimally the ""action requirement” in the President’s September 13 statement.
Well, we want to prevent their use,” which we would do by the surveillance and warning.
Correspondingly, Nitze’s notes of October 17 show, on the next day McNamara followed his reiteration of his b1ockade-andsurveillance package with a ""Variant.
In other words, McNamara’s ""variant” dropped the blockade, limiting United States actions to aerial and electronic surveillance, with offensive action only in the event that the United States believed actual missile attack was imminent from Cuba.
Such a proposition was consistent with McNamara’s repeated judgment, with which Bundy says he and ""most others” agreed, that it made no difference at all to the strategic balance, it had no strategic impact on the security of the US, if missiles aimed at the United States were based in Cuba or in Russia.
A final citation, from the same page of Nitze’s notes on the October 17 meeting.
This thought is offered by the only military man on the ExComm, the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.
All these previously-unreported attitudes focus new attention on the President’s own role in defining the situation as a ""crisis,"" on his possible reasons for doing so--including the personal psychological and domestic political pressures that impact specifically on the President rather than on his chief officials-and on his personal influence in setting the terms of discussion in the ExComm from the beginning, and throughout.
In his own initial bent to military action and his determination that the missiles already in Cuba could not be allowed to remain, Kennedy was neither yielding to nor expressing a clear consensus among ExComm members.
Responsibility for the risks involved in subsequent actions is his, in much more than a formal sense.
My aim, now as then, is an understanding of events that is not only accurate but rel evant to policymaking in ways that could help reduce the risk of nuclear war.
I was drawn back to this episode early in 1989 because it was newly apparent that such an understanding is within reach.
Since then, even more information has become available, by recent declassification and in meetings with former officials and analysts in Moscow and Havana.
The immediate issue is whether to maintain and ’’modern i ze"" United States and German short-range nuclear missile forces in West Germany, or to reduce or eliminate them--along with the more numerous Soviet short-range missiles in East Europe by an agreement with the Soviets.
Because the Soviets had recently proposed mutual elimination of both SNF and nuclear artillery in Europe, and this is supported by 90% of the German public--a large majority of all parties-elimmation of such weapons and perhaps of all nuclear weapons from the continent of Europe had become by mid-1989 a live political option for the first time since such weapons were introduced in the mid-Fifties.
In other words, if Gorbachev’s present policies, within a few years the single legitimating rationale for NATO nuclear first-use policies will have disappeared.
This d o es not mean that United States tactical nucl ear weapon s_w ill _ au t omatical l v be withdrawn _f r om E u r ope as a consequence of the loss of their rationale.
Yet with the change in political and military context, the removal of nuclear weapons and even the rejection of first-use doctrine in Europe appears political p oss ib 1 e in a way that has not been true for almost forty years.
This removal, in turn—in ways discussed below—would open the way to the rejection of nuclear first-use policies worldwide, and to truly radical mutual reductions in tactical and strategic nuclear stockpiles.
And its immediate effect in Europe would be a lasting reduction in the risk of nuclear war erupting in an unpremeditated manner from a future crisis.
But none of this will come about, or even get underway, without sharp political debate and struggle, in this country as well as in Europe, since the Bush Administration and the Thatcher Government have made it one of their highest foreign policy priorities to avert elimination of nuclear weapons from Europe and to postpone as long as possible even the start of negotiations over reducing such weapons.
To override this inertial resistance in the United States Executive Branch, I believe, will require a considerable reconstitution of the antinuclear educational and lobbying effort of the early Eighties.
That is not certain to happen without better understanding than is common at present among activists and sympathetic experts— including Congressional staffs--of the urgency of seizing the present unprecedented opportunity to rid Europe of nuclear weapons.
But one of the reasons these weapons are unacceptably dangerous is also the main reason that Bush and the NATO Commanders are right, too, to believe that the short-range land-based nuclear weapons ^re_ effective first-use threats.
These weapons are, indeed, significantly more likely to be launched--in the event of armed conflict taking place on the territory of West Germany — than any other element in the NATO panoply of tactical or strategic nuclear weapons.
The main reason for this for this greater likelihood of detonation is not one that Bush or NATO officials care to discuss openly.
The American public has never heard it officially and might, at first, find it hard to take seriously.
Most people would be reluctant to believe that responsible officials could have adopted and maintained an approach so iundamenta11y reckless.
An informed understanding of the real ""deterrent functioning of these particular weapons is long overdue, both for the public and for most specialists.
Crucial to the analogy are several of the most striking revelations of the last two years.
Second, it is accepted—in a dramatic transformation of consensus opinion among American analysts that a major motive, at least comparably important to any other, driving Khrushchev s decision to deploy mediumand intermediate-range missiles secretly to Cuba was his desire to avert such an invasion by deterring it.
So new, and important, are these revelations (along with new1y—dec1 ass i f i ed documents disclosing contrary to continued denials by McNamara and Bundy—serious attention by top American officials including the President to contingency planning for a fall invasion of Cuba throughout 1962) that their implications for an overall understanding of the crisis are only beginning to be explored.
He sought to deter non-nuclear attack by threatening local first-use of nuclear weapons in response.
After all, he didn’t need to be told—though Kennedy went ahead and told him anyway, in his speech of October 22--that if he fired a missile from Cuba the United States would treat that as a missile directed from the Kremlin, and retaliate accordingly.
To initiate nuclear attacks on the United States would be potentially suicidal for Khrushchev.
Their main fear was that their attack might trigger the launch of a Soviet nuclear missile without an intervening order from Khrushchev, against Khrushchev’s wishes.
A third significant revelation in the last two years—based on recent testimony by McNamara, confirmed by ExComm transcripts --is that he took very seriously the possibility that a mediumrange missile would be launched against the United States in the event of a United States non-nuclear air or ground attack against Cuba.
But his fear was not so much that General Secretary Khrushchev would deliberately order missiles to be fired, under any circumstances.
Repeatedly in recent interviews and discussions McNamara has emphasized that what worried him was the possible action of a ’’Soviet second lieutenant” in Cuba acting without order s to launch a missile in the heat of an American attack on his own unit elsewhere in Cuba.
Even though he saw the probability of such an event as ’’very low...maybe one in fifty” that prospect was enough, in his own mi nd--and he felt sure that President Kennedy agreed —to preclude the choice of an air strike or invasion, in face of the very possibility that some of the missiles were operational.
And that possibility could not be excluded from the earliest days of the crisis.
Medium-range missiles in Cuba deterred nonnuclear attack on Cuba—because those missiles were stationed in the potential combat zone—in a way that comparable numbers of ICBMs in the Soviet Union would not.
In effect, McNamara feared Khrushchev’s possible loss of control over these weapons under conditions of combat in Cuba.
It was a fear that Khrushchev could not reliably prevent the possible firing of a missile stationed in Cuba, in the event of a United States nonnuclear attack in the vicinity of such weapons.
By that time in his career, Secretary of Defense McNamara had good reason to know the limits on his own practical control of personnel and weapons, even in the nuclear sphere.
Some Soviet experts would have disputed him; the image of Soviet command relationships among specialists in those days portrayed obsessive centralised control, iron discipline, Godlike authority, both over Soviet and ""satellite"" officials and troops.
Hence no American so much as imagined, when a U-2 was shot down by a Soviet SAM on the climactic Saturday of the crisis, that a Soviet officer had taken first blood without authorization from Khrushchev, indeed against his wishes.
Nor that Khrushchev had been unable to prevent his Third World ally Fidel Castro from risking the survival of the Soviet Union by firing at American planes.
McNamara’s apprehension about the possible "" i n i t i at i ve"" of a Soviet nuclear missile officer in Cuba was not misplaced.
Indeed, had McNamara known at the time the extent to which control of non-nuclear operations had slipped away from civilian leaders on both sides, it could only have confirmed his concern.
What he feared a Soviet junior officer might do with a nuclear missile if his region of Cuba was under direct attack was what a Soviet subordinate did do with a surface-to-air missile in the presence over Cuba of a high-flying U-2 reconnaissance plane, Saturday morning October 27.
That threat depended essentially on the ground-based ""forward"" location of the weapons, where their crews would inevitably come under direct attack, or fear it imminently, in the event of American invasion or non-nuclear airstrike.
Here, then, is the functional link between the medium-range missiles that Khrushchev sent to Cuba and the short-range nuclear missile forces and nuclear artillery that have been stationed in Europe since the mid-Fifties.
To be sure, the analogy is even closer to the intermediaterange Pershing II and cruise missiles that were recently removed from Germany under the INF agreement.
But contrary to most analysis, it is not the range of the weapon that is functionally essential, but its location--in a potential combat zone—hence its vulnerability to attack or capture and to a ""use it or lose it"" mentality among its local commanders.
After all, any use of short-range nuclear weapons in Europe, whether authorized or not, is highly likely to lead in short order to the launching of longer-range weapons that can hit the Soviet Union.
So the SNF are a tripwire for strategic weapons, just as the United States ground troops in Europe are a tripwire for the SNF that accompany them.
The strategy that Khrushchev chose in 1962 to deter invasion of Cuba was the strategy that the United States pressed on NATO in the midFifties to deter invasion of West Germany and Western Europe.
It is the strategy which President Bush is pressing Chancellor Kohl to maintain and ""modernize"" today.
Indeed, we can better understand the specifics of the NATO strategy in the light of Khrushchev’s ""defense"" of Cuba.
It is a strategy of deterring non-nuclear attack on an ally or client by threatening to initiate tactical nuclear warfare.
An additional element is to accompany the weapons with sizeable numbers of one’s own troops in the ally’s territory, to make it still more plausible that either the national authorities or local commanders will use the tactical nuclear weapons to ""protect"" these national units or to avenge their loss.
Under conditions of nuclear parity, that implicit threat can be far more credible than the most explicit commitment that national authorities will deliberately initiate first-use.
It was the one time when the commanders of one superpower were poised for and actively contemplating imminent attack on part of the nuclear forces of the other.
And in that test, the Soviets’ implicit threat of unauthorized action—whether Khrushchev had ever consciously intended such a threat or not — operated strongly on the mind of the opposing Commander-in-Chief and his second in command, according to the latter’s direct testimony.
There can be little doubt, to be short about it, that the short-range nuclear missiles and nuclear artillery on both sides of the borders in Europe--along with forward-based aircraft-are just as effectively deterrent, and for exactly the same reason.
The often-cited notion that a President in Washington would be much more willing to order such weapons launched, because he hoped to keep) the resulting two-sided nuclear war limited within the borders of Germany, is at most a small and imp>lausible part of that reason.
What is far more plausible is that in face of overwhelming attack some of these forward-based weapons would be fired because local commanders would fire them, from a variety of motives.
In fact, given the nuclear stand-off between the two Pacts, no other elements of either side’s nuclear posture are remotely so credible for first-use.
Not carrier aircraft or cruise missiles ; certainly not submarines or homebased missiles or bombers.
One could well conclude that these vulnerable, ground-based short-range nuclear forces are essential to the effective credibility of a strategy relying on threats of initiating and, if necessary, escalating nuclear warfare.
All of these levels of command are subject to non-nuclear attack in the earliest minutes or hours of actual conflict, and subject to being overrun in hours or days.
Anyone attacking them would be right to worry about nuclear detonations, authorized or not.
That dress rehearsal for superpower war, that field test of crisis stability under near-combat conditions, demonstrates both sides of the issues raised by the short-range nuclear weapons in Europe.
Of course, since November 9, 1989, the likelihood of a Warsaw Pact offensive into West Europe spearheaded by Soviet tanks has come to seem virtually impossible, so long as Gorbachev’s present policies prevail.
But that does not mean that armed conflict in the still highly-armed neighborhood of West and East Germany is totally ruled out, whether in the long run or even the short.
Conflict in East Europe is, if anything, more likely than before (we have just seen civil war in Rumania, and the resurgence of territorial and ethnic disputes in the Balkans and elsewhere) with the possibility of expansion and spillover.
Direct involvement of Soviet troops in such a conflict would almost surely require a successor to Gorbachev in power.
Western involvement, amazingly, might not require new officials; the French foreign minister last month, seconded by the United States Secretary of State, proposed the possibility of armed involvement by Western forces or "" vo 1 un t eer s "" — along with Soviet intervention!— into the fighting in Rumania.
Spillover into the regions where United States nuclear weapons are deployed might be very unlikely.
To believe that their presence in an area of historic conflict is tolerable must be to believe that highest-level self-control and operational control in crises is absolute, quite literally absolute.
In 1962 it could have failed despite leaders on both sides who really were ""determined"" to avoid losing control and going to war.
And if this strategy fails in Europe, it can blow the lid off the Northern Hemisphere.
That is the trouble with the strategy, and with the Bush Administration’s position.
The lesson I indicated in the first section of this paper is all the more pointed in the light of the revelations mentioned in this third part.
On the one hand, what McNamara’s recent testimony implies is that both he and — after a day or two’s reflection — President Kennedy, desperately anxious to avoid nuclear war, were secretly determined to avoid at all costs an air attack or invasion of Cuba that might bring it about.
If this inference is correct, their strategy and aims were considerably more cautious than some others in the ExComm believed them to be.
On the basis of other evidence both McNamara and Kennedy seem clearly to have been ready to offer a public trade—the mutual withdrawal of United States warheads in Turkey along with Soviet missiles in Cuba—rather than to carry out the air strike or invasion they were ostentatiously preparing.
In short, though no commentator seems to have drawn the blunt inference, both the threat implicit in these preparations and Robert Kennedy’s explicit ultimatum to Ambassador Dobrynin on the night of October 27 — threatening an air strike in 48 hours and rejecting any possibility of a public trade—appear to have been, in the eyes of the President, enormous bluffs.
Moreover, he expected them to fail, and almost surely intended to follow them with major concessions to end the crisis, including an offer publicly to withdraw the Turkish missiles.
Despite the President’s conscious determination to avoid a war with Soviet forces, his willingness to do almost anything—even make humiliating public concessions—rather than to test the discipline of Soviet missilemen by attacking them, John Kennedy could have found himself doing just that on Sunday, October 28, if Cuban antiaircraft gunners had been closer to their marks on Saturday afternoon.
Contrary to their wishes and expectations, and in ways they neither controlled nor were aware of at the time, Kennedy and McNamara might well have found themselves, a few hours after Robert Kennedy’s threats to Dobrynin, taking the actions and getting the war they were anxious to avoid.
And it could have had, in the end, the nuclear consequences that they most feared.
Khrushchev’s clever strategy did not end well for him; but it risked, and barely avoided, far worse.
We could already rule that out — even before the change in Soviet doctrine and deployment and then, the opening of the Wall the possibility of a premeditated, aggressive surprise attack by Soviet forces ""out of the blue, 11 for the purpose of taking over Western Europe.
That was no more a realistic concern under Brezhnev or Khrushchev than it is under Gorbachev.
If that were the only way that Soviet tanks might confront NATO SNF, there would be little to worry about.
When Pentagon planners postulated a Soviet blitzkrieg offensive against West Germany — or when Soviet tank divisions in East Germany rehearsed such a ""counteroffensive,"" as they have frequently done in training maneuvers over the last generation both sides had contingencies in mind that were considerably more realistic, though their planned responses were not.
For many years American and NATO planners regarded this sequence of events not just as one among many ways that conflict might arise between NATO and the Warsaw Pact, but as perhaps the most likely of dangerous contingencies.
An authoritative article in the most recent issue of Foreign Affairs starts by alluding to this traditionally secret concern.
One does not have to credit Soviet leaders with an intent to attack Western Europe to believe this.
The peoples of Eastern Europe are no more satisfied today with Soviet dominance than they were before 1914 with Austrian and Russian rule.
Nor is it yet clear that the Soviet rulers are more ready to yield control of this region than were the Romanovs or the Hapsburgs.
The German problem is certainly not new, though it now arises in a different context.
The conflicts of Eastern % % 26 Europe, once the confining cloak of Communist rule has been thrown off, may well be reawakened in all their ancient ma1/ignities.
Mikhail Gorbachev’s struggle with the dissident republics of his forcefully built empire is a magnification of a problem that has plagued the USSR almost from its inception.
M Suppose that in the next year or two, independence movements in the USSR like those that have revolutionised East Europe should lead to a hardline replacement of Gorbachev by a leader and faction determined to preserve empire not only in the USSR itself but in parts of East Europe.
Administration officials, speaking on background, have not only imagined, they have come close to predicting such a sequence.
As illustrated by events that occurred—and still others that were postulated--in Rumania last month, December, 1989, a complex and ambiguous combination of civil war, revolution and international intervention could result.
If that conflict originated or spilled over into East or West Germany, it would be taking place among the most heavily nuclear-armed units in the world.
Starting to negotiate today to remove such weapons promptly from both sides of the border would not be too soon.
It was as reckless and irresponsible for the American and West European governments to bring short-range nuclear weapons into a potential zone of conflict in the Fifties, and to keep them there till today (and for the Soviets to match such deployments in the Eighties) as it was for Nikita Khrushchev to send medium-range missiles to Cuba.
More generally—in the absence finally of the threat (""if,” as Wicker says in his column today, ’’there ever was one”) of a Hitlerian blitzkrieg by Soviet tank columns against West Europe— it should at last be seen as profoundly unacceptable to defend any borders or national interests by the threat of deliberate firstuse of nuclear weapons, still less by the tacit threat of losing control of nuclear weapons, under any circumstances whatever.
That rules out anything close to present United States strategy or nuclear deployment in Western Europe or South Korea and on United States surface naval vessels.
Likewise, covert nuclear dimensions of United States intervention policies throughout the Third World.
Likewise, the ’’deterrence” policies of a number of lesser nuclear states.
