Commander in Chief Atlantic \^u To: Distribution List Subj: CINCLANT Historical Account of Cuban Crisis L962, promulgation of End: CINCLANT Historical Account of Cuban Crisis 1962 i»u1.
The objective of the subject record is to present a comprehensive IEX53U account of the actions taken within the Atlantic Command to meet the requirements of the situation created by the introduction of Soviet offensive weapons into Cuba in the fall of 1962.
The President announced the establishment ; of a naval quarantine to be effective as of 0900, 24 October.
The President also made clear that he intended to assure the ili ; **removal of Russian missiles from Cuba.
If necessary, the United States p£ui was prepared to take additional action.
It was> in fact, a direct I 1 ****confrontation between the security of the United States and the challenge imposed by the Soviet Union.
Headed by Admiral Robert L Dennison, United States Navy, its Headquarters was in Norfolk, Virginia.
The Unified Command Staff was integrated with the Staff of Commander in Chief United States Atlantic Fleet, also commanded by Admiral Dennison, The Army and Air Force Components of the Unified Page _j of 17^ Pages Enclosure tc CINC-LAN g fccx* :s^ A5--.y>i «ri Command were not activated.
A JCS conducted world-wide CPX of the build up and initial phases of geaer' had been completed in late^September.
Units of the Command soon to be involved in Cuban Contingency Operations were carrying out or preparing for routinely scheduled exercises upkeep overhar-i and deployments.
Exercise ""BLUE WATER,"" a CPX of Commander Toini iask Fo'ce FOUR plans, was conducted from 2 to 5 October in Puerto Rico.
Of the six cruicer types, two were in overhaul and two in the Mediterranean throughout, leaving CANBERRA and NEWPORT NEWS available.
In the Amphibious Force, the only AGC immediately available was MT McKINLEY, participating in FHIBRIGLEX-62.
POC0N0 was sailed back from SIXTH Fleet arriving Norfolk on 12 November.
Loading of these helicopter squadrons along with 4th Marine Expeditionary Battalion Headquarters and Battalion Landing Teams 3/2 and 1/6 in PHIBRON TWELVE ships commenced 15 October.
It is of interest that as early as about 10 October the National Military Command center began inquiring informally of CINCLANT as to thenature and scope of PHIBRIGL5X-62.
Without ever relating the exercise to the Cuban situation, there, were indications of high-level interest in it. _3 of 1""4 Pages ; I I So as to provide a proper setting for the Cuban contingency operation, it rjfcj^ i3 cec-ssary to take the intelligence picture back to tha initial support or ^ C--ba by the Soviet Union.
Eventually, armored chicles, tanks, and more complex weapons were introduced into the Cuban ara:d forces, and finally, Soviet offensive weapons were included in tha military buildup of the island.
On achieving power in 1959, Castro openly collaborated with the Csarcxia^s • jgjjj and allowed them to operate as a political power.
Relations of the 2£th of July movement with the Communists were at times strained during tha early period cf the regime, especially in competition for control of the national J labor organizations.
The USSR witched and waited until February i960 before respasdiig ta ^'~r Castro's growing need for its support.
L, -. followed in rapid progression by a variety cf trade and credit agriMsents Vl ^r and by a flow of Bloc technicians and arms to Cuba.
This Else assistants fzz£ was indispensable to the survival of the Castro regime and had the effect cf Cuba's alignment with the Bloc.
In the early part of 1962 the old line ^amacmists attsicptad to gain ascendancy over Castro.
Ti* proximity of Cuba to the U.S., its strategic Larcatiss in Shs Caribbean Sea, and its legation in the Wt.stirn Satisphsrs increased the importance of any activity undertaken th.--.ra which is not it thi bast ir_«». tarest of the United States and the Free Wcrld.
On 2 July 1962, Raul Castro arrived in Moscow for two weeks of tali. with Khrushchev and other high ranking Soviet officials.
The buildup was continued into October, when 40 Soviet ships arrived in Cuba, despite the fact that, on the institution of the Naval Quarantine, 16 Soviet ships believed to be headed fcr Cuba turned back to Soviet ports «> Approximately four flights a day were flown between Guantanamo Naval Base and Key West for shipping surveillance.
Strategic material was photographed inbound to Cuba but was not associated with the buildup of offensive weapons, until just prior to October when intelligence confirmed that fact.
Bloc shipping, other than Sc\-iet, arriving in Juba remained at a fairly constant level, with an average of about eight ships arriving per month.
During the key mcnths of August and September when Soviet shipping activity was at its highest, cniy eight Bloc ships, other than Soviet, arrived in Cuba, This indicated that the weapons provided to cf 17 u u*kiTi3iae.iftCastro were carried in Soviet vessels, with other Bloc ships carrying en normal shipping activity.
On ths contrary, the construction of permanent barracks type buildings at Soviet camps indicates. a prolonged' stay.
Year's Day Parade, that the extent of these deliveries could be' ascertained.
During the period January through March 1962, the consolidation of Cuban Ground Forces into three distinct elements was cenf irmsd «■73,000 in the standing Armyj 100,000 in the ready resarra; and 100,000 comprising the F.ome Guard.
Analysis of photographs taksn in August 1952 of isrious deck loading of Soviet merchant ships revealed an imprissivs 3upply c-f advanced mi'iitarjwsapons.
The introduction was confirmed cf S-T^iet and Czechoslovakian Page _6 of 17^ Pag£3 small numbers of helicopters and light transport* had been provided.
Intelligence substantiated the return to Cuba during the summer df 1961 of approximately 75 Cuban pilots who had received MIG jet training in Czechoslovakia.
F-^em-2 fphotograph5 of Santa Clara Airfield taken in October, after the quarantine was established a nd later r-^t-wa^confirmed tha^a total of 42 c£#as the new generation fighter intercepter.
The Cuban Revolutionary Air Force is patterned aftir its Soviet benefactor.
At the present time the entire MIG fighter force occupies four airfields— San Antonio de Los Banos, where its headquarters is located, Santa Clara, Camaguey International and Holguin in Oriente Province only about 70 nautical miles from Guantanamp.
Force, fighter intercepter capability was. probably motivated by his concern over "" invasion and by Moscow's determir."" ation to retain him in power, and for the defense of the later discovered MRSM and IRBM sites.
In early September 1962, the exis_ar.ce of surface-t--air missiles in Cuba was confirmed.
It was apparent that the construction of these sites was a rapid and coordinated Page _ \ endeavor, since some Missiles were even placed on launchers in firing '. position before their revetments were completed.
By 1 October the number of fc*^ sites had grown to 24 where it now stands.
Three of the .24 sites. have ••ttfcfij. since been moved short distances to provide better coverage in more poorly ]m^ defended areas.
We estimate the range of this missile at 25 to 35 nautical • ***. miles.
Two ^?:; additional sites of this type were found on 28 September, and the number p^r. had grown to 5 by the middle of October.
The introduction of a nbced-force of offensive aircraft, the IL-28 , light jaf bomber, and medium range missiles closely follow^-the defensive buildup.
It had"" been suspected that the BEAGLES might be enrcute to Cizba when we photographed Soviet ships on 16, 28 and 29 September and on 2 October, because cf the size and shape of the crates on deck.
In a photograph of San Julian Airfield taken on 6 November an assembled BEAGLE can be seen being towed down the taxiway and others* in various stages of assembly.
The existence of 9 additional crates of BEAGLES at Holguin Airfield near Guantanamo was later confirmed.
It is estimated that the construction of the Medium Range Ballistic Missilsites began in early September.
Confirmation of the existence of the sites was made oil 14 October of the San Cristobal missile Complex which consisted of 4 sites, each with 4 launch positions.
Two additional sites at Sagua Grade were confirmed on 17 October, bringi-g the total of 6 sites, or a total of 24 launch positions.
The missile used at these sites is known as the SS-4 and has a range capability about 1,100 nautical miles.
A total of 42 MRBM missile transporters and some ether missile^ associated equipment have been removed from Cuba aboard eight ships.
Some were probably on the. large hatch Soviet merchant ships en. fc* route to Cuba that turned back when the quarantine was sstabllaasd.
On 17 October, a sighting of the Scvist navy rspisnishmant ship TEREK in the North Atlantic was considered -~.ujual.
Naval patrols kept this shio under surveillance as it worked its way tc the southwest.
If two possibly valid asntaat reports are aiso Page . ), accepted, this could have meant that she had been on a covert patrol in the western Atlantic near the east coast of the United States.
Low level reports that Soviet submarines would be based in Cuba had been received for some time.
These reports took on added significance with the discovery of the medium range missiles in Cuba and the large buildup of der fensive weapons.
The discovery of the ZULU submarine indicated that the Soviets might be deploy:::' some submarines to the western Atlantic oh covert patrols.
Anti-submarine warfare ccscmanders at sea were alerted to this possibility.
Shortly after their discovery the submarines began return to the Russian.
On 14 October sufficient information was obtained from the U-2 flights to confirm that offensive missile bases were completed and that other bases were uader construction.
The Presidents announcement of the naval quarantine put an additional requirement on the intelligence effortMost significant was the need for information concerning ship cargoes, locations of ships, 6tatus of missiles and bases in Cuba, and the Cuban armed forces order of battle.
When the quarantine was put into effect, suspect ships were designated by the XS and CINCLANTFLT and located by surveillance aircraft. or surface vessels prior to interception.
Sixteen Soviet ships erir.oute to Cuba altered course away from Cuba shortly after the quarantine was put into effect indicating that .these ships were carrying cargo that the Soviets felt would net pass the quarantine.
Two ships stopped dead in the water for several days prior to proceeding into the quarantine area.
Some sort of. cargo was transferred by high line from a Bloc 6hip headed for Cuba to one that was enroute from Cuba.
One Swedish ship did not 6top when requested and would not reveal her cargo.
No action was taken by the intercepting ship arid the suspect ship proceeded into Havana harbor.
Captain .misunderstood iiistr'^c-. tions from 'his company that he was to submit ta'iinspecticn and reveal his cargo.
Enclosure of thi6 chapter shows the shipping trade to Cuba during the crisis.
On 25 October, the Soviet FROG— i'ree Rocket Over Ground— unguided field artillery rockets and the SNAPPER wire-guided, anti-tank, scout car-mounted missiles were seen 'at Remedies ir.
Central Cuba, and the modern Soviet T-54 medium tanks were confirmed at Santiago de Las Vegas.
Page 12 of _17; These observations and other intelligence available through low-level photographs indicated the presence in Cuba of Soviet_ ground _force .troops drawn from Elite Guards units.
A medium tank battalion , and armored reconnaissance company, an armored infantry company , a multiple rocket launcher battery, a nuclear-capable FROG artillery battalion , and a SNAPPER anti-tank company with about nine •triple launchers^ It is believed that the FROG's and SNAPPER's are under Soviet control and , are maintained principally at the four camps mentioned.
Although it is believed that most of thesa are connected with the four Soviet . camps, it is possible some of this new equipment may have been issued to Cuban Army units.
Previously, it was estimated that the Cuban Army battalion s was the parent ground force unit.
Demobilization .was begun on 2223"" November and it is estimated that t'ne demobilization process was completed on approximately .25.November.
Cuban Army. activities during, the mobilization period indicated that training under Soviet and Blcc advisers' paid, of Cuban Army units mobilized and assumed defensive positions quickly and with a minimum of confusion.
This mobilization was carried out in spite of the logistic deficiencies which continued to plague the Cuban Army.
Unverified repcrts allege that several Cuban Army units left their field pt-sitlcaa without authority when they experienced hardships due to lack of fcod and proper rainwear.
Additional construction and caotz-i lags continued on the missile bases aftsr the.
Hcvevsr, on 1 November initial evidence was cbtair.ad by lr.w livsl aerial photography that dismantel"" ing had begun on the MRBM bases and construction had stopped on the IR3K bases.
All the missiles from the MRBM s^tes have probably been removed from Cuba.
The missiles were transported as deck cargo and were covered by canvas ever the shipping crates and transporters and by a tight-fitting plastic covering over the missile.
No significant results were obtained by this method and flights were discontinued. .d.
One mission of two planes was fired upon by anti-aircraft weapons believed to be 57mm.
TJ33 other incident involved the sighting by the reconnaissance pilcts of a MIG-21 which appeared to be on an intercept course.
The plane followed the flight :~tbouad from the target but no hostile action was taken.
The most significant and unique aspect of the photo reconnaissance was the rapid development of the films, movement by jet courier to photo intertfclSl pretation centers, and availability of interpretation results for use in ifrftfr military planning and diplomatic negotiations.
A total of 11 BEAGLE /MASCOTS were completely assembled and two were in various stages of assembly when the decision was made to p**disassemble and remove them from Cuba.
E^* areas prior to being loaded for shipment and also aboard the ships while • being taken back to Russia.
The MIG-21 is a first-line Soviet fighter and with the AA-2 ATOLL air\^~ to-air missile, it possesses an intercept and kill capability up to 50,000 feet.
The surface-to-air missiles ir» C""ba vera operational prior to 20 October, but one site was m::-vsd frrm Cabanas ti Maidando which was about 10 miles to the northw36t.
The pilots observed an object trailing flame which eventually .burn id cut and disappeared.
The possibility of an actual attempt ' ' to shoot down the aircraft has b2sr-.disr.reditecl.
The_ intelligence support for this proposed quarantine was also adequate.
CINCLANT l&i ^ clarified responsibilities for air operations, dvring the transition from the _£j.
CH:CAFLANT would be responsible for air operations :in the Western Zone of Cuba, less the amphibious objective area.
Task.Force would be responsible for operations in ' the Eastern Zone of Cuba.
In addition Commander Joint Unconventional Warfare Task Force, £^_ Atlantic was included inplanning and would conduct operations, as directed -*— by CINCLANT when activated.
CINCSTRSXE also performed augmentation force planning involving Army and Air Force units ■ assigned to the United States Strike Command.
The Commanding General I'nited States Continental Army Command,' , General Herbert 3.
Powell, and the Commander Tactical Air Command, , General Walter C Sueaney, Jr., were designated as Commander in Chief Army Atlantic, , and Commander in Chief-Air Force, , '.to assist CINCLANT in contingency planning.
CIHCIAHT would «<*""£"" -. o^erationri cLaand of individual. service task forces through each of his service component comnandere.
CHARLESTON 'IN PORT Enclosure (11 Chpter I JfLJlLJtL JSH. m :Ufel FURSE DDR-882 2ND FLT TG 123.
ADAMS DDG-2 2ND FLT TG 123,2 37-OON 73-OOW UNDERWAY BIGELOW DD-942 2ND FLT TG 123.
PERRY DDR-883 2ND FLT CHARLESTON IN PORT STEINAKER DDR-B63 2ND FLT TG 123.
Enclosure -"" Chapt ;II„ 11 IIL Ml ill M Mi HAZAMA AE-9 PIIIBLANT TG 123.
MAYPORT NPORT QUILLBACK SS-424 SUDLANT TG 123.il GTMO NPORT ATULE SS-403 SUDIANT TG 123.
Chapter II ^/-\l . iiiU_. ill. am. m m SEA LION APSS-315 AEWRON VAW-33 VMCJ-2 DET BJ1J-2 MT McKINLEY AGC-7 OKINAWA LPH-3 CHILTON APA-38 ROCKBRIDGE APA-228 MONROVIA APA-31 P, MARION APA-249 UVALDE AKA-88 ALGOL AJA-5'I AKA-19 RANKIN AKA-103 PIIIBLANT NAVAIRLANT CG 2ND MAW PIIIBLANT PIIIBLANT PIIIBLANT PHIBLANT PHIBLANT PHIBLANT PIIIBLANT PIIIBLANT PHIBLANT PHIBIJVNT PIIIBLANT PHIBLANT TG 123.
NEWPORT NAHANT AN-83 COMFIVE TG 128,1 HALIFAX ARL-18 ORLEANS PARISH HCS-6 MINLANT TG 128.
LITTLE CRK N PORT N PORT N PORT N PORT N PORT N PORT N PORT JNDERWAY UNDERWAY N PORT N PORT N PORT N PORT :n PORT fe'ff ^W *&ta \Hl M fl 1:1 Si UDT DET PHIBLANT TG 128.
Full utilization of all available Defense Communications System circuits was planned.
The ' inter~area Single Sideband Net, , and the Atlantic Area SS3 Net, , was available for voice communications.
The fleet Broadcast, Naval Teletype Net, NA70PNET, STARCOH and AIRl -~~~ COMNET were operational and prepared for increased traffic.
Army Signal Radio Propagation Agency and other organizations attended, and aside frcm develop^ i,L ""ing communications requirements the conferees also benefited by becoming ; :v; . acquainted and working together.
Although the eamaand structure was changed _.<*~rlater, this preliminary planning facilitated the expansion of CINCLANT comm""* ^~ unications which followed.
The command reorganization to direct Cuban Contingency Operations was approved by the JCS and placed in ef£-»-:t on 20 October 1962.
Component Comman ds and Forward Bases. jg_ In order to satisfy the connnunication requirement in the event of major changes in organizational structure and to provide the necessary communications with the commander in the objective area numerous full duplex, direct, on-line, top secret circuits were established from CINCLANT Headquarters to all probable key subordinates.
Communication sets available had to be held in reserve for possible deployment to the Cuban area.
A hot line for passing AS-^IFORIANT information existed, | being a party line alcng the east coast with many locations tied in. f Classified messages were sent ever the Naval Operation Net, which was j on-line 1 but required the messages to be retransmitted through the Naval j Communications Station, Xcrfclk.
The Kaval 2231 teletype system was avail.able for passing unclassified traffic to stations in the system.
ICk ser.t representatives to provide direct liaison with DCA in masting CTECIANT circuit requirements.
The circuit may consist of several lirius tat""-rs st. various Switching centers.
These lengths are scheduled to bee -.me a part :f a complete circuit when call up is received.
The two n:\ds cf th» .-.irnit* are installed to the ewe respective military bases.
The approximate r P ,., ,,„„ „. „ai„tained with AFLAST and ARIAST to insure I Meanwhile, coordination vas ■>«"""" „ lthout having duplication.
In some areas that required circuits were ordered ""^J 1 ^^ circ uits and/or circuit ; thr oushout the .oua,e.s t^her ^/^ cOTpa „ Us provided excellent ^ ^^1™ «.««"" with »ioi»» delay. ^ ^•1 had also established some o £ ^^.'^^""ive „t £ this period.
Corps, F Bragg, Nortn conducting -^ ARLAKT, AFLAMT, , and other terminal points.
A LO kilowatt mobile f transmitter located at Cape Canaveral was offered to the Naval Comraunicacirza Station San Juan, by the Air Forca.
Common user circuits v:ere utilised whenever possible,.These included DCA circuits into Washington, Puerto Rico, Guar.tar.atno, Panama, Key West, Camp Lejeune and others.
The CINCSAC SSB radio net was available for. use and had -stations . in Florida and San Juan where entry to other SAC installations cculd be made.
The CSO Composite Fle-at SS3 Command Net, , was also available for use.
T-2 Engineered for passing a 3000 cycle signal, , with oiniflfisa delay distortion.
Some flexibility of conmunim«^ cations between installations along the east coast of the U S. was also' necessary.
At a conference between CLT and component representative it was determined that very little equipment was available to meet CZNCLMT r-quir— u^~ nents due to internal requirements of each Service and because of commitments for other contingencies.
The Army had an AN/TSC 20 multichannel set to provide circuits from the objective area back to Fort Bragg, branching north and south to the Department of the Army and ARLANT FORWARD-nere were some single channel AN/TSC-15s available.
There was a general shortage of single sideband sets, since this type equipment had only recently V-*been included in unit tables of allowances.
The dileisna was solved by obtaink . ing 4 airborne transportable communication units from the Navy.
It was de-ided ,. fcT"" to move the ATCU-100 from 3alboa to Key West for extending circuits into Guantanamo.
This link would provide 16 channels for Voice and/pr teletype, with 5 channels terminating at Key West aad the rzst patched through to Sarfolk and the Washington area.
The ATCIT-100A j in Washington was deployed to Glynco for standby and possible circuit termination requirements.
The AT3""-100A at Ncrfclk was used for training and was scheduled for. movement ir.to the objective area.
The ATCU-100A was to be air transported frc-m Norfolk as soon as an airfield was secured.
The Army Midwest Relay at Tzzz Leavenworth, Kansas, ' lMJL was selected as an entry point for this multi-channel set since it wasn't t?-' heavily occupied with the present operation and was central iy located for Page 30 cf 17Fagss « r« All DCS circuits.
Radio propagation was also suitable for this j lotion C*c£ts Wd then b« routed back to the east coast for tie-in , i ^» ^th-^uth relay system between Fort Ritchie and Fort Bragg. ; to the ^ th ""~""f ""Xe circuits between CINCLaNT and Fort Lee were ^ ^T\ir:^U^Tli^ case the Fort Leavenworth entry had to be ^ switched to Fort Ritchie or Fort Bragg.
White the equipment was furnished by the Navy, the Army tathSed an operacinrteam to traiTon the set and to accompany it to Cuba, had it been deployed Training was also conducted by the Navy team manning the ATCU-lSoA at G.lynco.
During the readiness period communications was established with the Midwest Relay and other DCS entry^ points. m^ One additional facility was brought tot ^ h V Per H^""hrt^ S ATCU-2o1 ibiUty ^ "" and reliability of command communications.
The Navy brought the ATCU ZUU Som *e Pacific area for additional support.
Communications can be ™ff^* while airborne and continued immediately upon landing.
Plans called for *~ landing the aircraft as soon as an airfield was secured to provide C ^^^^^ S p back to CINCLANT while the ATCIH100A was being air-shipped and placed in operation.
As combat units moved into Cuba they were to be supported cotnffl ;^ c ^^ a U i«, e bv their oreanic personnel and equipment, maintaining links wiuh their re pectivf Ssk l""ce Commanders until such time as the Command Headquarters^ ^ ashore.
Single sideband mult i -channel equipment with teletype f^* ■£££»_ i^ bv cryptographic devices was planned where possible, with operation al and authentication codes available for passing information over voice clrcux-s.
Other tactical equipment such as the AN/GRC-10 and AN /IRC -24 was jl««**« field communications.
A tactical Radio Relay Net fcr command and functional use was to be established in accordance with the SOPs of the tac tical ualtt.
The Naval Communication System had been in operation all along and little change or adjustment was necessary to handle increased requirements Ute^ for the Quban activity.
All this occurred during the build up period and contributed"" to the backlog of traffic.
As Fleet ships changed to the Washington Broadcast and ware more evenly distributed among uu. other stations, the traffic flow improved.
However, 'r^..'. flexibility is permitted"" depending on the propagation characteristics and k^'_ other factors affecting the ability to copy.
The increased amount of traffic """" did not permit this wide latitude in the selection of the station broadcast.
The Fleet Submarine Broadcast operated ir. a ncr^l manner without Lii Pag3 1 £S£l Scfr^icr^^l,' edfaSt, responsive for the AS„ Barrier Commander.
Th« Caribbean Emergency Network was also brought into use with ScOKGEN Santo Domingo and COMOARIBSEAFRON in the net.
Shlp/shora communications vlth the command . «""«t^ ^oughout moat propagation and HERO restrictions.
Upo^plation'of this vork tha taam movad to San Jnan to rmprova tha installation.
Page 33_ cf 17^ Pages in the process of completion when the operation ended.
These additions would have provided improved communications for the quarantine operation. rft Occasional changes of command ships by the commands afloat caused communication difficulties.
All fleet ships are not fully equipped tc handle increased communications requirements brought en by placing a task force command aboard* When' the Commander SECOND Fleet,' s ' passed the Quarantine Command to COfcER'JDESFLOT SIX, , on 13 November 1962, there were not sufficient aboard to provide covered \ z .-.. circuits with Norfolk.
The CINCIANTFLT Communications Center solved the i problems by temporarily accepting all the traffic for further relay.
Internal Communications . 135"" g5> CTNCLANTFLT communications canter had progressed through several stages of expansion and/change since its inception and was in the middle of another modification when the Cuban crisis developed.
The results of Exercise ""HIGH HEELS"" had indicated that the facility iri its present stats could not handle a large increase in traffic.
CINdANTFLT requirements to be provided by this communication center acd/or NA7C0KSTA Norfolk.
It was decided to move the SU3LANT circuits out of the J^^ CINCLANTFLT Wire Room for more space and t;< terminate additional circuits there.
The advent of the Cuban build up escalated the rata of progress -with the work reaching completion around 20 Cctsber 1962.
Many new circuits were being installs in the wire room while the traffic build up was developing, causing some de^rsase in handling efficiency.
Teletype equipment came from ^AYCOilSYS Washington and some vas^or-owed from the iLio Operates School and the HA8MMSUL Horrolk.
The C-NCLA'fT operations cT..t*r owitzhbaarc, , was expanded to a maximum with a subsequent >:rea,« lr. operator service.
Additional message reproducing equipment was required to handle the increased message load.
Initially assigned communi-atirns personnel were at 907. allowance, but ■ ■ this was not sufficient to meet -.he increased work load.
This increase facilitated more rapid processing of messages but occasionally contributed to inefficiencies. u«*_ New positions were established and internal procedures developed to cope ;..,_ with' the facility expansion.
Multilith macs were used or incoming teletype machines _ with the mat passing immediately to a multilith machine for reproduction or the desired number of conies for internal distribution.
Teletype machines werinstalled in the OPCOS Center for rapid delivery of ""Shot Gun copies to the War Room Staff.
Outgoing high precedence messages were sent to tw wire room for immediate transmission bsfcre i:.t-n-l processing through >~the message center.
This ""as supposed to reduce the rlov of non-essential traffic leaving the circuits available for passing important information.
Us of -hia--r ^_ changes began to take effect, new parson^ 1 ^ c ""^JL^i^lS a-Slce to and the backlog of traffic started to decline.
Additional commercial circuits i-. n'kH'.-r :.• • can then be leased to meat mforscca requirements.
Better utilization of skilled personnel can also be facilitated by only «_3ir.g specialists at positions requiring specialized training.
All services and major commands should implement the use of cite £.5^ numbers in messages; for ready reference, to standardize procedures and L^ to insure correct delivery to the office of action. jpW* 4.
Tactical frequencies assigned organizations for use at the scene of w*« action must be thoroughly coordinated at the joint level to eliminate """"l^ intercomponent frequency conflicts.
Good communications ^ ' equipment is in the hands of the operating forces.
Gome commercial circuits ; required for continued use are still being leased.
It was in these three weeks that Command and Staff actions were taken, relating directly and indirectly to the Cuban situation, with rit<rt-tmifm public notice, to improve the readiness posture of the Atlantic Command.
CDCCLANTFLT and CINCAFLANT ware directed to recommend jointly the new boundary line.
LANT/CINCLANTFLT War Room of units designated, locations, and types of aircroft.
They were, however, the forerunners to the quarantine operations which were ultimately placed into effect.
The increased flow of Soviet/Bloc shipping had >come a source of concern This action was also initiated on 3 Octooer 1962.
The relocation involved prepositioning a Marine Air Group at Key West and the assignment of an additional 1/3 Marine Division/Wing Team to' the Atlantic Command along with appropriate amphibious shipping.
On 9 October CIJICSTRIKE informed JCS, CINCARSTRIKE and CIECAFSTRIKE that the response to CIl'CLAXT's message of 6 October on increased readiness inso~ far as it applied to STRICOM forces would he prepared by his Headquarters since the action addressees were not in a position to assess the overall impact on the cotcmand.
Soviet action against Western rights in Berlin calling for a Western response including among other actions a blcckada of Communist or other shipping enroute to Cuba.
An attack against the Guantsnsaio Naval Base or against United States planes or vessels outside Cuban territorial air space or waters.
A substantial popular uprising in Cuba, the leaders °f which request assistance in recovering Cuban independence from the Castro Soviet puppet regine.
A decision by the President that the affairs in Cuba have reached a point inconsistent with continuing United States national security.
The consequences cf the actions on tho availability of forces and on .our logistics posture to deal with threats in otnar areas,e., Berlin, Southeast Asiff, etc.
The removal of the thra&t to United States security of Soviet weapons systems in Cuba, or The removal of the Castro regime and tne securing in the island of a new regime responsive to Cuban national desires.
CIKCLAKT in resosmss. r^mr^.id-d <,doi:.-; r^ids dv l-uba against COMJS as another contingency* urui-cr „hicn miiU&ry ~ .-.'; ag^-nst Cuba may beecessar . ..... ^j^^iS^U^^.-^Hi3^i-^.u / i,-^L>SS l iiZ -i He named plans considered appropriate to cope with the various contingencies that might arise.
Without unduly derogating training or readiness for other critical missions, commence prepositioning of forces.
On 10 October the JCS by message io U""J:ANT, OINCSTkIKE, Service Chiefs . and information to T.-l.
In the meantime She JCS had queried USCIMCEUR and CINCPAC as to availability of amphibious forces assigned to them for implementation of ClNCLANT contingency plans.
In reply both noted the impact that transfer of troops would have with CINCEUR stressing the effect on allies and CINCPAC on training and rotation of forces to West Pac.
Preclude simultaneous, , reinforcement of either CINCEUR or CINCPAC using trocp carrier or MATS aircraft.
Selected ammo stocks for Navy and Marine forces v?.re prepositicned at Florida and Caribbean bases and available in AE and CVA type ships.
Air Groups 14 and 31 to preposition certain aviarion equipment at the United States \£uZ Naval Air Station, Key West on a priority basis, The USS GRAKT C3UNTY was .. "" :' made available for sealift cf material.
T to provide information on his civil affairs requirements and tne lengtn of time civil affaire companies w*«might be required for Cuban contingencies.
On 17 Gctooer CISCLATIT advised the JCS that one civil affairs area headquarters, four civil affairs groups, ■■■**■■. and eight civil affairs companies would be required.
Additional figrvter aircraftwere deployed to Homestead and Patrick Air Force Bases and those units based at 'Tyndall were placed in and alert status for. augmentation as necessary.
Javy 3 Air Force and Marine units using Key -vast facilities was required.
The shortage of equipment at Key West, made it ntcsrssary tjr units to provide some cf ttviir own ground handling equipment, bidding, «ce. fer Lneir forces.
CINCONAD provided representation in the Center to facilitate' the ' interchange of intercept information.
The i<aval Air Station at Sanford, Florida was approved for use as an additional staging base and direct liaison between COMTAC and CO, NAS, Sanford was authorized for planning purposes.
The use of Strategic Aix Command bases at Homestgad, MacDill and McCoy -wasrequired by CINCLANT forces.
In order to accommodate the AFLA>JT units at these* fields, action -was initiated to relocate SAC aircraft from these bases.
Subsequent arrangements were made between the Strategic Air Command and the Tactical.IAir Command and SAC aircraft ctvacuated to ether airfields.
Complete cooperation between SAC, CINCLANT, TAC and the Department of the Air Force enabled CIKCAFLANT to preposition his forces and materials at these vital installations for the possible execution of Cuban Contingency Plans.
The heavy conceatration of aircraft at MacDill, Homestead, McCoy . and Key West was of great concern to CIKCLANT and the evacuation ""of SAC *"" aircraft reduced the risk to some extent.
Option one consisted of not launching air strikes against a **•""•' selected SA-2 site. ^ £*& i J Under Option two, two SA-2 sites would be selected.
Precise air attacks would be launched to destroy only the fire control system on one site and only the launchers and missiles on. the other sites.
The new chain of command, for plans and for operations when directed, from JCS to CINCLANT to Service Component Commanders to Service Task Force Commanders demanded that CINCLANT have a truly Joint Staff adequate both in numbers and in tri-service representation to plan for and conduct the projected operations.
Off icers not assigned to the Contingency Battle Staff were assiryned super.
The danger of escalation, particularly in the initial stages, made it .wis. imperative that full CINCLANT capabilities for general war be maintained while JS*^ at the same time the requirement to operate the Contingency'ar Room had taken the services of four of the twelve officers assigned to the CE:CLAi:T/CI""CLANTFLT Joint War Room, including the Army, Air Force, and Marine officers.
The contingency, staff gradually. merged with the CL x :CLAHT/Cn3CLAMTFLT Staff with cooperation and coordination so outstanding that it was difficult to distinguish between them.
In recognition of this, the Contingency Battle Staff went to a four section watch on 1 November and was gradually reduced in size from then until its disestablishment on 3 December.
This saturation resulted in a heavy rick in the event of a successful air attack or missile bombardment of tlese fields.
During the build-up of forces, elements of Task Force CHARLIE conducted training operations in the Georgia-Florida area.
Since there was no additional LST shipping available in the Atlantic Fleet, it was necessary to charter four commercial LSTs for a period of 60 to 9D days.
It was determined thfit the original four LSTs allocated and the four chartered LSTs were still insufficient to meet hpmy requirements.
In order to alleviate the shortage of LSTs the Co mm a n derin-Chief, United States Atlantic Fleet recommended that the Chief of Naval Operations activate eleven LSTs from the Atlantic Reserve Fleet.
These eleven LSTs would require rehabilitation and, when activated, they '•■■ere to be manned by a minimum crew ready for immediace use.
Action Sas take"" upon CffCtlS"" ° Ut "" ^ atlon co do this on .26 October.
JPP™^^^ 3I2/316 °™* it beca^ 312/316 plans were not ade q uaL £/ he taX""""^ J 1 *""*"" U "" ed *"" 'h. build-up of Cuban military potential an M ""8ned.
Substitution of items could be accomplished where it was in the best T£T. i U t ^ Wh6re SUCh substit ^icn waa not inconsistent .with the general objective of the basic mission.
Ic '■'« f """"ner pointed out that estimate of casualties based on the assumption that the enemy may employ tactical nuclear weapon u« not meaningful because operations could cause severe losses.
Army on 19 October . toj^X-_£ • prepare plane' for the return of these units ""to their home stations on a :t*$\ \ 12 hour notice.
L Armored Divi'jior;, as wall ad xczr :• Tra*. fscrcarior Corse Ii.«.n r trrck companies and ins 3i7tr.
KE tr; pia,-a lie Antirs coooar.d en DEFvis, 3 ttar.-'s effacrrse 2300Z l:^i, 22 O-r.-ri-sr.
In view of the austere facilities available at Key Westit was necessary that detailed"" planning factors be provided to the-«v Commander, Key West Forces to Insure that existing base support facilities . were not exceeded.
For these reasons J"" USCONARO' requested authority from '*?"".:■?? ,.'."" the.
In addition to the boat units, two terminal service companies '•. i ■i were included at this time to provide proper support for the outloadiag ( ,.of assault troops and for subsequent unloading of equipment and supplies ie« ^ either over the beaches or in captured ports.
Lauderdale, Florida, was the outloadirig port fdr the first increment of Task • £&-■ ■.-: xm: begun ""moving §S Stewart, Georgia, on the morning of the 26 Octbbef""l962.
CINCLANT also pointed out that the Kaval Air Station at Key West --which had been suggested ""by"" CINCARLANT as an altemate'-iivrSiii^-"":. facility -was fully committed to~the support of high performance aircraft""; '"" and would not be available for use by Army aircraft.
Task Force for : outloading a th.rough"" 4 tfi'e same port-in order to speed up its""^ A:: introduction into, the objective ""areaTby"" from"" one' to three dayb' The revie^' ion of the movement schedules""' also* changed' the arrival *•*""««» ^^-•n.
A lack of proper storage space for loaded equipment cars at Fort Stewart, Georgia, created a major problem for the elements of the 1st Armored Division arriving at that station.
In an attempt to solve this problem and to prevent' any undue delay, CINCARLANT initiated action to procure additional rail siding capacity in the vicinity of Fort Stewart and particularly requested appropriate rail storAge at neigfc^or-ng Hunter Air Force Rase.
CTNCARLANTv was. -then in the process oftransferring • this respon-.sibility to the proposed Peninsula Base Command which was to be established in Florida for just such purposes.
Page 70 of 1""^ Pages I The Department of the Army authorized JG USCONARC/C.INCARLANT or. i 29 October to issue movement directives for all those units which, at tratime, were assigned to, <Jr in support of, OPLAN 316.
These units, moreover, would require replacements for currently authorized craft which night become unserviceable or mijL-'t ' fMi ^ require extensive maintenance as a result of the assault operations.
The depot did have an in-house maintenj ance capability for processing a total of three craft for issue a aa ; operational status within a period of two to three weeks time.
The ' remaining 27 craft would have to be processed by contract in commercial rxes facilities, a process which would require a minimum of five to six weeks for completion.
At the same time, CINCARLANT was able to aacource *%'"" that the Chief of Staff, United States Army, had approved the preloading of .the Jr~ r two Roll-on, Roll-off ships and the four available LST's.
While the two "" Roll-on, Roll-off ships had previously been scheduled to outload fen^ Fort Lauderdale, Florida, CINCARLANT was now preparing plans to load them out of Savannah, Georgia, in -eiew of the fact that the troops wtra located in nearby Fort Stewart.
Area Commands at the intermediate staging airfields gave Headquarters, X""*""""— Airborne Corps, a chance to evaluate their support capabilities and to consider the development of problems, circumstances which could pr~> ride valuable information for future operations of this type.
Ey 29 October CG USCONARC was apprised of the specific locations of the HAWK and NIKE-HERCULES air defense battalions which it had made available for the defense of strategic locations ar.d ir.stallatior. ir. ths Florida area.
The 6th Battalion, 65th Artillery, <KAWK) a vas located in the general Key West area, with A Battery at the western tip of Key' West, B Battery on the beach nearest to Cuba ir.
Battery was located at Patrick Air Force Base, while D Battery was located at MacDill Air Force Base.
XM29 — which were to remain at their home stations with crews and equipment and which could be maintained in an on-call status to be brought forward if required.
Once again on this date, CINCARLANT pointed out to the Department of the Army that it was considered imperative that immediate authority ►♦*;-; be granted for Army use of the Key West International Airport.
CINCARLANT emphasized to the Department of the Army that either Key West International Airport or equivalent space at the Kiy West Air Station was essential to the success of Army Air Operations in the objective area.
The Commanding General, USJONARC, on T:9 ^-.crber described to th£ Lepartment of the Army the command or2ar..iTatior; whi'h hs, as JIN JAR"" LAST, had established for the implsras.-.tar-ior of hie assigned misaions ;;r.dsr OPLAN 316.
Ths Advance Ta;t; -:-_ pis Wi AlCommand, , command post, which controlled troop carr.sr I a~d «-iiht aircraft, was physically located in the same building.
The2nd -logistical M£;! -.ommand was selected as its command and control headquarters Liaise ,_ detachments from the Army Material Command, port, ""« M ^'""^ pand from pertinent Department of Defense agencies were either aleady^ located at Opa-locka Air Ease or were moving into position.
This e_t— , — ra-ization, immediatedly responsive to the Commanding General, wb.-OKAR-, as CINCARLANT, afforded maximum flexibility, control, ar.d ..-ordination.
The Department of the Army was requested to ta*e && appropriate action with the Joint Chief of Staff to effect ths des_r£~ -ranp* far of control.
The BARC a would be available for 1*, mediate use upon arrival in the objective area.
Al~o— s place the P 554th Transportation Platoon BARC Operation and Maintenance, in the surface echelon of OPLAN 316.
Planning ^J 1 ' provided that the BARC's be deck loaded on car S° vessels and that they *~ be made ready for drop discharge at the destination.
The Rodl-oc y Roll-off vessels were now scheduled for preloading at Savannah; Georgia, but the four LST's earmarked for Task Fcros CHARLIE remained as previously scheduled for outloading through Fort Lauderdale, Florida.
Action to initiate trhe move, however, was held in abeyance by the Deputy Chief of Staff fee Logistics pending a final coordination on the location of the LST's.
New logistical problems were encountered at this time in* connect ion . with the four LST's which were earmarked to transport the various ie~ creae-ts of Task Force CHAP.LIE to the objective area.
Therefore, four LST's were considered sufficient, since the total wetent requirements for the First Increment of Task.
LST, thus giving Task Force CHARLIE a carrying capacity of approximately 3,000 weight-tons for an anticipated over-the-beach landing.
This my.ant that even with the fifth vessel, Task Force CHARLIE' a equipage would have to he reduced if that force intended to land over-tne-hsech.
As far as CINCARLANT wa», concerned, it was not a matter pf space; btt rather cr.s of weight and the manner in which the tonnage was r,o fa landed.
Jhis problem consequently led directly to another, that of providing waterproofing kits for the vehicles to be landed form amphibious vessels.
ItStp-ny Chief of Staff for Logistics, CG USCGNARC, announced on 31 0:.r.ober L5£.'.har. only one such kit was available to the Command.
T .t assault fcrces could not possibly be expectedo land all"" or ;.z.&iz vehic^ a-cos3 the beach in water ies3 than 30 inches deep.
Page 75 of l 7 ^ Pages CINCARLANT proposed the charter of a fifth LST in order to alleviate S ome of the problems thus created in connection with transporting Task For-e CHARLIE to the objective area.
One such vessel under civilian ow—rsbip, the CAL-AGRO, was berthed at Ocean City Terminal, Savannah, Georgia.
A preliminary inspection of the vessel by CINCARLANT representselves indicated that it was in good shape and that approximately three day 3 would be required to bring it close to its original configuration.
On 31 October CINCARLANT requested the Commander in Chief, United States Atlantic Fleet, , to make the necessary official inspection of the vessel and to determine the practicability of chartering and operating i~ in view of CINCARLANT' s deficiency in this type vessel.
F""""theactions were taken on 31 October to move units into a posi-io-ed"" location at Fort Stewart, Georgia.
Those units which moved or. r^ *his date consisted mainly of the Signal and Medical units wnich were re-jquired to accompany Task Force CHARLIE into the objective area.
These '-eluded a Field and an Evacuation Hospital, a Medical Group Headquarters, ■ , two specialized Medical Detachments, a Signal Group Headquarters, and J a Signal Platoon.
The Medical Group and the two hospitals were directed to move their currently assigned personnel and with full TOE equipment.
Additional professional personnel were to be provided by USARLANT when ia~ required.
CINCARI3, submit such a recommendation directly to tr.e v eiv.t -.-^' cf Staff.
While all wheeled ' vehicles had been offloaded for future convoy movements, they were ret *^* tained in a combat loaded condition.
The entire Ja^"" 1 Taak Force was placed on a three hour alert status for movement to the i ports of embarkation.
At this point, it was estimated that the personnel t of the Divison Floating Reserve would arrive at Fort Steward on 2 November, with equipment arriving on 4 November.
Reserve was scheduled to commence a training porgram on 5 November • which was designated to increase the individual ""combat proficiency of all **""* personnel.
Wheeled vehiciles were to be offloaded bet to I remain under combat load.
The Floating Reserve was to be held on a j six hour alert for eventual movement to the ports of embarkation.
As of * 1 November the JCS On-Call Forr.e was still located at Fort Hood, Texas,, but was shceduled to begin its move to Fort Stewart, Georgia, about 4 Nov• .,. ember.
At Fort Stewart this force would accomplish the same training ' program as the Division Floating Reserve.
The division planned to send four M+6 canks, four M41 tenks > and one M59 to Fort Lauderdale, Florida, whure driver training would re conducted for all tank commanders and drivers of the First Increment as well as lor certain supervisory personnel.
A t-tal of £0 personnel were involved in the first of such training courses fcr Task Forje JHARLIE. ire division planned .to' ship the personnel no Fort Lauderdale ':'/ :'.:sm^rsial bus whil^ the equipment would be shipped by rail.
Array Transformation Terminal Command, Atlantic, on 3 November, with the personnel and equipment scheduled to arrive. at Port Everglades, Florida, on the following day.
In order to give additional assurance, one of tie four LST's would carry a complete causeway pier of. four sections.
This would. enable the LST's to carry the maximum planned weights since they, would not be required to beach.
The XVIIC Airborne' Corps recommended that these procedures be carried out in a practice landing as a preliminarr to actual operations in the Assault Phase of OPLAN 316.
It was. print id Out that' the Division' Floating Reserve was scheduled to arrive in the objective area on cargo 6hlps on D+10 and could unload at any of four possible locations.
The availability of theFloating Reserve closed. ashore was estimated at D+12.
Planning factor estimates for the. number. of tanks in the objective area on D-5-12 were approximately 300.
USC3NARC/USARLANT planners concluded that •operations.. at .thatpoint would'faver an; ihfari.tr-jr-hsavy rather .than a tank-. • heavy force.
Battalion, 81st Armor, form the On-Call Force to the Division Floating Reserve, displacing the 2nd Battalion, 52nd Infantry.
This, switch, however, would have to be accomplished; within the shipping currently allocated by the Joint Chiefs of Staff fcr'ti* Floating Reserve.
The XV'III Airborne Corps was given until the t clawing day to make a firm recommendation in this regard.
In preparation for actual assault phase movements, the boat and floating craft units of the Transportation Corps had besr. moved f crward to tia St.
Tis units wire -jr.dir trs. cemmard and/er control of the 159th Transporraticn Battalion, ^Eoat>, from.
An additional boat company and a ICOcon crane from the United States Army Transportation Terminal Command, G-l£, were also added to the amphibious element of che surface ecnelon.
CG USC3NARC directed on 3 Ntv-_n:i Page 78 of that, upon arrival at St.
Petersburg, Florida, the lC2th Traneportati -o , battalion for operational control for the duration o~f the Csban emergency.
Upon termination of the operation, that -licit .and the ecuipaii&t world revert to the control of the Co-nmanding General,, Fourth Army.
On that date the Joint Chiefs of Staff directed the Chief of ' ' Staff, United States Army to initiate action with local authorities for use of the airi pert.
On 4 November, tie 1st Armored Division was Queried by higher headp^quarters as to its capability to maintain its-taaTeat operational' reedixess posmre and its current deployment configuration without significant reduction of crmbat readinass.
Jc Frorce CHARLEE was at full TOE strength in both personnel and equipment and was in the highest possible state of readiness.
All equipment was combat loaded and tracked vehicles remained loaded on flat curs in holding «**.,-areas in the vicinity of Fort Stewart.
Personnel of the Xivisicn Floating Reserve were scheduled to close at Fort Stewart on L^-tie following day, but all equipment had already arrived.
All wheeled veils Is s ^ • wsrs already offloaded and the tracked vehicles were scheduled for eff, ; >-' loading commencing on 11 November.
Like TasK Farce CHARLIE, the personnel prof the Liviaion Floating Reserve were in alert status .and were restricted to tie Fort Stewart reservation.
Although tits -iCiirs wi-re still short a few key personnel and a few item3 of eruipment, th-vr were plaasd on a twelve-hoar alar'; status.
Although not required, the' 1st Armored Division planned to place this force under the same uniform and off -post. restrictions as the Tafrk Force and the Floating Reserve.
The 1st Armored Division concluded that a somewhat lesser state of readiness approximately a 24 hour alert status — could be maintained for an additional 30 days, or 'until abort 30 December, provided that certain of the restrictions placed on Task Force CHARLIE and the Division Floating Reserve were relaxed, Measures proposed by the 1st Armored Division included a controlled relaxation of pass and uniform policies for all' concerned and controlled offloading, and reloading of fulltrack equipment for Task Force CHARLIE in order to permit firing practice and maintenance operations.
In addition to the above situation, queries had also been nvsde as to the possibility of a ""Stand-Down"" for these forces.
The division requested authority from CINrARLANT to dispatch an additional 80 personnel to Tort Lauderdale for. such training as aeon as the. first group ccmpleted its training phase.
The divisica also requested authority to leave the pertinent equipment at Fort Lauderdale . until all this training was completed.
CUTCARLAWThad previously requested an additional LST for the movement of Task Fores C3A3LIE due to weight limitation of the old-, style LST' By 4 November j hcvev-vr, it was determined that CIFJAR 1 LAKT 1 s requirements hadLzzzeastd to four additional 7-ST's because of the incorporation if an eightinr.h icvitser battalion and a different mix of tanks resulting from tie substitution of elements of the 1st Armored Division for tbose of tha 2nd Armorad division.
The Joint Chief s cf Staff approved tie request for tie charter of. oaa additional LST on 5 Novemier and grantfcd authority to the Commander.
Military Sea Transport Service, to charter tie LST CAL-ASRO at Savannah, Georgia.
Justifying this recommesiatiaa, Third Arm pointed out-that maintenance, training, and morale would be affected significantly if these units were held in their current readiness posture beyond -9 November.
The estimated arrival of the On-Call Force vas now moved forward to 11 November.
The 2nd Battalion, 81st Armor, had been substituted for the 2nd Battalioa., 52nd Infantry, in the Division Floating Reserve and the latter unit va* aow :'jx the On-Call Force.
In addition, the 3rd Battalion, 2nd Artillery, had ssea added to the On-Call Force.
P^£"" la response to an inquiry from CINCARLANT, the Commanding General, XVIII Airborne Corps -also designated as Commander, Joint Task Fores Cuba — submitted a number of comments and recommendations ""on the composition and use of the forces allocated to OPLAN 316.
This resulted from recurring increases in both the force requirements and ^ qS^ fcrce availability as n«w intelligence information on Cuba was made -avail' ^. able.
This seemed to him to be the next logical st«p in ths development of. «'«ronger ""plan.
First of all, on D-Day the 62ad aid 101st Airborne Divisions would conduct their planned praciojae. assault and the Marines, in sufficient force, would secure the beachhead at Tarara.
Th2 2nd Infantry Division would land over-the-beach at Tarata immediately of L7A Pages W# b«hirid the Marines.
The 1st Armored Division would land through the pert at Mariel, using the maximum available assault shipping, while the ' let Infantry Division — • Xess tSs planned airlanded elements — would immediately follow the 1st Armored Division through the port of Mariel or possibly through Havana, if that port had already been opened.
This would enable the use cf the 5th Infantry, the.nd Armored, or the 4th Infantry Divisions, —the. three as a Floating.
The availability of assault shipping, however, was the primary factor which limited the ability to introduce additional forces into the initial phase of the . ' operations.
Current planning factors called for a maximum use of. the port facilities at Mdriel and, unless sufficient quantities of assault ehipping were made available, it was extremely doubtful if any more forces — in addition to those already being used in the OPLAN ~ could be placed ashore within the first eight to ten days.
During the period 19 November to 21 Deceaber, a series of joint airborne exercises called ""SUN SHADE"" were conducted for each battle group _^ of the 82nd and lOlat Airborne Divisions.
The experience gained during the Cuban emergency has resulted in the Army attaining a high state of readiness and the As«y was ready in all respects to execute military operations in Cuba in support of U 5. natiorul policy.
Naval forces involved in the Cuban operations • included Attack Carriers, with embarked Air Groups, Anti-Submarine Fo ""«» Amphibious Forces, Fleet Marine Forces, Service Forces, Mine Forces Suomarine Forces, and Naval Air Forces.
All of these naval units contriout ed signifi cantly to the readiness to execute CINCLANT OPIANS 312/316 if directed.
Provide or arrange for the logistic and administrative support of naval forces.
Anne:: J to CINCLANT OPLAN 314. f&, Direct COMKHESTFOR to support Joint Task Force 122, as required.
Anti-raider, Mine Countermeasures, and other operations { .. :r in the Atlantic Command area outside the Cuban area of operations, (Joint Zone £i;v Cuba), in order to defend the continental U.S., essential bases asd areas, JT£ shipping at sea, and United States forces deploying to or participating in the operations . set forth.
Conduct ASW operations as necessary. within the Cuban area of operations, , JxLsup'port of or in coordination with Commander Naval Task Force.
Direct Carib PHIBRON with embarked Marines to deploy to an area '.:ithin 4 hours steaming of Guantanamo Bay.
Chop Carib PHIBRON to COMANTDEFCOM; when Marines disembarked, sail PHIBRON to CONUS port for re-load. cProvide designated naval forces and direct Commander Naval.
Force, to form and' deploy Naval Task Force to vicinity of objective area.
The major combat unit assigned ::as a Marine Battalion to be air lifted to Guantanamo on order.
On 12 October COMCARIBSEAFRON recomner^.d that at the first sign that hostilities were imminent, a Regimental Headquarters and two Marine Battalion Landing Team* should be placed aCJGuantanamo and dependents evacuated.
Roosevelt Roads; a VMF Squadron be on alert status at Roosevelt Roads or CONUS; a GV be maintained at Roosevelt Roads at all times; a Destroyer Division be maintained in the Guantanamo vicinity; and a'TAO/AOG be prepared to a:.:uirc responsibility for fresh xjater resupply.
Four days later on 15 October, COMPHIBLANT recommended the immediate reinforcement of Guantanamo.
VA-35 which hadbeen assigned to COM-., NAVBASE GTMO was in place' at'McCalla by 16 October.
The decision had been made -that the adequate defense of Guantanamo reauired the presence of substantial numbers of attack aircraft, naval gunfire ""support ships and marine ground forces.
From this time forward the entire combat capability of the Atlantic Command was to be brought to bqar on the Government of Cuba.
Brigadier General Collins, USMC, Commanded the ground forces; Three marine rifle companies were in position on the main line cf resistance ; an observation plane was airborne seeking unusual activity in Cuban territory; the ESSEX was underway -to provide AAW and surveillance to the west of Guantanamo; one and a half rifle companies from the air-lifted battalion from Camp Pendleton were in place.
October; Naval gunfire ships were occupying three fire support areas; two FSU 'aircraft were providing airborne CAP and two on strip alert during daylight; PHI3R0N o was within four hours of the base, but out of the sigh™ of land.
Recognizing the shortcomings of his anti-aircraft warfare capability, en 6 October CDMNA'BASE GTMG stated that the only AAW capability was being provided by FSU type aircraft of Utility Squadron 10 and ships undergoing refresher, training.
Not c^iy would this enhance the anti-aircraft capability but. would also pryyide for improved close air support.
C0M3ARI3SEAFR0N conevrring with this recommendation further cecommended to dNCLANXIT-T that the HAWK or REDE'iE be provided for defense against no warning low level air strikes.
JHN JLrtiy.'..'-FIT ordered eight YMF aircraft equipped with Sidewinder displaced from Roosevelt Roads to Guantanamo by 21October.
COMCARIBSEAFRON' was to provide air and surface escort to protect ships and aircraft evacuating non-combatants.
Water suppIv if water source was cut off. i' To provide a means of emergency water resupply in the event the Base water source was eliminated, plans were made to have two TAO/AOG readied f-v""-?to haul water when ""required.
Base defense plans were to include attack :-to the Northeast to capture the Yteras water plant. f""*' 1 Shortage of surgical teams and whole blood supply.
On -23 October _, J^*~ the radio instructed local militiamen and soldiers, to report to the military. f*""* school at San Justo.
I ^* Cij Army, Militia, and Communist Bloc Forces in Central and Eastern Critate Provjij^r inca.
Incoming intelligence summaries in mid-November reported that .extsasivs construction was continuing at the Holguin Airfifild in Orientc.
V ■ ■ .. • bC£L The success of this air movement would hava bees. i,^. ■greatly impaired if the airfield had been exDOsed to any kind cf barraas:y^ i""g artillery or mortar fire.
As a show of fore*, G0MNA73ASE GT-AS cir^tad -• t££"" ths-t. elements of VA-35, vMA^331 t and VD'-IO provide a dawn air demonstrs.tic-n ovtr the Base on 22 October.
Fleet training had been discontinued and members of the Fleet Training Group were assigned base defense-billets. b Reporting the Base Defense situation, C0MNA7BASE GTMO reiterated to COMCARIBSEAFRON that, adequate defense against air attack was still the ^greatest weakness.
To improve 'the air. defense, 6 aircraft were directed to fly a one hour dawn patrol.
COMNAVBASE GTMO, receiving CAP and on station CAS from the ENTERPRISE and INDEPENDENCE, requested that 2 VFN be on station from sunset to sunrise and 4 VFN be on station at dawn and dusk.
In reserve were two more battalions comprised <if two • companies from the Marine Barracks, two companies of CB's and fcur ccxnparii-.s --.£ blue jackets.
ZAHX made some observations, to CINCLANT regarding the vulnerability of air"" ^;'; craft at Guantanamo.
Base at Guantanamo the minimum number of aircraft try smit -jj*sra£ioral requirements.
JL'; S-ss «rperiiti«m». ~hs ECS cams"" in from the USS OKINAWA and the jets were fcs ccme fr.se T*&'-333 at Roosevelt Roads.
A careful check was kept of all surface operations involving merchant ships, particularly those carrying cargo to or from Cuba.
CNO sent the dependents a message delivering his congratulations and respects on the manner in which they were carrying out the evacuation.
The few interruptions were Page 98 of 17A Pages r as a result of harassing tactics on the part of the Cuban military.
Suzh '< tactics as disrupting the transportation and lengthy interrogation and search ' were used.
As a matter of fact, certain on-board Cubans volunteered for w^i extra duties.
For example, 40 Cubans were standing watches with the Base p""*""** Police as the second man in a police patrol.
A significant development was I the bringing forward of evidence of 2 employees cooperating with Cuban authorities in the harassment of Base employees.
Except for one occasion .on 31 October when the 12 inch water line between, the Yateras River and pump house #5 sustained a leak, water service was normal.
As emergency measures however, 2 tankers and a water barge were available tor fresh water resupply.
The water problem just like the Cuban labor for?.i never became critical.
Marines were critically injured when they inaavcitvrrtf.lv entered a mine field.
Four other Marines and a Navy corpsman were wound&d when they attempted to remove the injured Marines.
On 6 November 2 Marine sentries accidentally ran a Ford pick-up truck through the fence line.
No Cuban officials appeared at this masticg and the matter was considered closed.
Planning .and preparations for both offensive and defensive actiens continued.
A schedule was established for relieving the units on the Main Line |:-.^,:5 of ' Resistance so that the troops could enjoy hot meals.
Watches were organL^g,ized so that the men could have adequate sleep under more comfortable csndi; tions.
And, if g^ such a state is possible under the conditions as they existed, the situation had become normal.
Thought was given toward sending liberty parties to other Caribbean islands for rest and recreation.
W» Credibility of this rumor mounted. on 21 November when the quarantine of -^£ Cuba was lifted. * fcgr$ By 28 November 1962, the situation had so improved that most of the reinforcing Marine units had been ordered returned to their home stations and ; plans were being made to have dependents back to Guantanamo by Christmas.
A minimum of three surface fire support capable/* destroyer type ships.
Maintained in readiness to provide for arrival first company 12 hours and remainder of battalion within 24 hours.
COMCRUPESFLOT SIX with 2-Cruisers; 2-DLG; 1-DDG; 9-DD; 2-DDR; 1-DDG; and 1-EDD assigned CTG 136.
Later, it was determined by U.S.aerial reconnaissence that the Cuban Air Force and the Cuban airfields were in a poor state of readiness to launch attacks against ships on the ""WALNUT"" stations.
Consequently with the approval of CINCLANT and JCS the quarantine arc was readjusted closer to Cuba but seaward of the Bahamas Chain.
Naval Air Patrol Squadrons and the Anti-Submarine Warfare Forces Atlantic Fleet provided aircraft to search the ocean approaches to Cuba.
At the outset of the Quarantine the United States Air Force provided six KB-47 aircraft and four RB-50 aircraft to augment Navy search efforts.
The six RB -47 aircraft were -oithdrawn from the quarantine effort after about a week of seaEih operations.
The majority of ships intercepted were first sighted by aircraft and than J the quarantine ships were vectored for the interception. j The Remington Rand Univac Sea Surveillance Computer System was the pripj'j* mary method of tracking the merchant shipping to and from Cuba.
The beat C^ information' on point of departure, course and speed for each ship was entered Bou. in the computer.
A read-out every two hours listed the latitude and longtit^ ude of each ship of dnterest.
The initial frequency of the STTSUMS was six per day which was ; reduced to three per day commencing 31 October 1962.
Others with non-suspicious cargo ■slowed or even stopped, seemingly awaiting guidance from the Kremlin.
It was during. this phase that JKE"" CINGIANTFLT promulgated the code name SCOTCH TAPE followed by a numeral todesignate a suspect ship which might warrant special attention.
This code j name facilitated unclassified reference to a particular merchant ship. j During this phase, eleven SCOTCH TAPE ships were observed outbound from Cuba.
The masters of the Soviet ships accepted close Observation in varying degree, in some cases willingly, in other cases j reluctantly.
During the first phase, Quarantine Operations were held in abeyance on 30 and 31 October 1962 during the visit of Secretary General U Thant of the United Nations to Cuba.
The name, call signs and hull numbers of all USN combatant ships were indicated in the.
As a result, it was necessary to initiate an extensive special air and surface search to intercept the nine Soviet ships.
Mention should be made of the excellent capability of the ASW carrier groups to participate in such an effort.
KOMSOMOL 6 42 6 8 . • 2 6 2 7 5 8 42 representatives was not entirely -accurate. _ tw<™ Phase Three, CTF 81 continued routine and special air searches operations on the.
This Quarantine Operation was unique in naval annals and it could well , h«Jd a pat^Sn of future naval operations.
The two considerations listedin the preceeding paragraph were fulfills* by cScW readily and with no .undue difficulty.
Sec ondly, the <*»-J-^™ were closely directed from Washington, presumably to insure that ^diplomatic and military endeavorscomplemented eachother and"" would noat any time be working at cross purposes.
Even *,, M-. damage incurred did not render either ship incapable of c « r '^^ £"" assign-d missions the CHESTNUT line.
Pag^is ^'^Kpjaf^""-^ 2 *** 3 rt:ary <nt the skill, enthusiasm and spirit of the officers and enlisted personnel involved.
This deployment was directed by COMSECONDFLT in response to a CINCLANTFLT directive that in order to reduce reaction time it was desired, until further notice that a CVA be located in Mayport or operate in or south of the Mayport area to the maximum extent practicable.
What started as a routine deployment was to become A3 days of steady steaming for INDEPENDENCE before she returned to her home port.
ENTERPRISE had returned to CONDS after a European deployment on 11 October.
This OPORD provided ; the basis for naval actions in support of CINCIANT OPIAN 312.
Reinforcement of Guantanamo; evacuation of dependents and non-combatant 3 from Guantanamo. by COMANTDEFCOM; deployment by CG FMFLANT of a 4 squadron MAS to Key Vest and squadrons as required to establish a three 6quadroh MAG at Roosevelt Roads.
Commander Naval Task Force with shore and carrier based aircraft was, commencing at H-Hour, to strike assigned targets in Cuba and provide air defense and close air support to Guantanamo.
C0KCARDT7 SIX was intiaily designated Commander Naval Force and CCMCARDI7 TWO was to be directed to assume command when appropriate.
CG FMFLANT. upon execution was to deploy one MAG to Key West and CHOP it to CINCAFIANT, and, if not previously directed, reinforce Guantanamo with cne air lifted battalion and the required ..sea lifted echelon.
PHIBRON and CHOP itto COM GTMO Sector, CARZBSEAFRON . and retain' one PHIBRON with embarked Landing Force in the Caribbean.
Commander Antilles Defense Command on the 20th made certain recommendation with respect to control of forces.
He further recommended that air units at Guantanamo remain under. the control of COMNAY; BASE GTMO and that CTF i35 allocate targets to these units from the approved target list.
By message to COMSECONDFLT, CG FMFIANTand COMNAVAIRLANT, CINCLANTFLT on the 20th directed COMNAVAIRLANT to hold the ENTERPRISE A3J aircraft ashore.
OOHSECONDFLT was told to direct ENTERPRISE to take aboard a 20 plane Marine A4D squadron.
CG FMFLANT was told to provide the squadron and fly planes, personnel and equipment aboard as soon as possible and not later than 21.
COMCARDIV SIX requested C0MCARDI7 TOO to inform him of readiness to attack assigned targets in first strike and statad his desire for early reconnaissanceand destruction -of KOMARs.
In a follow-upmessage, COMCARDiv SIX further defined . approach/retirement areasand statsd his -i^tantions to remain north of Cuba until after first day of operations.
If directed to hit allocated targets only, strike against^targete connected with the defense of Guantanamo would be~under taken if the Cuban forces -committed an act of aggression against the base or if previously directed by.
During this period there was a large volume of traffic relating to target assignments and weapons selection.
ENTERPRISE with FISKE, {* RUSH and HAWKINS commenced movement via Mayaguana and Windward Passages. «jj INDEPENDENCE with ENGLISH, HANK, CORRY and O'HARE followed through Windward • ^ Passage.
L» A * ternate day refuelings continued until the departure of COMDARDTV TWO from . the area on 5 December.
Had any plan been executed, all units would have ; b^n""op»£ off^ornea^ ed periods without refueling.
Fuelings were scheduled to occur *« °""°* each day to permit the beginning of limited flight operations on completion.
The uncertainties of any readiness for contingency plans required all units S bHept a5 a high logistics level, thus considerable effort was made to maintain this level.
SS move was ideal for submarine protection and an effort was made to operate in the vicinity of shoals present in the area.
Because of the increased distance ana transit time involved the Windward Passage air patrol was -cured on 29 October.
Due to the • number of forces positioned south of Cuba a proposal was initiated to position a tender at Kingston, Jamaica for TAV purposes.
TG 44. assumed TF -128 ' task ' • organization, dividing into two groups one stationed in San Juan area and one south of Jamaica.
By thiB means the tempo of air operations training was increased by providing one fully ready CVA and one CVA with slightly reduced readiness.
This method of alternating the ready duty was continued until the departure. of INDEPENDENCE and. greatlyincreased the flight operations conducted by both CTA's.
RDVDS TG 135. TRTSKEE, PAWCATUCK, KANKAKEE, GREAT SITKIN, MA2AMA with ENGLISH and STTCKELL. as escorts.
On 25 November a fatal aircraft accident occurred during the catapult launch of an.
Caribbean Area with one carrier .on station and a second carrier in CONUS on call.
I tracked, or investigated 2? .contacts in the Western Atlantic. j On 21 October no submarine contacts were under active prosecution.
Cuba would be forthcoming and additional ASW forces would be ™<«j£«** the southern Florida area.
Aircraft operating from NAF Lajes continued to perform dally surveillance in the vicinity of the TEREK, to ensure continuous contact and possible Soviet submarines attempting to rendezvous with Jie ship.
Several ASW aircraft were directed to intercept csr-ain Soviet shipping enroute to Cuba.
On 24 October 17 VP aircraft and 10 submarines were directed to deploy to the Naval Station Argentia to provide forces for an Argentia Sub-Aix Barrier.
HUK unit,, was directed to proceed and rendezvous with the USS DEPENDENCE group and to provide ASW protection.
This^ -tion^e Fleet ^ Commander advised, could be a deliberate counter action by the Soviets p against quarantine forces.
The Chief of Staff, United States Air Force offer ""of USAF aircraft for aerial surveillance of. shipping utilizing B-52 aircraft was accepted j£«~J*« \ 6atrol were assigned.
On the 26th of October CINCIANTFLT reported hisconcern over^the shortJ»"" age of ASW torpedoes and strongly urged an increase in delivery of these weapons.
The submarine situation >nth e ftlantic basin indicated that Soviet subs were making *f * f ^^S^ east of the Argentia Barrier.
Identifying numbers, were pain.ed ou.. gand photographs of the sub. were obtained. -^ On 30 October the quarantine was suspended commensurate with the visit of United Nations Secretary General U Thant to Cuba.
In additisa, ASW-,„-.,— f • s participated in surveillance operations for Soviet snipping ■ S^e"" to remove offensive weapons from Cuba.
The code word ""S^3 TAPE"" £ SrS-slinated for use when merchant ships were kept under actual swrailx-nsa ^ £ ei-Cr air or surface «r.lT3.
Details of ""SCOTCH TAPE"" operations |S2L are noted in the section, on Quarantine Operations.
On 1 November the TEREK was observed continuing on her south we3t2rly -cu-sThe CAT^TERRA «ho was shadowing the TEREK observed what appsared to oe'signals from the TEREK' s search light.
There was no confirmation, howvr, that TEREK was actually signalling a -submarine.
A P3A aircraft waa punched to search 2 l^ a Lea to the north of the Azores.
One new submarine contact . 5efignated""-35 was reported southeast of Bermuda, The contact was placad ^nder continUous""~VP surveillance.
Surveillance would continue until TEREK was in Jm. vicinity of 55N and was observed on its homeward course.
Lrine contact was reported by. a HATS flight southeStt-of -Charleston, K~., however,, it wa« ^f. low validttyw^ha-.axea-.was -.kept under survs.llance.
A S2F tracker squadron, , was deployed to the Marine .orps Air^ Station at Cherry Point, N.C. for a period of 4 days to provide ASW co,zr far amphibious, operations.
No new contacts were reported and no significant information en oJ ^ c ' s were made.
Prom the 19th through the 20th of Norsmber ASW forces were primarily employed in ""SCOTCH TAPE"" operations with no significant unidenti-isd st-3marine, activity reported.
On the 25th of November, just as it appeared that the tempo cf operations would subside, two new sub contacts were reported.
No sigoilxcant < «^t""occurred from the 28th through the 1st of December.
This force of combined United States and Latin American Naval Forces took an active part in the quarantine of Cuba.
There had bees little warning in tie Force that crisis was building up over Cuba.
Therefore, it was with some surprise that the United States ships, listening over short wave radio, heard the President say, ""Thifl urgent transformation of Cuba into an important strategic base — by the presence of these long-range, and clearly offensive weapons of sudden -mass destruction — consitutes an.
On Hedaxsday morning, the 24th of October, QOMSOLANT was directed to return to Trinidadwith key members of his staff as soon as possible.
On request, the senior Chilean and ""Peruvian officers transferred to MULLINNIX to be briefed on the situation.
Upon arrival the morning of the 25th, COMSOIANT and most of the members of his staff boarded the UNITAS United States Air detachment aircraft and flew to Trinidad, arriving the morning of 26 October.
CINCIANTFLT ordered the establishment of a quarantine force which would be placed in position to intercept shipping going to and from Cuba to the northeast.
However, this force permitted free access to the Caribbean area through the Le6ser Antilles passages.
Accordingly, CINCIANTFLT cancelled bis direct"" ive and ordered COMSOLANT to report to C3NCIANT for operational control.
Having only recently returned from an extensive period at sea, most of their crews had been on leave and the ships were undergoing repair when the quarantine was established.
These officers and men had.experience in cryptography and in radio communication and could also speak Spanish or, in a few tfaseo, Portuguese.
COMaOi^NT and staff normally consisted of the Admiral, 8 officers and 20 enlisted men.
After the augmentation, the staff had expanded to 25 officers and 51 men, £f vhich 10 Officers and 20 men were earmarked for the express purpose of assignment to Communications-Liaison Teams.
A third Ven«ueUu AJfe. the submarine ARV CARTTE remained on call iTvene^uelTaSiting orders to take part in the operation.
There ™J"" d •need for her services at the"" time, but it was planned to use her in combined anti-submarine exercises later.
On hand to greet the Argentine ships whenthey-arrived in Trinidad «B RADM Grunwaldt, the Argentine Naval Attache ^Wash^gton.
It became apparent Mediately after tne compined operation was • ordered-.that.
Naval Station, Trinidad, ^ ;P rovides^l c^i^ tloj^ support for COMSOIANT headquarters when ashote, would be stable .o provide either the number of circuits needed to conduct the operation nor t*_ guarantee the necessary reliability.
These limitations were due to lack ofequipment, age and obsolescence of the equipment installed «*""*■£ ations ^numbefof communication personnel.
Center was quickly built la_ COMSOIANT's headquarters building, the message center was _^^«* t °* aadU the increased volume of traffic, which had mere than tripled due to the crisSrand ofSce space with equipment was made available for the augmented staff; The departure of Task Force""l37 on 12 November J 9 ""^^^^^. patrol stations was a history-making event, it marked-the first. time tha.
The heavily travelled As the ships reached their assigned patrol stations, their reports of oercnanfshlp contacts began to reach the COMSOIANT OPCON Centex, where thsr were recorded and plotted.
They were in *xtresely poor condition, particularly with regard to their engineering plaaxtar, and had to be giver an immediate tender availability in order to make them ready of operations.
Howevsr, the quarantine, ended before either of these ships put to sea.
AH ships of Task Force 137, with the exception of the Dominican Republic ships, had computed one patrol before President Kennedy announced the end of the quarantine at his press conference on Tuesday, 20 November.
The following day, 7 December, operational control .of the 7enesuelan ships was returned to the Venezuelan Navy and. the' ships were sailed for home.
The Chief of Naval Operations hailed the Latin American participation in the quarantine as an historic milestone in hemisphere relations and perscnallv thanked his counterparts in Argentic,, the Dominican Republic and Venezuela for their contributions to the commcn effort.
SS3H, Claris equipped submarinas), vers on statian In assigned patrol areas In normal soaxigarattoa.
C0MSU3IANT immediately prcraailsatad.an A^Sin^. to the submarine force aatting DEFCON 3 to Insure that all eubasar ins units were advised.
Units at sea ■ earmarked for deployment wars directed .t:r rsfjrntoport and load cut with wartime torpedo lead and ten off for teasia-a estanded operations.
The ensuing paragraphs axe not all inclusive and only highlight Service Force operations.
The force sailed, for the ..vicinity ,;■• I of Vieques Island, PuertoRico, for the scheduled exercise. j On 22 October 1962 the USS ENTERPRISE and her destroyer screen joined ^ the exercise Task Force and SERVRON FOUR provided the logistic support for Mj* these ships.
Also on this date COMSERVLANT activated the SERVLANT. war xocm ^ on a 24 hour basis consistent with the President's announcement concerning **the Quarantine of Cuba. • On -24October.
CCMSERVRON TWO was designated CTG 136.3. <g Ships of the Service Force undergoperiodic refresher training in the . fg Guantanamo area.
As the scope of Naval operations broadened it became obvious that J* additional tankers would be required to support the fleet.
The need for these fahips was recognized, and two ""black"" and two ""white"" ^STS tankers were assigned to resupply underway replenishment groups.
By 25 October replenishment utilizing ELOKOKIN . and CKIKASKIAin thesouthern mostsector, NEOSHO and KANKAKEE in the middle sector and KASKASKIA in the northern sector was operating satisfactorily.
On 29 October the underway replenishment group commander for the Quarantine forces.
Underway replenishment for the force was directed to conform to this 1-ne.
The Service Force use of TA0:«s was c-nsidered satisfactory after initial difficulties in ""hock ups"" were resolved.
Getting the men fe their u-its was cc^U^tsc by lack of tranaFage -^7 I portation to the operating force. c nor ^^n it became apparent that neither of the two After a few weeks of <*£*£££% ope Stiona without, periodic reURG's could.maintain *• Jfjgft^rf ^rt required, it™ necessary lief. ^^^^taff foremploymeTt In successive relief *f the rJ^""«'on d ^e TineT Accordingly^CO^RVDIV 21. and a email staff was as^led and scheduled to sail on 19 November.
L/T of fleet -.freight to ships'** TF 135, varying front electronic tubes to jet aircraft engines.
In one 24 hour period, TRUCKEE fueled and consolidated a total of 23 hours.
After Joining COMSERVRON FOUR on 15 -October, USS MAZAMA steamed continuf ' ously until 3 December meeting all commitments without incident.
During these fewhqurs in• x Roosevelt Roads, MAZAMA personnel accomplished a task that normally would I have required two days.
IF UA '^^^""STtOaelLTeacWa terminated and CO*.. to avoid, the .hurricane.
Because Page . la the mear.ta, COrfPHIBRON 6 had arrived in Norfolk and was taking cm fuel and Visions.
This entire movement unit then proceeded through the Mona Passage to a pointsouth of the taid^part of the Dominican Repuolic.
At the same t<J ^Caribbean Ready PHIBRON 8 consisting of two AP A,,, an ALA^ an LSD and an APD continued toward Guantanamo.
The President announced the quarantine cf Cuba/ CNO authorized release of 5»j«* Tate stocks.
North Carolina and sail for the Caribbean. <~ wnu AST's activities on 22 October COMPRTBLANT was in ■J2 w4,vHm to outibad-BLT ^ 3/8.
The CHILTON va, .directed to proceed to Korehead City. event a combat situation ensued.
C0MFH3LANT and COKPHIBGRU FOUR conferred, and it was decided that C0MFH3LANT would return to Norfolk, disembark irom the Mt.
McXBHEX, shift his flag to Little Creek and assign the AGC to CCMFHT5GRT FOUR as his flagship.
Later COMFHIBGRU FOUR effected a rendezvous with SOMFRTBRON 8 near San Salvador.
On 24 October the staff s of COMFHIBGRU' TWO ' and CG, XVIII Airborne Corps conferred regarding the armored division lift from Fort Lauderdale by four older LSI' COMSTS also had representatives present.
COMPHIBRON 6 and COMPHIBRON 12 reported to COMFHIBGRU "" FOUR cn 24 October.
In turn COMPHI3R0N 6 was directed to take his squadron to a point northward of Northeast Providence Channel.
On 27 October the souadron commander was ordered to rendezvous his group off Charleston when lading was completed.
In the meantime, not all of the Amphibious Force ships were playing their role as members -oaf the,Task Force.
This ; versatile 1156 class LST remained uncommitted to the Task Force 44 organization until 6 November.
She loaded in five ports, offloaded in three ports and steamed a total distance of nearly 5,000 miles.
Only those forces assigned to COMPHIBIANT, CTF44 operational control were to be activated under TF U8.
COMPHIBGRU THREE was further instructed to proceed within 24 hours steaming of Guantanamo and, upon ""rival, maintain one half of his forces in readiness at saa.
Wher loading out vas completed on 31 October, C0MPHI3LANI JJ«""^^ ed roJ£*uIr REP at Norfolk but established a REP at Maypcrt.
At this point a question arose relative to the control of «BTS shipping invoWefin Se operation.
By 2 November all FrilBIANT units assigned to the Cuban cpe rat ^ were loaded and formed Into the TaskForce -44"" organization, fe basicoper.a ; ^ cnal pattern of the holding operation was new firmly establishes .ask groups steaSo beyond visual ran^e of land in separate holding areas with.xn tne l^thJctew off the northern Florida coast.
Each group was required « -^tiln gjog.pMcji pLition, material and personnel readiness to arrive "".^^^r'S^n well within the required reaction time.
STlibsrty necessary for material readies and hi** ««J. . ,« -ajcr remains -rcactrsnant was for a landing arsa t-3 conduct rsr.ear^als andcrvidS^SStoS^ps with excise ashore.
This was the ^J^^f^ this decision all with this number of LFH available.
All ^ee^ve^^ * * ""-* ^ ""™ ^^ accordingly. ■V -m t£e ^ietoity 6£ the « st '^^^f^glSen stn S«dor and Northeast OKISAUS. and TBETIS.EAY.. vera on atatlon bet«en a Sovidenee Channel.
Atlantic Movement Element ALFA ONE MT McKINLEY CHILTON ROCKBRIDGE CAFRICORNUS ALGOL LINDENWALD DESOTO COUNTY TRAVERSE COUNTY (LST 1160} LTDDLE C-E 128.3.1.
Atlantic Movement Element BRAVO ONE BOXER 2 THETIS BAY OKINAWA UVALDE RANKIN FT SNELLING SHADWELL LORAIN COUNTY CTE 128.3.1.
Pa S es ■%^HA--^<\^^-C:■gecas^aas^^ ;^2223i**Qli^iWSCi6S£V*tJ^^ COLONIAL THOMASTON CTE 128.4.8.
PACRIB Movement Element BRAVO ONE BAYFIELD RENVILLE WASHBURN ; ■■• BELLE GROVE ■ CARTER HALL CTE 128.4.9.
In addition, CNO vas advised of the possibility that all eleven LST of the Atlantic Reser^ Fleet might be needed.
Developments concerning these LST rare followed wi-h great interest at FHIBLANT headquarters.
Additional LST vo-ald have «*Vre4.«» of the most difficult problems of the Cuban operatione. the precis icacf adequate, timely amphibious lift for the Army Armored Division.
As a satfier of fact, late -in November CINCLANTFLT further reconnended ta vAO that -as many LST As feasible be transferred, to class ""^selected Reserve status In the Atlantic Reserve Fleet if it vere decided not to • activate tne elersn ^T for the Atlantic Fleet.
Page 15Q of W L Pages ■fe fa* jT-Vj-ii CINCIANT notified CINCARIANT, COMPHIBU^NT and CG FMFIANT of a Pi*™** CINCLMfi no Kovember to resolve the problem of over the conference sfcheduled tor u r '° ve °° co „tin ee ncY plan.
Upon the arrival of POCONO at Norfolk on 12 November, COMFHIBUNT shifted ""his flag aboard.
At 0700, 16 November 1962, the high poin t of '^^^^J^f^ On conclusion of *, Undlng « ^^» ^""^^f ^^^3""Mayport-Charleston or the holding area. factrscmTof the Marine units made three landings.
With the lifting .of the quarantine operations on 21 November ^%<jempo _ of operations began to draw rapidly to a conclusion.
Nevertheless, COMPHIBLANT directed COMPHIBGRU FOUR to Conduct a landing exercise at Ons low on 28 November.
In addition COMPHIBGRU TWO was directed to inspect four chartered commercial LST that had been contracted fori He waa to determine the specific material, personnel and training requirements necessary to «ake their use feasible.
COMSERVIANT was notified that at least two tenter/, repair ships were required in the Jamaica-Puerto Rico area to maintain -he readiness -of FHXBGRU THREE :ships.
Arrangements were made through CGMCR^SS IANT that the YOSEHTTE would remain at Kingston, Jamaica to provide tend*, repairs for PHIBGRU THREE ships.
DEFCON FIVE was set in theAtlantic Flee, and Dispersal Condition FOUR was ordered in CONUS ports.
Shortly before midnight, the uncertainty concerning the stand-oown ■ was "".ended.
THREE ships the msxiauni number of personnel and equipment of the Marine battalion that had SSTfro.
Additionally, the .headquarters functioned as Headquarters, II Marine Expeditionary Force from 23 October to 6 December.
Evacuation of dependents from NAVBASE GTMO, Reconnaissance flights oyer Cuban territory, and Preparation for the defense of GTMO; limited aerial attacks on specified military targets; in Cuba; and anamphibious assault by. the -II MET : in Joint operations to seize Cuba.
West, NAS Roosevelt Roads and NAS Guantanamo, in preparation for the execution -of OPIAN 312.
The 2nd Marine Division, together with aviation command elemsnts and helicopters were embarking in preparation for the execution of OPLAN 314/316.
CBHBWM3IAHT and 33 WlfiC «r* ' scheduled to rotate the assignment on a monthly basis.
This organization had been engaged in connection with operations in Missiasippii with XVIII airborne Corps elements in the suppression of a civil disorder.
In -view of the lack of currently available airfields to support operations in Eastern Cuba, CG FMFLANT recommended that VMAs quadrons.be based aboard CVA upon execution of the contingency plans.
Report one MAG to CKCAFLANT for .planning and to deploy this MAG to Key West and chop to CINCAFLANT on exesution of this order.
RLT-6 arrived GTMO and chopped to Brigadier General Collins, USMC, the SuLtanaao Ground Uefeuse Commander.
PHIBRON 8, «P™ ^^ o7Z loading was directed to return to CONUS to embark additional II VS& units.
A battery from the 3d XAAM Battalion was ordered to Ouantanamo by air to report to the Commanding Officer, MAG-32.
By ^late in the day all assigned forces were in place at GTMO except the IAAM battery which was in the process of being emplaced.
On 26 October, as a result of an .approved. recommendation ^°S %CjQG• -IAOTsubsequentfanning for execution 6f OFIAN 314,was abandoned; in .faror of OPLAN 316.
Planning for embarkation of the II MEF, until 27 October, P*ovldedfor COMPASS/CAS and CG, II MEF to embark .in the Mt.
Actions during the following period 'were directed toward maintaining readiness cf deployed forces for a prolonged period, the modification and refinement of the designated plans, and occasional deployment of smaller ut.j.-s.
On 3 November CINCIANT requested ah estimate cf the time tne IKEF could maintain an advanced state of readiness.
After consideration of the posture of II MEF units, and recommendations of task group commanders, CG 7MFLANT established 20 December 1962, as the terminal date of tne period .in. wh<ch satisfactory readiness could be maintained.
Thsse two increments were scheduled for rotation at 10 day i-.t-rva is . 7 m Landing Group West was authorized to conduct a full scale exercise at Camp Lejeune, followed by separation into three increments.
The schedule provided fot one increment to conduct maintenance and training in Camp Cjlune, one increment on liberty in Florida and Carolina ports, and one increment remaining at sea and conducting landing exercises in the Mayport aria.
These three increments were scheduled for rotation at seven day ""tervals.
Either action would provide a rotation capability for training purposes, ""^as further recommended that a VMF be deployed from FMFPAC to provide a similar VMF rotation capability.
The following day CINCIANTFLT dlrwtad COM PHI3IA3T ar* CG J*^** embark BLT 2/1 at GTMO aboard PH3CEJ 3 snipping, ana to 1 M oR-3 ic-a-ntally to West Coast ports when loaded.
CINCLANTFLT further directed the II MEF less BLT 2/2 and BLT 1/8 to return to home stations.
MAG14, ""VMA-121, and the Det VMF-235 commenced returning to home bases -on 1 December.
CINCLANTFLT further directed that a PHTBRON be sailed to GTMO and Roosevelt Roads to embark BLT .2/2 and MAG-32 less VMF-115 and return them to home stations by 15 December.
On 15 December all FMFLANT/li MEF contingency deployments we're, termfc^ted and routine readiness measures reestablished except for MAG14 and MAG-32 which have been placed on 48 hour reaction for portions of OPLAN 312.
General Lemay approved the plan in principle, and directad General Walter C Sweeney, Jr., COMTAC, to inform Admiral Robert L Dennison > CINLANT, that, if he should approve the plan, it would receive the full support of the Air Force.
The plan was approv. ed, and vas adopted by CINCLANT as the air assault portion of existing' Cuba Contingency Plans.
Also at this time, command arrangements were established which placed General Sweeney in the. .position of::air component commander to CINCIANT. ■ CINCAFLANT was to have operational control of all TAC aircraft and those shore-based Navy and Marine aircraft committed to the Cuba Contingency which were not directly related to the defense of Guantanamo.
Accordingly, all AFLANT forces were placed on full alert status and moved into their employment bases in Florida.
Conferences were held with Army, Navy and Marine planning groups to insure maximum integration -cf effort and the fullest exploitation possible of the air assault plan in the errant the invasion -plan should be implemented.
As .a reeult of the deployment, TAC aircraft at the Florida employment bases iacrjgased -vary rapidly.
The target date could not have been met without the full """"P*""""^ an* t<ll2^Lsistance of all concerned.
Teamwork and singleness of ^ e P^evarielTtwe^ the military services and full support was Sceived from the JCS .and the Governmental agencies in Washington.
SSSTthTSr Force, support of the operation was jlf^^^, T^tJL^^lX H e oTtead Setty^ oT^esT v^eraole^^ ""nderec^^ ^~ * l Xtactes.
It must also be remembered that fe^'^e resident mlde hour airborne alert beginning 22 Octooer just berore the President ma Page . ^gj-^ gjcareu ffl'-gf-ft' fFWTaqr gar&iaagEaag. jM^y^y7^ ; 7^»S£aggga^ *# the Quarantine announcement.
Air Defense Command and Continental Air Defense Forces immediately moved into southern Florida bases to protect the area from air attack and to assist in controlling reconnaissance and combat air patrol flights.
Air Force air defense intercepters in Florida flev more than 2,000 individual fighter patrols and maintained a 24-hour orbit of several strategic points cff Florida.
MATS aircraft assisted greatly in the airlift of the thousands pf . personnel and tons of cargo into the southeast United States.
It was largely because of the outstanding efforts of the Air Force Logistics Command and the Air Force Communication Service that the 20 October^ target date, was met.
However, reserve par t:expat ion in the Cuba crisis did not begin or sud with this active duty period.
In addition, during the crisis period, tuese reserve fleets airlifted almost two and one-half million pounds more and over 120O passengers into Florida.
These reserve personnel handled, their mobilization tasks in ^ a smooth and prefessional manner, and with high morale.
Ir '^f ^^S^/^H personnel were 7 Air Liaison Officers, 32 Forward Air .on-rcllers, and b SSS control teams, all to be airdropped alcng ^^J^S^ld. remaining Air Force personnel were to be airlanded to opera e the airfield, and handle the airlanding aircraft.
Of the more than ""'°°° ^£*J°; T^ to be introduced on D-Day, 14,500 were paratroopers, which is C ™P*^"" the United States Airborne Forces dropped during the Normandy invasion.
