May.22 THE CUBAN MISSILE CRISIS, 1962 Overt Confrontation, Covert Diplomacy and Downright Luck R GERALD HUGHES * I never thought I would live to see the day when I wanted to go to war.
General Earle Wheeler, Chief of Staff of the United States Army, October 20, 1962 1 If they carry out an attack on Cuba, a barbaric, illegal, and immoral act, then that would be the time to think about liquidating such a danger forever through a legal right of self-defense.
However harsh and terrible such a decision would be, there is no other way out in my opinion.
For the US, the crisis was initiated by the deployment of Soviet ballistic missiles in Cuba.
In the end it was resolved by negotiation, although the clandestine nature of much of this meant that the details remained a closely-guarded secret for many years after the crisis.
It seemed only a matter of time before the United States would invade Cuba and end the Cuban Revolution permanently.
FROM ESCALATION TO SECRET AGREEMENT By June 1962 Castro had acceded to Khrushchev’s request to install ballistic nuclear missiles on Cuba.
The installation of these missiles began later that summer in strict secrecy.
Kennedy was under no small amount of domestic political pressure over Cuba.
Republican politicians such as Senator Homer Capehart and Senator Barry Goldwater gleefully denounced Kennedy for his weakness in the face of the communist threat posed by Cuba.
In the Senate on October 10, 1962, Keating warned that the Soviets were actually installing nuclear missiles in Cuba.
On September 19, the CIA asserted that it was unlikely that the Soviets would deploy missiles in Cuba.
On October 14, 1962, a United States U2 spy plane photographed Soviet R-12 medium-range ballistic missiles in Cuba.
United States vulnerability to Soviet missiles was hardly new. – Overt diplomacy: pressurise the USSR to remove the missiles. – Covert diplomacy: make an approach to Castro to try and split him from the Soviets. – An invasion of Cuba. – Air strikes against Cuba. – A blockade of Cuba.
On October 16, the main actors in the National Security Council began to meet as the so-called Executive Committee , although this body was only officially established on October 22.
By the afternoon of October 19, 1962, senior figures in the Kennedy administration was leaning towards the blockade option, but a significant—and skeptical—minority advocated air strikes to neutralize the threat from Cuba.
In particular, Kennedy’s military advisers remained unconvinced, 12 and it was clear that more moderate responses were strictly limited in the time they had to effect a change in Soviet policy.
On October 22 Kennedy addressed the nation and made it clear that he would not permit offensive weapons to remain in 7 SNIE 85-3-62, “The Military Buildup in Cuba”, September 19, 1962.
After several days of tension, on October 26 Khrushchev sent a conciliatory proposal that, whilst still under consideration in Washington, was followed by a letter setting out a hard-line position.
At this juncture Attorney General Robert F Kennedy, the president’s brother, suggested replying only to Khrushchev’s first letter, and accepting its terms.
The deal that ended the crisis entailed the Soviet Union dismantling and removing its offensive weapons from Cuba.
The deal also involved a secret assurance whereby the United States agreed that it would dismantle all its Jupiter MRBMs in Turkey.
The first letter on the fateful weekend of the crisis had requested only the “no-invasion” pledge from the US; the second additionally demanded the removal of the Jupiters from Turkey.
To accede to this latter demand in public would have been political suicide for Kennedy.
A secret agreement effectively robbed Khrushchev of any significant political capital he could derive from the resolution of the crisis.
HESITATING AT THE BRINK OF NUCLEAR WAR For many years, the members of the group that had conducted United States policy during the crisis acted to preserve the myth that Kennedy had stood firm and refused to withdraw the Jupiters.
The “Quarantine” of Cuba ended on November 21, 1962, following the departure of the Soviet missiles.
Influential insider accounts cast Kennedy in heroic mold, an individual who had mastered the structures of international politics.
And, in fairness, the taped consultations demonstrate that Kennedy had successfully managed the crisis to a remarkable extent, although he had been assisted by Khrushchev and enjoyed some real strokes of fortune.
The nuclear age demanded better lines of direct communication and, in June 1963, the Moscow-Washington Hot Line was established.
The pursuit of détente, so Kennedy’s admirers insisted, would have been a central policy of a Kennedy second term.
Between 1987 and 1992, the historiography of the crisis was driven forward by critical oral history conferences.
During the 1989 Moscow conference, McNamara continued to downplay the risk of war in October 1962 and found support for his position from Sorensen and Bundy.
Indeed, the underestimation of Soviet forces in Cuba in 1962, allied to the pressures for a military solution, meant that the United States was far closer to war with the USSR than anyone realized at the time.
In negotiation terms, the absence of trust, the information asymmetry between the two sides and the lack of direct communication between the military headquarters make the event look very vulnerable to an escalation.
That the Cuba crisis avoided this trap due to luck should encourage political leaders to continue to think about how to handle such extreme cases.
Not surprisingly, the main practical lesson of this 1962 situation was the establishment of the Moscow-Washington hotline.
This demonstrated that, beyond whatever strategies can be put in place in order to handle such gamed theoretical cases , 30 crisis management and détente require constant interaction and negotiation.
In “chicken”, war is the mutual worst option, whilst defeat is the second-worst option.
THE MUNICH SYNDROME The disastrous policy of Appeasement in the 1930s had forever handicapped policymakers in their pursuit of peaceful solutions to diplomatic crises.
DOMESTIC POLITICS AND INTERNATIONAL POLICY It was the combination of high-risk nuclear gamble and volatile domestic political considerations that made the Cuban missile crisis so dangerous.
In the nuclear age the delicate art of balancing the maintenance of vital national interests against the danger of nuclear war has strained the sinews of statesmen for over 70 years now.
MCNAMARA, Robert S., BLIGHT, James, BRIGHAM, Robert K with Thomas J BIERSTEKER, Col.
