Library of Congress, and other archives for relBut the book is sufficiently provocative to evant materials; interviewed Clark Clifford; merit serious consideration on its own and and read widely in the literature of the period should be read by anyone interested in the under examination.
Much of the evidence cold war and American civil liberties. needed to prove anything conclusively about Professor Freeland's thesis is that after the the events covered in this book remains beyond war the Truman administration became conthe reach of scholars, but Professor Freeland is vinced that massive economic aid to Western to be congratulated for posing a challenging Europe was necessary to develop American ecothesis that should stimulate historians for a nomic and strategic interests (largely the forlong while. mer) on the Continent.
Little, Brown and Company.71. shall Plan was the ""main battle"" in the forging Pp. xii, 338.
In the ten years following those thirteen Train-a device that attempted, according to days when the world's two most powerful naFreeland, to elevate the Truman Doctrine to tions ""paused at the nuclear precipice,"" critics the level of the Constitution. of the Kennedy mystique have raised serious Numerous efforts have been made, of course, questions about the necessity and wisdom of to pin the blame for the cold war and Mcthat policy.
Only one of these books deals exCarthyism on Truman, and this study suffers clusively with the missile crisis, but all three, from some of the defects of its predecessors.
It for quite different reasons, consider it the underestimates the role of Congress in the touchstone of Kennedy's foreign policy and a drive for internal security legislation, mini""major watershed in the Cold War."" mizes Truman's contributions to the defense of Because of its analytical complexity Allison's civil liberties, exaggerates the political uses of book deserves a brief summary.
Writing under anti-Communism prior to Dewey's defeat, and, the auspices of the Faculty Seminar on Buabove all, makes little effort to describe those reaucracy, Politics, and Policy of the Institute of events at home and abroad that might have Politics in the John Fitzgerald Kennedy School given Americans good reason to fear Commuof Government at Harvard, Allison describes the nist aggression and subversion.
First there is the classical or the Air Force and because of a misunderstand""rational actor"" model, which is most often ing between civilian and military leaders over employed by diplomatic historians to explain the effectiveness of a ""surgical"" versus a ""masforeign-policy decisions.
Finally the Soviing what rational, strategic choices would be ets withdrew their missiles, partially because of made by key individuals for their nations withthe confusion created by' the few top Soviet ofout reference to any of the internal, personal, ficials who actually were aware of their emor bureaucratic machinations within their replacement and partially because actions by spective governments.
Viewed from this concompeting agencies created a contradictory sitceptual frame of reference, the missile crisis, it uation in which the left hand of the USSR did is assumed, can best be explained in terms of not know what the right one was doing.
According to this the burden of further escalation back to the pluralist model foreign-policy decisions are the Soviets, who finally withdrew their missiles not product of decentralized coordination (shared because of the blockade itself, as most published power) of the various pressures emanating from accounts have claimed, but because it was courepresentatives of interest groups inside and pled with the implicit threat of an air strike outside of government.
Using this conceptual or land attack. approach Allison speculates that the Soviet The second process model is one developed Union placed its missiles in Cuba as the result by organizational theorists and economists.
It of pulling and hauling among select members assumes that international politics is made up of the Presidium about which we do not as yet of organizational outputs that are invariably have enough public information for documenstandardized and sluggish in times of crisis betation.
But there is already an abundance of cause they are based on routines for this type of evidence for the United States in dealing witlh standard or normal day-to-day sitthe published personal accounts of the meetuations.
From this vantage point, the actions ings of the ExCom (Executive Committee of of the United States and the Soviet Union do the National Security Council), which Kennedy not have to be molded to fit a particular racreated to deal with the crisis. tionale.
Each agency did what it knew best to pushed Kennedy in the direction of strong acdo without concern for internal consistency or tion.
From the beginning, therefore, there was adherence to the same security standards.
Allilittle chance of negotiating through straight son suggests it is possible that IRBMs, instead diplomatic channels, especially in view of the of only MRBMs, were installed by the Strategic argument that such normal diplomacy would Rocket Forces without Khrushchev's direct allow time for the missiles to become operaknowledge. tional.
There is no confusion, however, about lines of communication to avoid misunderthe different lessons drawn from the three procstanding each other's intentions.
There is no doubt that Allison's multiconTo Louise FitzSimons all the foreign-polceptual approach adds new insights and specuicy actions of the Kennedy administration add lative dimensions to our understanding of the up not only to a defense of the international complex process of decision making during forstatus quo, but also to an intensification of the eign-policy crises which will prove invaluable cold war through the introduction of counterfor analyzing present and future ones.
This insurgency tactics and nuclear brinkmanship. study asks that diplomatic historians stop asWith particular reference to the emplacement suming that rational goals account for a naof Soviet missiles in Cuba FitzSimons contion's choice of action and begin to concentrate cludes that the crisis was as dangerous as it was on the intragovernmental factors that deterunnecessary.
Stone and Ronald Steel several years ago ever, it should be noted that the second and and are based on the argument that Kennedy third models require information not readily, arbitrarily raised the incident to a high-level if ever, available about recent developments in crisis because of his excessive concern for his foreign affairs, let alone past ones.
Also, as far own and his country's prestige (in the wake of as the Cuban missile crisis is concerned, none the Bay of Pigs and his poor showing at Viof Allison's hypothetical analysts address themenna with Khrushchev) and because of the selves to the nagging question of the role that November mid-term elections.
Thus he bythe forthcoming congressional elections may or passed traditional diplomatic contacts in favor may not have played either within the ExCom of ""eye-ball to eye-ball"" confrontation.
Like itself or among the much smaller group of the Stone and Steel, FitzSimons reaches this conpresident's personal advisers.
This is in essence United States, which attempt to cut themselves the Kennedy Doctrine.
It is based on the asoff from governmental bureaucracy and other sumption that since ""we can . . . we should afinfluential pressure groups.
The writing is disjointed and ramWalton's book, Cold War and Counterrevolubling, which makes the vague and poorly docution , is more balanced and better documented charges against Khrushchev and mented on this point. ""mush-minded"" American liberals all the less Aside from exaggerations about how Kenconvincing.
Holt, Rinehart and Winston.70. areas of the world, however, it provides a Pp. ix, 8o6.
She also these two books and the published works, but rightly laments the fact that Kennedy used his such quibbling will be beside the point.
Each charisma to stimulate cold war attitudes among book says what its author wants to have said, Americans rather than to eradicate them. and each, beyond question, has the flavor, both In contrast to the works of Allison and linguistic and moral, of its author.
The nearly FitzSimons, the McSherry book is an insimultaneous publication so soon after the tellectual disaster.
It is both the author's and event reveals a joint urgent need for apologia, publisher's intent to present ""a serious, conservabut neither does this diminish the significance tively oriented book,"" despite the difficulties inof the two books.
Indeed the manner in which herent in doing so because of the ""growth of the apologiae are presented enhances the siglock-step liberalism in the past thirty years."" nificance of these court reminiscences.
Johnson (one might say ""Ms."" in deferon inadequate research (primarily newspaper ence to the South, but that would be mistaken accounts and a handful of secondary sources) as a nod to Women's Lib, whose principles this book does not attempt the systematic analseem to be pretty well rejected by Lady Bird ysis of the diplomatic relationship between Johnson's whole approach to her husband and Kennedy and Khrushchev that the title imfamily) recounts that on their arrival at the plies.
