After careful consideration, President Kennedy chose a less aggressive course of action, in order to avoid a declaration of war.
Secretly, the United States agreed with the Soviets that it would dismantle all of the Jupiter MRBMs which had been deployed to Turkey against the Soviet Union.
Missile gap When Kennedy ran for president in 1960, one of his key election issues was an alleged ""missile gap"" with the Soviets.
Actually, the United States at that time led the Soviets by a wide margin, which would only increase over time.
By October 1962, they may have had dozens, with some intelligence estimates as high as 75.
The United States had a considerable advantage in its total number of nuclear warheads and in the technology required for their accurate delivery.
The United States also led in missile defensive capabilities, naval and air power; however, the Soviets held a two-to-one advantage in conventional ground forces, more pronounced in field guns and tanks, particularly in the European theatre.
Reservations about the plan continued to be voiced as late as October 21, the paramount concern being that once the blockade was put into effect, the Soviets would rush to complete some of the missiles.
Before the speech, United States delegations met with Canadian Prime Minister John Diefenbaker, British Prime Minister Harold Macmillan, West German Chancellor Konrad Adenauer, French President Charles de Gaulle and Secretary-General of the Organization of American States, José Antonio Mora to brief them on this intelligence and the US's proposed response.
Over the course of the crisis, Kennedy had daily telephone conversations with Macmillan, who was publicly supportive of United States actions.Shortly before his speech, Kennedy telephoned former President Dwight Eisenhower.
The heavy cruiser USS Newport News was the designated flagship for the blockade, with USS Leary as Newport News's destroyer escort.
In the October 29 issue of Le Figaro, Raymond Aron wrote in support of the American response.
Soviet broadcast and communications The crisis continued unabated, and on the evening of October 24, the Soviet TASS news agency broadcast a telegram from Khrushchev to Kennedy, in which Khrushchev warned that the United States' ""outright piracy"" would lead to war.
Khrushchev stated, ""if you weigh the present situation with a cool head without giving way to passion, you will understand that the Soviet Union cannot afford not to decline the despotic demands of the USA"" and that the Soviet Union viewed the blockade as ""an act of aggression"", and their ships would be instructed to ignore it.
Undoubtedly a product of pressure, it was not uncommon for Khrushchev to repeat himself and to send messages lacking basic editing.
