I first got involved in Model UN in sixth grade and have since attended close to a dozen conferences since then.
In addition to my role as chair of our crisis, I also serve as coPresident of BU Academy’s Model UN travel team.
Last year, I chaired JCC-Colombia in a joint crisis between Colombia, Venezuela, and Guyana.
The year before that, I chaired JCC-Taiwan on the topic of the hotly contested Senkaku Islands.
Outside of Model UN, I’m involved in Student Council and South Asian Student Association at the Academy.
During our simulation over the weekend, I will take on the role of President Kennedy, and you will serve as my most trusted advisors as we consider our options in midst of growing tensions between America and the Soviet Union.
All of the ideas during debate will come from you; my only role is to oversee debate.
If you’re confused about crisis procedure, don’t worry too much about this, as we will have a brief but comprehensive training session before we kick off debate.
As with any Model UN conference, the success of your performance as a delegate and our performance as a committee relies heavily on your knowledge of the topic at hand.
It is therefore crucial that you do ample background research beforehand.
To demonstrate your research, you will be required to hand in a policy paper.
These papers are useful for collecting your thoughts and developing ideas to bring forth during debate.
Events during the crisis will deviate from what actually occurred in history, so it doesn’t make sense to include events during and after the crisis in your research.
The Soviet Union you will deal with during debate will act differently from the one EXCOMM dealt with during the actual crisis.
He’ll be serving as Vice Chair for our committee and is also looking forward to meeting you guys come February.
Delegates, I look forward to meeting you all and seeing how you will steer our country through this crisis.
Yours truly, Rohit Chaparala excomm@buamun.org 3 Some Background In 1962, John F Kennedy assembled a group of advisors consisting of the National Security Council and others whose presence the President deemed necessary to address newfound CIA intelligence indicating the presence of Soviet intercontinental ballistic missiles in Cuba.
With Cuba only about ninety miles south of Florida, the presence of these missiles represented a clear danger to American security.
This gathered crowd, known as the Executive Committee or, more popularly, as EXCOMM, deliberated America’s options in face of this threat.
Relations between the United States and the Soviet Union, or USSR, were fragile long before the placement of these missiles.
After World War II, the United States emerged as the world’s superpower.
Its defensive capabilities, which included the atomic bomb, were unrivaled.
American manufacturing accounted for half of the total output at the world.
On the global level, the United States became the leading voice within the international community.
But at the same time, the Soviet Union was expanding its own role as a world power.
Soon after the war, the USSR under Stalin expanded its presence into most of Eastern Europe.
It became clear that the Soviet Union’s influence on the world posed a threat to American interests, both ideological and material.
On one level, the US’s global presence and influence was threatened by the Soviet Union because its allies were limited to the capitalist nations of the world.
As a result, American economic interests were also at stake as it did not engage in trade with communist nations.
Prime Minister Winston Churchill famously characterized the increasing divide between capitalist states and Soviet-controlled communist states an “Iron Curtain” that had divided the two.
Communists were labeled as anti-American totalitarians whose political agenda was antithetical to American freedom.
In 1947, The House Un-American Activities Committee , a subcommittee in Congress, interrogated figures in Hollywood to investigate the suspicion of Communist influence in Hollywood.
HUAC was noted for its aggressive and uncompromising mission to drive Communism out of the states.
Ten members who refused to comment based on their belief that the committee violated their First Amendment rights were blacklisted from the film industry for their unwillingness to cooperate.
The most infamous example of Communist hysteria occurred during the Joe McCarthy trials.
McCarthy, a Senator from Wisconsin, pursued a relentless antiCommunist crusade.
Unlike HUAC, which focused on Hollywood, McCarthy ruled out no one in his pursuit.
He prosecuted hundreds of individuals in various governmental departments and, by doing so, heightened hysteria throughout the nation.
American policymakers did not take news of these Soviet satellite states lightly either.
In “The Sources of Soviet Conduct,” American diplomat George Kennan describes Soviet Union and its ultimate mission to spread communism across the world as the ultimate threat to the free-enterprise world.
Kennan argued that the USSR would actively seek to dismantle free markets in favor of centralized ones if not properly 3 Ibid., 1024 5 contained.
Containment sought not necessarily to remove Communist governments, but to actively prevent capitalist nations from falling to the hands of communism.
Through isolationism, one of the three, the United States would have retracted its influence and power it developed and exerted throughout the Cold War.
Détente policies focused on deescalating tensions and relations, often with a particular emphasis on trade.
A final alternative to containment was rollback, which promoted aggressive, proactive, and militaristic action aimed at shrinking the control of the Soviet Union.
Although all of these methods were used at times during the Cold War, containment won out as the general strategy because it was a happy medium between aggression and caution.
One form of containment was embodied by the Marshall Plan, during which the United States revitalized economic conditions in Europe after World War II and in doing so attempted to install rejuvenated capitalist states.
Another form of containment was used later in the Cold War, when the United States got involved in Vietnam on the grounds of containment, fearing that if Vietnam fell under Communist rule so would the rest of Asia.
On another front, availability of nuclear weaponry added an unprecedented dimension to the conflict.
John Foster Dulles, Secretary of State under Eisenhower, developed an aggressive retaliatory defense policy toward Soviet military action.
Both sides were aware that military action would result in mutually assured destruction and thus were forced to act cautiously in proceedings with one another throughout the latter half of the 20th century.
The term “Brinkmanship” describes this ongoing struggle in which both sides, through aggressive action, went up to the “brink” of mutually assured destruction but cautiously avoided going over it.
While both sides were cautious to never go over the “brink,” the United States and the Soviet Union tested the water through the 20th century.
Both sides had vested interests in global, “Capitalism-versus-Communism” proxy wars, in which neither country ever actually initiated the conflicts.
For example, a proxy war ensued in Korea, where North Korea was backed by the Soviets and South Korea by the Americans.
In Vietnam, North Vietnam and the Viet Cong represented the interests of the USSR whereas the American interests where represented by the Southern Vietnamese forces.
Up until the crisis, the relationship between the United States and Cuba gradually deteriorated.
First, in 1960 Fidel Castro overthrew the American-backed Fulgencio Batista regime then ruling Cuba.
In response to 6 Foner, 1009 7 Castro’s control over Cuba, Kennedy initiated the Bay of Pigs invasion, in which 1,500 trained Cuban exiles launched an attack aimed at overthrowing Castro’s government.
Castro strengthened both his control over Cuba and his ties to the USSR while growing seriously distrustful toward the United States.
The United States had also conducted other small-scale militaristic covert operations directed toward Cuba throughout this time.
Furthermore, under Kennedy, United States defense forces grew to unprecedented levels.
Given these factors, Castro requested the installation of Soviet missiles, and Moscow obliged to his request.
Khrushchev’s Motive and Our Options Much of EXCOMM’s discussion centered on understanding Khrushchev’s motive in placing missiles in Cuba.
For one, Khrushchev could have used the Cuban missiles as diplomatic trade bait.
As previously mentioned, the United States had placed missiles potentially directed at the USSR in Turkey, and Khrushchev could have use the missiles in Cuba as a way to get rid of those in Turkey.
Before considering America’s response to this crisis, it is essential to know that Khrushchev is acting as a rational agent, and that there is likely a strategic reason for his actions.
In responding to Moscow, the United States made sure also to act rationally, reasonably, and justifiably.
Because the Cold War was categorized by global struggle between capitalism and communism, both nations were in a sense fighting over acceptance from the international community.
As a result, the United States made sure the international community, often represented through the United Nations, regarded any diplomatic or militaristic action the United States undertook as reasonable and justifiable.
Even if the United States had liked to strike Cuba, for example, it could have only done so if the international community would sanction such an attack.
The USSR had publicly supported Cuba on numerous occasions, just as Kennedy had committed his support to West Berlin.
This public commitment is precisely why Kennedy was reluctant to engage militaristically.
Khrushchev may have felt forced to retaliate had Kennedy attacked—be it through West Berlin or elsewhere.
International organizations played an important role during the Cold War.
Formed during the rise of Soviet global influence, the North Atlantic Trade Organization, or NATO, consisted of North American capitalist nations.
Many US-backed missions in the war were headed through NATO.15 NATO’s militaristic strength came to prominence during the Korea conflict.
Similarly, the United Nations had a role of significant global importance throughout the Cold War.
Most famously, the United Nations lead the effort against communist North Korea’s aggression toward South Korea.
Furthermore, as the Cold War was a worldwide conflict, most countries, both communist and capitalist, had representation through this forum.
Having both sides at the table often led to stalemate, especially in the Security Council.
Either the Soviet Union or the United States would veto resolutions on controversial matters, as evidenced by the Suez Canal conflict.
It’s important to consider ways in which America can work through and with the approval of these international bodies when considering its courses of action.
It serves our own best interest to act in a justifiable manner in the eyes of the international community to prevent the Soviet Union from potentially escalating the conflict.
For example, Defense Secretary Robert McNamara suggested that the United States furtively remove missiles in Turkey and then attack Cuba.
As spelled out earlier, both scenarios require extensive research on Moscow’s ulterior motives in placing the missiles in Cuba.
Because this is a global conflict, any action in Cuba will have an effect on other conflicts around the world.
When developing policy to deal with the crisis, it’s crucial to consider ripple effect of our actions on other countries involved in US-Soviet conflict.
Keep in mind; the USSR may have placed missiles in Cuba as a means for annexing the city.
Outside Research This background guide is meant only to serve as starting point.
To successfully prepare for this conference, it’s important that you do ample outside research as well.
To get a feel for how EXCOMM went, check out the official transcripts of their meetings.
Keep in mind that actual events that occurred when the meetings took place should be 11 disregarded, as the events in our crisis will play out differently.
He is an ardent believer in the use of military force in combating and containing communism; however, he had misgivings about the Bay of Pigs invasion.
A former Undersecretary of State, he understands the importance of economic power in diplomacy, as well as the damage a long war could have on an economy.
As such, he favors a swift strike to disarm the missiles, as well as a blockade.
He is a proponent of using the theory of Mutually Assured Destruction to deter an attack, rather than relying on firststrike capabilities.
He also supports flexible response strategy and the blockade option as well as increasing United States military capabilities.
Robert Kennedy has an unusual role for an Attorney-General, as both a trusted advisor of his older brother and a diplomatic envoy with experience in the Berlin Crisis of 1961.
He strongly supports covert action in Cuba and providing military aid to rebels.
A proponent of containment, McGeorge Bundy was also one of the main actors behind the Marshall Plan.
He was the first to alert the United States that Soviets may have placed missiles on Cuba, prompting the flyover which took the pictures.
Taylor was a critic of Eisenhower’s New Look policy, which was based on brinkmanship, and is head of the task force to determine what went wrong in Bay of Pigs.
Ambassador Thompson is noted for his extensive knowledge of Soviet language, history and culture.
Although he is wary that a blockade would lead to a strike, Thompson supports the blockade and is also urging Kennedy to order Khrushchev to dismantle the missiles in Cuba.
Cline was among the first to predict the Soviet missile transfers to Cuba.
As Head of the Directorate of Intelligence, he was also among the first to inform the President.
He is an ardent supporter of Nitze's policy of active confrontation with the Soviet Union, as well as Eisenhower's New Look policies.
Nitze is one of the principal architects and a major proponent of aggressive 13 containment.
He often speaks out against demilitarization or pursuing arms controls agreements with the USSR and is sometimes considered contradictory or inconsistent in his positions.
Edward McDermott is a staffer who has worked with Kennedy since his years in the House.
He is noncommittal, and is focused on keeping the American people safe, rather than holding any large overarching theory of combating communism.
Known for his cautious, sometimes even pacifistic policies, Stevenson speaks out against any form of confrontation with the Soviet Union or Cuba.
He is pushing for strikes on missile sites and arguing against a blockade or any other peaceful alternative.
Anderson strongly supports limited military action against Cuba and the blockade method.
However, his relationship with Robert MacNamara is contentious, and the two do not work well together.
Like McDermott, Roland's priority is securing the United States against attack rather than thwarting communism.
He is a proponent of direct military action against Cuba but also wants further naval assistance in defending American shores.
