Historians’ ‘understanding’ of this event has undergone dramatic evolution.
Continued study of this event remains valid as long as international conflict remains a reality; historians, political scientists, and policymakers investigate this event in an attempt to understand and alleviate future foreign policy and conflict.
It is evident, however, that a greater volume of information pertaining to the crisis has not led to consensus, or a greater understanding of the causes and consequences of the event.
Most historians do agree that Nikita Khrushchev, Fidel Castro, and John Kennedy each played a pivotal role in the crisis and its resolution.
This project draws on a variety of sources regarding the crisis and its administrators in an attempt to create an historiography of the available information regarding this important event.
I have investigated this crisis from the perspective that the character, actions and policies of Khrushchev, Castro, and Kennedy were inexorable in instigating and resolving the crisis.
Professors Rod Sievers, Delores McBroome, and Gayle Olson-Raymer have provided me and numerous other Humboldt County educators with their outstanding historical knowledge and professional support.
Your efforts in the Teaching American History Program have greatly benefited Humboldt County teachers and our students.
My students and colleagues at Fortuna High School have provided me with the inspiration and collegial support necessary to a fulfilling career.
Mike Benbow, your guidance and advice throughout this project and in the classroom are invaluable.
My mother and father, Joyce and Scott Pickering, have always provided the means and encouragement necessary to continue my higher education.
My sister and friend, Laura Pickering, consistently provides encouragement and I hope that I can be equally supportive as she continues her education and begins to develop a new career.
My best friend and partner Christopher Haynes has provided invaluable emotional and academic support.
I am truly grateful for your help in this project and all projects before and after.
MOTIVATION, INTENTION, AND THE CREATION OF A CRISIS The Cuban missile crisis is one of the most explored topics in American history.
More than four decades from the date of this nuclear showdown, the Cuban missile crisis continues to be a source of much controversy and opposing historical interpretation.
Rather than providing a more unified and concrete understanding and interpretation of the crisis, this additional information has, in fact, increased the debate surrounding this event, its causes, and aftermath.
The added documentary and audio information has enriched the discussion of one of the most pivotal moments of the Cold War.
The distance from this event and the end of the Cold War have freed many key figures to speak more frankly about the event and their role in it.
Between the years 1987 and 2002, American, Cuban, and Soviet scholars and participants of the crisis met in Hawk’s Cay in the Florida Keys, Cambridge, Massachusetts, Moscow, Antigua, and Havana to participate in discussion about the confrontation in 1962 and how to avoid similar crises in the future.
James G Blight, Bruce Allyn, and David Welch, all present at the conferences, have written a number of books exploring the crisis.
The authors of this work argue that analysis and understanding of Cuba’s role in the crisis has been markedly absent in traditional 3 discussion regarding this event.
Perhaps most important to the revised and improved discussion of the actual thirteen days that constituted the Missile Crisis is the declassification of many Soviet and Cuban documents.
In early summer of 1962, JFK asked a secret service agent, Robert Bouck, to install taping systems in the Oval Office and Cabinet Room.
Kennedy was able to discretely turn the recorder on and off; only he and his brother Robert Kennedy were aware that discussion was often being recorded.
Clearly and understandably angry and embarrassed after the failed 1961 Bay of Pigs operation, it has been suggested JFK had the recording devices installed after several policy advisers who had supported the invasion plan in closed session 4 claimed later to have advised against it.
Others believe he wished to have a source of information from which to write his memoirs after leaving the White House.
This belief is encouraged by the fact that JFK later installed a device to record telephone conversations in which he frequently made statements that could have incriminated him personally and politically.
Critics dismiss these tapes because the Kennedy brothers knew they were being recorded and JFK could decide when to turn the recorder on and off.
Thus, while their colleagues were frankly and honestly processing and discussing the crisis presented to them, the Kennedy brothers were consciously manipulating their personal images in the historical record.
Further investigation has also been helpful in understanding Cold War ideology, rhetoric, and assumptions that precipitated the crisis and the respective actions and responses of Cuba, the Soviet Union, and the United States.
Weldes provides a well-written analysis of fairly standard conclusions regarding Cold War posture and assumptions; she cites the American belief that the Soviet Union was an expansionist power seeking world domination and the American dislike for Fidel Castro and his revolution as the reasons that Kennedy and his advisors could not fathom the idea that the missiles were part of an entirely legal attempt by the sovereign nation of Cuba to defend 6 itself.
Many feel that those thirteen days in October, 1962 “brought the world to the abyss of nuclear destruction and the end of mankind,”vi while others claim, equally convincingly, that the 7 missiles in Cuba represented a threat only to American credibility and the credibility of the young President Kennedy, but posed no actual physical danger.
It has affected the psyche of the American citizen, and shaped and influenced future foreign policy, international conflict resolution, and national posture.
Though Cold War posture has evolved into national posture in the War on Terror, all of these issues continue to resonate with many citizens and governments of the world.
Cuban-American Relations The Caribbean Sea and in fact, the entire western hemisphere, is an area of great geopolitical interest to the United States.
Sugar, coffee, oils, fish, and many other goods entice those seeking economic benefit.
Americans soon recognized that military and political hegemony in the region was profitable.
The proximity of the Caribbean Sea and 8 the islands within it to the United States intensified the belief that Americans should control the trade, politics, and military affairs of that region.
When Spain, Russia and other European countries appeared to be taking steps toward strengthening and reorganizing their empires, parts of which were in the western hemisphere, President James Monroe responded in his annual address of December, 1823 by warning European powers not to intervene in the western hemisphere, and further that any such intervention would be interpreted as a hostile action toward the United States.
We could not view any interposition for the purpose of oppressing , or controlling in any other manner their destiny, by any European power in any other light than as the manifestation of an unfriendly disposition toward the United States. vii Though at the time, the United States possessed neither the military or political power to enforce such a statement, it became a cornerstone of future American foreign policy.
Both the Monroe Doctrine and the Roosevelt 9 Corollary would be invoked to justify American intervention in Latin America on multiple occasions.
Americans have long believed that they hold a special place in the world.
Tenants of Puritan belief in a utopian society of chosen individuals are still prevalent in Americans’ vision of themselves and their nation upon the world stage and have resulted in a uniquely American self-image and world view.
Manifest Destiny, the widely proclaimed and pursued conviction that American institutions and cultural characteristics were superior to those of other human societies and thus it was the right and duty of Americans to export their institutions and belief systems to other locations and peoples of the world led expansionists to consider the island of Cuba rightfully American territory by the early nineteenth century.
Cuba’s geographic location encouraged some to unabashedly argue that it was connected by alluvial deposits of the Mississippi River to the United States and thus belonged rightfully to the Americans.ix Its proximity to the southern United States encouraged many to envision the extension of the slave-based, plantation economy into the island despite its status as a Spanish colony.
Illegal efforts to acquire Cuba by fomenting a revolution were as equally unsuccessful as attempts by the Pierce Administration to purchase the island.
Frustrated by Spain’s refusal to sell what many Americans felt was rightfully theirs, American ministers to Spain, France, and England met in Belgium and issued the Ostend Manifesto.
As the United States steamed toward its own Civil War, the questions of Cuba’s annexation became a sectional issue, as northern states feared the addition of another slave state and then was lost in the chaos of war and wartime politics.
Though the public quest for Cuba was temporarily abandoned, it would soon be the site of and excuse for the Spanish-American War.
Gary B Nash and Julie Roy Jeffrey state, “hroughout history, the American people have actively and sometimes forcefully imposed their ideas and institutions on others.
The international crusades of the United States, well intentioned if not always well received, have usually been motivated by a mixture of idealism and self-interest.”xi This was true of American involvement with Cuba in the Spanish-American War of 1898.
By the late 1890s, the Cuban question regained the focus of American citizens, businessmen, and politicians.
Politicians wished to reduce, or eliminate, European influence from the Caribbean region.
Profiteers leered at trade and investment opportunities and wished to establish shipping lanes and ports for United States commerce.
Many wished to develop a canal in Central America that would link the east and west coasts of the United States and provide access to the profitable markets of Asia.
Military advisers 11 recognized the value of naval control of the region as evident in Alfred T Mahan’s discourse, The Influence of Sea Power Upon History in which he argues that national influence is dependent upon naval power and thus American military superiority rested on its ability to muster and maintain a formidable navy in both the Pacific and Atlantic oceans.
The Cuban question was, however, catapulted back into American discourse by actions of the Cuban revolutionaries against Spanish rule.
In the early 1890s, the Cuban economy collapsed, largely due to the American response to the depression of 1893 with protectionist tariffs.
As depression in Cuba fueled unrest, anti-Spanish forces attempted to gain control of the island.
By 1896, citizens of the United States had invested more than $30 million in Cuba, mostly in mines and sugar plantations, encouraging Congress to declare that the United States government “should be prepared to protect the legitimate interests of our citizens, by intervention if necessary.”xii In addition to economic interests, many American citizens recognized the Cuban independence movement as not entirely unlike their own revolution against the British.
Fueled by the “yellow journalism” of William Randolph Hearst and equipped with revolutionary, republican rhetoric, numerous individuals and organizations were outraged by the atrocities committed by the Spanish against the Cubans.
These groups and individuals encouraged American support of the Cubans in their quest for independence and raised funds and awareness for the struggle.
In reality, the governments of Spain and the United States had agreed that regardless of how this dispute turned out, power would not be transferred to the Cubans 12 themselves.xiii In fact, a negotiated settlement between Madrid and Washington seemed plausible until 1898 when two incidents infuriated Americans and ‘justified’ a declaration of war.
First, a confidential letter written by Spanish official Dupuy de Lome was intercepted that stated President McKinley was a “weak, venal, and vacillating politician.”xiv This letter was quickly made public and fueled fury against Spain within the American citizenry.
Additionally, the United States Battleship Maine was rocked by an explosion while in Havana harbor.
McKinley presented Spain with an ultimatum that included a Spanish assurance that there would be no further hostile actions, the repayment of cost associated with the damage to the Maine, and finally, Cuban independence.
President McKinley knew that Spain would not accept this last request and so prepared for war; he requested a declaration of war from Congress on April 11, 1898.
Congress recognized Cuban independence and authorized the use of force against Spain; in an intriguing additional resolution, the Teller Amendment, Congress stated that the United States did not intend to annex the island of Cuba.
The Platt Amendment was added to the new Cuban constitution by the United States in 1901.
The Platt Amendment provided beneficial economic rights to Americans, guaranteed a naval base at Guantanamo Bay, and the right to intervene in the affairs of the island “for the preservation of Cuban independence, and the maintenance of a government adequate for the protection of life, property, and individual liberty.”xv 13 Franklin Roosevelt would later abrogate the Platt Amendment after Fulgencio Batista’s rise to power, but retained the right to use the military base at Guantanamo Bay.
The American Good Neighbor Policy of the 1930s changed the style of American interference in Latin America from one of direct intervention to a more discrete form of political meddling.
Cuba went through a series of leaders in the 1930s, with U.S. officials watching with great interest and interfering when deemed necessary.
Throughout this period of leadership transition within Cuba, the United States maintained close contact with Sergeant Fulgencio Batista, who led the revolution in 1933 against the government of Machado and then encouraged Ramon Grau San Martin to resign in 1934.
As American politicians and businessmen became increasingly concerned about the communist influence in Latin America, post World War II American foreign policy evolved from one that tried to prevent the rise of fascism to one more concerned with halting the advance of communism.
United States support undoubtedly figured into Batista’s decision to run for president in 1940.
Batista’s democratically elected administration, as well as the other administrations of the 1940s, lost legitimacy because of their corruption and disorder.
In March, 1952, prior to the scheduled presidential elections in June, in which Batista remained a distant third candidate, Batista took control of the government in a military coup.
President Prio, his family, and close associates left Cuba with little resistance.
The idea to instigate a coup was presented to Batista by younger officers who sought his leadership because of his success in the 1930s.
Unlike in the 1930s and 1940s, 14 Batista did not have much popular support within the Cuban population and so relied on militarism to stay in office.
Fidel Castro, who was running for a seat in Congress in 1952, was outraged by the military coup and became a leading proponent of armed insurrection within the antiBatista movement.
The attack of July 26th, 1953 ended disastrously for Castro and his followers; many were tortured and killed, and the rest were imprisoned.
The Cuban population was simultaneously horrified by the brutal response of the Batista regime and inspired by the efforts of the young Cuban insurgents.
Fidel Castro captivated public attention and at his trial introduced a concise political vision of reform and defended himself with dignity and eloquence before being sent to jail.
In 1955, Batista released political prisoners, including Fidel Castro, who resumed opposition activities from his place of exile, Mexico.
In 1954, Batista staged an election and used his ‘re-election’ to claim legitimacy and justify his regime.
Following the 1954 election, Batista introduced a number of concessions, including the release of political prisoners from which Fidel Castro greatly benefited.
Meanwhile however, the Batistianos continued policies that favored wealthy regime supporters at the expense of the working class.
Labor leaders of the July 26th Movement and the communists worked collaboratively in an attempt to improve conditions for workers within the sugar industry, though they remained entirely different organizations with separate and often opposing methods and goals.
Many believed that “Batista had evolved into the worst kind of Latin despot – a leader offensive and corrupt enough to draw the ire of the American people but not powerful enough to stave off disorder in his own country.”xviii United States officials felt justified in revoking support of many dictators they previously supported when they felt that allowing said dictator to remain in power would, rather than prevent communism, in fact encourage the growth of a left-wing revolutionary movement.
By 1958, the anti-Batista movement had mobilized diverse groups and constituted a significant threat, and the ruling regime was rapidly deteriorating.
Additionally, the United States placed an arms embargo on the island nation, following a hostage situation instigated by Fidel and Raul Castro.
American officials were torn however, between condemning the brutal Batista regime and 16 encouraging the opposition movement in which a young Fidel Castro was rising to a dominant position.xix Fidel Castro was born into a wealthy family that owned a large sugar plantation in Oriente.
Following their defeat at the Moncada Barracks on July 26th, 1953, Fidel and his band of rebels were imprisoned and then exiled to Mexico.
In 1956, he returned to the mountains of Cuba and continued to build a rebel movement.
The July 26th Movement, so-called after the date in which Castro and a small band of rebels recklessly attacked the Moncada Barracks, was an umbrella anti-Batista organization that was made up of various professionals and groups of different political beliefs.
Fidel Castro, though a suspicious enigma to most in Washington, captured the imaginations of many in Cuba and the United States.
In the summer of 1958, however, rebels led by Raul Castro kidnapped nineteen American and Canadian civilians and thirty enlisted men of the Navy and Marines, claiming U.S. support of the Batista regime to be their reason for the action.xx The hostages were released the next month after Washington halted the delivery of some weaponry to Batista.
American officials felt their suspicions of the young rebel had been realized; the CIA was sent to prevent Fidel Castro from assuming power from the declining Batista regime.
Though the July 26th Movement had come to house a variety of different individuals and organizations of different classes and goals, Fidel Castro remained the single leading figure of the movement due in part to his engaging personality and in part 17 to social and economic conditions within Cuba.
Despite the efforts of the CIA, on January 1, 1959, Batista and his close associates fled Cuba and Castro triumphantly entered Havana with the support of the majority of the Cuban population.
William Wieland frankly stated his fears and those of his fellow Washington colleagues; “Fidel Castro is surrounded by commies.
I am certain he is subject to communist influences.”xxi CIA agents traveled to Cuba both before and after Castro’s takeover to arrive at a conclusion regarding this question – unsuccessfully.
Nikita Khrushchev and other Moscow officials had also been trying to assess the political persuasion of Fidel Castro and the Cuban revolution.
Most notably, the PSP condemned violent revolution, and denounced the rebels’ attack on the Moncada barracks.
Interestingly enough, two of the Cuban leadership triumvirate – Raul Castro and Ernesto ‘Che’ Guevara – were communists.
Che Guevara, a physician, though openly communist denounced the PSP as a passive and irrelevant group.
When leadership within the PSP seemed to be reconsidering some of its beliefs regarding armed revolution, and with Raul’s encouragement, Che did join the PSP in 1957.
Raul and Che however, represented a very different breed of communism from the traditional leadership of the PSP.xxii Fidel Castro was indeed, “surrounded by commies.”xxiii Raul Castro’s effort to hide his membership 18 in the communist party from his brother was concerning to both the PSP and the Kremlin.
Though both were encouraged by the leanings of Che and Raul, everyone was aware that the man who truly controlled the path and character of the revolution was Fidel.
Less than four months after replacing Batista, Fidel Castro visited the United States as a guest of the American Society of Newspaper Editors.
When he visited the U.S. in April, 1959 Fidel Castro was hounded by questions regarding his position on communism.
That is why we are against Communism.”xxiv While Fidel Castro was in the United States making statements denouncing communism, Raul was trying to establish a relationship between Cuba and the Soviet Union.
Upon his brother’s ascension to the post of prime minister, Raul had gained control of the Cuban armed forces.
In an effort to both cultivate a relationship with Moscow and strengthen the military capabilities of the revolutionary government, Raul sent Lazaro Pena, a member of the PSP to request aid for the Cuban military in the form of Spanish communists who recently graduated from the Soviet military academy and could serve as advisers “to help the Cuban army. . .on general matters and for the organization of intelligence work.xxv The Kremlin had indirectly already given much aid to the military efforts of Castro and his revolutionaries.
In 1958, the Czech government received a request for weaponry from the rebels and requested the guidance of Moscow.
Khrushchev, feeling especially sensitive to Chinese 19 criticisms that it did not do enough to support revolutions throughout the world, instructed Prague to provide the Cubans with the requested weaponry, though they did attempt to hide their involvement by allowing only those of German and Czech design.
Requests for the expansion of economic relations between Cuba and the Soviet Union and that the Soviet Union “unleash its propaganda organs in support of Fidel” were denied, however, in a large part because Moscow was still unsure of the character of the Cuban revolution and its leading figure.
It is unclear when and why Fidel Castro decided to accept communism and steer his revolution toward an alliance with the Soviet Union.
After his consolidation of power he continued to resist and disclaim communism to the point of causing a rift between himself and Che and Raul.
There were many political reasons for Fidel to deny the communist tendencies of his revolution, perhaps the most obvious being the CIA orchestrated overthrow of Jacobo Arbenz in 1957; Castro did not wish to provoke a U.S. attack.
Fidel was also surely aware of a warning from Egyptian leader Gamal Abdel 20 Nasser to Che Guevara to maintain independence and sovereignty from any superpower.xxvi While publicly denouncing communism, Castro paradoxically introduced socialist agrarian reform policies and then chose the author of those policies, PSP member Osvaldo Dorticos, to be President of Cuba in 1959.xxvii Though the position wielded very little real power that would remain in the hands of Fidel it assured the PSP that the revolution would proceed in their favor.
Fidel slowly began to agree that his greatest enemies were the noncommunist members of the July 26th movement and began replacing them with PSP members.
He also began to seek greater military and economic assistance from the Soviet Union.
Both nations cautiously yet optimistically negotiated an agreement to exchange Cuban sugar for Soviet goods.
Though publicly dismissive of Chinese attacks, Khrushchev was undoubtedly conscious of them as he continued to increase aid in the form of materiel and personnel to the young Cuban revolution, enough so that he set up a “chance” meeting with KGB agent Nikolai Leonov and Raul Castro while the Cuban was touring Czechoslovakia in 1960.xxviii Reacting to fears that perhaps Castro was losing interest in an alliance with the Soviet Union and was turning toward the Chinese, Leonov sought to reestablish the Cuban-Soviet partnership.
Raul Castro and Che Guevarra had very publicly proclaimed that revolution would be necessary to establish socialist governments and that the support of stable communist regimes by way of weaponry and personnel should be encouraged.
Additionally, Khrushchev and the Soviets recognized that Fidel Castro was first a 21 revolutionary, and second a communist, thus increasing their concern that he may abandon the Soviets to pursue the more active revolutionary path advocated by the Chinese.
It should be borne in mind that the United States is now not at such an unattainable distance from the Soviet Union as formerly.
Figuratively speaking, if need be, Soviet artillerymen can support the Cuban people with their rocket fire should the aggressive forces in the Pentagon dare to start intervention against Cuba.
And the Pentagon could be well advised not to forget that, as shown at the latest tests, we have rockets which can land precisely in a preset square target 13,000 kilometers away.
This, if you want, is a warning to those who would like to solve international problems by force and not by reason.xxxi Khrushchev’s arrogant and generally inaccurate claims of Soviet nuclear capabilities were nothing new or extraordinary; this threat was significant in that it established nuclear protection for the island of Cuba.
With this single statement, Khrushchev assured the Cubans, Chinese, and Americans that the Soviets were committed to supporting communism throughout the world, and more specifically, in Cuba.
Fidel Castro expressed his appreciation for Khrushchev’s nuclear deterrent by arranging for Raul to visit Moscow; during his visit, Raul further solidified the Soviet22 Cuban alliance both by his presence in the USSR on an official visit and by gaining further military and economic aid.
Khrushchev’s declaration of nuclear protection and growing alliance with the Castro regime illustrates his desire to prove Soviet prowess abroad, but more significantly, it illustrates the importance of the revolution in Cuba as his avenue for doing so.
John Fitzgerald Kennedy’s inaugural address highlighted Cold War concerns.
Prior to his inauguration, JFK sought the advice of outgoing president, General Dwight D Eisenhower.
Eisenhower warned Kennedy that the Soviet Union was on the offensive and would pose an extremely grave threat.
The Domino Theory strongly influenced the decisions of the Kennedy Administration as well as those of the later Johnson, Nixon, and even Reagan administrations.
Eisenhower expressed further concern about the government in Cuba and encouraged Kennedy to support guerrilla operations against Castro.xxxiii 23 Kennedy, perhaps also influenced by the intense anticommunism of his father, strongly believed in the need to actively prevent communism from expanding beyond the Soviet and Chinese bloc.
He also, however, intended to make a concerted effort to improve U.S.-Soviet relations.
Khrushchev also seemed eager for a moderate détente and requested high-level talks, which Kennedy responded to warmly, but made it clear that he could not participate in a summit immediately due to both foreign and domestic political concerns.
Kennedy inherited a rather disorganized and unclear policy regarding Cuba.
The Eisenhower administration planned to overthrow the Castro regime through both overt attacks and covert sabotage.
It soon became evident that a paramilitary force would be necessary to remove Castro, but it was undecided what kind of force would be adequate and what the role of the United States would be in creating and funding it.
By the time Eisenhower left office, early planning and actions had been taken to establish a 1,500 man guerrilla army in Guatemala.
The plan neglected to hide United States involvement to Kennedy’s satisfaction so he required two new conditions for future planning; the invasion had to occur at night and at a location where there would be little resistance, and if air support was necessary it would need to come from Cuban air bases, thus the “territory seized should contain a suitable airfield.”xxxiv Kennedy’s requirements greatly limited the possible landing areas and perhaps resulted in the failure of the operation.
Because it was an isolated beachhead and Kennedy did not wish to employ United States air support, the Bay of Pigs 24 location left the landed exiles to defend themselves and decreased the likelihood of inciting a general uprising throughout the island.
In early April, 1961 – right after agreeing to meet Khrushchev in Vienna in early June – Kennedy approved the plan for the invasion at the Bay of Pigs with conditions that made United States involvement further invisible.
Kennedy believed the best way to pursue American interests was to simultaneously promote diplomacy with the Soviet Union and take covert military action against Castro.
The Cubans and Soviets had very different views about United States intentions regarding an invasion of Cuba.
Perhaps because of encouraging signs of better relations with the new Kennedy administration, Khrushchev ignored concerns of the PSP that an American invasion was imminent and supporting intelligence of the KGB that suggested the rebels in Guatemala were finalizing preparations for a Cuban invasion also went unnoticed.
Soviet inaction may also be partly attributed to the fact that they had twice reacted to seemingly false Cuban calls of an American threat in October and January.
The exile force, working with archaic WWII propeller 25 planes depended upon air superiority to have any chance of success.
Wishing to avoid further questions about the American role in the situation in Cuba, JFK decided against the planned second air strike.
The initial air strike had disabled only 60% of the Cuban air force and air superiority was necessary for the small band of émigrés to hold the isolated beachhead for any extended period of time.xxxvii After brief successes against Castro’s surprised forces, the émigrés found themselves trapped on the beachhead and facing sure and swift defeat.
The Cuban armed forces are stronger, the popular response is weaker, and our tactical position is feebler than we had hoped.”xxxviii Without air support, Castro’s tanks and air force were able to pummel the defenseless rebels.
Kennedy now faced the difficult decision of abandoning the Cuban exiles or initiating greater United States support.
At the suggestion of his advisers, Kennedy grudgingly agreed to the use of unmarked American jets to protect the Cubans, however, timing errors resulted in their ineffectiveness anyway.
By April 19th, American officials concluded the invasion had been a total failure and attempted to evacuate the remaining émigrés; 1,189 surrendered to Castro’s forces, 14 were rescued by the United States military.xxxix 26 The Bay of Pigs invasion was an utter and complete failure.
The awkward and embarrassing attack resulted in a unified and publicly socialist Cuba.
The belief that counterrevolutionaries and American politicians wished to invade and overthrow the Castro regime had now been realized and both the Soviets and Cubans wished to prevent the operation from being successful the next time.
John F Kennedy was very personally and deeply affected by the botched invasion.
Though he fully accepted responsibility for the failed operation, some suggest that it further solidified Kennedy’s distrust of military advisers and experts.
Cold War ideology, combined with personal anger over the Bay of Pigs, had created a powerful incentive for the Kennedy’s to launch a “secret war” to get even in Cuba.”xli May and Zelikow agree that “Kennedy, and his brother even more, longed for some redeeming opportunity.”xlii Robert Bissell, CIA director before John McCone, “considered RFK a fanatic on the subject of Castro.”xliii Most historians agree that John, and especially Robert Kennedy became obsessed with the issue of Cuba and the Castro regime, and this was certainly 27 intensified by the Bay of Pigs fiasco.
And anyone who got into it and didn’t see it through had no guts.”xlvi Furthermore, the Soviet Union, despite Khrushchev’s rhetoric regarding détente between the superpowers, continued to also speak of Soviet military and nuclear missile superiority, and to fund and aid revolutionary movements in third world countries, most notably in Laos.
Southeast Asia was becoming an increasingly sensitive locale in the scope of the Cold War.
Though Kennedy certainly admired Eisenhower, he portrayed his own administration as being comparatively young and imaginative in terms of the Cold War.
Kennedy, however, was also determined to not be viewed as weak compared to the retired General.
Khrushchev certainly appeared the stronger leader at the end of 1961; The Bay of Pigs invasion perhaps marred the confidence of the new administration, encouraging some officials especially the Kennedy brothers to react to missiles in Cuba in a more hostile and belligerent fashion.
John Kennedy. . .worried that the Bay of Pigs and the indeterminate outcome in Laos were sending the wrong signals about his resolve to use all means to defend United States interests overseas.
But the brothers, especially the president, were equally concerned about the costs of a policy of unalloyed belligerence toward the Soviet Union.
Furthermore, the counterrevolutionaries’ invasion illustrated the necessity for a crackdown on dissidents and the creation of a surveillance state that some members of the PSP had been encouraging for some time.
The Soviets also concluded that their aid would perhaps be necessary to prevent the overthrow of the young Cuban government; the KGB assumed control of Cuban intelligence and Cuban requests for military aid were quickly approved and fulfilled.
Additionally, the resolve and posture of Kennedy, Khrushchev, and Castro was solidified.
The Castro regime was in fact, strengthened by the nationalism created by the attack of the United States colossus against the island of Cuba and the young revolution.
Nikita Khrushchev ever conscious of the Chinese criticism that the USSR was not doing enough for third world revolutions and of 29 his desire to remain the leader of the communist bloc was further convinced of the need for the Soviets to protect and aid the Communist beachhead in the western hemisphere.
The Kennedy Administration was determined to prove that despite the embarrassing operation, they still intended to do everything necessary to protect United States interests and avoid appearing weak in the eyes of their European allies, the Soviets, and the American public.
Khrushchev and Kennedy, the leaders of the two nuclear powers, though determined to achieve their goals in the Caribbean and maintain their current standings in the Cold War world, also recognized the danger of nuclear confrontation.
Operation Mongoose In November, 1961, following the Bay of Pigs invasion, Kennedy instituted a larger plan to harass and eventually replace Castro with a more American-friendly government.
Operation Mongoose, headed by Edward Lansdale, was the Kennedy administration’s plan to weaken the Castro regime through covert sabotage, aid to Cuban exile forces, and an eventual U.S.-led military invasion.
Robert Kennedy personally oversaw the operation and appointed General Edward Lansdale, who had become a prominent counterinsurgency figure in Vietnam, its lead planner.
Recently declassified American documents outline various plots of sabotage, economic isolation, infiltration, and even assassination.
Although some of the assassination plots did not advance beyond the stage of planning and preparation, one plot, involving the use of underworld figures reportedly twice progressed to the point of sending poison pills to Cuba and dispatching weapons to commit the deed.
Another plot involved furnishing weapons and other assassination devices to a Cuban dissident.
The proposed assassination devices ran the gamut from high-powered rifles to poison pills, poison pens, deadly bacterial powers, and other devices which strain the imagination.l The more efficient and advanced Cuban intelligence that resulted from the Bay of Pigs invasion uncovered additional schemes of sabotage and assassination.
The KGB-led intelligence agency in Cuba uncovered a CIA office and 8 tons of weaponry.
The undercover office remained operational in Cuba following the break in diplomatic relations in January, 1961 when Cuban officials claimed that the United States had too many diplomats placed in Cuba whom they assumed to be CIA agents spying on and disrupting the young revolution.
Additionally, a Guatemalan plot to assassinate Fidel and Raul Castro and Che Guevara was intercepted by Soviet intelligence and revealed to the Castro regime.
Many were convinced that American military action would be required to remove Castro.
By 1961, the Cuban government and their Soviet allies had been preparing for a United States invasion, or at the very least, American support for an insurgency force, for almost two years.
The young and idealistic Kennedy Administration continued with a very similar policy toward the island; focusing on all three means of weakening the Castro regime – continued economic sanctions, intensified covert action, as well as the further development of contingency plans for an American invasion of Cuba.
Castro was certainly aware of the removal of Jacobo Arbenz in Guatemala and it was perhaps instrumental in his decision to delay his announcement of the socialist path of his revolution and his alliance with the Soviets.
The Eisenhower and later the Kennedy administration both encouraged other Latin American countries to contain and suppress Castro through both economic and diplomatic means.
At a meeting of regional foreign ministers in San Jose, Costa Rica, the Eisenhower Administration tried to persuade the Latin American ministers to denounce the intervention of China and the Soviet Union in the Western Hemisphere so as to encourage the support of the entire region in their isolation of the Castro regime.
Between the period of Castro’s public embrace of communism on December 1st, 1961 and the New Year, thirteen Latin American governments halted all relations with 33 Cuba.
In January, 1962, the Organization of American states expelled Cuba at a meeting in Punta del Este, Uruguay.
Cubans continue to proclaim that the OAS did so in response to American pressure.
In reality, many Latin American states feared Castro’s antiAmerican rhetoric, increasing Soviet influence in the hemisphere, and the revolutionary nature of Marxism-Leninism encouraged by Castro’s revolution.lvii Castro in fact, did intend to aid revolutionary movements in other nations of Latin America.
While attempting to isolate Cuba diplomatically, both the Eisenhower and Kennedy administrations enacted increasingly damaging economic sanctions against Cuba.
In 1957, Cuban profits from trade with the United States totaled $600 million dollars; this fell dramatically in July, 1960, when United States sugar purchases were significantly decreased, and again in October 1960 when an embargo was placed on all Cuban goods except medicine, cigars, and some foods other than sugar.
On October 16th, President Kennedy was informed that a recent U-2 flight had provided photographic evidence of the construction of Soviet Medium Range Ballistic Missile sites on the island of Cuba.
Kennedy had made several public statements, as recently as September 4th and September 13th, warning the Soviet Union that offensive weapons in Cuba would be considered unacceptable by the United States and would result in American action.
The Soviets had also declared that they did not intend to introduce surface-to-surface offensive weapons to the island, but in a speech to the United Nations General Assembly on October 8th, Cuban president Osvaldo Dorticos had made a disconcerting statement, “If. . . we are attacked, we will defend ourselves.
I repeat we have sufficient means with which to defend ourselves; we have indeed our inevitable weapons, the weapons which we would have preferred not to acquire and which we do not wish to employ.”lx Upon detection of the missiles, JFK convened the Executive Committee of the National Security Council to discuss how to proceed.
After much discussion and debate, President Kennedy decided that because an air strike could not guarantee the destruction of all Soviet missiles in Cuba, a defensive quarantine should be imposed.
On October 23rd, Kennedy received a letter from Nikita Khrushchev that declared, “I should frankly say that the measures outlined in your statement represent a serious threat to peace and security of peoples.
We confirm that the armaments now in Cuba, regardless of the classification to which they belong, are destined exclusively for defensive purposes, in order to secure the Cuban republic from an aggressor’s attack.”lxi Despite their tough and uncompromising rhetoric, both Khrushchev and Kennedy took steps to avoid confrontation; Khrushchev recalled or slowed down ships headed toward Cuba, and Kennedy adjusted the quarantine boundaries and chose to allow some ships to pass through uncontested.
Additionally, both leaders sought the guidance of high-level advisers and repeatedly made it clear to their military leaders that no action should be taken without their personally expressed consent.
It soon became clear that both the Soviet Premiere and American President wished to avoid the “final failure”lxii and were becoming increasingly concerned that they might lose control of the escalating crisis.
By way of indirect private communication and letters, some of which made conflicting demands and were delivered by Western Union agents on bicycles, and on 36 one occasion, a transmission was stuck in an aging elevator, Khrushchev and Kennedy gradually moved away from the tense standoff.
On October 28th, Khrushchev announced, “The Soviet Government, in addition to earlier instructions on the discontinuance of further work on construction sites, has given a new order to dismantle the weapons, which you describe as offensive, and to crate them and return them to the Soviet Union.”lxiii JFK, conscious that it was crucial to publicly proclaim that victory was achieved by both sides and allow Khrushchev to save face, hailed his decision as “an important and constructive contribution to peace.”lxiv Fidel Castro, however, was furious.
Having learned about Khrushchev’s decision over the radio, rather than from the Soviet leader himself, Castro issued a “five point plan” as a solution to the underlying tensions in the Caribbean which led to the crisis.
Castro’s requests that the United States halt covert sabotage and relinquish control of Guantanamo Bay to Cuba were ignored.
The agreement negotiated between Khrushchev and Kennedy stipulated that the Soviets would immediately begin removal of all “offensive” weapons in return for an American pledge not to invade the island of Cuba.
Privately, the Kennedy brothers agreed to remove the missiles in Turkey, though they wished to avoid the appearance that they were willing to abandon NATO allies to secure American interests.
Khrushchev recognized and conceded to the political situation that the Kennedy Administration was concerned about and agreed to keep the Turkey missile trade a secret.
Despite encouraging developments in negotiations, the crisis was not over; on October 27th, an American U-2 was shot down while flying over Cuba, heightening the 37 tension of an already dangerous situation.
Additionally, the American demand that onsite inspections be allowed to verify the removal of the missiles and the list of allegedly offensive weapons submitted by Kennedy was dismissed by Castro as unacceptable.
Castro felt that on-site inspections on the island of Cuba threatened the sovereignty and independence of his nation.
Furthermore, he claimed that the IL-28 bombers included on Kennedy’s list of offensive weaponry were legal Cuban property, given to a sovereign nation by their Soviet allies.
After further negotiation between the Soviets and Cubans, Castro eventually agreed to the removal of the IL-28s along with the other weaponry.
On November 20th, Kennedy publicly announced that Castro had agreed to the removal of all offensive weaponry, and terminated the quarantine the next day.
The missiles were loaded onto the decks of Soviet ships, where they were photographed by American surveillance aircraft.
The dangerous confrontation led to a temporary thawing of Cold War tensions; a ‘hot line’ was established between the Kremlin and White House so as to facilitate future communication and a test ban treaty was negotiated.
It is undoubtedly true that the crisis would not have occurred were it not for the actions of Khrushchev, Castro, and Kennedy; it is also clear however, that the actions and personalities of these men were responsible for its resolution.
The leaders of each of the three administrations involved played a significant role in the nature of the crisis and its peaceful outcome.
Nikita S Khrushchev According to his memoirs, Nikita Khrushchev first came up with the idea to place nuclear missiles in Cuba while vacationing in Bulgaria.
He presented his idea to the Presidium upon his return to Moscow on May 20th, 1962 and achieved unanimous approval, though several key Soviet leaders voiced concern.
Much of Khrushchev’s rhetoric prior to American discovery of the missiles, however, supports his claim that the missiles were strategic weaponry with the sole intention of deterring United States aggression.
In a speech to the delegation he sent to propose the idea to Castro, Khrushchev stated, “An attack on Cuba is being prepared.
The correlation of forces is unfavorable to us, and the only way to save Cuba is to put missiles there.”lxix Certainly, one could interpret this as merely an attempt to persuade the geographically convenient island to host nuclear missiles so as to quickly increase Soviet bargaining power in the Cold War era of atomic diplomacy, and many have.
To fully investigate the claim that Khrushchev and the Soviets deployed nuclear missiles in Cuba with the sole intention of protecting the island from an imminent invasion by the United States, it is necessary to examine American actions that may have encouraged such a belief in Moscow and Cuba.
The American campaign of economic and diplomatic isolation, supported by covert sabotage was continued and intensified after the Bay of Pigs invasion of April 1961.
The Cubans seemingly were agreed that a second American invasion was inevitable, and certainly many members of the Soviet Presidium agreed.
The ultimate goal of Operation Mongoose was the eventual elimination of the Castro regime, which Lansdale scheduled for approximately October 1962.
Though all members of the Kennedy Administration continue to claim that the United States had no intention of invading the island of Cuba, many contingency plans were prepared and in place as the possible final move of Operation Mongoose.
Following the Bay of Pigs invasion, most United States officials believed that direct American military intervention would be required to remove Castro.
President Kennedy hoped to remove the Cuban government through covert means, yet he simultaneously planned for a full-scale invasion of the island.
Both contingency plans included the use of all branches of the military in a fast and overwhelming attack on the small island at great cost in lives and money.lxx Kennedy obviously wished to establish a quick and powerful strike against Cuba as a possible option for dealing with the communist beachhead and its threatening regime.
Concrete data about the start of the operation is as yet unavailable; though there is talk of its being in the next few months.”lxxi Though it is still unknown how the KGB received this information, it is clear that the Soviets were beginning to agree with their Cuban allies that an American invasion of Cuba would become a reality.
Furthermore, in April 1962, President Kennedy and the Shah of Iran publicly witnessed 10,000 soldiers land on Onslow Beach, North Carolina as part of Lantphibex62, a massive amphibious invasion exercise, simulating the landing of 40,000 soldiers on an unnamed island.
A less public, but even larger practice invasion was planned for Vieques Island, Puerto Rico, less than fifty miles from Cuba.lxxii Simultaneously, Khrushchev and the Presidium approved a six-month old request from the Castro regime for more Soviet weaponry.
By October 1962 the Soviets had intelligence that the United States was dramatically increasing its presence in the Caribbean and that Robert McNamara had ordered senior military officials to remain ready to participate in invasion planning.
There were covert operations extending over a long period of time. recollection is that they extended from the late 1950s into the period we’re discussing, the summer and fall of 1962.
And thirdly, there were important voices in the United States – important leaders of our Senate, important leaders of our House – who were calling for the invasion of Cuba.
So I state quite frankly again that if I had been a Cuban leader at that time, I might well have concluded that there was a great risk of United States invasion.
And I should say, as well, if I had been a Soviet leader at the time, I might have come to the same conclusion.
The second point I want to make – and I think it shows the degree of misperception that can exist and can influence both parties to a dispute [. . . – is that] I can state unequivocally we had absolutely no intention of invading Cuba.
Now, I don’t want to suggest there weren’t contingency plans; all of you – certainly our Cuban friends and our Soviet friends – are familiar with contingency plans.
All of our militaries – Soviet, Cuban, and United States – have contingency plans covering a wide range of contingencies.
An additional theory concerning the evolution of Khrushchev’s decision to deploy nuclear missiles to Cuba presented by many students of the crisis –and one certainly considered by the Kennedy Administration as a significant factor is that the Soviet premiere, while vacationing very near the ‘defensive’ American Jupiter missiles in Turkey, decided to place a similar threat near American soil so as to illustrate how unsettling such a threat could be and further, that the Soviet Union would continue to assume an active role in the Cold War world.
The agreement to place fifteen Jupiter missiles in Turkey was concluded in 1959 under the Eisenhower administration.
The missiles were, in fact, offered to all NATO nations to alleviate fears of a ‘missile gap’ favoring the Soviet Union.
Though NATO unanimously approved the emplacement of American nuclear missiles onto European territory to protect against Soviet aggression, only Turkey and Italy volunteered to house them on their own soil.
Furthermore, the fact that the Kennedy administration privately agreed to remove the missiles in Turkey as part of the resolution of the crisis illustrates that they are significant to the crisis and its outcome, and perhaps were a key motivation behind Khrushchev’s decision.
The desire to retain leadership of the communist bloc in the Cold War of the 1960s also influenced Khrushchev’s decision to place nuclear missiles in Cuba.
Following Stalin’s death, Sino-Soviet relations had rapidly deteriorated.
The Chinese criticized Khrushchev for statements he made regarding the unnecessary brutality of the Stalin regime and the possibility of “peaceful coexistence” in which nations joined the socialist bloc without bloodshed and violent revolution.
In 1962, while Khrushchev was being criticized as weak, the Kennedy Administration began to act in ways that the Soviets interpreted as arrogant.
Kennedy had decided to resume nuclear testing in April 1962, after Khrushchev had unilaterally broken the moratorium the previous year.
Furthermore, the Soviets were becoming increasingly concerned over the growing evidence of American involvement in Southeast Asia.lxxxi Perhaps most frustrating to Khrushchev was a lack of progress on the issue of Berlin.
In The Cuban Crisis Revisited, Leslie Dewart argues that by placing nuclear missiles in Cuba, Khrushchev hoped to both prevent an American attack against the island, but also to force negotiations on the Berlin issue, and perhaps even use their removal as a bargaining chip in the settlement.lxxxii Ronald Steel, however, concludes that Kennedy falsely assumed that Khrushchev’s behavior was the result of his desire to push the west out of Berlin.
Raymond Garthoff, a participant in the 47 crisis, claims, “We saw the principle Soviet objective as redressing a strategic inferiority, publicly revealed, and growing in diversity.”lxxxviii This belief is echoed in the statements of many members of the Kennedy Administration, including Robert Kennedy, Arthur Schlesinger, and Theodore Sorensen.
Khrushchev himself recognized the dual purpose of the deployment, and made this clear in his attempt to convince the Soviet Defense Council to support “a decision to which he was already firmly committed.”lxxxix In his memoirs, Khrushchev reports saying to his colleagues, “It would be foolish to expect the inevitable second invasion to be as badly planned as the first.
In addition to protecting Cuba, our missiles would have equalized what the West likes to call ‘the balance of power.”xc This admission that the missile deployment served any purpose other than the protection of Cuba was omitted from the second volume of Khrushchev’s memoirs, further emphasizing to many that Soviet insistence that Cuban protection was the only reason for deployment was a convenient way to save face after he withdrew the missiles.
Timothy Naftali and Aleksandr Fursenko suggest that the Soviet alliance with Fidel Castro was also in question in May 1962.
For these specific reasons, in the late spring of 1962, Khrushchev felt he needed a bold move to remind Washington of Soviet power, to ensure that the Kremlin received the respect it deserved from Washington.
At the same time he wanted to demonstrate to Castro personally and dramatically that the Soviet Union would defend his revolution.
It was undoubtedly a combination of these different factors and events, perceived through the lens of Cold War ideology, that influenced Khrushchev’s crucial decision in 1962 to break with tradition and emplace nuclear missiles only ninety miles from the United States.
Therefore the missiles have one purpose – to scare them, to restrain them, so that they have appreciated this business.”xciii Such admissions suggest that Khrushchev, despite many reports of his emotional and passionate character, respected the possible destruction caused by nuclear technology and had no intention of forcing such a confrontation.
Time and again between 1956 and 1961, he had threatened nuclear retaliation as a 49 bargaining chip to further his political objectives.
But Khrushchev did not have the desire to threaten nuclear war when it might actually lead to one.”xcivWhatever his motives, Khrushchev did not intend to start a nuclear war by placing missiles in Cuba, and perhaps even failed to fully consider this as a possible result.
While embroiled in the crisis, Khrushchev recognized the possible consequences of such a dangerous standoff, and fearing the crisis might escalate beyond his or Kennedy’s control, negotiated a settlement.
Oddly enough, the role of Cuba has been portrayed as that of a passive stage for a conflict between two superpowers.
In reality, Cuba was a very active player in this dramatic event and certainly affected the development, nature, and outcome of the missile crisis.
Declassified Soviet documents and Cuban participants in the Moscow and Havana conferences, as well as the efforts of several qualified academics are beginning to illustrate that Cuba played a very significant role in the international crisis of October, 1962.
In Cuba the missile crisis is referred to as the October Crisis, illustrating that the event was actually only one in a series of potentially catastrophic crises faced by the Castro regime.xcv By October 1962 Operation Mongoose, the Kennedy Administration 50 campaign to harass and destabilize the Cuban government, was well underway.
Immediately following Castro’s ascension to power, the United States enacted policies of economic and diplomatic isolation.
John F Kennedy inherited a Cuban policy from the Eisenhower administration that in addition to political pressure, included a plan to forcefully remove Fidel Castro by aiding a group of Cuban émigrés.
Though Kennedy had criticized the Eisenhower administration as stagnant and unimaginative when it came to Cold War issues, he maintained a very similar policy toward the island of Cuba.
Eisenhower’s plan for an invasion of the island by Cuban exiles, supported by the United States, became a reality under the Kennedy Administration in April 1961.
The Bay of Pigs debacle ended in embarrassment and defeat for the United States and had significant consequences for the missile crisis that materialized eighteen months later.
At the request of Raul Castro, the Soviet Union began to significantly increase its aid to Cuban intelligence within a week of the Bay of Pigs invasion.
The KGB sent agents to head all departments of Cuban intelligence and train Cuban agents as well as supplying necessary technical equipment.
Anibal Escalante, a PSP member who had been encouraging Fidel Castro to crack down on dissidents prior to the invasion, rose to a prominent position in the cooperative Cuban-Soviet intelligence organization that began to create the surveillance state that Castro had previously resisted as unnecessary.
Following the failed invasion of counterrevolutionaries and their superpower ally, Castro began to see the need for the police state many in the PSP had been encouraging for quite some time – especially Anibal Escalante.
Raul and Che had been members of the communist party since the 1950s and Fidel joined the PSP in November 1960.
The American sponsored attack confirmed the image of the ever-threatening nearby superpower that Castro had projected in order to push forth radical reform policies.
The choice of communism. . . could now be presented as the only possible response to the crime of the Yankees.”xcvi Castro and other leading members of his administration consistently portrayed American aggression, ranging from assassination attempts to economic embargoes, as necessitating the Soviet alliance, the increased need for domestic surveillance, and buttressing the stability of the Castro regime.
It boosted Castro’s political stature in Cuba, Latin America, and the developing world.
Sheldon Stern seems to agree that Castro’s success in crushing the Bay of Pigs invasion allowed him to announce his commitment to communism, “in the wake of his stunning triumph,” but doesn’t go as far 52 as to say that United States actions actually drove him to embrace communism and the Soviet Union as Frankel and Smith suggest.xcix Denunciation of ‘American imperialism’ and the embrace of socialism and the Soviet Union appeared to be the best way to save the revolution and maintain a sovereign Cuba.
An additional 80 tanks and 40 jets and reconnaissance aircraft were marked for Cuba and scheduled for delivery.c The invasion, which came at the end of a series of invasion scares in the space of a year, illustrated to both the Cubans and their Soviet allies that more must be done to protect the young revolution.
The Cubans, and many Soviets seem to have assumed that the Kennedy Administration “had reacted to the 1961 Bay of Pigs debacle by preparing for a much larger invasion of Cuba, one that would have the full intent of overthrowing the Cuban government and would rely on U.S. military forces.”ci Because of this, many have assumed that Castro welcomed the Soviet nuclear missiles to deter the American attack which he believed was imminent.
Following the botched Bay of Pigs invasion, the Kennedy Administration intensified its campaign of covert action against the Cuban government.
Most within the administration, however, felt that American military force would be required to remove the Castro regime.
General Edward Lansdale was recruited by the Kennedy brothers to design Operation Mongoose, the plan to weaken and eventually eliminate the communist government in Cuba by way of covert sabotage, economic embargoes, diplomatic 53 isolation, aid to counterrevolutionaries, and assassination attempts.
Furthermore, Lansdale’s project was to include a schedule illustrating when the effectiveness of covert operations would be exhausted and the island would be ready for the outright removal of Fidel Castro and his administration by way of military force.
The Kennedy Administration also increased American military presence and undertook large, conspicuous military exercises in the Caribbean, including an amphibious island invasion in nearby Puerto Rico to remove an allegedly fictitious, but unmistakable dictator named ORTSAC.cii Furthermore, the Kennedy Administration isolated the Castro regime through both economic and diplomatic means.
In 1961 President Kennedy eliminated the quota of sugar that the United States would purchase from Cuba and in early 1962 put an embargo on all trade with the island, except in the case of necessary medical supplies.
In January 1962 Cuba was expelled from the Organization of American States; the organization also instituted collective economic measures against the Castro regime and agreed to prohibit the sale of arms to the island.
As McNamara and others would later admit, Castro understandably expected an invasion by the United States.
In October 1960 and again in March 1962, the Soviet Union alleviated Cuban fears of an imminent attack by threatening the use of nuclear weapons.
Following the Cubans’ insistence that the United States was preparing for an invasion in 1960, Khrushchev declared that his commitment to the Cuban revolution included the use of nuclear weapons if necessary.
It was the second such reassurance in only four month.”ciii Fidel Castro, Raul Castro and Che Guevara publicly recognized the Soviet nuclear deterrent as being largely responsibly for the continued safety of Cuba.
Many in the academic community believe that this pattern of United States aggression against the Cuban government resulted in Castro’s acceptance of Soviet nuclear missiles.
This theory has been echoed by many Cuban, Soviet, and American participants in the crisis, including Castro himself.
More often, however, Castro has declared that he accepted the missiles not as a means of protection because in reality, the presence of the missiles made Cuba a target – but as a way of bolstering the strategic forces of the socialist bloc.
It is likely that the defense of the Castro regime, as well as the enhanced position of the socialist bloc in Cold War atomic diplomacy, influenced the decision of both Castro and Khrushchev to deploy Soviet missiles to the island of Cuba.
Certainly, there is evidence to support the circular argument that the character of the Cuban revolution resulted in American aggression, which in turn, resulted in Cuba’s alliance with the Soviet Union, which then resulted in intensified American aggression and the eventual acceptance of Soviet nuclear missiles.
Philip Brenner argues that Cuba, particularly Castro, influenced the character of the crisis, as well as Khrushchev’s decision to resolve the situation by removing the missiles.
According to several accounts, Castro remained admirably calm after Kennedy’s public announcement of October 22nd and “Cuban army units mobilized and assumed defensive positions quickly and with a minimum of confusion.”cviii Cuba’s preparations “would have made the ensuing conflict different from the one anticipated by United States planners.”cix At the Moscow conference, members of the Cuban delegation claimed that the difficulty and the casualty rate of the invasion would be much greater than the Americans appreciated.
At the height of the crisis, he defiantly ordered that all aircraft in Cuban airspace be shot down.
On October 27th, 1962, a U-2 plane was shot down over eastern Cuba, killing the pilot, Captain Rudolf Anderson.
The Soviet commanders in Cuba believed the reconnaissance plane was taking photos as preparation for the imminent United States invasion; they liberally interpreted Khrushchev’s earlier order to defend against a United States air attack as orders to fire at an American U-2 plane at the peak of the international crisis.cxi Khrushchev became concerned by Castro’s behavior and 57 recognized that the crisis had the potential of escaping his control and resulting in grave consequences.
Thus, Castro’s letter to Khrushchev of October 26th, received by the Soviets on October 27th, was especially distressing to the Soviet Premiere.
As part of the Soviet policy of glasnost, previously withheld sections of Khrushchev’s memoirs were published in the West.
In these sections, Khrushchev recalls Castro’s correspondence of October 26th, which he interpreted as Castro’s suggestion for a first strike attack against the United States.
If . . . the imperialists invade Cuba with the goal of occupying it, the danger that that aggressive policy poses for humanity is so great that following that event the Soviet Union must never allow the circumstances in which the imperialists could launch the first strike against it.
I tell you this because I believe that the imperialists’ aggressiveness is extremely dangerous and if they actually carry out the brutal act of invading Cuba in violation of international law and morality, that would be the moment to eliminate such danger forever through an act of clear legitimate defense, however harsh and terrible the solution would be, for there is no other.cxii Khrushchev also concluded in his memoirs that Castro was a reckless and emotional person who did not understand the potential consequences of nuclear war.
Thus, despite the fact that Khrushchev chose to exclude Cuba from the negotiations for the settlement of the dispute, Castro inadvertently played a large role in the resolution of the crisis.
Though Castro insists that he did not suggest that “the USSR should be the aggressor, because that would be more than incorrect, it would be immoral and insane,” he does admit that he felt nuclear war would be the result of an American invasion.cxv At the Havana conference, Castro reported, “I would have agreed to the use of nuclear weapons.
Because, in any case, we took it for granted that it would become a nuclear war anyway, and that we were going to disappear.
Before having the country occupied – totally occupied – we were ready to die in the defense of our country.”cxvi Castro has said that he equated a conventional attack against Cuba with a nuclear attack on the United States, because the very different forms of attack would have much the same effect on the respective nations.cxvii Thus, it is possible that Castro would have been less concerned about the consequences of nuclear war and therefore more likely to advocate the use of the missiles.
If this is the case, then Khrushchev was correct to fear the possible consequences of the rapidly deteriorating crisis, and to exclude Castro as he quickly maneuvered a resolution.
The Americans insisted upon on-site inspections to verify that all offensive weapons were removed, in return for a secret American pledge not to invade the island of Cuba.
Castro declared that the Soviets had no right to bargain away Cuba’s sovereignty by way of inspections and the return of all IL-28 bombers which, he insisted, were defensive weapons given to the Cubans by the Soviets and thus, Cuban property.cxviii Instead, Castro announced that negotiations would be considered only if his “five points” were recognized.
Castro’s demands included an immediate end to the American economic embargo, all U.S.sponsored insurgent activity and covert sabotage, “piratical attacks” originating in bases in the United States and Puerto Rico, and violation of Cuban airspace, as well as the return of the naval base at Guantanamo Bay.cxix Castro maintained this position despite the appeals of UN General Secretary U Thant and Anastas Mikoyan.
Fidel claimed that the Americans were not required to allow for the observation of a third party to verify that their pledge not to invade Cuba was being upheld, and thus it was insulting to Cuba that inspections should take place on Cuban soil to verify the Soviet pledge.
In an attempt to placate Castro, the Soviets left 3,000 of the 40,000 Soviet troops on the island as a defensive force.
Castro relentlessly refused inspection on Cuban soil so the Soviets were forced to reload the missiles and other weaponry onto Soviet ships where it would then be photographed by United States surveillance aircraft and verified by experts.
Further, Castro’s 60 statements at the Havana conference suggest that he still has not forgiven the Soviet leaders for what he perceived as the abandonment of an ally so as to selfishly pursue Soviet interests.cxx Obviously Cuba played a very significant and active role in the crisis.
Fidel Castro was not a passive player, and his personality and actions influenced the causes of the crisis, as well as the character of the conflict and its eventual resolution.
John F Kennedy The nature and effectiveness of President Kennedy’s actions prior to and during the Cuban missile crisis have been a topic of much disagreement within the American academic community.
Some suggest that Kennedy, an obsessed Cold Warrior, refused to negotiate or compromise with the Soviet Union and pushed the United States unnecessarily close to nuclear war over a situation that he had created with his aggressive policy toward Cuba.
Others believe that Kennedy expertly resolved the crisis through his staunch refusal to accept the ‘outrageous’ actions of the Soviet Union, and proved himself a capable and powerful executive of a Cold War superpower that would have lost ground across the globe if the Soviet offensive went unchecked.
This theory suggests that a pattern of hostility toward the Castro regime enacted by the Kennedy Administration did, most likely, initiate the crisis of October 1962, but that the United States was reacting to what it saw as threatening behavior from the Cubans and Soviets.
The ‘traditionalist’ view, generally proposed and supported by the American participants in the crisis such as Theodore Sorensen and Robert Kennedy, suggests that failures within the intelligence agencies of both the United States and the Soviet Union created misperceptions and misunderstandings that resulted in the crisis.
Robert McNamara states that, “the decisions of all three nations, before and during the crisis, had been distorted by misinformation, misjudgment, and miscalculation.”cxxii The participants in the crisis also seem to have reached some consensus on Soviet motives for the deployment of nuclear missiles to Cuba.
Whether such statements suggest Kennedy had a full understanding of the conflict within the larger context of the Cold War or that he was a typical Cold War politician continues to be a topic of debate.
Indeed, each of these motives was at least briefly considered by Kennedy or one or more members of the Executive Committee and each of these motives is put forth in later accounts.
Until recently however, there has been little discussion among former members of the Kennedy Administration regarding the idea that the Soviet Union put missiles in Cuba to protect the island from an American invasion.
According to contemporary statements he made, and his later published memoirs, Khrushchev’s primary goal was to protect the young revolution, and yet this possibility was hardly considered by ExComm.
This was also the accepted view of most general American observers of the crisis, as participants were the only ones with access to information regarding the crisis for quite some time and so controlled the history of the crisis and its resolution.
John F Kennedy was certainly influential in bringing the crisis to an end, but his means of doing so are being further explored and he was certainly not the only administrator whose efforts were necessary to resolution.
McCone blames not only the Kennedy Administration but also the Eisenhower Administration before it for creating a “climate of inaction.”cxxix Though the aforementioned authors are all proponents of a similar argument – that the Kennedy Administration, and to a lesser degree the Eisenhower Administration, had created a climate in which the Soviet Union felt it was possible to place nuclear missiles in Cuba without considering the response of the United States – they vary on the blame and criticism they assign to Kennedy himself.
The theory that Kennedy’s weak Cold War policies resulted in the missile crisis is countered by the opposite argument that it was in fact, Kennedy’s aggressive Cold War policies that created the environment that led to the crucial Soviet decision.
Proponents of what William J Medland calls the left-wing perspective of the revisionist argument suggest that “for the sake of personal prestige and political success, Kennedy adopted a belligerent course so that he could demonstrate his toughness, firmness, and manliness to the world.”cxxx Authors of this theory, such as Roger Hagan and Leslie Dewart, feel that President Kennedy’s arrogant policies resulted in an environment in which Khrushchev felt he had to place missiles in Cuba to both equalize the balance of power and protect the Castro regime.
Furthermore, they suggest that Kennedy rejected a path of private negotiation for a public showdown.
Thomas G Paterson and William J Brophy reject the claim that Kennedy behaved recklessly due to concern over domestic politics and the upcoming November elections.
The Democrats had no political need to manufacture a war scare, and Kennedy did not welcome a new Cuban crisis.”cxxxii Paterson and Brophy believe that the naval quarantine was not politically motivated, because many American politicians both Democrat and Republican called for harsher action.
They do suggest, however, that the tactic of the public statement may have been, citing the need to keep the American public informed of military mobilization to avoid later fallout, as well as an attempt to rally support of American citizens and the world.
Most discussions of Kennedy’s handling of the crisis eventually evolve into the question of the actual threat posed by the missiles in Cuba.
Kennedy’s critics however, claim that in an attempt to improve his domestic political prestige, Kennedy concocted false reasons to justify the public military response the first being that the missiles posed a grave and serious risk, and drastically altered the balance of power.
They suggest that the outdated missiles were useless for a first strike and thus were ‘defensive’ weapons and did not pose a significant threat, citing the nearly identical missiles in Turkey as proof that the administration understood that these missiles were not of an offensive nature.
Furthermore, they criticize Kennedy for escalating and extending the crisis by submitting a list of “offensive” weapons he demanded be removed in order to resolve the crisis that included the IL-28 bombers.
By this argument, Kennedy, by choosing to view the missiles as an offensive threat and demanding their removal, unnecessarily brought the world to the brink of nuclear war.
The major argument is the political effect on the United States.”cxxxvi Though perhaps Kennedy recognized the missiles did not actually pose a dramatic military threat, the political consequences of inaction, both at home and abroad were dangerous enough to warrant his response.
Many within the Kennedy 67 Administration felt that if the Cuban threat went unanswered, Soviet confidence to act elsewhere in the world might be bolstered, and European confidence in their American allies would be damaged, resulting in an extremely dangerous world in which Soviet actions went unchecked.
Last month, I said we weren’t going to , and last month I should have said we don’t care.
After all, this is a political struggle as much as military.cxxxviii Whether the military balance was greatly affected by the introduction of Soviet nuclear missiles on Cuba, it is clear that the Kennedy Administration felt the international political consequences of the situation were great.
Therefore, the argument that Kennedy acted in the manner he did solely for domestic political gains and the desire to appear strong, seems flawed; Kennedy reacted to what he considered to be a grave threat to the interests and safety of the United States and its allies.
He applauds Kennedy’s actions as commander in chief during this confrontation, but also concedes that previous actions of the Kennedy Administration, such as the failed invasion at the Bay of Pigs, were precipitous in the Soviet decision to move nuclear missiles to Cuba.
Stern strays further from the conventional exposition of this event with his presentation and analysis of Kennedy’s posture in the face of possible nuclear war with the Soviets.
Kennedy repeatedly expressed distrust of military operations and solutions as well as recognition of the danger of backing the Soviets into a corner and forcing escalation of the crisis.
Creating a Nation and a Society, by Gary B Nash and Julie Roy Jeffrey is not so approving of Kennedy’s role in resolving the Cuban missile crisis.
Nash portrays Kennedy as an “aggressive cold warrior.”cxl His discussion of the nuclear confrontation in Cuba is 69 preceded by a discussion of the Bay of Pigs “fiasco” in which he cites the failed invasion as an important precursor to the Soviet decision to place missiles in Cuba.
Nash suggests that the Bay of Pigs experience simultaneously hardened Kennedy’s stance toward communism and reinforced the Soviet and Cuban belief that the United States wished to overthrow Castro and eliminate communism from the western hemisphere.
Nash declares, “Understandably fearful of the American threat after the Bay of Pigs invasion, Castro sought and secured Soviet assistance.”cxli The language of the American People text regarding Kennedy’s response is clearly critical.
Additionally, Nash’s breakdown of what constituted the crisis reads, “the USSR had begun to place what Kennedy considered offensive missiles on Cuban soil,” and obviously calls into question, if it doesn’t directly imply that the crisis was a creation of the Kennedy administration.
This was first demonstrated with economic aggression and then with the organization of subversive forces against Cuba, the Bay of Pigs invasion.”cxliii The Cold War policies of the Kennedy Administration included economic and diplomatic pressure, assassination attempts, covert sabotage and harassment, an increasingly hostile and conspicuous military presence in the Caribbean, and aid to counterrevolutionary groups.
As noted above, McNamara himself admits that he would have believed a United States invasion imminent if he had been a leader of either the Soviet Union or Cuba.
The primary problem, according to the Secretary of Defense, was the Cuban alliance with the Soviet Union; the Kennedy Administration believed a communist beachhead in the Caribbean to be unacceptable and extremely dangerous to American interests within the larger context of the Cold War.
Second, American officials feared Castro’s support of socialist revolutions throughout Latin America, which he proclaimed in his Second Declaration of Havana, despite the belief of the Soviet Union and members of the PSP that this was a risky undertaking.
The third reason for American aggression against Cuba lay in its “hostile rhetoric directed at the United States,” which made it difficult to ignore domestic calls for action against the hostile Soviet outpost.
The final reason McNamara cites for the nature of American policy is “that the Cuban government betrayed its promises of a free election and began to establish a dictatorship that violated the civil and political liberties of the Cuban people.”cxlv Newly declassified documents and the findings of the series of conferences regarding the crisis have served to provide more material for discussion and interpretation; they have not, however, clarified the absolute motives of the administrators nor the causes of the crisis itself.
Len Scott and Steve Smith even go as far as saying “n our view, the great availability of sources on the crisis frequently adds to the difficulty of determining ‘what happened.’”cxlvi The continued debate regarding JFK’s role in this international conflict highlights the important fact that if the potentially catastrophic situation of October 1962 is to continue to be viewed as an example of 72 international crisis resolution, it is important that the strategy and posture of the negotiators be investigated, and if possible, understood.
Kennedy’s critics suggest that belief in his uncompromising foreign policy led to further American initiatives in the Cold War, specifically in Vietnam.
Robert McNamara has concluded that nuclear weapons are inexcusably dangerous and unless they are destroyed, represent the possible future destruction of mankind.
Though the elimination of nuclear weaponry is unlikely, it suggests perhaps, an increased respect for the power of nuclear technology and for the dangers inherent in international conflict and escalating confrontation.
It is clear that the personalities and statesmanship of Castro, Kennedy, and Khrushchev were significant to the creation and outcome of this crisis.
Though Khrushchev’s exact motives for deploying the missiles are unclear, there is strong evidence to suggest that he misestimated the American reaction to the deployment.
Furthermore, Khrushchev became increasingly concerned that the crisis would escalate out of his control, and thus was instrumental in its resolution.
Castro’s historic ‘relationship’ with the Kennedy brothers, his acceptance of the Soviet missiles, and his behavior after their discovery and during their removal, all played a hugely influential role in the October Crisis.
Perhaps because of the numerous articles and books available on Kennedy, it is his role in the crisis that has undergone the greatest evolution.
Critics have suggested that Kennedy’s obsession with removing Castro, and his determination not to show weakness in the face of the Cold War led the world unnecessarily close to a nuclear exchange, and aggressive foreign policy in future Cold War theaters.
The Kennedy Tapes portray a moderate and capable statesman, different from many of the traditional and revisionist portraits painted by participants and scholars.
He worked tirelessly to alleviate the crisis through diplomatic means and to avoid armed conflict and escalation, despite calls from his advisers and members of Congress for harsher action.
Though he was willing to risk his political reputation if it meant averting nuclear disaster, he can perhaps be criticized for his secret negotiations regarding the Jupiter missiles in Turkey and his political sacrifice of Adlai Stevenson.
Kennedy did request that his agreement to the removal of the Jupiter missiles remain a secret so as to avoid political difficulty both within the United States and with NATO allies.
He was also, however, one of the first in the administration to suggest the removal of the antiquated Jupiters in exchange for removal of the Soviet missiles in Cuba.
This contingency was not activated because Khrushchev agreed to the removal of the missiles in Cuba in return for a secret agreement to remove the American missiles in Turkey.
Adlai Stevenson was undoubtedly sacrificed by the Kennedy brothers in their attempt to avoid political fallout.
We believe that even if we knew every detail about the crisis that would not mean that we could write a definitive history, even if that history were to be written from the perspective of each participant in turn.
It is clear that this was a pivotal event of the Cold War which represented great danger, whether real or imagined, and that the political maneuverings of the statesmen involved resulted in its resolution.
The goal of this lesson plan is to illustrate the tensions of the Cold War era and the nuclear age, the personalities and influence of each of the three administrators on the crisis and its resolution, and to explore the crisis itself.
Through their investigation of this crisis, students should begin to recognize the danger inherent in international conflict and analyze ways in which we can prevent and mediate future conflicts.
Discussion of Content Hook Provide students with the section of the chronology from October 1st through October 16th, 1962.
Read the section out loud, and show students the photographic evidence Mention to students, that Kennedy couldn’t decipher the photographs without the aid of experts, so they are not alone if the photographs are confusing.
Students will recognize the need to understand the motives and reasoning of the participants, specifically Khrushchev and Castro.
Conclude the class session by asking students to write down their predictions about why Khrushchev chose to emplace Soviet nuclear missiles on Cuba, why Castro chose to accept them, and how Kennedy chose to react to their discovery, using their knowledge of these three characters and of the Cold War era.
The purpose of this hook 80 is to encourage students to see the missile crisis as the horrifying and exciting event that it is.
By allowing students to make predictions and/or suggestions as to how to handle historical situations, educators provide a more active form of education and empower students to act confidently when faced with decisions in their personal lives and as citizens.
See Discussion of Content Hook above; this activity/discussion will take a full class period.
Provide students with the section of the chronology that includes January 1st, 1959 through October 16th.
Ask students to review the two handouts and alone, or in pairs, write up the geopolitical significance of this event.
Cuban-American relations lecture outline to guide them through lecture.
Since students respond positively to visual aids, pair the lecture with relevant photographs which can be easily found on the internet.
As a second activity, ask students to write out how they believe Kennedy, Khrushchev, and Castro will respond to the crisis, and how they feel each leader should respond.
To gain a better understanding of the tension, escalation, and eventual resolution of the crisis, go over the chronology as a group.
Note to students that there is no documentary evidence or evidence of any kind of communication between Castro and Kennedy and ask them if/why this is 82 significant.
Instruct students to write how each primary source either supports or refutes their beliefs of causation of the crisis and the role of each individual leader, using specific examples from the documents.
Distribute the BBC article, Chavez gets Russian Helicopters, published April 4th, 2006.
Ask students to write a one-page response to the article that discusses if/how these developments are significant.
Days Eleven through Fifteen – View either the 1974 film, The Missiles of October or the more recent film, Thirteen Days.
Students should write a critique of the film, focusing on its portrayal of the causes of the crisis and the actions, behaviors, and character of the participants.
In their film review, they should discuss the possible consequences of the historical inaccuracies within the film.
Since time in class is limited, this is a good extra credit or homework assignment, if necessary.
Instruct students to research the current U.S.-Cuban and/or U.S.Venezuelan relationship, provide their opinion on these contemporary international relationships, and make predictions about future interactions.
Students trace the rise of the United States to its role as a world power in the twentieth century.
Describe the Spanish-American War and United States expansion in the South Pacific.
Understand the role of military alliances, including NATO and SEATO in deterring communist aggression and maintaining security during the Cold War.
Shortly thereafter Cuba first expropriates U.S.-owned properties, promising compensation.
July • President Manuel Urrutia of Cuba states on television that communism is not really concerned with the welfare of the people and that it constitutes a danger to the Cuban Revolution.
On 17 July, Fidel Castro accuses President Urrutia of treason and resigns as prime minister.
He is arrested and on 15 December he is sentenced to twenty years in prison for conspiracy, sedition, and treason.
He meets with the Cuban leadership and signs various agreements including, inter alia, $100 million in trade credits to help lessen Cuban dependence on the United States.
The following day, the Soviet Union announces that it is willing to buy the sugar that had been destined for the United States.
April • JFK pledges the United States will not intervene militarily to overthrow Castro.
By 19 April, the invasion has failed; more than a thousand Cuban rebels are captured by Castro’s forces.
Khrushchev announces a six-month deadline for a resolution of the Berlin situation.
Gilpatric acknowledges that the United States enjoys considerable nuclear superiority over the Soviet Union.
United States Secretary of State Dean Rusk declares Cuba a threat to the Western Hemisphere and calls for its isolation.
The OAS declares the Castro government incompatible with the inter-American system, and expels Cuba from the organization.
The organization agrees to prohibit its members from selling arms to Cuba, and agrees on collective measures against Cuba.
Edward G Lansdale’s “Cuba Project” program review details American covert activities in Cuba and specifies October 1962 as a target date for Castro’s ouster.
Cuba denounces the exercise as a provocation and as proof that the United States intends to invade.
Late April • Khrushchev first discusses the idea of deploying nuclear missiles to Cuba with Soviet First Deputy Premier Anastas I Mikoyan.
On 25 April, the Soviet press representative in Havana, Aleksandr Alekseev, receives an urgent cable to return to Moscow.
Another military exercise in the Caribbean, “Jupiter Springs,” is planned for the spring or summer.
On the return flight to Moscow, Khrushchev first mentions the idea of the deployment to Foreign Minister Andrei Gromyko.
Biryuzov, travels secretly to Havana to propose to Castro the deployment of nuclear weapons to Cuba.
The Cuban leadership unanimously and enthusiastically gives its approval in principle.
Malinovsky initial a draft treaty governing the deployment of Soviet forces to Cuba.
Late July • The first surface-to-air missiles and supporting equipment for the construction of nuclear missile sites leave the Soviet Union.
He claims that the USSR is committed to helping Cuba resist further imperialist attacks.
The Cubans propose that the deployment be made public to forestall an American overreaction; Khrushchev successfully argues for continued secrecy.
Kenneth Keating tells the Senate that there is evidence of Soviet missile installations in Cuba.
Keating urges JFK to take action and proposes that the OAS send an investigative team to Cuba.
Dobrynin conveys a message from Khrushchev that no ground-to-ground or offensive weapons would be placed in Cuba, which RFK relays to Dean Rusk and to Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara.
RFK suggests that a statement be issued declaring that the United States will not tolerate the introduction of offensive weapons in Cuba.
The president reassures the American public that the Soviets have deployed no offensive weapons in Cuba and warns the Soviets against such a deployment.
Dobrynin reiterates his assurances that Soviet military assistance to Cuba was strictly defensive in nature and did not represent a threat to American security.
Dobrynin also delivers a message in which Khrushchev promises that the Soviets will refrain from any activities that “could complicate the international situation” before the American congressional elections in November.
Cuba denounces this as a provocation, and proof of American plans to invade Cuba.
At the same time, JFK notes that no information to date suggests that military action would be necessary or justified.
Robert L Dennison, commander-in-chief of the Atlantic Fleet , to make preparations for a blockade of Cuba if necessary.
Charles Halleck , sanctioning the use of American forces to defend the Western Hemisphere from aggression or subversion from Cuba, and pledging cooperation with the OAS and “freedom-loving Cubans” to achieve selfdetermination.
Hilsman phones Dean Rusk, who in turn notifies Paul Nitze, assistant secretary of defense for international security affairs.
Informed that an air strike could not guarantee the destruction of all Soviet missiles in Cuba, JFK confirms that the United States will impose a quarantine, rather than execute an air strike.
The morning edition of the Washington Post, however, runs a story speculating about recent White House activity and surmising its focus might be Cuba, but mentions the possibility of Berlin.
The congressional leaders express support, but many advocate stronger action.
According to reporters, Dobrynin is “ashen” when he leaves Dean Rusk’s office.
Virtually simultaneously, American ambassador Foy Kohler delivers a letter from JFK and the text of his speech to the Kremlin, but he does not meet with any high-ranking officials, and there is no immediate response.
At the same time, American United Nations ambassador Adlai Stevenson informs Acting Secretary General U Thant of the president’s speech, and announces that the United States will request a meeting of the Security Council. • the president addresses the nation in a televised speech, announcing the presence of nuclear missile sites in Cuba.
Oleg Penkovsky, a senior officer in Soviet Military Intelligence and a Western spy since 1961, is arrested in the Soviet Union.
The final vote is 20-0 in favor of condemning the Soviet missile deployment and endorsing the quarantine.
Khrushchev agrees to U Thant’s appeal for a moratorium on further action, and agrees that if the United States ends the quarantine, the USSR will suspend arms shipments to Cuba.
He calls for voluntary suspensions of arms shipments to Cuba and for voluntary suspension of the quarantine for two to three weeks, so that a settlement may be negotiated.
Thomas Power, commander-in-chief of the Strategic Air Command , raises the alert level of the Strategic Air Command to DefCon2, indicating full readiness for war.
Unbeknownst to JFK, Power send his alert message in the clear, rather than in code (as would have been standard procedure), to demonstrate to the Soviet Union his confidence in American nuclear superiority.
Khrushchev states that the United States will have to learn to live with Soviet missiles in Cuba, just as the USSR has learned to live with American missiles in Turkey.
Khrushchev also claims that the SAMs and ballistic missiles in Cuba are under “strict Soviet control,” and vaguely proposes a summit.
JFK draws Khrushchev’s attention to his repeated warnings against the deployment of offensive weapons to Cuba, and to the Soviets repeated statements that they had no need or intention to undertake such a deployment.
Initially the letter contains demands for a non-invasion pledge and for the withdrawal of United States missiles from Turkey and Italy.
Later in the day, Khrushchev receives new reports suggesting that the invasion will begin shortly.
Khrushchev re-dictates the letter, eliminating mention of the missiles in Turkey and Italy.
He also announces that the tanker Bucharest has been intercepted and permitted to proceed without boarding.
Finding no prohibited material, the United States Navy permits the Marucla to proceed.
A couple of hours earlier Georgy Kornienko, Dobrynin’s deputy in Washington, reports that the information indicating an imminent invasion is faulty.
Dobrynin and Kornienko choose not to report the information to Khrushchev, so as not to delay the delivery of the letter.
Fomin suggests that if Stevenson were to propose this in the U.S., Zorin would be interested.
Khrushchev inadvertently omits any mention of Jupiter missiles in Italy in the drafting of his next letter to Kennedy.
The letter proposes a solution along the lines suggested more explicitly by Fomin.
ExComm mistakenly assumes Fomin’s message to Scali was a precursor to Khrushchev’s letter; Fomin, however, had no prior knowledge of Khrushchev’s letter and had been acting on his own initiative.
Fidel Castro then meets with the rest of the Cuban leadership to discuss the next course of action.
JFK concludes that “there is no evidence to date indicating that there is any intention to dismantle or discontinue work on these missile sites.
Convinced that they have done all they can to prepare for a United States invasion, Castro dictates a letter to Khrushchev.
Dated 26 October, the letter itself is sent at 6:40 A.M. on 27 October.
Moscow Radio carries Khrushchev’s proposal, as well as his statement that Soviet missiles in Cuba are under strict Soviet control.
Soviet air defense forces shoot down an American U-2 over Banes in eastern Cuba, killing its pilot Maj.
Although Soviet fighters scramble to intercept it, the plane returns safely to base without drawing fire.
Scali has instructions from Rusk to determine what has happened to the previous proposal and why Khrushchev raised the idea of swapping Turkish for Cuban missiles.
Khrushchev interprets this as an appeal from Castro to launch a preemptive nuclear attack on the United States.
In his memoir, RFK recalls telling Dobrynin that the United States knew work on the missile bases in Cuba was continuing; that the shoot-down of the U-2 was a serious turn of events; that JFK did not want a military conflict but that his hand was being forced; that the United States needed a commitment “by tomorrow” that the Cuban missile bases would be removed by the Soviets, or the United States “would remove them”; and that the United States would not publicly trade missiles in Turkey for Soviet missiles in Cuba, though the Jupiters were scheduled to be removed in any case.
He writes; “ You would agree to remove these weapons systems from Cuba under appropriate United Nations observation and supervision; and undertake, with suitable safeguards, to halt the further introduction of such weapons systems into Cuba.
Lauris Norstad which presents the difficulty for NATO of any Cuban-Turkey missiles trade.
Also, JFK tells Stevenson to tell U Thant that a Soviet tanker is approaching the quarantine zone and to remind U Thant of the Soviet statement that their ships would not challenge the quarantine.
Cordier is instructed, upon further signal from the White House, to give U Thant the letter, requesting him to propose the removal of both the Jupiters in Turkey and the Soviet missiles in Cuba.
He steadfastly refuses to allow United Nations on-site inspections in Cuba.
Mikoyan’s instructions are to discuss verification procedures for the removal of the Soviet missiles, and to enlist Castro’s cooperation in complying with the terms of the agreement, which include withdrawal of IL-28 bombers.
January 20, 1961 We observe today not a victory of party but a celebration of freedom--symbolizing an end as well as a beginning--signifying renewal as well as change.
For I have sworn before you and Almighty God the same solemn oath our forbears prescribed nearly a century and three-quarters ago.
For man holds in his mortal hands the power to abolish all forms of human poverty and all forms of human life.
And yet the same revolutionary beliefs for which our forebears fought are still at issue around the globe--the belief that the rights of man come not from the generosity of the state but from the hand of God.
We dare not forget today that we are the heirs of that first revolution.
Let the word go forth from this time and place, to friend and foe alike, that the torch has been passed to a new generation of Americans--born in this century, tempered by war, disciplined by a hard and bitter peace, proud of our ancient heritage--and unwilling to witness or permit the slow undoing of those human rights to which this nation has always been committed, and to which we are committed today at home and around the world.
Let every nation know, whether it wishes us well or ill, that we shall pay any price, bear any burden, meet any hardship, support any friend, oppose any foe to assure the survival and the success of liberty.
To those old allies whose cultural and spiritual origins we share, we pledge the loyalty of faithful friends.
Divided there is little we can do--for we dare not meet a powerful challenge at odds and split asunder.
To those new states whom we welcome to the ranks of the free, we pledge our word that one form of colonial control shall not have passed away merely to be replaced by a far more iron tyranny.
But we shall always hope to find them strongly supporting their own freedom--and to remember that, in the past, those who foolishly sought power by riding the back of the tiger ended up inside.
If a free society cannot help the many who are poor, it cannot save the few who are rich.
To our sister republics south of our border, we offer a special pledge--to convert our good words into good deeds--in a new alliance for progress--to assist free men and free governments in casting off the chains of poverty.
But this peaceful revolution of hope cannot become the prey of hostile powers.
Let all our neighbors know that we shall join with them to oppose aggression or subversion anywhere in the Americas.
And let every other power know that this Hemisphere intends to remain the master of its own house.
To that world assembly of sovereign states, the United Nations, our last best hope in an age where the instruments of war have far outpaced the instruments of peace, we renew our pledge of support--to prevent it from becoming merely a forum for invective--to strengthen its shield of the new and the weak--and to enlarge the area in which its writ may run.
For only when our arms are sufficient beyond doubt can we be certain beyond doubt that they will never be employed.
But neither can two great and powerful groups of nations take comfort from our present course--both sides overburdened by the cost of modern weapons, both rightly alarmed by the steady spread of the deadly atom, yet both racing to alter that uncertain balance of terror that stays the hand of mankind's final war.
So let us begin anew--remembering on both sides that civility is not a sign of weakness, and sincerity is always subject to proof.
Let both sides explore what problems unite us instead of belaboring those problems which divide us.
Let both sides, for the first time, formulate serious and precise proposals for the inspection and control of arms--and bring the absolute power to destroy other nations under the absolute control of all nations.
Let both sides seek to invoke the wonders of science instead of its terrors.
Together let us explore the stars, conquer the deserts, eradicate disease, tap the ocean depths and encourage the arts and commerce.
And if a beachhead of cooperation may push back the jungle of suspicion, let both sides join in creating a new endeavor, not a new balance of power, but a new world of law, where the strong are just and the weak secure and the peace preserved.
Nor will it be finished in the first one thousand days, nor in the life of this Administration, nor even perhaps in our lifetime on this planet.
In your hands, my fellow citizens, more than mine, will rest the final success or failure of our course.
Since this country was founded, each generation of Americans has been summoned to give testimony to its national loyalty.
The graves of young Americans who answered the call to service surround the globe.
In the long history of the world, only a few generations have been granted the role of defending freedom in its hour of maximum danger.
I do not believe that any of us would exchange places with any other people or any other generation.
The energy, the faith, the devotion which we bring to this endeavor will light our country and all who serve it--and the glow from that fire can truly light the world.
Finally, whether you are citizens of America or citizens of the world, ask of us here the same high standards of strength and sacrifice which we ask of you.
With a good conscience our only sure reward, with history the final judge of our deeds, let us go forth to lead the land we love, asking His blessing and His help, but knowing that here on earth God's work must truly be our own.
From an analysis of the situation and the reports in our possession, I consider that the aggression is almost imminent within the next 24 or 72 hours.
I understand that his variant would call for a large number of forces and it is, in addition, the most repulsive form of aggression, which might inhibit them.
I tell you this because I believe that the imperialists' aggressiveness is extremely dangerous and if they actually carry out the brutal act of invading Cuba in violation of international law and morality, that would be the moment to eliminate such danger forever through tan act of clear legitimate defense, however harsh and terrible the solution would be, for there is no other.
But at the same time, we are ready to calmly confront a situation that we view as quite real and quite close.
Our October 27 message to President Kennedy allows for the question to be settled in your favor, to defend Cuba from an invasion and prevent war from breaking out.
In this way the president of the United States has positively answered my messages of October 26 and 27, 1962.
I must say that I understand your feelings of indignation toward the aggressive actions and violations of elementary norms of international law on the part of the United States.
Naturally, if there's an invitation it will be necessary to repulse it by every means.
On our part, we will do everything possible to stabilize the situation in Cuba, defend Cuba against invasion and assure you the possibilities for peacefully building a socialist society.
This position of our government concerning your communication to us is embodied in the statement formulated today, whose text you surely know.
We decided not to sit back and wait for a surprise attack, with our detection radar turned off, when the potentially aggressive planes flying with impunity over the targets could destroy them totally.
We didn't think we should allow that after all the efforts and expenses incurred in and, in addition, because it would weaken us greatly, militarily and morally.
If we sought to avoid the risks of a surprise attack, it was necessary for Cuban artillerymen to have orders to shoot.
We cannot accept that, as it would be tantamount to giving up a sovereign prerogative.
We have received your letter of October 28 and the reports on the talks that you as well as President Dorticós have had with our ambassador.
We understand your situation and take into account the difficulties you now have during the first transitional stage after the liquidation of maximum tension that arose due to the threat of attack on the part of the United States imperialists, which you expected would occur at any moment.
We understand that certain difficulties have been created for you as a result of our having promised the United States government to withdraw the missile base from Cuba, since it is viewed as an offensive weapon, in exchange for the United States commitment to abandon plans for an invasion of Cuba by United States troops or those of its allies in the western hemisphere, and lift the so-called ""quarantine,"" that is, bring the blockade of Cuba to an end.
This lead to the liquidation of the conflict in the Caribbean zone which, as you well realize, was characterized by the clash of two superpowers and the possibility of it being transformed into a thermonuclear world war using missiles.
But we, political and government figures, are leaders of a people who doesn't know everything and can't readily comprehend all that we leaders must deal with.
Had we, yielding to the sentiments prevailing among the people, allowed ourselves to be carried away by certain passionate sectors of the population and refused to come to a reasonable agreement with the United States government, then a war could have broken out, in the course of which millions of people would have died and the survivors would have pinned the blame on the leaders for not having taken all the necessary measures to prevent that war of annihilation.
Preventing the war and an attack on Cuba depended not just on the measures adopted by our governments but also on an estimate of the actions of the enemy forces deployed near you.
In addition, there are opinions that you and we, as they say, failed to engage in consultations concerning these questions before adopting the decision known to you.
Under the conditions created, also bearing in mind the information that the unabated warmongering group of United States militarists wanted to take advantage of the situation that had been created and launch an attack on Cuba, if we had continued our consultations, we would have wasted time and this attack would have been carried out.
We have lived though the most serious moment when a nuclear world war could have broken out.
Obviously, in that case, the United States would have sustained huge losses, but the Soviet Union and the whole socialist camp would have also suffered greatly.
As far as Cuba is concerned, it would be difficult to say even in general terms what this would have meant for them.
There's no doubt that the Cuban people would have fought courageously or that they would have died heroically.
Of course, we made concessions, accepted a commitment, action according to the principle that a concession on one side is answered by a concession on the other side.
That's why when we compare aggression on the part of the United States and thermonuclear war with the commitment of a concession in exchange for concession, the upholding of the inviolability of the Republic of Cuba and the prevention of a world war, I think that the total outcome of this reckoning, of this comparison, is perfectly clear.
We have adopted and will continue to adopt in the future all the measures necessary to strengthen our defense and build up our forces, so that we can strike back if needed.
The shooting down of a plane over Cuba turned out to be a useful measure because this operation ended without complications.
But we think you will completely dominate your domestic enemies without our assistance.
This process of struggle will continue as long as there are two political and social systems in the world, until one of these-and we know it will be our communist system-wins and triumphs throughout the world.
There will still be machinations against you, but together with you, we will adopt all the measures necessary to paralyze them and contribute to the strengthening and development of the Cuban Revolution.
I don't know what news you received; I can respond for the message that I sent you the evening of October 26, which reached you the 27th.
What we did in the face of events, Comrade Khrushchev, was to prepare ourselves and get ready to fight.
When in our opinion the imperialist attack became imminent I deemed it appropriate to so advise you and alert both the Soviet government and command-since there were Soviet forces committed to fight at our side to defend the Republic of Cuba from foreign aggression-about the possibility of an attack which we could not prevent but could resist.
Danger couldn't impress us, for danger has been hanging over our country for a long time now and in a certain way we have grown used to it.
Countless eyes of Cuban and Soviet men who were willing to die with supreme dignity shed tears upon learning about the surprising, sudden and practically unconditional decision to withdraw the weapons.
Perhaps you don't know the degree to which the Cuban people were ready to do its duty toward the nation and humanity.
But from the instant the imperialists attack Cuba and while there are Soviet armed forces stationed in Cuba to help in our defense in case of an attack from abroad, the imperialists would by this act become aggressors against Cuba and against the USSR, and we would respond with a strike that would annihilate them.
Everyone has his own opinions and I maintain mine about the dangerousness of the aggressive circles in the Pentagon and their preference for a preventive strike.
Moreover, I spoke not as the troublemaker but as a combatant from the most endangered trenches.
There not must a few Cubans, as has been reported to you, but in fact many Cubans who are experiencing at this moment unspeakable bitterness and sadness.
The imperialists are talking once again of invading our country, which is proof of how ephemeral and untrustworthy their promises are.
I must say frankly that measures indicated in your statement constitute a serious threat to peace and to the security of nations.
The statement by the Government of the United States of America can only be regarded as undisguised interference in the internal of the Republic of Cuba, the Soviet Union, and other states.
And naturally, neither can we recognize the right of the United States to establish control over armaments which are necessary for the Republic of Cuba to strengthen of its defense capability.
We affirm that the armaments which are in Cuba, regardless of the classification to which they may belong, are intended solely for defensive purposes, in order to secure the Republic of Cuba against the attack of an aggressor.
The viewpoint of the Soviet Government with regard to your statement of October 22 is set forth in statement of the Soviet Government, which is being transmitted to you through your Ambassador at Moscow.
I think you will recognize that the step which started the current chain of events was the action of your Government in secretly furnishing longrange missiles to Cuba.
I think you will recognize that the step which started the current chain of events was the action of your Government in secretly furnishing offensive weapons to Cuba.
After that time, this Government received the most explicit assurances from your Government and its representatives, both publicly and privately, that no offensive weapons were being sent to Cuba.
Embassy translation follows of letter from Khrushchev to President delivered to Embassy by messenger 4:43m.
I see, Mr President, that you too are not devoid of a sense of anxiety for the fate of the world understanding, and of what war entails.
But if one concentrates artillery, and adds to it the necessary number of troops, then the same cannons do become an offensive means, because they prepare and clear the way for infantry to attack.
You, Mr President, are a military man and should understand: Can one attack, if one has on one's territory even an enormous quantity of missiles of various effective radiuses and various power, but using only these means.
Has something so new appeared in military strategy that one can think that it is possible to attack thus.
I say precisely attack, and not destroy, since barbarians, people who have lost their sense, destroy.
We should then be forced to put into effect the necessary measures of a defensive character to protect our interests in accordance with international law.
I spoke in the name of the Soviet Government in the United Nations and introduced a proposal for the disbandment of all armies and for the destruction of all armaments.
We, for our part, will declare that our ships, bound for Cuba, will not carry any kind of armaments.
Original of letter being air pouched today under transmittal slip to Executive Secretariat.
Following message from President to Khrushchev should be delivered as soon as possible to highest available Soviet official.
Dear Mr President, I have studied with great satisfaction your reply to Mr Thant concerning measures that should be taken to avoid contact between our vessels and thereby avoid irreparable and fatal consequences.
In your statement you expressed the opinion that the main aim was not simply to come to an agreement and take measures to prevent contact between our vessels and consequently a deepening of the crisis which could, as a result of such contacts spark a military conflict, after which all negotiations would be superfluous because other forces and other laws would then come into play--the laws of war.
The means situated in Cuba, of which you speak and which disturb you, as you have stated, are in the hands of Soviet officers.
These issues have so far not been resolved, but they are awaiting urgent solution, which would clear up the international atmosphere.
In order to eliminate as rapidly as possible the conflict which endangers the cause of peace, to give an assurance to all people who crave peace, and to reassure the American people, who, I am certain, also want peace, as do the people of the Soviet Union, the Soviet Government, in addition to earlier instructions on the discontinuation of further work on weapons construction sites, has given a new order to dismantle the arms which you described as offensive, and to crate and return them to the Soviet Union.
Thus in view of the assurance you have given and our instructions on dismantling, there is every condition for eliminating the present conflict.
I note with satisfaction that you have responded to the desire I expressed with regard to elimination of the aforementioned dangerous situation, as well as with regard to providing conditions for a more thoughtful appraisal of the internal situation, fraught as it is with great dangers in our age of thermonuclear weapons, rocketry, spaceships, global rockets, and other deadly weapons.
We trusted your assurance, because the weather was indeed poor in that area at that time.
I should like to express the following wish; it concerns the Cuban people.
And if you do not want this to happen, it would better if no cause is given for a dangerous situation to arise.
Following is text President's reply to Khrushchev letter of October 28 for delivery to highest available Soviet official.
President Hugo Chavez said they would help to protect Venezuela if the United States ever mounted an invasion.
Washington has dismissed claims of a possible invasion as ridiculous and says Mr Chavez's military purchases pose a threat to regional stability.
A crowd of Russian and Venezuelan generals and diplomats was treated to an air show, displaying the strengths of the Russian-built helicopters.
A group of around 20 parachutists jumped in formation out of the olive green MI-17 helicopters during Monday's ceremony.
President Chavez said Venezuela's latest purchases could be used to transport parachute troops quickly into combat.
This would be ideal for a war of resistance, Mr Chavez said, a reference to his often repeated concerns that the United States may want to invade Venezuela to seize its oil reserves.
Army Commander Gen Raul Baduel said Venezuela planned to buy a total of 33 helicopters from Russia.
Balance of power Venezuela has also agreed to buy a total of 100,000 Kalashnikov assault rifles from Russia.
Mr Chavez also repeated his accusation that the United States had blocked a deal to buy training aircraft from the Brazilian manufacturer, Embraer, because the Brazilian planes contained protected American technology.
The BBC's Greg Morsbach in Caracas says Mr Chavez's words may do little to dispel fears in Washington that Venezuela is stepping up its arms expenditure and is upsetting the balance of power in Latin America.
Introducing the concept – Editorial cartoons are not just like other comics.
They may be funny, but their main purpose is to offer an opinion or point of view about some issue or problem in the news.
Symbolism – A symbol is any object or design that stands for some other thing, person, or idea.
Exaggeration and Distortion – Changes in size or shape often add to the cartoon’s point.
Distorting an object means changing it in some way to make it look funny, ugly, etc.
It is often insulting, but it can also help the cartoon make its point quickly.
Caricature – Caricature is a portrayal of an individual’s features in an exaggerated or distorted way.
In it, a viewpoint is expressed in such an odd way as to make that view actually seem ridiculous.
Captions – Words are used to reinforce the cartoon’s nonverbal features.
Famous saying, slogans, song lyrics, and well-known phrases can be used as captions.
Addison-Wesley Educational Publishers, 2003), 823. cxli Gary B Nash and others, The American People: Creating a Nation and a Society, 4th ed.
Addison-Wesley Educational Publishers, 2003), 824. cxlii Gary B Nash and others, The American People: Creating a Nation and a Society, 4th ed.
Nash, Gary B., Julie Roy Jeffrey, John Howe, Peter Frederick, Allen Davis, Allan Winkler.
