Suppose President Kennedy had forty-eight hours to make up his mind before the story leaked.
It’s very hard to get to nuclear war if the framework you bring to the equation is purely rational.
In 1962, as the Soviet Union was emplacing nuclear-tipped missiles in Cuba, some worried that these weapons could be transferred to a young revolutionary named Fidel Castro.
First and foremost, the president should not think narrowly about his options, trying to decide between going to war or allowing Iran to acquire a nuclear bomb.
During crises, consider all available options, or create your own. -------------------------------------------------------------------------“The first and most important lesson from the Missile Crisis for Obama is that when presented with a binary choice between unacceptable options, it is important to explore alternatives that, however unacceptable, are less catastrophic.
Fidel Castro, the Cuban prime minister, sought to become the third, and had he succeeded, the crisis would have become significantly more dangerous.
Precisely because the White House recognized that the Cubans could become a wild card, it cut them out of the game.
Make sure all actors part of a crisis know the consequences of their actions.
In addressing nuclear dilemmas, military might and diplomacy are not distinct alternatives, but necessary complements.
Kennedy believed that the use of military muscle should be a last resort but knew that projection of United States power in ways that threatened potential use of force was an essential instrument of statesmanship.
Military might and diplomacy are not mutually exclusive. -------------------------------------------------------------------------JFK’s successful strategy in CMC depended on imaginative diplomacy: he invented additional options short of war; presented Khrushchev with the right mix of carrots and sticks.
When two options are unattractive, consider a broader scope of possible actions, invent additional alternatives, combining elements of both hard and soft power. -------------------------------------------------------------------------“Lesson Two: President Kennedy famously said, “Let us never negotiate out of fear.
Following that principle, the Bush administration watched as North Korea added eight bombs of plutonium to its arsenal and conducted a nuclear test.
Always leave the door open for negotiations and diplomacy. -------------------------------------------------------------------------“Lesson Three: The perfect should not be the enemy of the good.
Although his ultimate goal was to bury Communism, Kennedy knew that this was a long-term project.
Distinguish between the ideal outcome in the long-term and what can be achieved in the short-term.
Take time to consider all options before going to war. -------------------------------------------------------------------------“…JFK drew a cardinal lesson: Where the consequences could be catastrophic, never force an adversary to choose between humiliating retreat and war.
How close the world came to nuclear war during the Cuban crisis should be a reminder to us today of the very real possibility of nuclear war. -------------------------------------------------------------------------“The principal risk of nuclear war arises from the uncontrollable.
Nuclear powers are interdependent based on their shared interest in avoiding nuclear war. -------------------------------------------------------------------------“The perils of crisis management: Any one of dozens of accidents, misperceptions, personal fallibilities, or time driven choices by the Soviets or by Americans could have triggered a chain of reactions ending in war.
When faced with two unacceptable options , make a creative third option. -------------------------------------------------------------------------On North Korea: during the Missile Crisis, Kennedy signaled American resolve by publically demanding the withdrawal of the missiles.
A leak of information could have compromised the decision-making process.
Secrecy is quite important in decision-making to give time for deliberations.
No event demonstrates more clearly than the Missile Crisis that with respect to nuclear war there is an awesome crack between unlikelihood and impossibility.
Especially in the aftermath of the Cold War, most people would like to imagine that the nuclear sword of Damocles has been carefully lowered and put away, even if it has not been hammered into a plowshare.
Beware; nuclear war is still possible. -------------------------------------------------------------------------“While the adversarial competition between the United States and Soviet Union that led to the Missile Crisis has now faded, other nuclear risks have arisen.
While Cold War is over, be alert for new nuclear dangers. -------------------------------------------------------------------------Essence of Decision also provides a political scientific analysis of decision-making.
Model I focused on decision-making from the perspective of a state as a rational actor.
The second Model focuses on the role of organizations within a government as actors in a collaborative decision-making model.
The third model focuses on “governmental politics” and the role of individual policymakers and statesmen negotiating and deliberating to form policy.
Since nuclear war between the United States and Soviet Union would have been mutual suicide, neither nation would choose nuclear war; nuclear war not a serious possibility.
Given its strategic nuclear advantage at the time, the United States could choose lower-level military actions without fearing escalation to nuclear war.
Nuclear crises manageable; when vital interests at stake, leaders of both nations will think soberly about the challenge and their options and find limited actions to resolve disputes short of war.
Nuclear crises inherently chancy; information and estimates available to leaders reflect organizational capacities and routines as well as facts.
Leaders presented with much narrower options than the menu that analysts might consider desirable.
Organizational rigidities and even mistakes crucial for United States success.
Problem of control and coordination of large organizations, so prescription to put thought into the routines established in principal organizations before a crisis.
United States leaders can choose actions that they believe entail real possibilities of escalation to war.
Interaction of internal games within White House or Kremlin could yield war, even nuclear war as an outcome.
Mix of personality, expertise, influence, and temperament that allows a group to clarify alternatives even while it bargains over separate preferences must be better understood.
Employ multiple viewpoints, including iconoclastic ones, in decision-making process.
For example, Soviet missiles deployed in Cuba in 1962 and United States missiles deployed in Europe since 1983 were deterrents to the side deploying them and provocations to the side facing them.
Moreover, deterrence is based on threat, and the two sides often disagree about which types of weapons and deployments are inherently retaliatory rather than first-strike threats.
In crises mistrust and commitments harden, making it more difficult for leaders to be confident that they can discern or demonstrate the differences between enhanced communication and deception or between restraint and weakness.
The best solution to these tensions is to install sober and careful statesmen in both capitals – a vital but lofty goal.
Deterrent measures are frequently seen as provocative, especially in crises; to mitigate tensions resulting from this paradox we need good leaders.
Richard K Betts, “Surprise Attack and Preemption” in Allison, Graham T., Albert Carnesale, and Joseph S Nye, ed.
James Blight and Janet Lang, “How Castro Held the World Hostage” “Already we are beginning to see the inexorable process by which historical events when they recede far enough into the past, take on an antiquarian quality and gradually lose their visceral potency.
Those fortunate enough to have had a near miss will know how much their driving improved as a result of it—for a while, at least.
Be wary of the dangers of political and cultural myopia, of failure to communicate, misperception, failure to put yourself in your opponents’ shoes, of putting faith in efficacy of military threats, and of assuming that one’s motives are benign. -------------------------------------------------------------------------“President Kennedy, of course, had already come to realize at the climax of the crisis that he did not know, and could not control, all of the actions of his own military…it was largely a matter of great good fortune that things did not get out of hand.
Aspiring nuclear states should know that nuclear weapons are a problem, not a solution.James G Blight, Bruce J Allyn, and David A Welch.
Decision-makers’ preconceived world views affect how information is processed. -------------------------------------------------------------------------“A third lesson is closely related to the second: rational models of deterrence are not enough.
Rational actors can choose nuclear war: there are high risks of accident, miscalculation, or misperception that can cause it. -------------------------------------------------------------------------“It is critical for high-level officials to prepare themselves to deal with crises ahead of time… We need to find ways through briefings and simulations to ensure that top officials have a better grasp of the complexity of the nuclear systems they direct before a crisis occurs.
It is critical to prepare top officials to deal with crises before they occur.
This will expedite identification and mitigation of potential sources of tension. -------------------------------------------------------------------------“In 1962, the superpowers had not yet worked out the rules of the road governing such novelties as a Marxist regime in the Western Hemisphere or overseas Soviet military bases.
Nor had the two countries yet appreciated the significance of crisis stability; the importance of fast, direct communications between Washington and Moscow; the decreasing utility of force as an instrument of policy.
Furthermore, the crisis revealed how threats of military force lost its potency during the nuclear are. -------------------------------------------------------------------------“If there is one major theme common to all three parts of our journey, therefore, it is the significance of the burden of responsibility.
That the policymakers at Hawk’s Cay felt this burden so powerfully, while the scholars there felt it not at all, primarily accounted for the gulf between their understandings of the event.
It was also the burden of responsibility…that primarily account for the many differences between the hawks’ and the doves’ approaches to the crisis.
It’s remarkable how little agreement there was on this here this weekend.
And second, don’t have a process that creates a crisis unless you want one.
The crisis was caused by the United States because of the way it reacted to the missiles in Cuba.
Biggest source of crisis instability: miscommunication, mistakes, and misunderstandings.
The story of the Missile Crisis is replete with misunderstandings and miscalculations.
But something more than “dumb luck” was involved in sidestepping a nuclear apocalypse.
The problem was not so much with the collection of intelligence as with its interpretation and analysis.
Sometimes, the unconventional explanation may explain a shocking truth.
Nuclear weapons changed warfare completely: they made classic military victory impossible.
To manage future crises, we much devise strategies to achieve our objectives without the use of force.
Fen Osler Hampson, “Escalation in Europe,” in Allison, Graham T., Albert Carnesale, and Joseph S Nye, ed.
Missile Crisis illustrates the need for better international laws and institutions to defend small-state sovereignty.
Missile Crisis illustrates Cuba’s need to provide for its own defense; it could not rely solely on the Soviet Union.
One of the first things that Kennedy did was to convene a special group of eighteen advisers later dubbed the Executive Committee of the National Security Council…After the crisis had passed, it has been reported that Robert McNamara said that there was no longer bureaucratic decision-making but “crisis management”… Sorensen said that “Procedures do, of course, affect decisions.
Remarkably, practically all of these explanations start with the premise that Khruschev behaved rationally… the assumption of rationality… simply cannot be reconciled with Khrushchev’s policy… an alternative explanation should show why and how Khrushchev convinced himself in the face of all the indications to the contrary that he could successfully put Soviet missiles into Cuba… crises could most readily be traced to grave foreign and domestic threats that leaders believed could only be overcome through an aggressive foreign policy.
The most important external threat was the expectation of a dramatic shift in the balance of power… a multiplicity of motives on the part of the initiator… Graham Allison has suggested that the missiles could have been perceived as the solution to a number of different problems confronted by influential groups within the Soviet hierarchy.
Assumption of rationality cannot be reconciled with Khrushchev’s policy.
The review of the literature here suggests that this is even truer of the analysts; their interpretations of the crisis tell us at least as much about themselves as they do about Khrushchev and Kennedy.
Each side projected its own psychology and stereotypes about the behavior of the other and analysts did the same.
Analysts of the Missile Crisis have tried to deny the strong strain of irrationality in decision making.
The crisis lowered the long-run risks of nuclear war, but its lessons were wrongly applied in Vietnam.
During crisis, necessary to have deliberate and thoughtful discussions on possible solutions. -------------------------------------------------------------------------“One of the important and very difficult lessons from the crisis is that it did take time.
It took time for people to work out the possibilities, to see options that they didn’t see – even for President Kennedy to cool down, because he was prepared in the initial sessions to resort to immediate attack.
I say it’s a difficult lesson because there is almost no chance any president of the United States will have that leisure to deal with a crisis in the future; and the importance of presidents and their advisors internalizing the lesson from this crisis that David Gergen was articulating to some students a couple nights ago that presidents just must not allow themselves to be hussled by the media into premature decisions.
Decision makers must have time to develop and consider many options for dealing with international crises, and must not allow themselves to be pushed into premature decisions.
Only such examination can reconstruct key judgments within the little worlds in which they are made.
The best way to understand and assess the judgments made by policymakers of the past is to consider those judgments in light of the most detailed and seemingly insignificant historical information available.
To end that crisis before it escalated into a war between the superpowers, Kennedy agreed to the Soviet demand that the United States pull its nuclear-armed Jupiter missiles out of Turkey in return for the Soviets pulling their missiles out of Cuba.
The president understood that this concession would not play well with the American public, especially with the political right, and would also damage Washington’s relations with its NATO allies, especially Turkey.
So he told the Soviets that they could not speak openly about the deal, or else he would deny it and ultimately renege on it.
Still, there were suspicions in the West that such a deal had been cut, and the Kennedy administration was queried on the matter.
The president and his principal advisors lied and denied that there had been an agreement to take the Jupiters out of Turkey.
Sometimes leaders lie to the public and to other governments in order to resolve international crises.
The lies the helped end the Cuban Missile Crises can be viewed nobly because they helped defuse a dangerous nuclear confrontation.
The Truth about Lying in International Politics . ------------------------------------------------------------------------- “The President…is very isolated in the thinking he has to do and the concerns he has to take under consideration, even in the presence of a group like the ExComm.
In crises, realize that the ultimate decisions rest with the person in charge. -------------------------------------------------------------------------“ExComm didn’t advise the President on the politics of the event.
The president should be advised on the domestic and political ramifications of a crisis.
The crisis led the United States and Soviet to take fewer risks, given their newfound fears of destruction by mutual miscalculation.
Presidents often make decisions about war apart from Congress and even their advisors because of the need for secrecy, flexibility, uncertainy, and the need to act quickly.
Richard E Neustadt and Graham T Allison, afterword to Robert F Kennedy, Thirteen Days . -------------------------------------------------------------------------“The uses made of history appear to have contributed, demonstrably, to the high quality of analysis and management apparent during the missile crisis.
Kennedy and his advisors used historical examples to help understand the crisis, which increased the quality of their analysis and decisions. -------------------------------------------------------------------------“In employment of government power, particulars matter.
That may be historically insignificant except to them, but it matters at least to them.
Putting off the killing of those people for at least a week probably reduced the risk of nuclear exchange by mutual miscalculation. . . . arginal improvement, as we mean it, could consist of even less and still be worth the effort.
When JFK learned of the missiles in Cuba, his first impulse was to do something.
Only second did he think of whether to do anything, in what sequence, keeping open what options.
When high government officials make big decisions, details matter, seeking marginally better outcomes is worth the effort, and examining second thoughts can be helpful.
The Uses of History for Decision-Makers . ------------------------------------------------------------------------- “There are five areas which are seen as preventing us from drawing useful lessons.
One of these is human psychology; people still react to stress, fear, and fatigue the way they did in the 1960s.
Another is the dynamics of small-group politics; the way in which personalities and organization interests interact doesn’t change much over time.
A third is the wisdom of classical diplomacy; building golden bridges behind your enemy is as valuable and as important in the nuclear age as it was in the age of the great Chinese dynasties.
A fourth is the awareness of nuclear risks and the importance of the crystal-ball effect.
If the Kaiser, the Czar, and the other leaders of Europe had been able to see in 1914 what the world was going to be like in 1918, there would have been no World War I; nuclear weapons provide a powerful crystalball.
Bob McNamara referred to the quarantine earlier as a signal to the Soviets.
We know that it was only one among a very great number, several of which the ExComm didn’t even know about, such as the DefCon 2 order going out over an open channel Second, organizational procedures are not full controllable by small groups of men.
We heard a great deal about the problems of micromanaging complex military operations such as a quarantine, ASW activities, and reconnaissance.
Third, be sensitive to the risks of accident, as illustrated by the stray U-2 over Siberia.
Organization procedures are not fully controllable by small groups of meng. military operations.
Beware of the toll caused by stress and fatigue. -------------------------------------------------------------------------“Beware of being too clever by half-the uncertainties surrounding any crisis make it both impossible and unwise to craft and pursue a delicately nuanced strategy that relies heavily on your own virtuosity for success.
Also, nuclear crises are different…This means that the First World War or Guns of August analogy is only valid up to a point, largely because of the crystal ball effect of nuclear weapons.
Do not create overly complex plans in crises: avoid being too clever for the situation.
While conducting secret deliberations or actions during a crisis, be aware of those you may be shutting out.
He was able to use both hard and soft power and combine them very effectively on the world stage.
You need to remember that Kennedy was in office in the throes of the Cold War, at a time when the United States and the Soviet Union were building up nuclear arms and fighting proxy wars in far corners of the globe.
Leaders cannot rely on use of force alone in foreign policy decision-making.
According to the prevailing models, the American advantage of seventeen to one, and the vulnerability of the Soviet forces, should have deterred Khrushchev from placing missiles in Cuba and encouraged Kennedy to take larger risks than he did.
Models cannot fully explain decision-making: one must also account for the psychology of leaders in a given situation.
The odds change, and the outcome of one set of events may greatly change the odds for the next event.
Given the American strategic advantage at that time and the prospects of limiting damage to the United States by preemptively striking Soviet nuclear forces, some strategists might conclude that Kennedy must not have believed those probabilities would lead to a nuclear exchange, or else he acted irrationally in not launching the first strike that an expected value calculation would suggest.
Consider risks relative to consequences of inaction or different circumstances.
Joseph S Nye, Jr., Nuclear Ethics . ------------------------------------------------------------------------- “In cases that involve vital survival interests, we should not rule out unilateral action, though when possible we should seek international support for these actions.
The starkest case in the last half century was the 1962 Cuban missile crisis.
Joseph S Nye, Jr., The Paradox of American Power . -------------------------------------------------------------------------“In familiar situations, the problem may be primarily one of coordination and action…But in a novel situation, effective leadership may require greater diversity in the group that shapes decisions…In the failed Bay of Pigs invasion of 1961, John F Kennedy followed standard bureaucratic procedures and received a predictable framework of advice.
At the same time, given the bipolar Cold War, doing nothing could have been costly for America’s political competition with the Soviet Union.
Although it is true that sanctions were not effective in removing Castro, they were an efficient means of imposing costs and containing Castro.
Military action may be most effective option to crisis, but risks require policymakers to consider alternatives.
Avoid cherry-picking lessons just in order to justify current policy decisions.
Walter Pincus, “Cuban missile crisis still a teachable moment” “There are many historical examples which demonstrate military evasion of civilian control over military operations.
Be wary in international crises: civilian policymakers may lack full control over the military. -------------------------------------------------------------------------“Inadvertent escalation may occur because offensive and defensive actions are frequently indistinguishable.
The defensive needs of attack submarines, for example, may cause them to destroy Soviet strategic submarines – acts likely to be interpreted by the Soviet Union as very offensive.
In more general terms, measures that one state takes to defend itself may seem offensive to the adversary against whom they are directed.
The defender may have no choice but to take such actions, even if he understands that they threaten assets that the adversary values highly.
Even more dangerous, however, is that the defender frequently does not understand how threatening his behavior, though defensively motivated, may seem to the other side.
Thus, when the adversary reacts in a violent or escalatory fashion, the defender is surprised, and may respond even more extremely.
Difficulties raised by the “fog of war” can result in inadvertent escalation to nuclear war.
Missile Crisis illustrates the likelihood that something could go wrong during a crisis.
Despite end of Cold War, Missile Crisis reminds us that our current nuclear weapon SOPs have not changed.
Their cultures emerge from the intense emotional experiences through which they have passed, experiences that created vivid and enduring memories that readily spring to mind.
Munich, Pearl Harbor, the Cuban missile crisis, and the war in Vietnam were such experiences.
When future, or even present, conditions are difficult to discern, people make decisions based on what they see, and what they see is influenced by their memories of what has happened in the past.
Sometimes these are personal memories; sometimes they are organizational or national memories.
Intense emotional experiences like the Cuban missile crisis end up determining people's strategic cultures and traditions.
This emotional response would predispose the decisionmaker toward certain broad courses of action such as trust/distrust, cooperate/fight.
After that, the serial evaluation of options would occur in order to specify a course of action consistent with the broad emotional response.
What is striking is that the process in the Cuban missile crisis, which was a success, and the process in the case of Vietnam have notable similarities.
In both cases, a close examination clearly shows that the basic decision was made very early in the process, before it was necessary to decide, and quite clearly before all the relevant information had been received.
In both cases, the decision was not changed, or even reconsidered, when important information or analysis was received that was not consistent with the decision.
Leaders do not use fully rational decision-making processes, including taking into account new information, to determine what course of action to take.
In the former, the threat of nuclear escalation was explicit, in the latter implicit.
In each case, the two parties were in direct communication with each other, maneuvering for advantage in terms of the local stakes.
These examples illustrate an important defect in much of the recent discussion about crisis management.
There is a tendency to assume that the overriding interest of the parties is to defuse the crisis.
But that goal would certainly be given progressively more weight as a crisis intensified.
This record supports a prediction that as more states acquire nuclear weapons, the probability of their getting involved in conflicts will god own.
Crises between nuclear-armed states can happen, and when they do, participants want to fulfill their interests in the crisis, not just avoid war.
Henry S Rowen, “Catalytic Nuclear War,” in Allison, Graham T., Albert Carnesale, and Joseph S Nye, ed.
Our commander in chief needs political space to do what’s necessary to prevent a new war in the Middle East.
In foreign policy crises, often President and decision-making team will need time and space to deliberate over decisions before pursuing one course of action.
For example, the Strategic Air Command was supposed to launch the bombers, under failsafe procedures, before nuclear weapons were predicted to detonate on United States soil.
SAC, however, failed to do this during the October 28 “test tape” warning incident.
Armenian and Azeri leaders should review their militaries’ routines to weed out those contingency SOPs that may lead to escalation of a crisis into a war against their orders.
It helped us avoid further confrontation with the Soviets; it resolved the Berlin issue; and it established a new basic understandings about U.S.-Soviet interaction.
Uncontrollable elements, such as accidents and miscalculations, may drive states to nuclear war. -------------------------------------------------------------------------“…the highest officials in the American government clearly recognized that a confrontation with the Soviet Union would entail a certain risk of nuclear war.
One must be willing to accept a certain risk of escalation in order to prevent nuclear war. -------------------------------------------------------------------------“…the specter of nuclear war was deliberately manipulated to support American objectives in the crisis… McNamara’s assumption was that nuclear preparations would serve to deter Soviet responses in general; that is, the implied nuclear threat was not directed simply at the possibility that the U.S.S.R. might consider using its nuclear forces… the risk of nuclear war did play a role.
The risk of nuclear war was consciously manipulated in order to affect Soviet options in the crisis and support American objectives.
In conventional crises, leaders may sensibly seek one advantage or another.
They may bluff by threatening escalatory steps they are in fact unwilling to take…A conventional country enjoying military superiority is tempted to use it before other countries right the military balance.
In a nuclear confrontation, no country can take a first step without considering the last.
Nuclear deterrence works; due to the fear of nuclear retaliation, states are more cautious and will not risk escalation.
Cuban missile crisis has crucial lessons for modern leaders” Lesson 1: No one can “win” a nuclear war.
Both sides gradually formed views on how to ensure strategic stability and that was reflected in a number of official SovietUnited States and then RussianUnited States documents.
