Period study Option P4 Superpower relations and the Cold War,1941–91 Edexcel and BTEC Qualifications Edexcel and BTEC qualifications are awarded by Pearson, the UK’s largest awarding body.
We provide a wide range of qualifications including academic, vocational, occupational and specific programmes for employers.
Alternatively, you can get in touch with us using the details on our contact us page at www.edexcel.com/contactus.
We believe in every kind of learning, for all kinds of people, wherever they are in the world.
Examiners must mark the first candidate in exactly the same way as they mark the last.
Candidates must be rewarded for what they have shown they can do rather than penalised for omissions.
Examiners should always award full marks if deserved,e. if the answer matches the mark scheme.
Examiners should also be prepared to award zero marks if the candidate’s response is not worthy of credit according to the mark scheme.
Period study: Superpower relations and the Cold War, 1941–91 Question 1 Explain two consequences of the collapse of the Soviet Union.
An answer displaying no qualities of AO2 cannot be awarded more than the top of Level 1, no matter how strong performance is in AO1; markers should note that the expectation for AO1 is that candidates demonstrate both knowledge and understanding.
Indicative content guidance Answers must be credited according to candidates’ deployment of material in relation to the qualities outlined in the mark scheme.
While specific references are made in the indicative content below, this does not imply that these must be included; other relevant material must also be credited.
The account of events shows some analysis of the linkage between them, but some passages of the narrative may lack coherence and organisation.
Maximum 4 marks for answers that do not go beyond aspects prompted by the stimulus points.
The account of events analyses the linkage between them and is coherent and logically structured.
No access to Level 3 for answers which do not go beyond aspects prompted by the stimulus points.
The middle mark in Levels 2 and 3 may be achieved by stronger performance in either AO1 or AO2.
It shows some reasoning, but some passages may lack coherence and organisation.
It shows a line of reasoning that is coherent and logically structured.
An answer displaying no qualities of AO2 cannot be awarded more than the top of Level 1, no matter how strong performance is in AO1a; markers should note that the expectation for AO1 is that candidates demonstrate both knowledge and understanding.
The importance of the formation of NATO for the development of the Cold War.
The importance of the summit meetings of 1959-61 for relations between East and West.
The importance of the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan for Superpower relations.
