In response, Israel, followed by the United Kingdom and France invaded Egypt.
Aftermath of The Suez CrisisThe Suez Crisis began on October 29, 1956, when Israeli armed forces pushed into Egypt toward the Suez Canal after Egyptian president Gamal Abdel Nasser nationalized the canal, a valuable waterway that controlled two-thirds of the oil used by Europe.
The Israelis were soon joined by French and British forces, which nearly brought the Soviet Union into the conflict and damaged their relationships with the United States.
In the end, Egypt emerged victorious, and the British, French and Israeli governments withdrew their troops in late 1956 and early 1957.
The Suez Canal was built in Egypt under the supervision of French diplomat Ferdinand de Lesseps.
The man-made waterway opened in 1869 after ten years of construction and separates most of Egypt from the Sinai Peninsula.
Its value to international trade made it a nearly instant source of conflict among Egypt’s neighbors—and Cold War superpowers vying for dominance.The catalyst for the joint Israeli-British-French attack on Egypt was the nationalization of the Suez Canal by Egyptian leader Gamal Abdel Nasser in July 1956.
Two years earlier, in the wake of World War II, the Egyptian military had begun pressuring the British to end their military presence in the canal zone.
The Suez canal was developed by Frenchman Ferdinand de Lesseps, who in the 1880s made an unsuccessful attempt to develop the Panama Canal.Supported by Soviet arms and money, and furious with the United States for reneging on a promise to provide funds for construction of the Aswan Dam on the Nile River, Nasser ordered the Suez Canal seized and nationalized, arguing tolls from the ships passing through the canal would pay for the Dam.
Originally, forces from the three countries were set to strike at once, but the British and French troops were delayed.Scroll to ContinueRecommended for youHawaii’s Long Road to Becoming America’s 50th StateHow Theodore Roosevelt Changed the Way America Operated in the WorldInside Theodore Roosevelt's Gilded Age UpbringingBehind schedule but ultimately successful, the British and French troops landed at Port Said and Port Fuad and took control of the area around the Suez Canal.
However, their hesitation had given the Soviet Union—also confronted with a growing crisis in Hungary—time to respond.
The Soviets, eager to exploit Arab nationalism and gain a foothold in the Middle East, supplied arms from Czechoslovakia to the Egyptian government beginning in 1955, and eventually helped Egypt construct the Aswan Dam on the Nile River after the United States refused to support the project.
The response of President Dwight Eisenhower’s administration was measured.
It warned the Soviets that reckless talk of nuclear conflict would only make matters worse, and cautioned Khrushchev to refrain from direct intervention in the conflict.
However, Eisenhower also issued stern warnings to the French, British and Israelis to give up their campaign and withdraw from Egyptian soil.
Eisenhower was upset with the British, in particular, for not keeping the United States informed about their intentions.
The United States threatened all three nations with economic sanctions if they persisted in their attack.
The British and French forces withdrew by December; Israel finally bowed to United States pressure in March 1957, relinquishing control over the canal to Egypt.
The Suez Crisis marked the first use of a United Nations peacekeeping force.
The United Nations Emergency Force was an armed group dispatched to the area to supervise the end of hostilities and the withdrawal of the three occupying forces.Aftermath of The Suez CrisisIn the aftermath of the Suez Crisis, Britain and France, once the seat of empires, found their influence as world powers weakened as the United States and Soviet Union took a more powerful role in world affairs.
British Prime Minister Anthony Eden resigned two months after withdrawing British troopsThe crisis made Nasser a powerful hero in the growing Arab and Egyptian nationalist movements.
For almost a decade, the Suez Canal became the front line between the Israeli and Egyptian armies.In 1975 as a gesture of peace, Egyptian President Anwar el-Sadat reopened the Suez Canal.
It enables a more direct route for shipping between Europe and Asia, effectively allowing for passage from the North Atlantic to the Indian Ocean without having to ...read moreEisenhower DoctrineOn January 5, 1957, in response to the increasingly tense situation in the Middle East, President Dwight Eisenhower delivered a proposal to a joint session of the United States Congress calling for a new and more proactive American policy in the region.
The Eisenhower ...read moreYom Kippur WarOn October 6, 1973, hoping to win back territory lost to Israel during the third Arab-Israeli war, in 1967, Egyptian and Syrian forces launched a coordinated attack against Israel on Yom Kippur, the holiest day in the Jewish calendar.
Taking the Israeli Defense Forces by ...read moreIran Hostage CrisisOn November 4, 1979, a group of Iranian students stormed the United States Embassy in Tehran, taking more than 60 American hostages.
In a TV address on October 22, ...read moreIsraelIsrael is small country in the Middle East, about the size of New Jersey, located on the eastern shores of the Mediterranean Sea and bordered by Egypt, Jordan, Lebanon and Syria.
The nation of Israel—with a population of more than 9 million people, most of them Jewish—has many ...read moreZionismZionism is a religious and political effort that brought thousands of Jews from around the world back to their ancient homeland in the Middle East and reestablished Israel as the central location for Jewish identity.
While some critics call Zionism an aggressive and ...read more9 Facts About the Suez Canal1.
The modern Suez Canal is only the most recent of several manmade waterways that once snaked their way across Egypt.
