January 1, 1959 After a six-year long revolution President Fulgencio Batista flees Cuba and Fidel Castro assumes power after proclaiming victory in Santiago.
February 2, 1959 Cuba declares Fidel Castro to be the new premier and president.
October 28, 1959 Turkey and the United States agree to deploy fifteen nuclear-tipped Jupiter missiles in Turkey starting on June 1, 1961.
February 4-13, 1960 During his trip to Cuba Soviet First Deputy Prime Minister Anastas Mikoyan negotiates economic and trade agreements that help Fidel Castro to deccrease Cuba's economic dependence on the United States.
July 8, 1960 The United States stops the import of Cuban sugar, effectively cutting off 80 percent of Cuban exports to the United States.
July 9, 1960 The Soviet Union agrees to buy sugar previously destined for the United States market.
July 12, 1960 Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev supports Cuba in dispute with United States over Guatanamo Bay military base.
August 28, 1960 The United States imposes a trade embargo against Cuba.
September 1960 The first large Soviet Bloc arms shipment arrives in Cuba.
Soon afterward, Czech and Soviet technicians are reportedly assisting the Cuban military in assembling equipment and installing weapons such as anti-aircraft batteries.
Soviet Bloc personnel also begin to be employed as military instructors, advisers and technicians.
October 6, 1960 Cuba nationalizes United States private investments on the island worth approximately one billion dollars.
December 19, 1960 Cuba and the Soviet Union issue a joint communiqué in which Cuba openly aligns itself with the domestic and foreign policies of the Soviet Union and indicates its solidarity with the Sino-Soviet Bloc.
What is more, they are trying to present the case as though rocket bases of the Soviet Union are being set up or are already established in Cuba.
January 3, 1961 The United States and Cuba sever diplomatic and consular relations.
January 20, 1961 John F Kennedy is inaugurated as the thirty-fifth president of the United States.
April 12, 1961 On the eve of the invasion of Cuba at the Bay of Pigs, President Kennedy decides that United States armed forces will not take part in the operation.
April 14, 1961 Early in the morning, a group of B-26 bombers piloted by Cuban exiles attack air bases in Cuba.
The raid, coordinated by the CIA, is designed to destroy as much of Castro's air power as possible before the scheduled landing of a force of U.S.-trained Cuban exiles.
However, to keep the United States connection from becoming public, an additional set of airstrikes on Cuban airfields is canceled.
Cuban government aircraft which survived the earlier airstrikes are able to pin the invasion force on the beachhead, and without additional supplies of ammunition, the invaders are quickly crushed by Cuban ground forces.
Sarper objects to Rusk's suggestion, pointing out that the Turkish Parliament has just approved appropriations for the missiles and that it would be embarrassing for the Turkish government to inform Parliament that the Jupiters now are to be withdrawn.
Upon returning to Washington, D.C., Rusk briefs President Kennedy on his discussion with Sarper, and Kennedy accepts the idea of some delay in removing the Jupiters.
June 3-4, 1961 President Kennedy meets with Premier Khrushchev in Vienna.
On the second day of the summit, Khrushchev delivers an ultimatum on the status of Berlin, a continuing source of tension between the two superpowers.
Khrushchev threatens to ""normalize"" the situation in Berlin if the city's status is not resolved within six months.
June 13, 1961 General Maxwell Taylor submits a report on United States limited war programs that President Kennedy had ordered following the Bay of Pigs invasion.
Concluding that there is ""no long term living with Castro as a neighbor"" and that Cuban subversion ""constitutes a real menace"" to Latin American nations, Taylor calls for the creation of a new program of action against Cuba, possibly employing the full range of political, military, economic, and psychological tactics.
However, the construction of the Berlin Wall staunches the destabilizing flow of East Germans to the West, and Nikita Khrushchev allows his ""deadlines"" on resolving the Berlin question to pass wi thout further incident.
September 21, 1961 An inter-agency report on Soviet nuclear capabilities, National Intelligence Estimate 11-8/1-61, is disseminated within the government.
The NIE and later intelligence reports show for the first time that the Soviet ICBM program is far behind previous United States estimates.
Only some ten to twenty-five Soviet ICBMs on launchers are believed to exist, with no major increase in Soviet ICBM strength expected in the near future.
October 21, 1961 In a major speech cleared by Rusk, Bundy and President Kennedy, Deputy Secretary of Defense Roswell Gilpatric publicly deflates the ""missile gap"" hypothesis--the theory that the United States is dangerously behind the Soviet Union in its nuclear capabilities.
Gilpatric tells his audience in Hot Springs, Virginia, that the United States actually possessed a substantially larger nuclear arsenal than the Soviet Union.
November 30, 1961 President Kennedy authorizes a major new covert action program aimed at overthrowing the Cuban government.
The new program, codenamed OPERATION MONGOOSE, will be directed by counterinsurgency specialist Edward G Lansdale under the guidance of Attorney General Robert Kennedy.
Task Force W operates under guidance from the SGA and subsequently will involve approximately four hundred Americans at CIA headquarters and its Miami station, in addition to about two thousand Cubans, a private navy of speedboats, and an annual budget of some $50 million.
Task Force W carr ies out a wide range of activities, mostly against Cuban ships and aircraft outside Cuba , such as contaminating shipments of sugar from Cuba and tampering with industrial products imported into the country.
January 1, 1962 The New Year's Day parade in Cuba provides United States intelligence sources with the first reliable intelligence on the extent of Soviet Bloc arms deliveries to Cuba.
Aircraft in the possession of the Cuban Revolutionary Air Force are estimated to include around sixty Soviet-built jet fighters, primarily MiG-15 and MiG-17 aircraft with a limited number of somewhat more advanced MiG-19 planes.
Small numbers of helicopters and light transport aircraft are also believed to have been provided to Cuba.
January 18, 1962 Edward Lansdale outlines ""The Cuba Project,"" a program under OPERATION MONGOOSE aimed at the overthrow of the Castro government.
The program is designed to develop a ""strongly motivated political action movement"" within Cuba capable of generating a revolt eventually leading to the downfall of the Castro government.
Lansdale envisioned that the United States would provide overt support in the final stages of an uprising, including, if necessary, using military force.
January 19, 1962 A meeting of the SGA is held in Robert Kennedy 's office.
McManus attributes the phrase ""top priority in the United States government--no time, money...to be spared"" to Attorney General Kennedy.
Another resolution is also adopted prohibiting OAS members from selling arms to Cuba and setting measures for collective defense against Cuban activities in the hemisphere.
February 1962 The Joint Chiefs of Staff establishes a ""first priority basis"" for the completion of all contingency plans for military action against Cuba.
February 26, 1962 At a meeting of the SGA , the scale of Lansdale 's ""Cuba Project"" is sharply reduced, and Lansdale is directed to develop a detailed plan for an intelligence-gathering program only.
On March 1, the SGA confirms that the immediate objective of the program would be intelligence collection and that all other actions would be inconspicuous and consistent with the United States overt policy of isolating Castro and neutralizing Cuban influence in the hemisphere.
April 1962 United States Jupiter missiles in Turkey become operational.
All positions are reported ""ready and manned"" by United States personnel.
Late April 1962 While vacationing in the Crimea, across the Black sea from Turkey, Khrushchev reflects on the Turkish missiles and reportedly conceives the idea of deploying similar weapons in Cuba.
Soviet sources have identified three reasons that might have led Khrushchev to pursue the idea seriously.
Although Mikoyan is opposed, Khrushchev asks a group of his closest advisers, including Frol Kozlov, Commander of the Strategic Rocket Forces Sergei Biryuzov, Foreign Minister Andrei Gromyko , and Marshal Malinovsky to evaluate the idea.
The group proposes that a mission be sent to Cuba to see if Fidel Castro would agree to the proposed deployment and to determine whether the deployment could be undertaken without being detected by the United States.
May 1962 Deliberations regarding the possible installation of missiles in Cuba continue in Moscow.
In early May, Khrushchev informs the newly designated ambassador to Cuba, Aleksandr Alekseyev , of the plan.
Although Alekseyev expresses concern over the idea , it is decided that Alekseyev and Marshal Biryuzov should secretly travel to Cuba to explore the question with Castro.
Following further discussions in May and June, Khrushchev authorizes Soviet military officials to decide independently on the exact composition of nuclear forces to be deployed in Cuba.
The military proposes a force of twenty-four medium-range ballistic missile launchers and sixteen intermediate-range launchers; each of the launchers would be equipped with two missiles and a nuclear warhead.
Soviet officials also decide that a large contingent of Soviet combat forces should be sent to Cuba.
The proposed Soviet contingen t includes four elite combat regiments, twenty-four advanced SA-2 surface-to-air missile batteries, forty-two MiG-21 interceptors, forty-two IL-28 bombers, twelve Komar-class missile boats, and coastal defense cruise missiles.
May 8, 1962 A multi-service military exercise designed to test contingency planning for Cuba begins.
Another United States military exercise in the Caribbean known as JUPITER SPRINGS is planned for sometime in the spring or summer.
Soviet and Cuban sources have suggested that the series of United States military exercises conducted in the region throughout the year are perceived as additional evidence of United States intentions to invade Cuba.
May 29, 1962 Sharif Rashidov, an alternate member of the Soviet Presidium, arrives in Cuba with a delegation, ostensibly on a ten-day mission to study irrigation problems.
The presence of the ambassador-designate in Cuba, Aleksandr Alekseyev , Marshal Biryuzov, and two or three military experts is not known to the United States.
Shortly before the departure of the delegation, Premier Khrushchev informs all Presidium members that the Soviet Union plans to deploy nuclear missiles in Cuba and that Biryuzov and Alekseyev will broach the idea with the Cuban government.
On the evening of its arrival, the Soviet delegation meets with Fidel Castro and his brother Raul, the Cuban Minister of Defense.
Castro responds by calling the idea ""interesting,"" but tells the group that he will need to consult with his colleagues before providing a final answer.
May 30, 1962 After conferring with Raul Castro, Che Guevara, Osvaldo Dorticos and Blas Roca, Fidel Castro informs the visiting Soviet officials that Cuba will accept the deployment of nuclear weapons.
Since the crisis, Castro and other Cuban sources have suggested that this decision was made not only because the missiles would serve to deter a United States invasion but also because the Cuban government wished to shift the ""correlation of forces"" in favor of socialism.
In addition, Havana felt indebted to the Soviet Union for its support of the Cuban revolution.
Before departing Cuba in early June, Marshal Biryuzov seeks to determine whether the deployment could be accomplished without detection by the United States or others.
Upon the return of the party to Moscow, Khrushchev is told that Castro has accepted the offer to place missiles in Cuba, and Biryuzov reports that he believes such a deployment could in fact be carried out covertly.
During these discussions, detailed arrangements are made for the missile deployment.
According to the formal agreement, which is renewable every five years, the missiles and their servicing will be completely under the jurisdiction of the Soviet military command.
Raul Castro spends a total of two weeks consulting with Soviet officials before returning to Cuba on July 17.
July 15, 1962 Around this time, Soviet cargo ships begin moving out of the Black Sea for Cuba with false declarations of their destinations and reporting tonnages well below their capacities.
Aerial reconnaissance of the ships in the following months showing them ""riding high in the water"" would confirm that the vessels carried unusually light cargo, typically a sign that military equipment is being transported.
July 17, 1962 Raúl Castro leaves Moscow after two weeks of secret talks with Nikita Khrushchev and other high-ranking Soviet officials on the scheduled deployment of Soviet nuclear missiles in Cuba.
Although aware of the military make-up of the Cuban delegation, the fact that no public communiqué is issued after the visit leads the United States intelligence community at first to believe that the mission had failed.
President Kennedy had already ""made up his mind"" to invade Cuba, he asserts, but Cuba has acquired new arms to beat back such a direct attack.
August 1962 United States intelligence receive several reports of Soviet missiles in Cuba during the month, all of which are either linked to SAM or cruise missiles or shown to be incorrect.
After late August, numbers of such reports increase, as do reported sightings of MiG-21s and IL-28 August 10, 1962 After examining CIA reports on the movement of cargo ships from the Black and Baltic seas to Cuba, CIA Director John McCone dictates a memorandum for the President expressing the belief that Soviet MRBMs are destined for Cuba.
McCone's memorandum is sent over the objections of subordinates concerned that McCone has no hard evidence to back up his suspicions.
August 13, 1962 Aleksandr Alekseyev arrives in Havana to take up his post as the Soviet ambassador to Cuba.
Alekseyev delivers to Fidel Castro the text of the agreement governing the missile deployment which Raúl Castro had worked out during his June visit to Moscow.
Castro makes a few corrections in the text and gives it to Che Guevara to take to Moscow in late August.
August 17, 1962 On the basis of additional information, CIA Director John McCone states at a high-level meeting that circumstantial evidence suggests that the Soviet Union is constructing offensive missile installations in Cuba.
Dean Rusk and Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara disagree with McCone, arguing that the build-up is purely defensive.
August 20, 1962 Maxwell Taylor , the chairman of the SGA , informs President Kennedy in a memo that the SGA sees no likelihood that the Castro government can be overthrown without direct United States military intervention.
Taylor reports that the SGA recommends a more aggressive OPERATION MONGOOSE program.
August 23, 1962 President Kennedy calls a meeting of the National Security Council to air John McCone's concerns that Soviet missiles were in the process of being introduced into Cuba.
Although Dean Rusk and Robert McNamara argue against McCone's interpretation of the military build-up in Cuba, Kennedy concludes the meeting by saying that a contingency plan to deal with a situation in which Soviet nuclear missiles are deployed in Cuba should be drawn up.
In addition, Kennedy requests that the Defense Department investigate what actions could be taken to remove United States Jupiter nuclear missiles from Turkey.
August 26, 1962 Che Guevara, Cuba's Minister of Industries, and Emilio Aragonés Navarro, a close associate of Fidel Castro , arrive in the Soviet Union.
On August 30, Guevara and Aragonés meet with Nikita Khrushchev at his dacha in the Crimea, where Guevara delivers Castro's amendments to the Soviet-Cuban agreement governing the deployment of missiles in Cuba.
Although Guevara urges Khrushchev to announce the missile deployment publicly, the Soviet premier declines to do so.
The agreement is never signed by Khrushchev , possibly to preclude the Cuban government from leaking it.
Following additional talks in Prague, Guevara and Aragonés return to Cuba on September 6.
August 29, 1962 A high-altitude U-2 surveillance flight provides conclusive evidence of the existence of SA-2 SAM missile sites at eight different locations in Cuba.
Additional reconnaissance shortly thereafter also positively identifies coastal defense cruise missile installations for the first time.
However, U-2 photography of the area around San Cristóbal, Cuba, where the first nuclear missile sites are later detected, reveals no evidence of construction at this time.
Kennedy repeats that he has seen no evidence that Soviet troops were stationed in Cuba and stated that there was ""no information as yet"" regarding the possible presence of air defense missiles in Cuba.
August 31, 1962 President Kennedy is informed that the August 29 U-2 mission has confirmed the presence of SAM batteries in Cuba.
Keating urges President Kennedy to take action and proposes that the OAS send an investigative team to Cuba.
Although Keating's sources of information remain unclear, it appears that he simply made firm declarations based on rumors and reports that United States intelligence officials consider too ""soft"" to be definitive.
Soviet troops belonging to four elite armored brigades are believed to have begun arriving in Cuba at this time.
Troops belonging to the combat groups continue to embark through the second week of October.
September 3, 1962 At President Kennedy 's request, senior State Department official Walt Rostow submits his assessment of the Soviet military build-up.
Rostow recommends that current OPERATION MONGOOSE activities be intensified but also suggests studying the possibility of having independent anti-Castro groups oust Castro with minimal United States assistance.
Dobrynin tells the attorney general that he has been instructed by Premier Khrushchev to assure President Kennedy that there would be no surface-to-surface missiles or offensive weapons placed in Cuba.
After his meeting with Dobrynin , Robert Kennedy relates the conversation to the president and suggests issuing a statement making it clear that the United States will not tolerate the introduction of offensive weapons into Cuba.
President Kennedy releases a statement revealing that SAMs and substantially more military personnel than previously estimated have been detected in Cuba.
September 7, 1962 Soviet Ambassador Dobrynin assures United States Ambassador to the United Nations Adlai Stevenson that ""only defensive weapons are being supplied"" to Cuba.
The United States Tactical Air Command establishes a working group to begin developing plans for a coordinated air attack against Cuba to be launched well before an airborne assault and amphibious landing.
Joint Chiefs of Staff military planners have, until then, made no provision for such an operation.
September 11, 1962 TASS releases an authorized Soviet government statement condemning United States overseas bases and denying any intention of introducing offensive weapons into Cuba.
September 15, 1962 The Poltava, a Soviet large-hatch cargo ship, docks at the port of Mariel, Cuba, apparently carrying the first MRBMs to be deployed.
September 19, 1962 The United States Intelligence Board approves a report on the Soviet arms buildup in Cuba.
Its assessment, Special National Intelligence Estimate 85-3-62, states that some intelligence indicates the ongoing deployment of nuclear missiles to Cuba.
September 20, 1962 A Senate resolution on Cuba sanctioning the use of force, if necessary, to curb Cuban aggression and subversion in the western hemisphere, passes the Senate by a vote of eighty-six to one.
In the House of Representatives, a foreign aid appropriations bill is approved with three amendments designed to cut off aid to any country permitting the use of its merchant ships to transport arms or goods of any kind to Cuba.
September 21, 1962 In a speech to the United Nations General Assembly, Soviet Foreign Minister Andrei Gromyko charges the United States with whipping up ""war hysteria"" and threatening to invade Cuba.
Gromyko further warns that any United States attack on Cuba or on Cuba-bound shipping would mean war.
September 27, 1962 The plan for a coordinated tactical air attack on Cuba in advance of an airborne assault and amphibious landing is presented to Curtis LeMay, the Air Force chief of staff.
The concept is approved and October 20, is set as the date when all preparations needed to implement such an attack should be completed.
September 28, 1962 Navy air reconnaissance aircraft observing Cuba-bound ships photograph ten large shipping crates on the decks of the Soviet vessel Kasimov.
After studying the size and configuration of the crates, photoanalysts determine that the containers hold Soviet IL-28 light bomber aircraft.
The IL-28 s are over twelve years old and have been removed almost entirely from the Soviet Air Force in 1960.
Although technically capable of carrying nuclear payloads, the aircraft have never been given a nuclear delivery role.
October 1, 1962 Secretary McNamara meets with the JCS for a briefing on the latest intelligence on Cuba and to discuss intensified Cuban contingency planning.
Defense Intelligence Agency analysts inform the group that some intelligence points to the possibility that MRBMs have been positioned in Pinar del Río Province.
The commanders-in-chief of the United States Navy and the United States Air Force under the Atlantic Command are also directed to pre-position military equipment and weapons needed to execute the airstrike plan.
Evidence that the Castro regime has permitted the positioning of bloc offensive weapons on Cuban soil or in Cuban harbors. c.
An attack against the Guantanamo Naval Base or against United States planes or vessels outside Cuban territorial air space or waters. d.
A substantial popular uprising in Cuba, the leaders of which request assistance... e.
Cuban armed assistance to subversion in other parts of the Western Hemisphere. f.
A decision by the President that the affairs in Cuba have reached a point inconsistent with continuing United States national security.McNamara asks that future military planning cover a variety of these contingencies, and place particular emphasis on plans that would assure that Fidel Castro is removed from power.
The attorney general also expresses the president's ""concern over developing situation,"" and urges that ""massive activity"" be undertaken within the MONGOOSE framework.
The group agrees that plans for the mining of Cuban harbors and for capturing Cuban forces for interrogation should be considered.
October 6, 1962 CINCLANT directs increased readiness to execute an invasion of Cuba.
On October 1, CINCLANT orders military units to increase their readiness posture to execute Oplan 312, the airstrike on Cuba.
October 8, 1962 Cuban President Dorticós, addressing the United Nations General Assembly, calls upon the United Nations to condemn the United States trade embargo against Cuba.
Bowles, after having been briefed by Thomas Hughes of the State Department Bureau of Intelligence and Research, tells Dobyrnin that the United States ""had some evidence"" indicating that Soviet nuclear missiles were in Cuba.
Dobyrnin, who had not been told of the missile deployment by the Kremlin, repeatedly denies that the Soviet Union harbored any intention of placing such weapons in Cuba.
The reconnaissance mission, piloted by Major Richard Heyser, is the first Strategic Air Command mission after authority for the flights is transferred from the CIA to the Air Force.
The photographs obtained by the mission provide the first hard evidence of MRBM sites in Cuba.
Quick readout teams at the National Photographic Interpretation Center in Washington analyze photos taken by Richard Heyser's U-2 mission.
Late in the afternoon, one of the teams finds pictures showing the main components of a Soviet MRBM in a field at San Cristóbal.
Analysis of reconnaissance photos during the day also identifies all but one of the remaining twenty-four SAM sites in Cuba.
Other photographs of San Julián airfield show that IL-28 light bombers are being uncrated.
A senior officer at NPIC phones CIA Deputy Director of Intelligence Ray Cline to inform him of the discovery.
The officials at NPIC have tried to contact CIA Director McCone but are unable to reach him en route to Los Angeles.
Cline requests that NPIC completely recheck the photographs and consult with missile experts outside of the agency.
Cline asks that he be called again between 8:00 and 10:00P.M. to be informed of the results of these additional analyses.
Key Kennedy administration officials are tracked down in Washington and briefed about the discovery of the missiles.
Bundy later states that he chose to wait because it was not possible to prepare a presentation information until morning and because he feared that a hastily summoned meeting at night would jeopardize secrecy.
A major United States military exercise named PHIBRIGLEX-62 is scheduled to begin.
The two-week long maneuver was to have employed twenty thousand Navy personnel and four thousand Marines in an amphibious assault on Puerto Rico's Vieques Island and the overthrow of its imaginary tyrant, ""Ortsac""--""Castro"" spelled backwards.
However, because of the impending crisis, PHIBRIGLEX-62 is used primarily as cover for troop and equipment deployments aimed at increasing military readiness for a strike on Cuba.
McGeorge Bundy informs President Kennedy that ""hard photographic evidence"" has been obtained showing Soviet MRBMs in Cuba.
Kennedy immediately calls an 11:45A.M. meeting and dictates the names of the fourteen or so advisers he wants present.
This is the group that becomes known as the "" ExComm ""--the Executive Committee of the National Security Council.
Later that morning, President Kennedy briefs his brother Robert, who expresses surprise at the news.
Kennedy also telephones John McCloy , a Republican lawyer who acted as a private adviser to the president.
McCloy recommends that the president take forceful action to remove the missiles, even if that involves an airstrike and an invasion.
President Kennedy confers for half an hour with Charles Bohlen, the former United States ambassador to the Soviet Union who has just been appointed ambassador to France.
Bohlen participates in the first ExComm meeting later that morning but leaves for France on the following day.
Photographic evidence is presented to the group, including pictures of missile sites under construction with canvas-covered missile trailers.
The missiles are initially identified by photoanalysts as nuclear tipped SS-3s by their length; by evening, the MRBMs are correctly identified as longer range SS-4 missiles.
The first part of the noon meeting covers questions regarding the validity and certainty of the evidence, Soviet military capabilities in Cuba and what additional United States surveillance might be required.
Further U-2 flights are ordered, and six U-2 reconnaissance missions are flown during the day.
In the freewheeling discussion, participants cover a number of different options for dealing with the Cuban situation.
Preliminary discussions lean toward taking some form of military action.
McNamara , Deputy Secretary of Defense Roswell Gilpatric, and the JCS hold a luncheon meeting to begin preparing the military for any actions that might be ordered.
The USIB meets to examine U-2 photographs and to coordinate intelligence on the crisis.
During the meeting, the USIB directs the Guided Missile and Astronautics Intelligence Committee to prepare an immediate evaluation of the Soviet missile sites.
The GMAIC concludes that the missiles are clearly under Soviet control and that there is no evidence that nuclear warheads are present in Cuba.
It also concludes that the missile installations thus far identified do not appear to be operational.
The SGA convenes in the White House prior to the second ExComm meeting.
According to Richard Helms's notes, Robert Kennedy expresses President Kennedy 's ""general dissatisfaction"" with progress under the MONGOOSE program.
The SGA discusses but rejects several alternatives for eliminating the newly discovered Soviet missile sites in Cuba, including a proposal to have Cuban emigrés bomb the missile sites.
After the intelligence report is presented, Robert McNamara outlines three broad options for action.
The first is ""political,"" involving communications with Fidel Castro and Premier Khrushchev ; the second is ""part political, part military,"" involving a blockade of weapons and open surveillance; the third is ""military"" involving an attack on Cuba and the missile sites.
The ExComm members debate, but do not resolve, which option should be used.
Premier Khrushchev receives United States Ambassador to the Soviet Union Foy Kohler for a three-hour conversation on a variety of subjects.
Khrushchev reassures Kohler that the Cuban fishing port that the Soviet Union has recently agreed to help build will remain entirely non-military.
Once again, Khrushchev insists that all Soviet activity in Cuba was defensive and sharply criticizes United States bases in Turkey and Italy.
In Two Sections, 10/16/62; Sorensen, 691; Hilsman 1, 166) A U-2 spy plane returns with reconaissance pictures that show Soviet missiles being installed on Cuba.
Adlai Stevenson writes to President Kennedy that world opinion would equate the United States missiles stationed in Turkey with Soviet bases in Cuba.
Warning that United States officials could not ""negotiate with a gun at our head,"" he states, ""I feel you should have made it clear that the existence of nuclear missile bases anywhere is negotiable before we start anything.
Further debate on the Cuban situation takes place at the State Department.
Dean Acheson and John McCone attend discussions for the first time, though President Kennedy and Vice President Johnson are absent.
By this time, Robert McNamara has become the strongest proponent of the blockade option.
McNamara reports that a ""surgical"" airstrike option is militarily impractical in the view of the JCS and that any military action would have to include attacks on all military installations in Cuba, eventually leading to an invasion.
McNamara urges seeking alternative means of removing the missiles from Cuba before embarking on such a drastic course of action.
However, critics of the blockade, led primarily by Dean Acheson, argue that a blockade would have no effect on the missiles already in Cuba.
Airstrike proponents also express concern that a United States blockade would shift the confrontation from Cuba to the Soviet Union and that Soviet counteractions, including a Berlin blockade, might result.
United Nations ambassador Adlai Stevenson's opinion against an airstrike on Cuba.
Around this time, Georgi Bolshakov, a Soviet embassy official who served as an authoritative back channel for communications between Soviet and United States leaders, relays a message from Premier Khrushchev to Attorney General Robert Kennedy that the arms being sent to Cuba are intended only for defensive purposes.
Bolshakov had not been told by Khrushchev that the Soviet Union is actually in the process of installing MRBMs and IRBMs in Cuba.
By the time Bolshakov's message reaches President Kennedy , he has been fully briefed on the Soviet missile deployment.
An SS-5 IRBM site, the first of three to be identified, is detected in Cuba.
The GMAIC estimates that the IRBM sites would not become operational before December but that sixteen and possibly as many as thirty-two MRBMs would be operational in about a week.
No SS-5 missiles actually reach Cuba at any time, although this is not completely confirmed by United States officials during the crisis.
The JCS, attending part of the meeting, recommends that President Kennedy order an airstrike on the missiles and other key Cuban military installations.
However, Robert Kennedy responds by asking whether a surprise air attack would be a morally acceptable course of action.
More discussions take place in Dean Rusk 's conference room at the State Department.
During the day, Kennedy also meets privately with Dean Acheson for over an hour.
Acheson again voices his opinion that the surgical airstrike was the best United States option.
Acheson, however, is in the minority in dismissing the Pearl Harbor analogy.
Although Paul Nitze also recalls thinking that the analogy was ""nonsense,"" others like George Ball find it persuasive.
In some cases, as with Secretary of the Treasury Douglas Dillon, the moral argument becomes the deciding factor behind their support for the blockade.
Gromyko states that Premier Khrushchev plans to visit the United Nations following the United States elections in November and that he believes a meeting with Kennedy at that time would be useful.
After Kennedy agrees to meet the Soviet Premier, Gromyko turns the discussion to Cuba, charging that the United States is ""pestering"" a small country.
Kennedy has decided not to discuss United States awareness of the missiles with Gromyko.
So, without taking exception to Gromyko's claim, Kennedy responds by reading a portion of his September 4 statement warning against the deployment of offensive weapons in Cuba.
Following the talk with Gromyko, Kennedy directs Llewellyn Thompson to inform Ambassador Dobrynin that a summit would not in fact be appropriate at that time.
Kennedy then meets with Robert Lovett, a former government official brought in to give advice in the crisis.
Lovett warns that an airstrike would appear to be an excessive first step.
He argues that a blockade is a better alternative, although he expresses a preference for blocking the movement of all materials into Cuba except for food and medicine, rather than limiting the quarantine to offensive weapons.
By this time, most members of the committee support the blockade option.
As the meeting progresses however, individual opinions begin to shift and the consensus behind the blockade brakes down.
Katzenbach, to request the preparation of a brief establishing the legal basis for a blockade of Cuba.
The legality of a blockade is also examined independently at the State Department by Leonard C Meeker, the deputy legal adviser.
The first of a series of daily ""Joint Evaluation"" intelligence reports is disseminated.
The evaluation, the product of collaboration between the Joint Atomic Energy Intelligence Committee and the Guided Missile and Astronautics Intelligence Committee , states that the MRBMs in Cuba could probably be launched within eighteen hours.
At the State Department, Nicholas Katzenbach and Leonard Meeker provide the ExComm with their legal opinions regarding a blockade of Cuba.
As the meeting progresses, it becomes apparent that sharp disagreements about how the United States should proceed still exist.
In order to provide clear options to President Kennedy , the ExComm decides that independent working groups should be established.
Separate groups are to develop the blockade and airstrike options, drafting speeches for each plan and outlining possible contingencies.
The papers developed by the separate working groups are exchanged and critiqued.
In the course of this process, airstrike proponents begin to shift their support to the blockade option.
The airstrike speech is abandoned, and Theodore Sorensen agrees to try to put together a speech for President Kennedy on the blockade.
U Alexis Johnson and Paul Nitze meet to develop a specific timetable for carrying out all of the diplomatic and military actions required by the airstrike or the blockade plan.
The schedule includes raising military alert levels, reinforcing Guantanamo naval base and briefing NATO allies.
All timing revolves around the ""P Hour""--the time when President Kennedy would address the nation to inform Americans of the crisis.
Responding to questions about an article by Paul Scott and Robert Allen dealing with Soviet missiles in Cuba, a Defense Department spokesperson replies that the Pentagon has no information indicating that there are missiles in Cuba.
Reports that emergency military measures are being implemented are also denied.
On the other hand, a total blockade of Cuba, the SNIE projects, would ""almost certainly"" lead to ""strong direct pressures"" elsewhere by the Soviet government.
Any form of direct military action against Cuba would result in an even greater chance of Soviet military retaliation.
The SNIE is read by President Kennedy and most of the main policy planners the following day.
Final planning for the implementation of a naval blockade is completed, and Theodore Sorensen's draft speech for President Kennedy is amended and approved.
As McNamara leaves the conference room, he reportedly phones the Pentagon and orders four tactical squadrons to be readied for a possible airstrike on Cuba.
He notes that the airstrike plan as presented is not a ""surgical"" strike but a massive military commitment that could involve heavy casualties on all sides.
As if to underscore the scale of the proposed United States military attack on Cuba, one member of the JCS reportedly suggests the use of nuclear weapons, saying that the Soviet Union would use its nuclear weapons in an attack.
President Kennedy directs that attention be focused on implementing the blockade option, calling it the only course of action compatible with American principles.
The scenario for the full quarantine operation, covering diplomatic initiatives, public statements, and military actions, is reviewed and approved.
He proposes that the quarantine be accompanied by a United States proposal for a settlement involving the withdrawal of United States missiles from Turkey and the evacuation of Guantanamo.
The proposal is promptly attacked by several of the participants who believe it concedes too much.
After the meeting adjourns at 5:10P.M., President Kennedy tells Theodore Sorensen that he is canceling the remainder of his midterm election campaign trip.
Kennedy instructs Sorensen to redraft the quarantine speech, although he notes that he would not make a final decision on whether to opt for the quarantine or an airstrike until he has consulted one last time with Air Force officials the next morning.
Reston is given a partial briefing on the Cuban situation but is requested to hold the story in the interests of national security.
The intelligence community prepares another SNIE reviewing the possible consequences of certain courses of action that the United States could follow with regard to Cuba.
It is estimated that sixteen launchers for SS-4 MRBMs are operational and that these operational missiles could be fired within eight hours of a decision to launch.
Sorenson's summary of objections to airstrike option and advantages of blockade option A nuclear warhead storage bunker is identified at one of the Cuban MRBM sites for the first time.
United States intelligence proves unable to establish definitively whether warheads are actually in Cuba at any time, however, and the ExComm believes it prudent simply to assume that they are.
Soviet sources have recently suggested that twenty of a planned deployment of forty nuclear warheads reached the islands but that none of the warheads were ever actually ""mated"" to the missiles.
After a brief discussion, Kennedy gives final approval to the quarantine plan.
At a meeting in the Oval Office, the commander of the Tactical Air Command , General Walter C Sweeney, meets with President Kennedy and other top officials to discuss the air attack concept.
Sweeney tells the group that to eliminate the missiles in Cuba, TAC believes that additional strikes are required on, at a minimum, Soviet SAM sites and MiG airfields, and that altogether several hundred bombing sorties would be required.
After carrying out all these strikes, Sweeney states, he can only guarantee that 90 percent of the Soviet missiles would be destroyed.
Although Kennedy has apparently finalized plans for the quarantine before Sweeney's briefing, he nonetheless directs that the military be prepared to carry out an airstrike anytime after the morning of October 22.
The president convenes a formal meeting of the National Security Council.
Admiral George Anderson briefs the gathering on the quarantine plans and procedures that he has drawn up earlier in the day.
Anderson explains that each ship approaching the quarantine line will be signaled to stop for boarding and inspection.
If there is still no response, a shot will be fired into the rudder to cripple the vessel.
President Kennedy expresses concern that such an action might unintentionally destroy the boat, but Anderson reassures the president that it is possible to cripple a ship without sinking it.
Midway through the ExComm session, Kennedy and Robert Lovett leave the room briefly to hold a private conversation.
Kennedy asks Lovett if he thinks that Adlai Stevenson is capable of handling negotiations at the United Nations.
Kennedy agrees, and Lovett arranges to have McCloy flown from Germany to the United States.
Despite White House precautions, several newspapers have by this time pieced together most of the details of the crisis.
Pierre Salinger notifies President Kennedy in four separate calls during the day that security is crumbling.
The State Department transmits a special ""go"" message to most United States diplomatic posts abroad instructing envoys to brief foreign heads of government or foreign ministers about the Cuban missile crisis.
Dean Acheson briefs Charles de Gaulle and delivers President Kennedy 's letter on the Cuban situation.
Acheson is not able to provide de Gaulle with a copy of Kennedy's speech because only part of the text has arrived.
At about the same time, United States Ambassador to Great Britain David Bruce briefs Prime Minister Harold Macmillan and Lord Home, the British foreign minister.
Bruce al so fails to receive a complete copy of Kennedy's speech and briefs MacMillan without it.
He hastens to assure Bruce that he will assist and support the United States in any way possible.
The President directs that personal messages be sent to commanders of Jupiters missiles in Italy and Turkey instructing them to destroy or render inoperable the Jupiters if any attempt is made to fire them without Kennedy's authorization.
During the meeting, State Department Legal Advisor Abram Chayes successfully suggests changing the legal justification for the blockade presented in Kennedy's speech.
Instead of basing the action on the United Nations charter, which assures a countr y's inherent right of self-defense in case of armed attack, Chayes suggests citing the right of the OAS to take collective measures to protect hemispheric security.
SAC initiates a massive alert of its B-52 nuclear bomber force, guaranteeing that one-eighth of the force is airborne at any given time.
B-52 flights begin around the clock, with a new bomber taking off each time another bomber lands.
The alert is directed to take place quietly and gradually and to be in full effect by October 23.
For the first time in ADC history, all aircraft are armed with nuclear weapons.
During the day, Norstad confers with Harold MacMillan, who strongly argues against ""mobilizing"" European forces.
Aware that an alert might weaken European support for the United States--and having received a personal message from President Kennedy stressing the need to keep the alliance together--Norstad decides not to put European forces on higher alert status.
The President reviews the crisis in a formal meeting of the National Security Council.
Seventeen congressional leaders from both parties assemble at the White House for a briefing by President Kennedy , Secretary of State Rusk and an intelligence officer.
Others, however, led by Senators Richard B Russell and J William Fulbright, argue that the quarantine will not compel the Soviet Union to remove the missiles from Cuba and that an airstrike or invasion should be employed instead.
Calling the Soviet missile deployment ""a gross error,"" Rusk hands the Soviet ambassador an advance copy of President Kennedy 's speech.
United States Ambassador to the Soviet Union Foy Kohler calls the Kremlin to deliver a letter from President Kennedy and the text of the speech.
The State Department receives a letter addressed to President Kennedy from British Prime Minister Macmillan.
MacMillan warns that Premier Khrushchev , in reaction to the blockade, ...may try to escort his ships into the Caribbean and force you to attack them.
This `fire-first' dilemma has always worried us and we have always hoped to impale the Russians on this horn.
We must be ready for retaliatory action against Berlin pressure on the weaker parts of the Free World defense system.
During the crisis, the two leaders remain in close contact, speaking with each other over the telephone as often as three times a day.
President Kennedy addresses the nation in a televised seventeen-minute speech.
Announcing that ""unmistakable evidence"" has established the presence of Soviet MRBM and IRBM sites and nuclear capable bombers in Cuba, he states that as one of his ""initial steps,"" a ""strict quarantine on all offensive military equipment"" is being put into effect.
Khrushchev 's order was reportedly reversed at the prompting of Anastas Mikoyan as the Soviet ships approached the quarantine line on the morning of October 24.
United States military forces worldwide, with the exception of the United States Air Forces in Europe , are placed on DEFCON 3.
ICBM missile crews are alerted and Polaris nuclear submarines in port are dispatched to preassigned stations at sea.
During the president's speech, twenty-two interceptor aircraft go airborne in the event the Cuban government reacted militarily.
Assistant Secretary of State Edwin Martin conducts a further closed-door briefing for Latin American ambassadors at the State Department.
At around 8:00P.M., Secretary Rusk speaks to a meeting of all other ambassadors in Washington.
The first United States Jupiter missile site is formally turned over to the Turkish Air Force for maintenance and operation.
Although the move is publicized in Turkey and probably detected by Moscow, United States decision-makers apparently are not aware of the action.
From April 1961 to the end of August 1962, Penkovsky has been a spy for British and United States intelligence services, providing them with material on Soviet military capabilities, including important technical information on Soviet MRBM and ICBM programs.
Penkovsky had been given a few telephonic coded signals for use in emergency situations, including one to be used if he is about to be arrested and one to be used in case of imminent war.
When he learns he was about to be arrested, Penkovsky apparently chose to use the signal for an imminent Soviet attack.
Western intelligence analysts decide, however, not to credit Penkovsky's final signal, and the ExComm is not informed of Penkovsky's arrest or its circumstances.
In a TV broadcast President John F Kennedy informs the American public about Soviet nuclear missiles stationed on Cuba.
We reaffirm that the armaments which are in Cuba, regardless of the classification to which they may belong, are intended solely for defensive purposes in order to secure Republic of Cuba against the attack of an aggressor.
At a meeting of the ExComm , President Kennedy approves plans for signing an official quarantine proclamation.
In anticipation of a possible reaction to the blockade from the Soviet government, Kennedy directs John McCone to prepare an analysis of the effects of a comparable blockade on Berlin.
The ExComm then examines the question of how the United States will respond if a U-2 aircraft is shot down.
If such an event occurs and ""evidence of hostile Cuban action"" has been established, the ExComm decides that the SAM site responsible for the downing will be attacked and destroyed.
Continued harassment of U-2 flights, it is agreed, would probably result in attacks on all SAM sites in Cuba.
Zorin submits a draft resolution demanding an end to United States naval activity near Cuba and calling for negotiations to end the crisis.
Adlai Stevenson urges United Nations Security Council to support resolution stopping flow of weapons to Cuba.
Fidel Castro announces a combat alarm, placing the Cuban armed forces on their highest alert.
Cuban armed forces subsequently reach a size of 270,000 men, following a massive mobilization effort.
The ExComm holds a brief meeting prior to the president's signing of the quarantine proclamation.
ExComm members are informed that an ""extraordinary number"" of coded messages have been sent to Soviet ships on their way to Cuba, although the contents of these messages are not known.
In addition, John McCone states that Soviet submarines have unexpectedly been found moving into the Caribbean.
A new message from President Kennedy is transmitted to Premier Khrushchev via the United States embassy in Moscow.
Kennedy, stressing that it is important that both sides ""show prudence and do nothing to allow events to make the situation more difficult to control than it already is,"" asks the Soviet Premier to direct Soviet ships to observe the quarantine zone.
In a ceremony at the White House, the president signs Proclamation 3504, formally establishing the quarantine.
CINCLANT is directed to enforce the blockade beginning at 10:00 the following morning.
Fidel Castro tells the Cuban public in a ninety-minute television speech that Cuba will never disarm while the United States persists in its policy of aggression and hostility.
At a Soviet embassy reception in Washington, D.C., Lieutenant General Vladimir A Dubovik appears to suggest that the captains of the Soviet ships heading for Cuba are under orders to defy the blockade.
Ambassador Dobrynin , arriving late at the reception, declines to refute Dobovik's comments, saying, ""he is a military man, I am not.
United States intelligence also notes a statement by the president of TASS during the day warning that United States ships would be sunk if any Soviet ships are attacked.
At a debriefing for State Department officials, Edwin Martin emphasizes to U Alexis Johnson the importance of preventing exile groups from creating an incident in Cuba during the crisis.
Robert Kennedy , at the suggestion of the president, meets with Anatoly Dobrynin in the latter's office at the Soviet embassy.
Dobrynin tells Kennedy that, as far as he knows, there are still no missiles in Cuba, and said that he is not aware of any change in instructions to captains of Soviet ships steaming toward Cuba.
Robert Kennedy relates his conversation with Dobrynin to President Kennedy and British Ambassador David Ormsby-Gore, who is meeting with the president.
Ambassador Ormsby-Gore then reportedly expressed concern that the naval quarantine line reportedly has been set at eight hundred miles from Cuba.
Ormsby-Gore recommends drawing the interception line closer to the island in order to give the Soviet government more time to analyze their position.
President Kennedy agrees and calls Secretary of Defense McNamara to shorten the line to five hundred miles.
Low-level reconnaissance flights over Cuba begin for the first time, supplementing high-altitude U-2 photoreconnaissance.
The Soviet government also defers the scheduled release of troops in the Strategic Rocket Forces, air defense units, and the submarine fleet, and it announces that ""the battle readiness and vigilance of all troops"" has been raised.
Gallup poll survey taken on October 23 shows that 84 percent of the United States public who know about the Cuban situation favor the blockade while only 4 percent oppose the action.
A CIA report based on information as of 6:00A.M. states that communist reaction to the United States quarantine against Cuba has ""not gone beyond the highly critical but noncommittal statement"" issued by the Soviet government on October 23.
Official world reaction is reported to be generally favorable, particularly in Latin America.
No new offensive missile sites have been discovered, but nuclear storage buildings are being assembled with great speed.
Soviet ships en route to Cuba capable of carrying military cargoes appear to have slowed down, altered or reversed their courses.
Sixteen of the nineteen Soviet ships en route to Cuba at the time the naval quarantine is announced, including five large-hatch vessels, reverse course and are returning to the Soviet Union.
William Knox, a United States businessman, has a 3 1/4-hour interview with Premier Khrushchev at Khrushchev 's request.
Khrushchev states that it is now too late for the United States to take over Cuba, and that he will eventually give orders to sink a United States vessel enforcing the blockade if Soviet ships are stopped.
The United States naval quarantine of Cuba officially goes into effect.
Robert McNamara tells the group that Soviet ships approaching the quarantine line show no indications of stopping and that two Soviet ships, the Gagarin and the Komiles, are within a few miles of the line.
Naval intelligence then reports that a Soviet submarine has moved into position between the two ships.
McNamara states that the aircraft carrier USS Essex has been directed to make the first interception, and that antisubmarine tactics, including the use of small explosives, has been ordered to prevent the Soviet submarine from interfering with the blockade.
President Kennedy directs that no ship be intercepted for at least another hour while clarifying information is sought.
A cable drafted by George Ball is transmitted to United States Ambassador to Turkey Raymond Hare and United States Ambassador to NATO Thomas Finletter, notifying them that the United States is considering a Turkey-for-Cuba missile trade.
The cable states that while the comparison of missiles in Turkey with those in Cuba was ""refutable,"" it is nonetheless possible that a negotiated solution to the crisis might ""involve dismantling and removal"" of the Jupiters.
Each diplomat is requested to assess the political consequences of the removal of the Jupiters in a variety of different circumstances.
U Thant's plea, made at the request of more than forty non-aligned states, calls for the voluntary suspension of arms shipments to Cuba together with the voluntary suspension of the naval quarantine for between two and three weeks.
A Defense Department spokesperson announces publicly that some of the Soviet Bloc vessels proceeding toward Cuba appear to have altered their course.
Khrushchev warns that the Soviet Union views the blockade as ""an act of aggression"" and that, as a consequence, he will not instruct Soviet ships bound for Cuba to observe the quarantine.
At the direction of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, SAC increases its alert posture to DEFCON 2 for the first time in history.
Consequently, Powers decides on his own authority to transmit uncoded messages to SAC commanders noting that SAC plans are well prepared and that the alert process was going smoothly.
At the request of President Kennedy , the Defense Department drafts two separate plans to increase civil defense preparations during a possible military engagement with Cuba.
The first outlines civil defense measures which could be taken in the vicinity of targets close to Cuba under attack with conventional weapons, while the second suggests measures which could be taken in response to possible nuclear attack within MRBM range.
A message from President Kennedy for Premier Khrushchev is transmitted to the United States embassy in Moscow.
Kennedy notes that he had received ""solemn assurances"" that no missiles bases would be established in Cuba.
The aircraft carrier USS Essex and the destroyer USS Gearing hail and attempt to intercept the Soviet tanker Bucharest.
Since there is no reason to suspect the ship carries contraband, the Bucharest is allowed to continue its voyage to Cuba.
A syndicated column by the influential journalist Walter Lippman proposes a ""face-saving"" agreement whereby the United States would agree to remove Jupiters from Turkey in return for a Soviet withdrawal of missiles from Cuba.
Many in the United States and the Soviet Union mistakenly interpret the proposal as a trial balloon floated by the Kennedy administration.
During the morning ExComm meeting, President Kennedy authorizes the development of a program to drop propaganda leaflets over Cuba.
Although leaflets are produced and approved by the ExComm , the program, later christened ""Bugle Call,"" is never actually carried out.
In his reply to United Nations Secretary General U Thant's letter of October 23, President Kennedy avoids responding directly to U Thant's proposal that Soviet arms shipments to Cuba and the United States quarantine be suspended for several weeks.
Concerned that acceptance of the proposal would allow Soviet military personnel to continue work on the missiles already in Cuba, Kennedy writes only that he appreciated the ""spirit"" of U Thant's message, adding that Adlai Stevenson is prepared to begin preliminary negotiations regarding the crisis.
Also, during the day, Premier Khrushchev writes to U Thant to say that he welcomes and agrees with his proposal.
At the prompting of the United States, U Thant sends a second message to Premier Khrushchev and President Kennedy asking them to avoid direct confrontations between Soviet and United States ships while the quarantine remains in effect.
At the close of the meeting, CIA Director McCone indicates that some of the missiles deployed in Cuba are now operational.
The commander of United States quarantine forces, Admiral Alfred Ward, orders the USS Kennedy to proceed toward a Lebanese freighter, the Marucla.
During the day, the freighter has been selected by President Kennedy as the first ship to be boarded by quarantine forces.
The USS Kennedy informs the Marucla that night by radio that the ship will be boarded the following morning.
The State Department receives a cable from United States Ambassador to NATO Thomas Finletter relaying Ankara's position on the possible withdrawal of Jupiter missiles from Turkey.
Finletter reports that the Turkish representative to NATO has made it clear that his government sets ""great store"" by the Jupiters, and that Turkey regards the missiles ""as a symbol of the alliance's determination to use atomic weapons"" against either a Soviet conventional or nuclear attack on Turkey.
Finletter states his belief that any arrangement that fails to substitute some other form of nuclear capability in Turkey would be rejected by the Turkish government.
A CIA sabotage team, dispatched to Cuba to destroy facilities at the Matahambre copper mine in Cuba , is prevented from executing the sabotage attack by Cuban authorities.
The CIA memorandum reporting information as of 6:00A.M. notes that construction of IRBM and MRBM bases in Cuba is proceeding without interruption.
President Kennedy tells the ExComm that he believes the quarantine by itself will not cause the Soviet government to remove the missiles from Cuba, and that only an invasion or a trade of some sort will succeed.
After discussing the airstrike option again at some length, Kennedy agrees to apply further pressure by increasing the frequency of low-level flights over Cuba from twice per day to once every two hours.
The ExComm also decides not to undertake any emergency civil defense programs at this time, although preliminary measures have been initiated.
President Kennedy orders the State Department to proceed with preparations for a crash program aimed at establishing a civil government in Cuba after an invasion and occupation of the country.
During the meeting, Robert McNamara reports to the president that the military believes that heavy casualties should be expected in an invasion; several days later, CINCLANT estimates that up to 18,484 United States casualties might occur during the first ten days of fighting.
John Scali, State Department correspondent for ABC News, lunches with Aleksandr Fomin at the Occidental Restaurant in Washington at Fomin's urgent request.
Fomin, officially the Soviet Embassy public affairs counselor, is known to be the KGB's Washington station chief.
Noting that ""war seems about to break out,"" he asks Scali to contact his ""high-level friends"" in the State Department to ascertain whether the United States would be interested in a possible solution to the crisis.
Following the lunch, Scali goes directly to the State Department to report on the meeting to Roger Hilsman.
The State Department receives a cable from United States Ambassador to Turkey Raymond Hare warning that Turkish officials will ""deeply resent"" any Turkey-for-Cuba missile trade.
Hare expresses his opinion that the most satisfactory resolution to the crisis would avoid the Jupiter issue altogether but suggests that if the missiles have to be removed, it should be done gradually.
United States Ambassador to Brazil A Lincoln Gordon is requested to ask the Brazilian government to have the Brazilian ambassador in Havana, Luis Batian Pinto, meet privately with Fidel Castro to relay a message from the United States government.
The message that Pinto is to give to Castro includes reassurances that the United States is unlikely to invade Cuba if the missiles are removed.
The message arrives in four sections, with the final portion arriving at 9:00P.M., some twelve hours after the text has been delivered to the United States embassy.
United States officials assume that Fomin's message has been initiated by the Kremlin and interpret Khrushchev 's newly arrived letter in light of Fomin's offer that the Soviet Union remove its missiles under United Nations inspection in return for a United States non-invasion pledge.
Recent information from Soviet sources suggests that, contrary to United States assumptions at the time, Fomin's proposal was not in fact authorized by Moscow.
The ExComm reconvenes in an extraordinary session to consider Premier Khrushchev 's letter.
Further textual analysis of the letter is ordered, and two Soviet specialists, Helmut Sonnenfeldt and Joseph Neubert, are directed to analyze the letter alongside the proposal from Aleksandr Fomin.
Unknown to any of the ExComm members, Robert Kennedy and Anatoly Dobrynin meet at the Soviet embassy, one of a series of secret meetings the two held during the crisis.
Khrushchev 's statement may refer to a cable from Fidel Castro that was transmitted on the evening of October 26.
Fearing that a United States invasion is imminent, Castro reportedly composes the message--dictating in Spanish to Soviet Ambassador Alekseyev, who translates the letter into Russian--while spending the night in a bomb shelter in the Soviet embassy in Havana.
Khrushchev apparently understood the cable both as a warning of an impending invasion and as an attempt to get Khrushchev to launch the missiles in Cuba against the United States.
According to an unpublished portion of Khrushchev 's memoirs, Khrushchev recalls Castro warning that ""an American invasion would take place within a few hours.
At the Havana Conference in January 1992, Castro states that his letter was mistranslated; that he was suggesting that if Cuba was invaded, the Soviet Union would need to defend itself from attack by using nuclear weapons.
Fidel Castro orders Cuban anti-aircraft forces to open fire on all United States aircraft flying over the island.
According to one source, Castro's order reportedly replaces his standing orders to fire only on groups of two or more low-altitude airplanes.
When Soviet Ambassador to Cuba Alekseyev asks Castro to recind his order, he apparently is rebuffed.
The airstrike plan now includes three massive strikes per day until Cuban air capability is destroyed.
Some 1,190 bombing sorties are planned for the first day of operations.
Nikita Khrushchev demands from the United States a removal of nuclear missiles in Turkey as well as a promise to not invade Cuba as preconditions for his removal of Soviet missiles on Cuba.
President Kennedy replies that all work in Cuba must stop prior to any negotiations.
The CIA intelligence memorandum containing information compiled as of 6:00A.M. reports that three of the four MRBM sites at San Cristóbal and the two sites at Sagua la Grande appear to be fully operational.
The mobilization of Cuban military forces is reported to be continuing at a high rate, but the CIA advises that Cuban forces remain under orders not to engage in hostilities unless attacked.
In contrast to the private message of the day before, the new message calls for the dismantling of United States missile bases in Turkey in return for the removal of the Soviet missiles in Cuba.
While the broadcast is underway, the original copy of Khrushchev 's last letter to President Kennedy is delivered to the United States embassy in Moscow.
The Russians would then be in a position to decide whether to turn back their tanker or allow her to enter the quarantine zone sometime later today.During the meeting, Premier Khrushchev 's second message begins to be received.
The U-2 pilot apparently enters Soviet airspace as a result of a navigational error.
The pilot radios for assistance and a United States F-102 fighter aircraft in Alaska scrambles and head toward the Bering Sea.
At the same time, Soviet MiGs take off from a base near Wrangel Island to intercept the U-2, which eventually manages to fly out of Soviet territory with no shots being fired.
Alaskan Air Command records suggest that the United States fighter planes are armed with nuclear air-to-air missiles.
A U-2 reconnaissance plane is shot down over Cuba and its pilot, Major Rudolf Anderson, killed.
Anderson had flown one of the first U-2 missions responsible for detecting the Soviet missiles.
The ExComm , when informed of the downing, assumes that the attack had been ordered by the Kremlin and speculates that the move is designed to escalate the crisis.
In fact, as Soviet and Cuban officials have only recently revealed, the attack is the result of a decision made by local Soviet commanders.
Although a Soviet major general, Igor I Statsenko, claims responsibility for the decision in 1987, other Soviet sources have suggested that Lt.
After the incident, Marshal Malinovsky mildly reprimands the officers and orders that no other U-2s be attacked.
Several ExComm members assemble in George Ball 's conference room to consider possible options in light of the deteriorating crisis situation.
F8U-1P low-level reconnaissance planes take off for afternoon missions over Cuba.
Two of the six planes are forced to abort their mission due to mechanical problems.
As the remaining planes fly over San Cristóbal and Sagua la Grande, Cuban troops open fire with anti-aircraft guns and small arms.
One of the United States aircraft is hit by a 37mm anti-aircraft shell but manages to return to its base.
President Kennedy orders the immediate dispatch of a message to U Thant asking urgently whether he would ascertain if the Soviet government is willing to stop work on the bases while negotiations continue to find a solution to the crisis.
In the middle of the meeting, Maxwell Taylor brings in a late report confirming that the missing U-2 had been shot down over Cuba, probably by a SAM site.
President Kennedy , however, decides not to retaliate but agrees that if any more surveillance planes are fired on over Cuba, the SAM sites would be attacked.
Kennedy's order to call off the planned reprisal is reportedly received with disbelief in the Pentagon.
Most of the long meeting, however, centers on formulating a response to Nikita Khrushchev 's most recent proposal.
President Kennedy , in deliberations throughout the day, continually favors trading away the missiles in Turkey for those in Cuba as Khrushchev has offered--possibly because he secretly has hinted to the Soviet government through Robert Kennedy and Anatoly Dobrynin on October 26 that the United States would agree to such a deal.
However, most of the group argues that an open trade could fragment the NATO alliance.
McNamara argues that the Jupiters in Turkey should be removed, but only as a prelude to an invasion of Cuba; Maxwell Taylor forwards the JCS recommendation simply to initiate the airstrike and invasion plans; and the State Department drafts a letter flatly rejecting the Soviet proposal.
As the meeting progresses, the idea of ignoring Khrushchev 's new proposal and responding only to the October 26 letter gradually begins to emerge.
President Kennedy , initially hesitant to accept the idea because he does not believe Khrushchev would accept such a deal, finally agrees when Soviet specialist Llewellyn Thompson argues that Khrushchev might.
Theodore Sorensen and Robert Kennedy leave the meeting to compose the proposed response.
After the ExComm meeting breaks up, a smaller group composed of President Kennedy , McNamara, Robert Kennedy , Bundy , Rusk , Llewellyn Thompson , and Theodore Sorensen meet in the Oval Office.
They further agree that Dobrynin should be informed that if the Soviet missiles are not withdrawn, there will be military action against Cuba.
If they are removed, however, the United States will be willing to give a non-invasion pledge.
The proposal quickly gains the approval of the group and the president.
Concern is so acute that the assurance not be leaked to the public or to NATO that not even other ExComm members are told of the additional assurances regarding the Jupiters.
At Dean Rusk 's request, ABC News correspondent John Scali and Soviet embassy official Fomin meet once again.
He states that Premier Khrushchev 's new message had been drafted before his report on the favorable United States reaction to the October 26 proposal had arrived.
Fomin says that he and Ambassador Dobrynin are expecting a reply from Khrushchev at any moment and urges Scali to report to United States officials that there is no treachery.
Scali replies that he does not think anyone will believe Fomin's assurances but that he will convey the message in any case.
However, I said, President Kennedy had been anxious to remove those missiles from Turkey and Italy for a long period of time.
Anatoly Dobrynin has recently contradicted Robert Kennedy 's account of the meeting in several ways.
According to Dobrynin , Kennedy did not in fact threaten military action against the missiles sites if the Soviet government did not remove the missiles.
Second, Kennedy reportedly did not say that the Jupiters had been ordered removed earlier, instead he suggested that an explicit deal on the Turkish missiles could be struck.
After the meeting with Dobrynin , the attorney general returns to the White House.
At President Kennedy 's direction, McNamara instructs Secretary of the Air Force Eugene Zuckert to order to active duty 24 Air Force Reserve units totaling 14,200 personnel.
President Kennedy 's letter to Premier Khrushchev drafted earlier in the day is transmitted to Moscow.
The letter is also released directly to the press to avoid any communications delays.
In response to U Thant's request that Cuba stop work on the missile sites while negotiations continue, Fidel Castro indicates in a letter to the United Nations acting secretary general that he would order work to cease, provided the United States lifted the blockade.
U Thant informs Adlai Stevenson that Soviet representative Zorin has refused to accept information about the exact location of the quarantine interception area that the United States passed on earlier in the day.
Unknown to other members of the ExComm , President Kennedy and Dean Rusk prepare a contingency plan to facilitate a public Turkey-for-Cuba missile trade.
At Kennedy's instruction, Rusk phones Andrew Cordier, a former United Nations undersecretary, and dictates a statement that Cordier is to give to U Thant upon further instructions from Washington.
The statement is a proposal to be made by U Thant calling for the removal of both the Jupiters in Turkey and the Soviet missiles in Cuba.
During the day, Kennedy also asks Roswell Gilpatric to draw up a scenario for the early removal of the missiles from Turkey.
Fidel Castro meets with Soviet Ambassador Alekseyev for lengthy discussions in the Soviet embassy in Havana.
Castro, Alekseyev later reports, had been briefed by him on each of the messages sent back and forth between Moscow and Washington during the crisis.
Instructions are sent to Ambassador Finletter to review the deepening crisis with the NATO allies.
The CIA's daily update as of 6:00A.M. reports that Soviet technicians have succeeded in making fully operational all twenty-four MRBM sites in Cuba.
Construction of one nuclear bunker reportedly has been completed but none are believed to be in operation.
A new message from Nikita Khrushchev , which effectively terminates the missile crisis, is broadcast on Radio Moscow.
Although there is a sense of relief and exultation among most of the ExComm members after word of Khrushchev 's decision is received, several members of the JCS are less enthusiastic.
After meeting with high military leaders during the morning, Castro apparently goes to San Antonio Air Force Base himself in order to shoot down a United States low-altitude aircraft.
Robert Kennedy meets with Anatoly Dobrynin at the Soviet ambassador's request.
Dobrynin notes that Premier Khrushchev has agreed to withdraw the missiles, and he tells Kennedy that the Soviet leader wants to send his best wishes to him and the president.
By this time, the full text of Premier Khrushchev 's message announcing the decision to dismantle the missiles in Cuba is available.
Secretary of Defense McNamara reports that the Soviet ship Grozny is standing still and that no other Soviet Bloc ships will be entering the quarantine zone during the day.
President Kennedy directs that no air reconnaissance missions be flown during the day, and that no action be taken against any Soviet Bloc ships with regard to the unresolved question of the IL-28 bombers in Cuba.
Kennedy agrees that the United States should consider the IL-28 s ""offensive weapons"" and press for their removal, but he also suggests that the United States should not ""get hung up"" on this issue.
Fidel Castro declares that the United States assurance of non-aggression against Cuba is unsatisfactory unless it includes additional measures.
They include an end to the economic blockade against Cuba; an end to all subversive activities carried out from the United States against Cuba; a halt to all attacks on Cuba carried out from the United States military bases on the island of Puerto Rico; the cessation of aerial and naval reconnaissance flights in Cuban airspace and waters; and the return of Guantanamo naval base to Cuba.
The JCS asks CINCLANT to re-evaluate Oplan 316, the invasion plan of Cuba, and determine what modifications should be made to the plan in light of the most recent intelligence estimates on military equipment in Cuba.
CINCLANT is specifically directed to consider whether tactical nuclear weapons, both air and ground, should be included in the arsenal of United States forces invading Cuba.
John Scali meets with Soviet embassy official Fomin for the fourth time during the crisis.
Fomin then adds, ""And that includes your explosion of Saturday""--indicating that United States anger, as conveyed by Scali, toward the broadening of Soviet demands had reinforced Khrushchev 's decision to accept the United States proposal for ending the crisis.
The Soviet embassy in Havana receives a lengthy telegram from the Kremlin explaining the decision to withdraw the missiles.
Soviet Ambassador Alekseyev passes on the telegram to Cuban President Dorticós, who is reportedly somewhat reassured by it.
Khrushchev agrees to dismantle the sites after the United States promises to stop the blockade of Cuba, to withdraw the missiles in Turkey, and to not invade Cuba.
Kuznetsov proposes that when the dismantling is completed, the Soviet Union report to the Security Council, which would then authorize a United Nations team to visit Cuba for ""on-site"" verification.
As a result of an order from Robert McNamara to begin the process of removing Jupiter missiles from Turkey, an interdepartmental task force convenes under Defense Department General Counsel John McNaughton.
At the morning ExComm meeting, President Kennedy orders that United States Navy ships maintain their quarantine stations.
Low-level reconnaissance flights are directed to resume, but no U-2 missions are authorized.
U Thant briefs Adlai Stevenson , John McCloy , and Charles Yost on his meeting with Vasily Kuznetsov earlier in the day.
U Thant tries to convince the Americans that the quarantine should now be suspended, but McCloy and Stevenson disagree, linking the end of the quarantine to the actual removal of offensive weapons from Cuba.
They do agree, however, that the quarantine could be suspended for the duration of U Thant's visit to Cuba, scheduled to begin on October 30.
CINCLANT informs the JCS that, in view of reports that Cuban forces have nuclear-capable FROG short-range missiles, he intends to modify invasion plans so that United States air and ground forces engaged in operations against Cuba would also be armed with tactical nuclear weapons.
CINCLANT assures the JCS that the nuclear weapons would be employed only if Cuban or Soviet forces initiated the use of nuclear weapons.
The JCS agrees to allow United States invasion forces to be armed with nuclear-capable weapons but specifies that the actual nuclear warheads should not be introduced into Cuba without further JCS authorization.
The Soviet Union attempts to hammer out a formal agreement with the United States on the settlement of the missile crisis.
Anatoly Dobrynin brings Robert Kennedy an unsigned letter from Premier Khrushchev explicitly spelling out the terms of the arrangement, including Robert Kennedy 's pledge that the Jupiter IRBMs will be removed from Turkey.
The attorney general makes no immediate response but takes the letter with him to consider the proposal.
When he meets Dobrynin the following day, Kennedy rejects the idea of a written agreement involving the Jupiter missiles.
Garthoff writes, however, that the United States can not ""reasonably insist"" on the withdrawal of MiG aircraft, SAMs or non-missile ground force weapons.
Shortly after his arrival in Havana, U Thant and his aides meet with Fidel Castro , Cuban President Osvaldo Dorticós and Foreign Minister Raúl Roa.
