Recognizing that today’s toughest nuclear challenges have deep roots in the past, NPIHP seeks to transcend the East vs.
West paradigm to work towards an integrated international history of nuclear weapon proliferation.
The continued proliferation of nuclear weapons is one of the most pressing security issues of our time, yet the empirically-based study of international nuclear history remains in its infancy.
As a non-partisan institute of scholarly study, the Woodrow Wilson Center takes no position on the historical interpretations and opinions offered by the authors.
The Elephant in the Room The Soviet Union and India’s Nuclear Program, 1967–89 Balazs Szalontai 2.
Between Aid and Restriction Changing Soviet Policies toward China’s Nuclear Weapons Program 1954–60 Zhihua Shen and Yafeng Xia 3.
From the Peaceful Atom to the Peaceful Explosion Indo-French nuclear relations during the Cold War, 1950–1974 Jayita Sarkar 4.
Russia’s Policy in the Run-Up to the First North Korea Nuclear Crisis, 1991–93 Sergey Radchenko 5.
The Persistent Legacy Germany’s Place in the Nuclear Order Andreas Lutsch 6.
The Imagined Arsenal India’s Nuclear Decision-making, 1973–76 Yogesh Joshi 7.
Tlatelolco Tested The Falklands/Malvinas War and Latin America’s Nuclear Weapon Free Zone Ryan Alexander Musto 8.
Prelude to the Euromissile Crisis The Neutron Bomb Affair, the Netherlands, and the ‘Defeat of the Strangeloves’ 1977–78 Ruud van Dijk 9.
Bringing Seoul into the Non-Proliferation Regime The Effect of ROK-Canada Reactor Deals on Korea’s Ratification of the NPT Se Young Jang 11.
Waiting for the Bomb PN Haksar and India’s Nuclear Policy in the 1960s Yogesh Joshi 12.
Interpreting the Bomb Ownership and Deterrence in Ukraine’s Nuclear Discourse Polina Sinovets and Mariana Budjeryn 13.
The Influence of J Robert Oppenheimer on American Nuclear Policy after the Second World War Marco Borghi 15.
The African National Congress and Apartheid South Africa’s Nuclear Weapons Program Jo-Ansie van Wyk and Anna-Mart van Wyk 17.
The papers draw on a range of primary sources from Egypt, the United States, the United Nations, the Soviet Union, and elsewhere, materials which provide new insights and information on Cairo’s experience of the crisis.
These papers developed from their authors' work for the Cairo conference, discussions between them, and their earlier research on aspects of the missile crisis and Egyptian foreign policy.
James Hershberg has a long-standing interest in the crisis and published extensively on various aspects of its history.
Hassan Elbahtimy had assessed Egypt’s understanding of nuclear vulnerability during the crisis and wrote a chapter on the topic for a book edited by Benoit Pelopidas.
The complementary papers both draw on sources from Egypt, the US, UN, Soviet Union, and elsewhere, sources which provide new insights and information on Cairo’s experience of the crisis.
While we made every effort to bring a wide variety of original research and sources to this topic, we still hope to be able to draw on more sources in the future, particularly from Egyptian Foreign Ministry archives currently not open for consultation.
Such evidence could valuably enhance, and perhaps more fully portray, the picture the two papers offer.
Traditionally, the confrontation between the two biggest ideological and military adversaries, the United States and USSR, has dominated the period's diplomatic history.
Conversely, the experiences, actions, and influence of non-aligned powers, many newly independent, are often overlooked or marginalized.
Similarly, the history of the missile crisis has focused on how the conflict was experienced in Washington and Moscow, the two poles of the Cold War, and to a lesser extent Havana.
Studies have paid far less attention to the role of the decolonized and non-aligned states.
Our new contributions, in other words, surf the ""third wave"" of missile crisis historiography – with the first centering on United States actions and sources, the second delving into the communist side – and explore the event's global dimensions, particularly “Third World” and neutralist as opposed to East-West.
Our papers seek to contribute to the history of the crisis through augmenting a still fairly fresh global perspective beyond the superpowers and their respective blocs.
The crisis occurred one year after the inauguration of the Non-Aligned Movement at the September 1961 Belgrade conference hosted by Yugoslavia's Tito, at which Nasser was a leading voice.
In 1962, Cairo was presented with the challenge of how to position itself in the crisis drawing on non-aligned principles while supporting Cuba’s right to self-determination.
The result was an attempt to walk a thin line between United States and Soviet positions while trying to divide the blame.
Relying on United States and Soviet reports, Hershberg’s paper shows how Cairo's stand irritated Washington, particularly when its UN representative openly denounced the American blockade imposed on Cuba.
The UN had become a platform that the United States and the USSR could not ignore but also one where they increasingly had to share influence with a growing number of independent-minded actors.
Cairo, then occupying one of six non-permanent seats on the then 11-member Security Council, canvassed the views of many of the neutral and recently decolonized states to push for deescalation and greater UN involvement in the crisis.
The transformed face of the UN meant that new coalitions emerged that pushed the organization to intervene and presented a draft resolution on the crisis competing with the resolutions presented by the United States and the Soviet Union.
Interestingly, both papers see evidence that behind Cairo’s public support for Cuba’s self-determination, some Egyptian officials privately criticized Havana’s conduct.
As seen from Cairo, Havana allowed the deployment of Soviet nuclear capable missiles on the island and relied too heavily on the Soviet Union in the management of the crisis, in the process straying away from the principles of non-alignment.
The intriguing topic of relations between Cairo and Havana, and in particular relations between Nasser and senior Cuban revolutionaries such as Ernesto ""Che"" Guevara and Fidel Castro, merits further investigation when significant Egyptian and Cuban archives and sources become more accessible.
Non-aligned Diplomacy in the Face of Global Crisis Hassan Elbahtimy In autumn 1962, governments around the world followed the unfolding of the crisis in the Caribbean.
The crisis had pitted Cuba, the USSR, and the United States against one another, but soon evolved to engulf the whole world in fear.
The United States instituted a self-styled “quarantine” on Cuba after discovery of Soviet missile bases there.
Cuba and the USSR both objected to United States measures, describing them as illegal while refusing to change course.
For many states around the world, the crisis was more than just a superpower confrontation.
It raised questions about sovereignty, global governance, and the imprudent danger of nuclear brinkmanship.
The crisis has been the focus of a vast and still growing body of literature, yet our understanding of the global dimensions and implications of the crisis remain limited.
In doing so, it contributes to a growing body of literature that seeks to open up the examination of the crisis to new and global perspectives.
This new literature adds to the now familiar narratives that has presented the crisis through the prism of the US, Soviet Union, and/or Cuba as the direct protagonists.
Three sources of overconfidence in the manageability of nuclear crises,"" European Journal of International Security 2, no.
This included mobilizing the Afro-Asian bloc, submitting a draft Security Council resolution on the crisis, and backing the UN Secretary General in his mediation efforts.
In Egypt, the events were seen as a serious, and potentially catastrophic, international crisis.
It triggered an internal debate on nuclear issues and significantly increased domestic interest in global nuclear politics.
This study primarily relies on Egyptian and Arabic primary sources, many of which have not been previously used in studying the crisis or on Egypt’s foreign policy.
These documents provide a detailed account of Egypt’s proactive multilateral diplomacy at a time when it held a seat in the Security Council.
The archives of Egypt’s two main official dailies Alahram and Al-akbar provide a window into the public discourse in Egypt on the crisis.
They also provide interesting and revealing insights on elite views and commentaries related to nuclear politics and deterrence.
Both the Egyptian National Archives and the British Library in London contain comprehensive archives relating to how the October events were reported in government-controlled press.
Cairo, Non-alignment, and the Cuban Revolution To understand Egypt’s position in the Cuban crisis of 1962, a broader understanding of how Cairo situated itself on the international scene is crucial.
Cairo at the time was a prominent advocate for both decolonization and non-alignment between the Soviet Union and the United States.
Cairo therefore rejected military alliances functioning within the communist East or the capitalist West.
Instead, Egypt sought to chart an independent course for itself in the Cold War and advocated for others to follow the same approach.
Along with newly decolonized states, it was an active contributor to the Afro-Asian Conference in Bandung in 1955 and a few years later became a founding member of Non-Aligned Movement in 1961.
Regionally, Cairo fiercely pushed back against any extension of Cold-War-style defense pacts in the Middle East and actively opposed the establishment of the Baghdad Pact.
Non-alignment as a foreign policy orientation carried a nuclear dimension too.
Egypt’s foreign policy towards Cuba can be understood as a function of its relationship with the United States and the Soviet Union, but what is frequently overlooked is that this policy was a product of Cairo’s experience of, and later advocacy for, decolonization.
Cairo invested in good relations with the new Cuban regime under the leadership of Fidel Castro.
In many cases, parallels were seen and explicitly highlighted between Egypt’s and Cuba’s respective struggles for decolonization.
The Cuban Revolution was therefore seen as part of a global, historic wave of national liberation movements reversing the injustices inflicted by decades of colonization and control of European and Western powers on vast swaths of the world.
It is hardly surprising then that Cairo was ready to open its arms for the new Cuban regime.
Che Guevara visited Cairo in 1959 soon after the new regime had established itself on the Caribbean island.
The warming of relations also meant that Cairo was able to provide some modest and symbolic assistance to Havana with the aim of supporting the new regime and in defiance of United States efforts to isolate it internationally.
Nasser also lent the new regime his support openly and frequently drew connections between Egypt’s own struggle for independence against colonial and dominating powers and Cuba’s, highlighting the importance of solidarity between Third-World powers.
For this reason, we believe that we ought to support the cause of freedom in every part of the world.
In 1961, Nasser quickly and harshly denounced United States attempts to invade the Caribbean island during the Bay of Pigs operation.
Following the attacks, Nasser sent a private message to Castro through the Egyptian ambassador in Havana expressing Egypt’s support and drawing parallels with Egypt’s own fights during the Suez Crisis of 1956.
The movement provided an umbrella for states around the world, the vast majority of them newly decolonized, to assert different positions on world affairs than those advocated by the United States or the Soviet Union.
It was through NAM and other similar channels that Cairo projected its voice in support of Cuba and anti-colonialism more broadly and sought to build international coalitions with like-minded countries.
Cairo’s Experience of the Cuban Crisis of 1962 As the crisis was picking up pace in the Caribbean, Cairo was heavily engaged with foreign policy priorities elsewhere.
Only a month earlier, Egypt had started its active, and later costly, engagement in Yemeni affairs.
Cairo supported a group of Yemeni officers in removing the conservative Imamate dynasty from power to establish a republic inspired by Egypt’s own free officers movement in 1952.
With time, Egypt became heavily involved in the Yemeni civil war that followed between the traditional leadership and the republican officers – picking the side of the republicans.
By October 1962, around 20,000 Egyptian troops were reported to have been deployed in Yemen in what later came to be known as “Nasser’s Vietnam” due to the great loss in blood and treasure suffered by Cairo.
But the military involvement in Yemen was not the only major issue on Cairo’s diplomatic radar.
In the fall of 1962, China and India went to war over a border dispute.
The conflict risked a deep fissure in the anti-colonial camp and caused significant alarm in Cairo.
As the situation in the Caribbean heated up, Nasser was also engaged in efforts to mediate between the Chinese and Indian leadership to de-escalate and resolve the conflict.
Preoccupied with Yemen and the Sino-Indian conflict on the international stage, Cairo did not foresee an imminent escalation in Cuba.
Egypt had no access to information on the intensions of the Soviet Union to introduce the missiles, nor did Cairo have any privileged access to the U2 photographs available to the Americans before the blockade.
Kennedy’s Middle East and the Making of the U.S.-Israel Alliance , 162.
As events in the Caribbean kicked off, Cairo was commemorating the sixth anniversary of the Suez Crisis.
This timing coincidence made the connection between Cuba’s struggle and its own prominent in Egyptian perceptions.
Cuba’s defiance in the face of United States subversive efforts symbolized the struggle many post-colonial countries experienced to achieve independence.
On the 22nd of October 1962, Nasser received a private letter from Kennedy informing him of the Soviet efforts to introduce missiles in Cuba and of the United States decision to impose a quarantine on the island.
In making the case for United States action, Kennedy emphasized that the offensive Soviet ballistic build-up in Cuba was beyond “any doubt” and stressed how recent actions by the Soviet Union were in flagrant contradiction with earlier commitments by Khrushchev and Gromyko that the USSR will only provide defensive weapons to Cuba.
It focused almost entirely on the Soviet Union and its leadership as the main culprits.
With the Bay of Pigs in recent memory, Egypt’s default position was to think that the US measures were a new attempt to compromise the Cuban regime and aimed at re-instating US control over the Caribbean Island.
Cairo’s acknowledgement of the Cuban regime’s vulnerability in the face of what was perceived as determined efforts by its mighty neighbor to undermine its government would continued to overshadow Egypt’s early attitude toward the situation in the Caribbean.
Only later with the escalation of the crisis and US-Soviet standoff did the alarming nuclear dimension of the crisis gain salience in Cairo and the risk of nuclear war become clear.
This was no longer strictly a US-Cuban affair where the Cuban island was subjected to the risk of a ground invasion or subversive action aimed at destabilising Castro’s government.
The newly formed “Presidential Council,” the highest political body in Egypt at the time, discussed the issue in at least two meetings on the 24th of October and 1st of November.
After the first meeting, a statement was released calling for negotiations between the US, USSR and Cuba to resolve the crisis peacefully.
The statement also made public Cairo’s position based on a dual rejection of the measures to establish a quarantine on Cuba and of the establishment of foreign military bases.
Undersecretary Hafez Ismail arranged a crisis group of seven departments, meeting every hour, to examine and analyze the latest information coming from Egyptian embassies abroad and news cables.
A report in Al-ahram describes “tens of diplomats that have not left their offices” in the Egyptian Ministry of Foreign Affairs since the very start of the crisis.
Even religious authorities in Egypt accorded the matter some attention.
On the 24th of October, the Grand Imam of Al-azhar, one the biggest and oldest institutions in the Muslim world, issued a statement calling on all nations to stand against nuclear war.
Al-azhar’s statement referred to the self-defeating nature of nuclear war and its global consequences.
The statement also mentioned that during the meeting the Council was in contact with the Egyptian representative in the UN who was instructed to coordinate a common position with countries from the Afro-Asian bloc and the non-aligned states.
Only a day before the Cuban crisis publicly erupted, Al-ahram, Egypt’s government-controlled and widest distributed daily, reported on its front page how the US was close to wiping North Carolina off the map when two nuclear weapons were dropped on the state by accident.
As the USSR showed early signs that it might challenge the US-imposed quarantine, Alahram’s headlines announced the advent of “the danger of atomic war” and a “world rolling down an abyss of hell” in a crisis unseen since the Second World War.
The paper even started publishing a serialized version of “Fail Safe,” an American novel that vividly described how the world can step into a nuclear war by accident.
The danger was described as unprecedented in its seriousness and global in nature.
Quotes from politicians and intellectuals expressed a doomsday scenario.
The pope was quoted as warning of war that would exterminate humankind.
Non-aligned Diplomacy in Action In 1961, Egypt joined the Security Council as an elected non-permanent member of the most consequential body of the UN.25 This was a reflection of Cairo’s growing international clout; particularly within the Non-Aligned Movement which was formally launched in the same year.
As the Cuban crisis escalated in 1962, Cairo focused on the Security Council as its main vehicle to engage with the crisis and the venue where Egypt put into action its support for nonalignment principles and anti-nuclear positions.
By the 23rd of October, Egypt had fully mobilized its diplomats and foreign service in support of its UN mission.
Al-ahram publishes the book the world is talking about with fear and concern’ 2 November 1962, Alahram 24 ‘Pope warns of nuclear war that would exterminate mankind,’ 24 October 1962, Al-ahram archives,2.
The first meeting of the 11 members of the Security Council on the crisis took place on the 23rd of October 1962.
The US, supported by its Western allies, accused the Soviet Union of secretly building “launching bases and the installation of long range ballistic missiles capable of carrying thermonuclear warheads to most of North and South America” and stressing their “offensive” nature.
More controversially, it laid out the rationale for its imposition of a quarantine on Cuba.
Cuba, on the other hand, supported by the USSR and the Eastern bloc, focused on the illegality of the United States actions under international law.
Reflecting these divergent views, two radically different draft resolutions, presented by the United States and by the USSR, were tabled for the Council’s membership to consider and vote on.
To many states on the Security Council and in the UN more broadly, their position was dictated by their respective places in the Cold War divide.
Western powers and allied governments like the UK, France, Ireland, Chile, Venezuela, and the Republic of China expressed support for the US draft, while Romania, the only other communist regime on the Council, supported the Soviet draft.
For Egypt, buoyed by the recently established non-aligned platform, the dominance of the East versus West shadow over international diplomacy had to be challenged.
Recently decolonized Afro-Asian countries should be able to chart their own foreign and domestic policy.
They should deflect pressure from both the East and the West to automatically align with their 26 ‘Urgent instructions sent to Mahmoud Riad,’ 24 October 1961, Al-ahram archives.
China’s Security Council seat was held by the anti-communist Republic of China.
Using its membership in the Security Council, Egypt sought ways to bypass the pressure of East-West antagonism on the wider UN membership.
The following days showed Egypt’s proactive role in leveraging the non-aligned and decolonized states into an independent position.
These efforts centered on giving the UN, as the embodiment of global will, a prominent place.
After the first day of Security Council debate, Egypt coordinated a meeting of 50 such states to drive greater and more proactive UN involvement in resolving the crisis.
Egypt with Ghana and Cyprus formed a troika that represented the group and met with the Acting Secretary General of the UN U Thant to press on him the will of a significant section of the international community for the UN to play a mediatory role in the conflict.
Egypt’s diplomatic position in the UN was, in large part, built on two principles that started to play an increasingly visible role in Egyptian foreign policy at the time.
The first was active advocacy of the non-alignment of newly independent states.
Alongside other leading non-aligned voices, this advocacy was meant to produce a loose umbrella under which a diverse set of countries could deflect pressure from the United States and the Soviet Union to blindly affiliate with their positions and protect the sovereignty of the smaller and newly independent states.
The second was a growing inclination toward an anti-nuclear stance that had been in development during the preceding years and took form in Egypt’s support of Irish proposals in 1961 for an international instrument addressing the spread of nuclear weapons.
On the ground, this transpired into a position that used the UN and the Security Council membership to advocate de-escalation while denouncing nuclear brinkmanship.
This was done in parallel with stressing 31 According to Riad, the meeting lasted for three hours on the night of the 23rd of October followed by another meeting next day morning.
These interventions also show a deliberate effort from Cairo to distance itself from American and Soviet positions, reflecting a desire not to be identified with any of the competing Cold War camps.
In contradiction to the United States position, Egypt’s representative Riad emphasized the importance that states desist from intervening in the internal affairs of other states, that each state had the freedom to choose its own political system and to be able to defend its political and territorial integrity.
Egypt described the United States quarantine as illegal under international law, but interestingly opted to phrase this opposition in a controlled and restrained manner.
Additionally, the Egyptian Ambassador used “quarantine,” the term adopted by the US, rather than “blockade” as used by Cuba and the USSR, which had more serious legal connotations.
On the face of it, and in the middle of a polarizing crisis, this position brought the Egyptian position too close to the Cuban and Soviet narrative that stressed Havana’s right to fend off American efforts to subvert its new regime.
For balance, the Egyptian Ambassador mentioned Egypt’s firm opposition to the establishment of foreign military bases, conceding to the United States narrative that placement of Soviet missiles on Cuban territory was a destabilizing act and detrimental to regional and global security.
Egypt also came out with a strong and vocal antinuclear position that it shared with the Security Council.
The Egyptian ambassador Riad said that he received direct instructions from his government to reaffirm Egypt’s opposition in principle to the spread of nuclear weapons.
To back a more proactive approach by the UN, Egypt and Ghana propelled their own draft for a Security Council resolution that sought to provide a mandate for a larger UN role.
This was a direct attempt by the smaller powers to find a way out of the crisis through a coordinated multilateral approach using the United Nations.
Ghana’s representative to the UN described the draft as the “peace resolution” and asked Council members to support it.
In the same vein, the Egyptian Ambassador said, “Ghana and the United Arab Republic, as non-aligned countries, feel it imperative to ask the Security Council to act urgently and resolutely to save international peace.
The diplomatic cover and the mandate the resolution would provide for the ASG to play a mediatory role in the crisis was not universally welcomed.
The United States and some of the Western countries were not comfortable that the resolution did not address the dismantlement of the missiles in Cuba.
Equally, the Soviet Union would have wanted to see a denunciation of the unilaterally imposed quarantine.
Through tabling the resolution, the non-aligned sought to directly urge the ASG to play such a role.
However, these diplomatic actions seem to have yielded some results in getting the UN to step in.
Following the appeal, U Thant told the Security Council that “at the request of a large number of member states,” he had sent identical messages to President Kennedy and Chairman Khrushchev urging them to adhere to two or three weeks of reciprocal and “voluntary suspension” of all arms shipments to Cuba, as well as halting the quarantine measures, such as ship-searching.
The aim for such suspension was to give time for the parties involved to discuss an enduring resolution of the crisis.
The next day the Council was informed of the encouraging, if not conclusive, replies by the United States and the Soviet Union.
The Egyptian representative was among the delegations that welcomed the responses and called for direct negotiations between the two powers with the assistance of the ASG.42 The following day, the ASG followed up with letters to Khrushchev and Kennedy asking the first to keep Soviet ships away from the quarantine area and the second to avoid direct confrontation with Soviet ships, with the aim of minimizing the possibility of an incident that could escalate into war.
In separate letters received on the 25th and 26th of October, both powers accepted the ASG proposals and in so doing the crisis looked like it was on its way toward containment.
Egyptian mission in the UN was vocal in its support for negotiations under the UN Umbrella.
In Cairo, Egypt’s biggest daily dedicated considerable coverage to ASG efforts to mediate, including publishing the complete record of letters exchanged between Kennedy, Khrushchev, and U Thant.
These were celebrated as a consequence of non-aligned mediation diplomacy.
By 28 October, the parameters of a compromise were reached that involved the removal of the Soviet missiles from Cuba and a secret promise by Kennedy to remove the Jupiter missiles from Turkey.
The UN was also involved in efforts to verify the dismantlement and the removal of the missiles, including efforts to get Cuba to agree on some form of international verification.
The End of the Crisis Despite differences between Cuba, the US, and the Soviet Union over verifying the removal of the Soviet missiles, by early November the worst of the crisis was over.
Against the background of Cold War antagonism, de-escalation was not universally welcomed.
Voices at the margins of each alliance were pushing to establish deterrence credibility.
On the other hand, China used the crisis to accuse the Kremlin of capitulation.
In this landscape, Egypt, along with the non-aligned states, sided with de-escalation.
Nasser exchanged correspondences with Kennedy and Khrushchev in support of the outcome.
When it came to Cuba, a more complicated picture started to emerge in Cairo about Havana’s conduct during the crisis and its non-aligned credentials.
Nasser’s messages to Kennedy and Khrushchev praised their restraint, but also highlighted the importance of the role played by the UN and the Acting Secretary General.
Nasser’s letter ended by highlighting that the United States “with all its might and prestige” can 45 Melvyn P Leffler and Westad, The Cambridge History of the Cold War.
And ‘U Thant arrives today to Cuba,’ 30 October 1962, Al-ahram 47 Egyptian press picked up on Chinese dissatisfaction.
See ‘Chinese press print an abridged version of Khrushchev’s decision and Albania’s radio ignores it’ Al-ahram 30 October.
He mentioned Egypt’s appreciation of the “wise and prudent” positions the USSR and Khrushchev personally had shown during the crisis.
Nasser ended by telling Khrushchev that “true courage is to perform one’s duties.
As the crisis was receding, Nasser’s close adviser Heikal wrote an editorial reflecting some unusual criticism in Cairo directed at Cuba’s handling of the crisis.
Cuba was criticized for allowing the Soviet Union to completely run the show on its behalf during the crisis, rather than acting in an independent and non-aligned way.
Heikal compared the Cuban experience of 1962 and the Egyptian experience in 1956 during the Suez crisis.
While in 1956, Nasser challenged the British, French, and Israeli invaders, during the Cuban crisis it was Khrushchev who responded to Kennedy’s letters, and it was the Soviet leader who made the commitment to dismantle the missile bases, not the Cuban leadership.
Such criticism shows that underneath the sympathy and public support to Cuba, lurked a skepticism in its ability to chart a truly independent and non-aligned course like the one Cairo was advocating at the time.
The influence that the Cuban missile crisis had on enforcing Nasser’s position on neutrality is noteworthy.
One of the lessons Nasser took away from the crisis was that a Cuba-like situation was something to be avoided.
Increasingly, Nasser’s fear of entrapment into a global nuclear confrontation exceeded any benefits that might accrue from hosting nuclear forces in Egypt.
When proposals were made that Egypt should consider hosting Soviet nuclear forces to counter Israeli nuclear potential, Nasser would fiercely reject the idea, citing the events in the Caribbean in 1962.
Egypt’s policy against hosting foreign nuclear forces remained a solid component of Nasser’s approach to the nuclear question.
Conclusion Despite being thousands of miles away, Cairo’s diplomacy was pulled into the Cuban crisis primarily through its presence on the Security Council as well as its prominent role among the non-aligned and decolonized states in the United Nations.
The ambition to carve an independent and non-aligned course is instrumental to understanding Cairo’s approach to the crisis and its diplomacy in the United Nations.
Behind Cairo’s proactive role in the Security Council was a sense that Egypt and other neutral and decolonized states are entitled to play an active international role.
Their new status as independent states and full members of the United Nations and its bodies presented a window to challenge the bipolar structure and represent their own interests.
Egypt was also keen to present the non-aligned states as a constructive and independent actor on the world stage in the face of the skeptical views by the greater powers.
However little influence it had on shaping the course of events in the Caribbean, Cairo aspired for a proactive role through the UN and groups of like-minded states.
Using its membership in the Security Council and its clout among the newly independent states, Cairo was at the heart of efforts by a group of heterogeneous, neutral and mostly Afro-Asian states to press for de-escalation and a bigger role for the United Nations in resolving the crisis.
Egypt was part of a UN troika that pressed U Thant to use his offices for mediation.
Egypt, with Ghana, 54 Samy Sharaf, Nasser’s Chief of Staff, Personal Interview.
Egypt’s perceptions of the crisis were built on an entrenched foreign policy identity/orientation around neutrality, which Nasser championed since his assumption of power in Egypt.
Establishing foreign missile or military bases was one aspect of the Cold War that Nasser was vehemently opposed to.
What happened in Cuba showed how an added nuclear dimension can make these bases a source of serious international confrontation and tension.
Heated competition between the United States and the USSR to gain global influence can come at the expense of smaller states seeking an independent foreign policy.
In a sense, the crisis reinforced both Egypt’s Cold War neutrality and its emerging antinuclear sentiments that were starting to take shape at the time.
The crisis demonstrated the dangers of being entangled in alliances that can ultimately turn to great power confrontations chipping away the sovereignty and independence of smaller states.
In a way, the crisis was a practical demonstration of the dangerous risks associated with global nuclear confrontations and perhaps fed into Nasser’s own fears of entrapment in such conflicts if he veered off the non-aligned course.
Nasser's Gamble, as the intervention's leading scholar aptly calls it, undertaken with Khrushchev's avid and ""remarkably fast"" support even as Operation Anadyr covertly transported nuclear arms to Cuba, launched a costly and ultimately unsuccessful five-year involvement that some have likened to Egypt's Vietnam.
Hassan Elbahtimy’s essay, featured above, delves deeply into the attitudes of Egyptian policymakers and elites, especially regarding nonalignment and nuclear weapons, as well as Cairo's UN diplomacy.
Ostermann, Malcolm Byrne, Kian Byrne, and Leila Afzal, as well as Ryan Musto, Guy Laron, and Sergey Radchenko.
Using a diverse array of Russian, Egyptian, and other sources, Ferris shows that, contrary to the ""traditional, and not illogical,"" view that Moscow singlemindedly focused on the clandestine deployment to Cuba, Khrushchev reacted speedily in late September and early October by sending transport planes, pilots, and other aid to Egypt to defend the new Yemeni regime.
As the missile crisis erupted, Khrushchev discussed the Yemen situation with Romanian visitors, explaining Soviet military help for the ""progressive"" Yemenis via Egypt.
It is hoped that the two inquiries may, therefore, be complementary and mutually informative.
Despite its urgent military entanglement closer to home in Yemen, the UAR could hardly avoid reacting to and participating in the diplomacy of the Cuban crisis, which, after all, raised the prospect of an apocalyptic thermonuclear conflagration.
Since helping to oust King Farouk a decade earlier, the charismatic President Gamal Abdel Nasser had boosted Egypt's stature as a major international and not merely regional actor.
In the Arab world, his electrifying rhetoric had promoted unity, opposition to Israel, and anti-imperialism (highlighted by his defiance of England and France by nationalizing the Suez Canal in 1956), although his pan-Arab aspirations had suffered a blow when, in September 1961, Syria withdrew from the ""United Arab Republic"" he had created as a first step toward a broader Arab entity.
Within Africa, Nasser had ardently backed anti-colonial movements and leaders, from Patrice Lumumba in the former Belgian Congo to Kwame Nkrumah in Ghana, and belonged to the radical ""Casablanca Group"" forged in 1961 by Morocco, the UAR, Ghana, Guinea, Mali, the Provisional Government of Algeria (still battling France for independence), and Libya.
At the same time, along with Yugoslavia's Tito, India's Nehru, and Indonesia's Sukarno, Nasser was a pillar of the emerging ""neutralist"" or ""nonaligned"" group.
He participated actively in the AfroAsian gathering in Bandung and Non-Aligned Movement heads of state founding summit in Belgrade , and hosted several NAM meetings.
All these considerations, as well as domestic politics, the ongoing Arab-Israeli standoff, and other factors, could influence Nasser's and Egypt's handling of the missile crisis – but what made Cairo's diplomacy especially pertinent was the coincidence that, in 1962, the UAR held one of the six non-permanent seats on the United Nations Security Council, a scene of continuous and intense negotiating and maneuvering related to the superpower confrontation.
Nasser, reported his confidant, Mohamed Heikal, had initial ""suspicions"" toward the Cuban revolutionaries but soon overcame them.
In mid-1959, he had welcomed Ernesto ""Che"" Guevara to Egypt and compared notes on land reform and revolution.
Defense minister Raul Castro visited the following year, but a dispute ensued when the Egyptians pressured him to tone down a speech.
On the other hand, Nasser had appreciated Eisenhower's refusal to support the British-French-Israeli Suez adventure in 1956, and JFK had made a concerted effort to lure Nasser into closer relations.
Chile, Ghana, Ireland, Romania, and Venezuela; in 1966 the non-permanent UNSC membership was raised from six to ten.
Presumably Loutfi reported in some form to Cairo, but details are not known.
A career diplomat, he was later Egypt's ambassador to Sweden and the People's Republic of China, among other positions.
Conferring at the same Hotel Theresa in Harlem where the Cuban had famously bear-hugged Khrushchev, the Egyptian invited Castro to join the ""neutrals"" in their incipient movement to form a buffer between the rival superpower blocs.
Cuba did, in fact, join NAM from the start, the only Latin American nation to do so, fully participating in a June 1961 preparatory meeting in Cairo and the foundational Belgrade summit three months later (a few other Latin American countries such as Brazil also came, but only as observers).11 At the same time, however, Havana's delegation annoyed some relative moderates, including Tito, Nehru, and presumably Nasser, by staking out militant antiUS stands, raising questions about how authentically nonaligned Cuba (and by implication NAM) really was.
Diplomatically, Cairo supported Havana, and Heikal sensed ""a mutual and growing admiration"" between Castro and Nasser.
In March 1962, at the Security Council, the UAR, along with Ghana and the Soviet bloc, had supported a Cuban resolution aimed at blocking actions passed by the recent Organization of American States foreign ministers' meeting in Punta del Este, Uruguay.
In late August 1962, an Egyptian journalist told a United States diplomat that bilateral relations were ""more than cool,"" citing the UAR government's decision to block reporters from visiting Cuba.
The Crisis Like dozens of other world leaders, Nasser first learned of the crisis through an ostensibly personal letter from JFK, its delivery by the United States embassy timed to coincide with Kennedy's televised speech announcing the discovery of the missiles on Monday, October 22, at 7m. , a copy of which was also conveyed, translated into the local language.
Due to the time difference, Kennedy spoke after midnight Cairo time, so serious deliberations there could not begin until the next day.
Ambassador to Egypt John S Badeau to relay positive news on a different topic of considerable concern to Egypt's leader.
This version of JFK's letter was sent to Bangkok, Canberra, Manila, Taipei, Seoul, Djakarta, Wellington, Phnom Penh, Saigon, Tokyo, Karachi, Tehran, Ankara, Athens, Cairo, Dublin, Accra, and Lagos.
Besides being intensely involved in the Yemen affair, Nasser was also vying to mediate the SinoIndian border conflict, writing Zhou Enlai and Nehru to urge a cease-fire and negotiations, and did not immediately respond, directly or indirectly, to JFK's letter.
On Tuesday, October 23, Washington concentrated its diplomacy on securing an endorsement of its imminent blockade from the OAS, but also anticipated the action soon moving to the UN Security Council.
Zorin also reported that neutral states were drafting a resolution calling on interested parties to cease actions that could ""directly or indirectly aggravate the situation,"" and on UN Acting Secretary-General U Thant to take immediate steps to alleviate the confrontation.
The Security Council Having considered the recent serious developments in the Caribbean, Noting with grave concern the threat to international peace and security, Having listened to the parties directly concerned, 1.
Calls upon the parties concerned to refrain from any action which may directly or indirectly further aggravate the situation and to take the necessary steps to bring the situation in the Caribbean back to the state of affairs existing prior to 22 October 1962.
Requests the Acting Secretary General to promptly confer with the parties directly concerned on the immediate steps to take to remove the existing threat to world peace, 3.
Calls upon the parties concerned to comply forthwith with this resolution and provide every assistance to the Acting Secretary General in performing this task, 4.
Requests the Acting Secretary General to report to the Council on the implementation of paragraph 2 of this resolution.
For four hours, beginning at 6:15 pm, Nasser presided over a Presidential Council meeting at the AlQubbah Palace in north Cairo held to discuss, in the words of state-run press reports the next day, ""the international situation resulting from the blockade against Cuba,""e., not ""resulting"" from the Soviet nuclear missile deployment.
Most importantly – the headline news for Americans28 – the statement, echoed the next day by all Egyptian media, explicitly criticized the United States blockade.
At the same time, it ""equally"" opposed foreign military bases and demanded their liquidation, ""wherever they may be,"" implicitly referring both to the US Guantanamo Bay naval base and to the Soviet missile installations in Cuba.
Sabri repeated Cairo's support for the principle of disarmament, including the idea that states that did not produce nuclear weapons should not be supplied with them – a notion that could be read as rapping the Soviet nuclear deployment to Cuba, supporting the creation of nuclear weapon free zones , or both.
They conveyed guidance and heard a briefing on the ambassador's contacts with Thant and fellow diplomats in anticipation of an emergency Security Council meeting set to re-convene around 5m.
At the Egyptian foreign ministry, meanwhile, deputy foreign minister Hafez Ismail organized a round-the-clock crisis group to monitor developments and coordinate communications with various diplomatic outposts.
Ghana's ambassador had a strong interest in Cuba and impressed colleagues as capable and energetic.
Although Roa had allegedly thought this effort might be countered by improved ties with Washington, Quaison-Sackey acknowledged that ""perhaps...things had gone too far"" with the recent Soviet military build-up in Cuba and new United States shipping embargo.
Quaison-Sackey, who doubled as Ghana's ambassador to Havana, had mixed views.
Mahoney was unhappy with Quaison-Sackey's October 24 UNSC speech on the Cuban matter, however.
Quaison-Sackey later briefly became Ghana's foreign minister shortly before Nkrumah's overthrow in early 1966.
Riad also proclaimed that the UAR, as a ""loyal"" UN member, believed all countries ""should refrain in their international relations from the threat or use of force against the territorial integrity or political independence of any State"" and that ""member States should settle their disputes by peaceful means in such a manner that international peace and security are not endangered"" – statements that inspired a complaint that the UAR might apply these principles in its dealings with Israel, which it had refused to recognize or negotiate with.
Besides their speeches, the UAR and Ghana representatives, serving as, Quaison-Sackey later recalled, the nonaligned states' ""unofficial spokesmen,""40 co-sponsored a resolution to promote negotiations, calling on UN Acting Secretary-General Thant to promptly and actively enter the crisis diplomacy and intervene between the superpowers.
That morning, Riad, Quaison-Sackey, and Cyprus' Rossides, who that month chaired the UN's Asian-African group, effectively representing NAM nations, had seen Thant to explain the resolution and urge him to move briskly to promote a resolution to the dispute.
The state-run Cairo daily Al Akhbar on October 25, citing ""informed circles,"" listed a ""proclamation of neutrality"" as the first element of the UAR government's position on the crisis.
Riad later told Stevenson he had asked the Soviet delegate Zorin whether Moscow could accept Cuba's neutralization, ""such as he had suggested in his Security Council speech,"" but received no concrete reply.
Requests the Acting Secretary-General to promptly confer with the parties directly concerned on the immediate steps to be taken to remove the existing threat to world peace, and to normalize the situation in the Caribbean; 2.
Calls upon the parties concerned to refrain meanwhile from any action which may directly or indirectly further aggravate the situation.
The proposed resolution triggered some urgent diplomacy, and, fittingly for a measure advanced by two NAM stalwarts, dissatisfied both Moscow and Washington.
Already irked by Riad's speech, with its disapproval of the blockade, United States officials were ambivalent about interjecting U Thant into US-Soviet diplomacy, fearing a distraction from the exchanges between Kennedy and Khrushchev.
The Americans wanted to avoid any protracted diplomacy that might delay a prompt resolution to the crisis.
Moscow's UN delegate, Valerian Zorin, told Thant his proposal was ""incorrect and wrong-headed"" for putting the ""provocative"" United States actions, such as its illegal blockade, on the same level as the ""normal"" and ""lawful"" measures Cuba was taking for its own self-defense.
Reporting to Moscow, Zorin indeed faulted the draft resolution for failing to directly call on Washington to lift its ""quarantine"" on Cuba, but commented that, despite being ""vague"" on this point, the speeches by Riad and Quaison-Sackey clearly implied a demand that Kennedy revoke such measures.
Moreover, he added, the General Assembly was unlikely to approve a more favorable step, since a majority of ""the Afro-Asian group"" supported the UAR/Ghana resolution – exactly the dynamic Zayyat discerned.
A previously declassified version of this cable redacted all references (both names and nationalities) to the identities of the Soviet, Egyptian, and Yugoslav diplomats.
Considering the issue on Thursday, October 25, the Soviet Presidium endorsed Zorin's plan (Anastas Mikoyan, Khrushchev's top associate, even urged supporting the UAR/Ghana proposal rather than abstaining).49 The Kremlin still felt ambivalent about the measure.
In contrast to that ambiguous act, Kuznetsov emphasized, the Afro-Asian nations' statements were ""good and strong"" and the ""neutral nations"" exerted ""strong"" pressure on Washington.
Yet, Moscow's own retreat from threatening to veto the UAR/Ghana resolution showed that it, too, was occasionally susceptible to NAM's diplomatic muscle-flexing.
On Thursday, October 25 – as, in Cairo, state-controlled media followed the lead provided by Sabri's statement, indicating ""disapproval"" of the American position51 – the State Department, irritated by Riad's speech the previous evening, summoned Nasser's ambassador to Washington, Mostafa Kamel, for a detailed briefing on the United States actions in the Cuban crisis.
Acutely annoyed that some Egyptians were skeptical of the American claim, Talbot also laid out the evidence to blame Moscow for provoking the crisis by deploying offensive nuclear weaponry to Cuba.
Merely stopping delivery of additional offensive arms and suspending the quarantine (as Thant had proposed in letters to Kennedy and Khrushchev) was hence unacceptable.
As if anticipating Khrushchev's offer two days later to swap the Soviet missiles in Cuba for American missiles in Turkey (an idea Walter Lippmann had advanced that very morning in The Washington Post), Talbot vowed that ""US not repeat not prepared fall into trap of letting USSR take something to which not entitled, then stop and bargain for payment of something else"" – as, he argued, China sought to do in relation to its border clashes with India.
Talbot's briefing, apparently the most substantial personal US-UAR official interaction during the crisis, seems to have had its intended effect.
Personally, Talbot reported, the UAR 53 Fleming, "" United Nations Neutrals Seek 'Freeze' In Caribbean,"" Washington Post, 25 October 1962, A1.
However, Kamel advised that the ""neutrals"" could be more helpful if Washington did not press them to ""subscribe 100% to United States position,"" and observed that if some Americans did not like Riad's remarks, well, neither did Zorin.
Talbot, who agreed the ""neutral"" countries might be helpful in verifying the missiles' dismantling and removal, in response to Kamel's suggestion quickly directed the immediate sending of U-2 photographs to the embassy in Cairo to use in briefing UAR leaders.
After the famous Stevenson-Zorin colloquy in which the American challenged his Soviet counterpart to admit the presence of the missiles in Cuba (and then exhibited the U-2 photos to support his case), the UAR and Ghana ambassadors, after welcoming the onset of correspondence between the Acting Secretary-General and the two superpower rivals, with Thant receiving at least somewhat favorable replies from Khrushchev and Kennedy, proposed that the Security Council adjourn sine die to allow the contacts and negotiations to proceed.
Hearing no objections to the UAR motion, Zorin, chairing the session, gaveled it to a close – without calling to a vote any of the earlier introduced resolutions, either the US, the Soviet, or the one put forward the night before by the UAR and Ghana.
By this time, another idea to resolve or mitigate the crisis was circulating around the Security Council — with special implications for the UAR and Nasser.
Taken together, these positions implied sympathy for the idea of establishing nuclear weapon free zones, an idea that had recently come into vogue with the proposal by Poland's foreign minister, Adam Rapacki, to create a NWFZ in the heart of Europe that would bar such arms from either East or West Germany, in addition to Poland and Czechoslovakia.
Though the Rapacki Plan had failed to enter into force, facing determined United States opposition, it generated much discussion about whether such atomic weapons-free areas might make sense elsewhere.
In the Western Hemisphere, Brazil, aspiring to a larger role in international affairs, was investigating the idea.
When the Cuban crisis ignited, some Brazilian diplomats thought making Latin America a NWFZ might offer a face-saving method to get the missiles out of Cuba – and even had hopes of gaining Soviet support.
The USSR had, after all, backed the Rapacki Plan, signed an accord with the United States and others to make Antarctica nuclear-free59, and Brazil's ambassador in Moscow had recently heard positive words on the subject from a senior Soviet figure, deputy prime minister Frol Kozlov.
On October 24, sensing the ""urgent necessity for creative formulas that, avoiding humiliation for both sides, reduce the tension,"" Brazil's ambassador in Washington, Roberto Campos, suggested organizing a movement at the United Nations of Latin American and African nations to denuclearize their continents, under UN inspection.
An International History"" , part of his forthcoming international history of NWFZs.
At the Excomm, United States officials desperate to escape the crisis without war approved cooperating with the Brazilian concept at the UN if it would yield the verified eviction of the Soviet missiles from Cuba – even amidst grumbles from military officials worried about potential restrictions on the stationing or transit of nuclear weapons in such United States territories as the Panama Canal zone, the Guantanamo naval base, or Puerto Rico.
This once-promising effort collapsed in late November and early December, mostly due to opposition from Cuba, which had earlier sounded interested; once Havana backed away, so did the Soviets and their allies, and the Brazilians grudgingly withdrew the proposal.
On November 6, an aide to Riad approached a United States UN delegation member to explain the UAR's objections to the Brazilian proposal.
Ahmed , apparently under instructions, stressed that the UAR was both an African and Middle Eastern country, with commitments in both areas, and while Cairo's African concerns and commitments might accommodate an NWFZ, the same could not be said for the Middle East.
The UAR would hence be grateful if Washington could press the Brazilians to water down their resolution, perhaps reducing its African aspect to a mere appeal, alluding to a previously passed measure.
On Nasser's nuclear ambitions, which remain unclear, see Elbahtimy, Nasser, Egypt and the Arrival of the Nuclear Age, 1955-1970.
It was, of course, secretly developing nuclear weapons, with French help, at its Dimona research station in the southern Negev desert, and Nasser and Kennedy were conducting an intense secret dialogue about Israeli nuclear work at Dimona, the existence of which was publicly revealed in late 1960, with Washington trying to reassure Cairo that Dimona's aim was nuclear power, for ""peaceful purposes only,"" not arms.
Yet, in the mid1960s, Israeli Premier Levi Eshkol also repeatedly raised the idea of a nuclear weapons free zone in the Middle East67 – an idea not really inconsistent with Nasser's own reassurances, in his private dialogue with JFK and LBJ, that he did not intend to develop nuclear weapons.
In the Middle East, Israel raced ahead, secretly completing, it now appears, an operable atomic bomb by the time of the June 1967 Middle East war.
In 1968, Nasser's Egypt, unlike Israel, and contrary to the implications of his own earlier rhetoric, signed the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty, officially forswearing nuclear weapons.
As the Cuban missile crisis climaxed, Egyptians learned about events through a combination of wire service reports relayed by local and international media, and commentary and headlines reflecting the state policy laid out by Ali Sabri following Wednesday evening's Presidential Council meeting, with its opposition to the United States ""quarantine"" and demand for the liquidation of foreign military bases.
Edging aside reports on the Sino-Indian and Yemeni events, the Cuban crisis inspired widespread fears of nuclear war, which diminished somewhat after the Soviets opted not to challenge the blockade.
Monitoring media, United States Information Service embassy officials discerned a ""comparatively mild"" tone to reports that by the weekend grew ""perceptibly more anti-American""73 – and collected more favorable views of United States actions from consulates in Alexandria and Port Said.
Other than presiding over the Presidential Council on Wednesday evening, he did not appear to play any visible role in trying to influence public opinion or international diplomacy.
Despite his well-known talents as a fiery speaker, able to whip up public opinion, he did not make any pronouncements at the height of the crisis.
As the outcome remained unclear, he held off on replying to JFK's October 22 letter, and no available evidence suggests he met either United States or Soviet officials.
On Friday afternoon, October 26 word reached Washington that the UAR ambassador, together with colleagues from Jordan and Ceylon , heard Castro's rep, Mario Garcia-Inchaustegui, state that Cuba would be willing to remove the missile bases in return for a UN guarantee against a USbacked invasion.
On October 27 – arguably the most perilous day in human history – Riad met separately with Stevenson, Zorin, Thant, and the Cubans.
Late that Saturday afternoon, after seeing the Soviet delegate and Burmese statesman, but before meeting the Cubans in the evening, he called on the United States UN ambassador and relayed the substance of his exchange with Zorin.
The USSR diplomat had appealed to the ""neutrals"" for support to resolve the crisis, arguing that Moscow had accepted the terms of Thant's appeal while Washington had rejected them or attached conditions; but he had evaded Riad's queries as to whether Castro might be willing to stop construction on the missile sites, or whether Cuba's neutralization, as he had advocated in his speech, might be possible.
A bit ruefully, Riad told Stevenson that, especially since the Soviets had introduced Turkey into the negotiations (in Khrushchev's letter to JFK that day), the neutrals felt they were not in a position to push substantive proposals on the superpowers, only to urge both to resolve the matter peacefully.
The UAR ambassador promised to urge the Cubans, when he saw them in the coming hours, to stop missile construction, though he was ""less explicit"" about the ""inoperability"" question.
It could be useful to know, if Egyptian archives opened, whether Riad, after seeing JFK's rep, in fact saw the Cubans that Saturday night and if so what took place between them.
Zorin also reported to Moscow that he had met with Riad that Saturday, as part of his efforts to appeal to ""exert pressure"" on Thant and UN delegates from the ""neutral countries"" to back Soviet proposals and, in turn, pressure the United States.
When Boland attempted to preempt Riad on October 30 by calling for the Council to reconvene as soon as Thant returned from Havana to hear his report and possibly authorize a method to inspect the dismantling/removal of the Soviet missiles, the UAR delegate firmly objected , saying that ""the first priority is resolving the matter of guarantees for Cuban security,"" Zorin reported.
We confidently declare our belief that the United States, with its might and prestige, can consolidate the peace more than any other nation.
In this respect it bears a historic responsibility before all mankind since peace based on justice is a human need that takes precedence over all others, for it not only preserves but dignifies life.
When the letter, which Nasser aide Samy Sharaf delivered privately to the United States embassy in Cairo on November 1 and was not released publicly by the UAR government89, reached Washington, it was viewed relatively positively.
In sum, State saw the letter as Nasser's attempt to ""redress any grievance"" the United States felt towards Cairo due to the UAR's ""equivocal position"" during the crisis, and suggested Badeau orally convey JFK's appreciation.
In Cairo, meanwhile, the United States ambassador finally secured an appointment with Fawzi to elaborate the American view of the crisis and show him the U-2 photographs that had been dispatched to the embassy after Talbot's October 25 conversation with Kamel with the aim of quelling any doubts that the Soviets had deployed offensive weapons in Cuba.
Although UAR officials had conveyed interest in learning the ""intelligence basis"" of the United States assessment93, not until November 1 did Badeau see the UAR's ""most seasoned diplomat"" – his ""old friend,"" experienced , but not especially influential with Nasser or his inner circle.
After Nasser's foreign minister welcomed the briefing since he had been traveling as the crisis sharpened, Badeau immediately handed him copies of the U-2 photographs and stressed that the JFK-Khrushchev deal must be promptly and fully implemented.
On October 29, the US ambassador saw Nkrumah to review Washington's handling of the crisis, reviewing and handing over blown-up U-2 photos while scorning Quaison-Sackey's skeptical UNSC speech.
He believed Ghana's leader, ""aware that he could get into deep water if he veers too far from a neutral position on Cuba,"" sounded convinced by the presentation, reinforcing his ""fairly moderate stance"" on the crisis.
The two then discussed Yemen, with Badeau urging the UAR to avoid destabilizing Saudi Arabia and cooperate with Washington to promote ""both stability and more progressive government"" on the peninsula.
They agreed to keep talking, and Badeau thought the Cuban crisis might have usefully enhanced Cairo's perception of United States determination to protect its interests.
However, Badeau doubted the crisis had sufficiently improved Washington's standing to enable it to compel Arab states and Israel to begin direct negotiations.
However, after mulling the matter over for a week, the State Department recommended against publicizing the still-secret NasserJFK correspondence, and the White House agreed.
State would not mind if the UAR divulged the exchange, but since Nasser's letter to Khrushchev had attracted no notice in the United States, eschewed any initiative to release it publicly.
Cuba State Department Cables, Section 3: 1962: 31 October 19 November, RFK/AG, RFKAG-202-005-p0110.
On November 8, a State Department official dined with Kamel and UAR official Tewfiq AbdulFattah, on his way to Havana to take up residence as Cairo's ambassador.
Like his foreign minister, the Egyptian was traveling during the crisis, so the American took the opportunity to edify him on why many in the United States negatively viewed the UAR's position during the crisis.
The UAR's well-known hope of somehow luring Cuba ""out of the Soviet orbit and into the non-aligned orbit"" appeared ""totally impossible"" in the view of informed Americans and Latin Americans, the American said.
Somewhat to my surprise, Mr Abdul-Fattah responded that whereas it had been the UAR's hope that it could make gains with Castro, and whereas the UAR recently felt it had a certain moral obligation to help Cuba as a smaller country, the UAR had learned a lot from the Cuban crisis and realized the futility of its former policy.
He implied that the UAR had no further interest in the Castro government, and that his mission in Havana would be a holding operation.
After the two discussed the Sino-Indian border conflict, Rusk reviewed the state of play in the negotiations with the Soviets over Cuba, noting continuing disputes over on-site inspections and bombers.
Sabri said that at one time the UAR looked upon Cuba as a country trying to live its own life.
Since the Cuban crisis, however, the UAR regarded Cuba simply as part of the Warsaw Pact.
He said, he could not tie the hands of his government, but he implied that the UAR was washing its hands of Castro and would simply concentrate on non-aligned efforts to bring about a compromise between the two great power blocs.
Playing to Sabri, he agreed that ""even non-alignment"" would be better for Havana than the policy it was pursuing.
The UAR deputy foreign minister, in turn, elaborated Egyptian scorn for the Cubans.
In fact, he added, at the time of the Suez crisis, some Soviet advisers were in Egypt but Nasser pointedly ""shipped them all off"" to Khartoum, Sudan, for its duration, precisely to avoid any insinuation he was acting under Moscow's influence or control.
At mid-day on November 14, Ambassador Badeau escorted a powerful delegation of United States senators (led by majority leader Mike Mansfield and including Richard Russell, Claiborne Pell, Benjamin Smith, and J Caleb Boggs) to see Nasser at his personal residence in the eastern Cairo suburb of Heliopolis.
Asked about the recent crisis, Nasser, in a ""relaxed, vocal, and friendly"" mood, quickly unloaded on Cuba.
Nasser said he had warned Havana's ambassador in Cairo that the Soviets could not be trusted in the pinch (i.e., ""that Russia would not fight a World War to protect Cuba""), and that recent events had amply borne out that assessment.
Despite receiving domestic pressure to ""conclude a 'special arrangement' with the USSR"" – an obvious euphemism for permitting the Soviets to establish a military base and/or deploy nuclear rockets in the UAR – Nasser said he had firmly rejected the idea because it would sacrifice Egypt's independence.
Regardless of Nasser's true feelings, he obviously didn't want the Cuban affair to gratuitously encumber his higher priorities in dealing with Washington; while Riad's UNSC remarks accurately reflected Cairo's nonalignment, senior UAR figures,e., Kamel, Sabri, and most importantly Nasser in contacts with high-level United States officials, sought to dispel or at least mitigate American resentment over Egypt's crisis behavior.
Although, despite periodic White House consideration of inviting him (as Komer had urged and Kennedy apparently discussed with his ambassador to Cairo when he briefly returned to Washington in mid-December), Nasser never visited the United States during Kennedy's presidency, much to Badeau's regret.
As for Cairo's missile crisis diplomacy at the UN, it also quickly dissipated.
In their absence, another promising source could be Soviet records of Khrushchev's discussions with UAR leaders prior to his ouster in October 1964.
Heikal briefly quotes Khrushchev's remarks to Nasser, but full zapis besedy of these conversations could illuminate both men's views of the missile crisis and its ramifications.
So far, unfortunately, they have not been found in Moscow archives, or at least not published.
Komer said Kennedy at least twice ""approved in principle specifically going ahead with the Nasser visit 'at some future date’,"" but that circumstances always arose to postpone an invitation.
Cyprus had been a founding member of NAM, with its president, Archbishop Makarios, attending the September 1961 heads of state summit in Belgrade.
Intermittent commerce also continued,g., in early 1963, a sudden sugar shortage prompted the UAR to seek to purchase the bulk of the needed sweetener from Cuba.
Cuba remained a full NAM member, attending all meetings , but Nasser and Castro never visited each other's country while the two were alive.
In early 1965, around the time of his ill-fated venture to rouse Congolese revolutionaries, Lumumba's successors, against the USbacked Mobuto regime, Guevara paid a return trip to Egypt and conversed extensively with Nasser.
Divulging his clandestine mission to the Congo, which Nasser advised him against, Che seemed troubled by the course of Cuba's revolution, his relationship with Fidel Castro, and his own personal and political direction.
Discussing revolution, in Heikal's excerpts (again, we lack full records), Nasser stressed the pragmatic importance of governing effectively and building structures after taking power, while Guevara remained attracted to the romantic, purist challenge of making revolution.
When Guevara met his fate in Bolivia on a doomed mission to do that two years later, Nasser felt he had warned him in vain.
With Nikita Khrushchev's Soviet Union, as well, Nasser kept relatively positive relations, which reached a high point when the USSR leader visited Egypt in May 1964, five months before he was ousted, for ceremonies marking the opening of the Aswan Dam constructed with Soviet aid.
Nasser's attempt to maintain decent relations with Washington also persisted, but he instinctively distrusted Lyndon B Johnson, and tensions over Yemen and Israel, culminating in 1967, sent bilateral relations downward.
Conclusion The missile crisis and Cuba, however, appeared to have had relatively little effect on the trajectory of Cairo's relations with either Washington or Moscow.
The experience may have slightly enhanced Nasser's appreciation for United States might as wielded by JFK as compared to Soviet power handled by Khrushchev, as Komer suspected, but did not change the UAR's basic nonaligned orientation, as Elbahtimy demonstrates.
Regarding Cuba, there may have been a slight chill in what remained generally friendly and mutually supportive relations.
As for Cairo's missile crisis diplomacy, it had a moderate impact, on effective behalf of the NAM, in prodding UN Acting-Secretary General U Thant to actively and speedily intervene to mediate the USSoviet standoff – Quaison-Sackey claims this UN non-aligned effort had a ""decisive role""118 – but the Burmese statesman undoubtedly would've felt obliged to do his utmost in any case.
Regarding the crisis' nuclear dimension, it would be intriguing to learn whether Brazil's denuclearization proposal triggered any internal Egyptian debate over the broader concept of regional NWFZs – including, possibly, in the Middle East.
He has published extensively on international politics and arms control issues including in Foreign Affairs, Journal of Strategic Studies, Security Studies and the Nonproliferation Review among others.
In 2019, his research was awarded the McElveny Grand Prize by the Nonproliferation Review Journal.
Dr Elbahtimy is director for the Masters programme Science and International Security at King’s College London.
