BackgroundThe Arms RaceIn 1945, the United States dropped two atomic bombs on Hiroshima and Nagasaki, shocking the world.
The USSR raced with the United States to stockpile, test and develop weapons.
After that incident, it was quickly followed by the USSR testing their first atomic bomb.
Witnessing such a situation, the United States began to stockpile H-bombs, while the USSR stockpiled more conventional weapons such as missiles.
Intercontinental Ballistic Missiles were then developed by both countries, marking a very imminent threat of mutually assured destruction.
In the later 1950s, the USSR was circled by United States missiles based in Europe.
Furthermore, after Khrushchev found out that Eisenhower has sent spy planes to photograph USSR’s ICBMs, the Cold War escalated even more.
He proceeded to nationalize institutions and redistributed land back to the peasants.
As such, the richer people in Cuba fled to Miami and Florida, waiting to strike back.
The United States began to show hostility towards Cuba, starting with an oil blockade.Eisenhower broke all relations with Cuba just before Kennedy took over, and also agreed to a CIA plan to assist the exiles to invade Cuba.
However, these assassination attempts failed, and the exiles were prepared to invade Cuba in April 1961.
Kennedy approved of this, but denied air support for the actual invasion as he did not want evidence against the United States for this illegal act.
The United States hoped that this “invasion” would spark civil unrest, leading to a civil war in Cuba itself, and eventually overthrowing Castro.
By 19 April, the exiles were crushed by Castro’s force of tanks and aircraft.
ForeshadowingCastro makes a new allyThe actions taken by the United States have made Castro realize that they were hostile towards him.
Furthermore, both parties had similar ideologies such as nationalizing companies and distributing land to the poor, which promoted their friendship.Immediately after the Bay of Pigs fiasco, Khrushchev quickly suggested measures to assist Cuba.
To Khrushchev, Cuba was a very eligible candidate to join the “Communist empire”, which meant that it was an opportunity to spread Communism.
Affected under this newly-found friendship, Castro finally declared himself as a communist on 1 May 1961.
On 24 June 1961, Castro received intelligence from a Soviet ambassador in Havana about a planned assassination on him.
With this information, arrangements could be made in order to protect Castro.
Operation AnadyrKhrushchev, too, felt that an United States invasion was imminent.
In fact, Khrushchev thought that Cuba was of great importance to him, as it was part of the communist cause.
In May 1962, he discussed the plan of secretly placing nuclear warheads in Cuba with his Defence Minister Malinovsky and Chief of Staff Zakharov.
Khrushchev felt that words were not strong enough to deal against the US, and the next available choice would be missiles.
He gained confidence in this plan partly from the Bay of Pigs invasion, which showed that Kennedy, being an unconfident man, would accept the missiles in Cuba as a fact that cannot be changed.
He was wrong.US U-2 planes find out about the missilesOn 25 September 1962, the first U-2 spyplanes were sent on reconnaissance missions over Cuba.
They reported that Soviet forces were set up there, with 42 nuclear warheads present.
In another reconnaissance mission on 14 October, the pictures showed that missile bases and pads were under construction.
This caused great distress in the US, which was not prepared for such circumstances.
The Thirteen Days of True CrisisKennedy’s response after knowing about the missilesOn 16 October, Kennedy got wind of the reconnaissance pictures.
On that very same day, he assembled the Executive Committee of the National Security Council , comprised of fourteen officials and his brother, Robert Kennedy.
Through discussions, the EXCOMM proposed five possible responses to Kennedy, namely :1.
The Joint Chiefs of Staff unanimously voted for either the invasion of the air strike.
Finally on 18 October, Robert McNamara suggested that a blockade or quarantine should be carried out instead, reason being that this was a powerful move that gave the United States control over Cuba, while maintaining little, if not no contact with the Soviets.Kennedy informs the United States citizens of the current situationEven after the decision of the United States response has been made, the Joint Chiefs of Staff still believe that the bombing of the missile bases was the most viable option.
However, on 22 October, the Joint Chiefs of Staff are unable to guarantee the destruction of all the missile sites, and hence the idea was scrapped.
At 7:00 pm on the same day, Kennedy made a public speech over the radio informing the people of the nuclear crisis.
He also tells the people that the United States has decided to employ option of the naval blockade.
The quarantine is applied to all Soviet ships and ships from the countries under the Warsaw pact that are sailing to Cuba.
On 24 October, 9:24pm, Khrushchev sent a telegram to Kennedy regarding the negotiations.----------Start of Message----------Letter From Chairman Khrushchev to President Kennedy, October 24, 1962Moscow, October 24, 1962.
Dear Mr President:I have received your letter of October 23, have studied it, and am answering you.Just imagine, Mr President, that we had presented you with the conditions of an ultimatum which you have presented us by your action.
And this would have been understandable to us.In presenting us with these conditions, you, Mr President, have flung a challenge at us.
But in this case the question is in no way one of quarantine, but rather of far more serious things, and you yourself understand this.You, Mr President, are not declaring a quarantine, but rather are setting forth an ultimatum and threatening that if we do not give in to your demands you will use force.
You are no longer appealing to reason, but wish to intimidate us.No, Mr President, I cannot agree to this, and I think that in your own heart you recognize that I am correct.
I am convinced that in my place you would act the same way.Reference to the decision of the Organization of American States cannot in any way substantiate the demands now advanced by the United States.
We observe these norms and enjoy the rights recognized by all states.You wish to compel us to renounce the rights that every sovereign state enjoys, you are trying to legislate in questions of international law, and you are violating the universally accepted norms of that law.
Unfortunately, such folly can bring grave suffering to the peoples of all countries, and to no lesser degree to the American people themselves, since the United States has completely lost its former isolation with the advent of modern types of armament.Therefore, Mr President, if you coolly weigh the situation which has developed, not giving way to passions, you will understand that the Soviet Union cannot fail to reject the arbitrary demands of the United States.
And we also say--no.The Soviet Government considers that the violation of the freedom to use international waters and international air space is an act of aggression which pushes mankind toward the abyss of a world nuclear-missile war.
The telegram also stated that the USSR viewed the blockade as an act of aggression, and their ships were ordered to ignore the blockade.
The next day, at 1:45am, Kennedy replied to Khrushchev’s telegram, stating that the United States was forced into the blockade since evidences have shown the there were offensive missiles placed on Cuba. ----------Start of Message----------Letter From President Kennedy to Chairman Khrushchev, October 25, 1962October 25, 1962Dear Mr Chairman:I have received your letter of October 24, and I regret very much that you still do not appear to understand what it is that has moved us in this matter.The sequence of events is clear.
If you will review the statement issued by Tass in September, you will see how clearly this assurance was given.In reliance on these solemn assurances I urged restraint upon those in this country who were urging action in this matter at that time.
I hope that your Government will take the necessary action to permit a restoration of the earlier situation.Sincerely yours,John F Kennedy----------End of Message----------The naval blockade was more of a selective one.
Kennedy was tempted to conduct the invasion to remove the Cuban missiles, but the EXCOMM persuaded him against doing so.Secret negotiationsOn 26 October 1:00 pm, Aleksandr Fomin, the KGB Station Chief in the US, met up with John Scali from ABC News.
The Soviet Union would remove the missiles, Castro would announce that he would not accept any more nuclear weapons, and the United States would announce that it would never invade Cuba.
Scali passed this message to the United States government, who responded by asking the Brazillian government to inform Castro that an invasion would be unlikely should the missiles be removed.
This formed the basis for the final agreement later on.Khrushchev’s second messageAt 9:00 am on 27 October, Radio Moscow broadcasted a new message from Khrushchev, different from the one that he wrote yesterday.
He offered that the Cuban missiles would be removed if the United States Jupiter missiles in Italy and Turkey were removed.
Kennedy, President of the United StatesCopy to U Thant, Acting Secretary General of the U.N.Dear Mr President,I have studied with great satisfaction your reply to Mr Thant concerning measures that should be taken to avoid contact between our vessels and thereby avoid irreparable and fatal consequences.
This reasonable step on your part strengthens my belief that you are showing concern for the preservation of peace, which I note with satisfaction.I have already said that our people, our Government, and I personally, as Chairman of the Council of Ministers, are concerned solely with having our country develop and occupy a worthy place among all peoples of the world in economic competition, in the development of culture and the arts, and in raising the living standard of the people.
The main thing that must be done is to normalize and stabilize the state of peace among states and among peoples.I understand your concern for the security of the United States, Mr President, because this is the primary duty of a President.
Our aim has been and is to help Cuba, and no one can dispute the humanity of our motives, which are oriented toward enabling Cuba to live peacefully and develop in the way its people desire.You wish to ensure the security of your country, and this is understandable.
It will declare that the United States will respect the inviolability of Cuba's borders and its sovereignty, will pledge not to interfere in its internal affairs, not to invade Cuba itself or make its territory available as a bridgehead for such an invasion, and will also restrain those who might contemplate committing aggression against Cuba, either from the territory of the United States or from the territory of Cuba's other neighboring states.Of course, for this we would have to come to an agreement with you and specify a certain time limit.
Let us agree to some period of time, but without unnecessary delay--say within two or three weeks, not longer than a month.The means situated in Cuba, of which you speak and which disturb you, as you have stated, are in the hands of Soviet officers.
Our position and yours on this issue are very close together.All of this could possibly serve as a good impetus toward the finding of mutually acceptable agreements on other controversial issues on which you and I have been exchanging views.
KhrushchevOctober 27, 1962----------End of Message----------It states that :""You are disturbed over Cuba.
At 12:00 pm, a U-2 was shot down by a surface to air missile over Cuba, and its pilot was killed.
Kennedy knew that a resolution must quickly be written in order to prevent a nuclear war from erupting.Kennedy’s resolutionOn 28 October, diplomats sent from both Kennedy and Khrushchev met up to discuss about the solution to the crisis.
Kennedy was advised to ignore the harsher and more aggressive demands of the second message, and only reply to the first one.
Text has been handed Soviet Embassy in Washington and has been released to press:Dear Mr Chairman:I have read your letter of October 26th with great care and welcomed the statement of your desire to seek a prompt solution to the problem.
We, on our part, would agree--upon the establishment of adequate arrangements through the United Nations to ensure the carrying out and continuation of these commitments-to remove promptly the quarantine measures now in effect and to give assurances against an invasion of Cuba.
I am confident that other nations of the Western Hemisphere would be prepared to do likewise.If you will give your representative similar instructions, there is no reason why we should not be able to complete these arrangements and announce them to the world within a couple of days.
Scali became suspicious of the fact that the first and second message from Khrushchev was drastically different.
Fomin blamed it on “poor communications”, but Scali accused that it was a double-cross and betrayal.
Scali claimed that an invasion on Cuba was imminent, and at that point Fomin stated that Khrushchev’s reply would arrive soon, and assured him that there was no treachery involved.It turned out that the letter was only received by Khrushchev at 8:05 pm.There was much discussion between Kennedy’s cabinet and Khrushchev’s.
The USSR was to dismantle and remove its missiles in Cuba, while the United States was not to invade Cuba.
The United States also secretly dismantled the missiles in Italy and Turkey.
The removal of United States missiles in Italy and Turkey was secret; they were not made known to the public.
As such, it seemed like the USSR failed to finish what it had started in the first place – influence Cuba to join the communist empire.
The circumstances that they themselves had started – the placement of missiles in Cuba to defend against a United States invasion – were retreated.
Despite being young and inexperienced, he has proven himself to be an efficient negotiator, as seen in the negotiations with Khrushchev, an experienced verteran.
He has also been shown to make good decision, which eventually averted a nuclear war, solving the crisis.Castro thought that the Soviets had partially betrayed him.
They promised to protect him against an United States invasion by using their missiles, but they were dismantled in the end.
He was awarded with many military honours.The Hotline Agreement was formed, leading to the Moscow-Washington hotline.
This was a allowed the leaders of both countries to contact each other directly via the telephone, should such a crisis happen again.
It is still in use today.After witnessing such a crisis, Kennedy realised how nuclear weapons could threaten the world.
This sparked a chain of treaties regarding bans on nuclear weapons testing, namely the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty in 1968 and the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty in 1996.
It had demonstrated to Kennedy, Khrushchev and the world how dangerous it could get when the destructive potential of nuclear weapons fell into the hands of humans – aggressive, indecisive, illogical and most importantly, imperfect.
A weapon that could wipe everything off the face of the earth combined with humans that dared to use it was a very hairy situation.
Nuclear weapons let the world know that there would be no winners in a nuclear war , especially one based on a power struggle.
Post Comments Cold War and End of Communism In USSR This History blog belongs to Ryan You, Tan Shan and Yen Yan.
