Although in the past half century presidents have surrounded themselves with a vast national security apparatus, consisting of intelligence agencies and the National Security Council, it is not at all clear that presidents have been effective as crisis managers.
They often lack crucial information, use incomplete or misleading analogies to understand crisis situations, find it difficult to micromanage events, and are unable to project force effectively.
Even when they are successful, it is often in spite of, rather than because of, the resources of the institutionalized presidency at their disposal.
They did so without revealing to the world how they had defused the crisis, a decision to maintain confidentiality with far reaching consequences for subsequent presidential crisis decision making.
The illusion that presidential crisis management can compel an adversary to submit and that a nuclear crisis can be successfully managed left Kennedy's successors with impossible burdens of public expectations.
He is author of The American Presidency and co-author of the President, Congress and the Constitution.
The resolution of the crisis was trumpeted in the United States as a great victory-""Reds Back Down"" and ""Retreat to Moscow"" blared headlines in United States newspapers-and scholars of international relations and of the presidency attempted to learn lessons about crisis management.
Kennedy's speechwriter Arthur Schlesinger, Jr. wrote that ""Kennedy was well satisfied by the performance of his government.
According to the conventional accounts, the Soviets backed down because Kennedy understood their psychology, and his national security advisers had I Roger Hilsman, To Move a Nation , xii.
The experts wanted Kennedy to hang tough and make few if any concessions.
Llewellyn ""Tommy"" Thompson, a former ambassador to the Soviet Union, intervened at various points in ExComm meetings to take a hard line.
The crisis managers, according to these accounts, had stayed the course against the ExComm hawks, who otherwise would have led the nation into a nuclear war, and also against the doves such as Adlai Stevenson, who wanted to negotiate with, rather than confront, the Soviets.
Kennedy had given the Soviets room to retreat, had not rubbed salt in their wounds, and had allowed them to back away from confrontation.
According to this version of events, Khrushchev had been emotional and frightened, while Kennedy had been cool and collected.
The Soviets had not understood Kennedy at all, thinking him weak and irresolute; but Kennedy had understood the Soviets and knew how to manipulate them in the desired direction.
United States local and strategic military superiority was a decisive factor in ending the crisis without accepting Soviet terms, especially not the proposed trade of missiles, according to subsequent Department of Defense analysts.
It gives us a distorted view of presidential capabilities in crisis decision making.
An adequate understanding of the resolution of the crisis must begin with the fact that for the U.S. side it was not primarily a question of the military balance between the two superpowers.
Republicans had claimed that the Soviets had put offensive missiles in Cuba.
Had Kennedy not acted, Republicans would have exploited his lack of foresight, his intelligence lapses, and his irresolution in the forthcoming elections, much as they had attempted to do between August and mid-October before Kennedy had challenged the Soviets.
But he, his brother, and McNamara all felt that the United States was required to confront the Soviets publicly out of political rather than military necessity.
Kennedy had drawn a line publicly, and the Soviets had stepped over it in a deceptive and disrespectful manner.
Where the law was drawn in terms of a nuclear balance of power had been less important than the fact that a line had been drawn in the Western Hemisphere, and the Soviets had pretended to respect it and then had deceived the president, leaving him politically vulnerable.
He deployed, not because he thought Kennedy was weak or irresolute, but because he knew that the United States had strategic nuclear superiority and was beginning to act accordingly.
The United States had just begun its satellite reconnaissance of the USSR in the summer of 1961, and with its new Corona satellites it had learned that it had four times the number of land based ICBMs as the Soviets.
The Soviet missile sites were soft and vulnerable to an American first strike.
Once the United States knew that it had the numerical advantage and that the Soviets were vulnerable, the Soviets were at a strategic disadvantage.
Presumably the United States would soon act to exploit its proclaimed advantage.
Sending missiles to Cuba was a temporary stop-gap measure to counter this perceived American threat.
The Soviets had a large supply of 1,000-mile-range MRBMs and of 2,000-mile-range IRBMs, sufficient to cover most of the United States if launched from Cuba.
The Soviets may have had 24 ICBMs operational, and the 24 SS-4s in Cuba doubled their total of missiles capable of hitting U.S. targets.
There was a missile gap, and the Soviets were on the wrong side of it, with or without the Cuba deployment.
From the Soviet point of view, Kennedy's strength and firmness-not his weakness-were the problem that the deployment of missiles was intended to address.
Had that been true, he would have had no objection to making the deployment public, as the Cubans wished.
In a letter he sent to Fidel Castro during the crisis, he recalled that he was on vacation in Varna, Bulgaria on the Black Sea, walking on the beach with Soviet Minster of Defense Roman Malinovskii, who told him the United States had bases on the far shore in Turkey that could wipe out Soviet cities.
Khrushchev asked Malinovskii if missiles in Cuba could do the same to the United States and was assured they could.
The Jupiters in Turkey became operational in April 1962, the same month Khrushchev decided to put missiles in Cuba.
This was not the first time the question of Jupiters had preoccupied Khrushchev.
Hilsman has the number at 44 ICBMS for the Soviets at the time of the missile crisis in the Soviet Union and the United States with 140.
After the summit, the State and Defense Departments agreed that the missile deployment in Turkey should not be canceled, because it would send the wrong message to the Soviets.
In May 1962, Kennedy told Dean Rusk to raise the issue with the Turks, who responded that before the missiles were removed, the new Polaris submarines should be deployed in the Mediterranean.
In August, Kennedy again told his diplomats to persuade the Turks to allow the missiles to be removed.
THE REAL DEAL The missile crisis was not settled with a Soviet capitulation, but rather through political horsetrading.
McNamara raised the possibility of a trade of missiles as early as 19 October.
He then recommended that Turkey be notified to dismantle the missiles so that they would not be subject to a Soviet preemptive strike.
Save all the invasion, lives . .""..26 President Kennedy himself kept coming back to the logic of Johnson's question.
On 25 October he broached the possibility of a trade of Turkish and Cuban missiles to British Prime Minister Harold Macmillan.
The following day at an Ex Comm meeting, ""The President said we will get Soviet strategic missiles out of Cuba only by invading Cuba or by trading.
In Robert Kennedy's account of the crisis taken from his diaries and published posthumously in 1969, he related that in talking to Soviet Ambassador Anatolii Dobrynin at 7:45 PM (before Kennedy's acceptance of terms had been sent to Khrushchev), he had told the ambassador that, ""President Kennedy had been anxious to remove those missiles from Turkey and Italy for a long period of time.
The account offered by Robert Kennedy in his posthumous memoirs of his meeting with Dobrynin was incomplete and misleading; there was more to it than Kennedy or his literary executors had let on.
No decision had been made about the status of the missiles, and there had been no orders to dismantle them.
Kennedy was neither surprised nor angry at the fact that they had not been removed.
The statement would be given to Thant on a signal from President Kennedy, with assurances that if Thant called for the trade, the United States would immediately announce its acceptance.
Rusk was sure Kennedy would trip the circuit breaker rather than take the country to war.
In doing so, Kennedy had bypassed the ExComm, which was unaware of the Cordier channel; Kennedy was acting with his own prerogative powers.
In working out ways to end the crisis, he didn't try to forge a consensus among his advisers, most of whom were strongly against making a trade.
To resolve the missile crisis, Kennedy and Khrushchev relied on their own prerogative powers.
The most important ""backchannel"" involved KGB officer Georgii Bolshakov, Ambassador Dobrynin, and Attorney General Kennedy.
President Kennedy could bypass the ExComm, and Khrushchev could bypass the Presidium as they worked out a deal to trade the missiles in Turkey for the missiles in Cuba.
After the early evening ExComm meeting of the 27th, at which the Trollope ploy suggested by Tommy Thompson had been approved, President Kennedy convened a meeting in the Oval Office with Robert Kennedy, Dean Rusk, Robert McNamara, McGeorge Bundy, Theodore Sorensen, George Ball, Tommy Thompson, and Roswell Gilpatric.
Its purpose was to set the terms of reference for the meeting that evening between Robert Kennedy and Dobrynin.
Kennedy probably had gone beyond the terms of reference and offered an explicit deal.
He may then have provided a paper trail for Rusk that could be used to deny such a deal.
Alternatively, he may have offered assurances based on Rusk's ""no quid pro quo"" limitations, but couched in language that Dobrynin took as an explicit deal.
The preponderance of evidence seems to indicate that at the very least the Soviets assumed they had a real deal.
The following day, acting on Kremlin instructions, Dobrynin was able to reassure Kennedy that the Soviets agreed to the United States insistence that the dismantling in Turkey would not occur immediately; instead, it would take place four to five months after the crisis was resolved.
Khrushchev noted that ""it is somewhat difficult for you at the present time to publicly discuss the question of eliminating the United States missile bases in Turkey,"" and he agreed that the terms for ending the crisis should be considered confidential.
The Soviet version of what was agreed to was not denied by the administration.
He insisted that Dobrynin take back the letter from Khrushchev, so there would be no evidence of the exchange in the files of the United States government.
Subsequently, exchanges between Fidel Castro and Khrushchev involved heated discussions of the missile trade, with Castro accusing Khrushchev heatedly of betraying Cuban interests.
Even a hunting trip in Russia arranged to mollify Castro did little to soothe the Cuban leader's anger.
Robert Kennedy's posthumous recollections did not include the specifics of the deal.
And his diary was very explicit that this was part of the deal; but at that time it was still a secret even on the American side, except for the six of us who had been present at that meeting.
On 25 April 1963, almost six months to the date the arrangement was reached, the last missile was taken down in Turkey.
In the ExComm transcripts there is no mention of any deal negotiated by the president as of the 27th, though Kennedy had on numerous occasions talked about the probability that a deal would be the only way to end the crisis.
In the discussions that occurred within the ExComm after Robert Kennedy returned from meeting with Dobrynin, it still seemed as if there were no explicit arrangement.
It may be that Turkish intransigence about removal of the missiles and the difficulty of getting a NATO Council meeting organized within two days to take the heat for such a proposal had led Kennedy to bypass the ExComm, the Turks, the NATO allies, and everyone else that a consultative process would have required.
Instead, Kennedy employed his own diplomatic prerogative powers, using his brother as a confidential intermediary.
Just as Kennedy bypassed a slow and cumbersome State Department bureaucracy for routine business, in this situation he used a variant of the ""invisible presidency"" to settle the issue just as the crisis was spinning out of control.
Castro the Missile Crisis, and the Soviet Collapse, 224; also Michael Beschloss, The Crisis Years, , 536.
Whatever else the Cuban missile crisis might have been, it was certainly not an example of successful crisis management.
The term itself makes no sense in this context, because no crisis can be managed until one or both parties redefine the issue to the point at which it no longer remains a crisis and gamesmanship can be supplanted by traditional diplomacy and political deal making.
In nuclear crisis management, the nuclear confrontation is treated by participants as a game in which pieces or territory can be won or lost, and a strategic balance can improve or deteriorate.
A success in the game is supposed to establish an equilibrium of power based on the existing balance, and it is up to the president to manage the United States side of the game to the nation's best advantage.
A game has rules that are understood, even if broken by one or the other side.
A game with an equilibrium point has predetermined outcomes, or scores, with values known to the participants.
The missile crisis itself was precipitated when the Soviets broke the rules by placing missiles in Cuba.
The Soviet response is that the United States broke the rules with an illegal blockade.
The interactions between players on the two sides are unpredictable and not fully controllable.
There may be no equilibrium points, no preferred solutions once a game is underway-at least none that make sense when some outcomes involve a strategic or tactical nuclear exchange.
Crisis management requires reasonably high capabilities to acquire, manage, and process data rationally in accordance with effective theories about how the world works.
The United States was surprised that the Soviets placed missiles in Cuba.
Its theories about Soviet capabilities and intentions were wrong, and its data about the missiles came in late-almost too late.
The Soviets were stunned at the U.S. response, clearly expecting that at worst it would lead to a protest and negotiations, and at best to acquiescence to a fait accompli.
The United States expected and was surprised at the absence of a countermeasure from the Soviets.
Crisis management and game playing require effective control over the pieces on the board.
Yet consider the number of near misses in the crisis involving these pieces, any one of which might have caused a cascading set of events to result in a nuclear holocaust.
When Soviet MIGS went to intercept it, fighter aircraft from Galena Air Force base in Alaska went to its rescue.
The United States planes were armed with nuclear weapons that could be fired on the pilot's own authority.
An Atlas missile was test launched from Vandenberg Air Force base in California on 26 October.
It was launched from a site next to other missiles that had already been mated with nuclear weapons and were on full alert.
Had the Soviets monitored the launch (with the kind of reconnaissance they were to have only a few years later), they might have thought a preemptive strike was beginning and reacted accordingly with a strike of their own.
A Soviet submarine was disabled by a low-level depth charge and forced to the surface; had it been sunk, naval hostilities might have ensued.
The Soviet submarine had nuclear armed torpedoes and was authorized to fire them if attacked.
The Navy sent its ships far out to sea to establish its interception line to enforce the blockade.
President Kennedy ordered the line moved further in, to give Khrushchev more time to decide to comply.
Many scholars have described the confrontation between Secretary of Defense McNamara and Chief of Naval Operations Admiral George Anderson in the naval operations room, at which time McNamara ordered Anderson to move the line back.
But according to Roger Hilsman, the Navy did not draw back, but kept its line well out to sea.
U.S.-sponsored agents infiltrated into Cuba committed acts of sabotage.
Had they killed Soviet military officers, the Soviets might have begun shooting down United States low-flying aircraft.
By 27 October, all of the medium-range ballistic missiles were launch-ready, and within a day could have been mated to the nuclear warheads that had been stockpiled for them.
Any military incident in Cuba might quickly have escalated into a nuclear confrontation on the island.
Although United States intelligence at the time had no knowledge of Soviet tactical nuclear weapons in Cuba, reconnaissance photographs taken by the Navy over the intermediate-range missile sites revealed the presence of Soviet ground forces.
The photos also showed six launchers for FROG battlefield nuclear missiles, and subsequent flights showed a total of fourteen missiles.
They also claimed to have had several nuclear bombs for their Jluyshin bombers.
While Khrushchev gave initial authority for their use to General Issa Pliyev, commander-in-chief of Soviet forces in Cuba, there is some evidence that he centralized the command decision when the crisis broke out on the 22nd.
Nevertheless, in a United States invasion, local Soviet commanders might have disregarded command and control procedures and initiated a nuclear exchange.
They had already shot down a U-2 at the height of the crisis on their own authority, in spite of orders from Moscow that they were not to do so.
On the 26th, Pliyev ordered nuclear warheads moved from their storage areas closer to the MRBM missiles, as a prelude to possibly ""mating"" them.
The United States, for its part, also had plans for use of tactical nuclear weapons.
An invasion contingency plan, CINCLANT OPLAN 316, developed by the military commanders readying for an invasion, proposed among other things to have tactical nuclear weapons available to the invasion force.
These would be used without further authorization only in retaliation if Soviets used FROG missiles with nuclear weapons against United States forces.
The Joint Chiefs of Staff approved a plan for nuclear capable mortars and howitzers and Honest John rockets, but with nuclear shells and warheads being used by the force only with the JCS approval.
Top-level officials such as McGeorge Bundy were unaware at the time that the military had included such weapons in its planning.
The civilian authority did not authorize the use of nuclear warheads on the Honest John rockets, but did plan on using tactical nuclear weapons delivered by airplanes.
Kennedy would not have authorized first use of such weapons, but no doubt would have sanctioned retaliatory strikes had the Russians used their tactical nuclear weapons first.
NONSTANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURES At every stage of the crisis, organizations acted on their own.
On the contrary, they were in a state of hair-trigger readiness, which distorted standard procedures.
The Presidium was ready to send orders to Pliyev permitting the use of two kiloton Luna missile tactical nuclear weapons in case of invasion, but decided on the basis of Malinovsky's arguments to wait before sending authorization.
Instead, the Kremlin put a hold on any use of nuclear weapons on the 22nd.
Castro ordered his anti-aircraft artillery units to protect the Soviet missile sites, and local Soviet commanders then ordered the shooting down of a U-2 as a show of fraternal solidarity with their Cuban compatriots.
Thereafter the Cubans used their antiaircraft weapons against United States planes engaged in low-level reconnaissance.
Cuban saboteurs blew up oil refineries in Venezuela, crippling one-quarter of oil production in the Caribbean.
Rather, the crisis freed these organizations from the ordinary constraints, because a crisis by definition meant that they were acting in an uncertain environment.
Each organization had to get information, test its own capabilities, and determine the capabilities and the intentions of the other side.
In practice, each organization acted autonomously, increasing the level of risk.
Each leader relied on his own decisional prerogatives, which overturned or subverted the consensus position within their advisory systems.
These decisions transcended the bureaucratic interests of the participants in the advisory groups and also transcended the chains of reasoning used by the advisers in recommending courses of action.
The complex and chaotic real world environment in which the missile crisis was played out had more to do with the separate decisions made by Kennedy and Khrushchev to seek an end to the confrontation than any factor in the small-group advisory environment.
Khrushchev sent Kennedy a letter raising the issue of IRBM Jupiter missiles in Turkey.
In Washington, the FBI reported that the Soviet embassy was preparing to burn its papers, often a signal that war is imminent.
Aerial reconnaissance showed the Soviet Beagle IL-28 bombers continued to be assembled at the San Julian airfield.
A U-2 flight on a routine air sampling mission from Alaska strayed into Soviet territory over the Chukhotsk peninsula in Siberia and was chased back by Soviet fighters, who nearly got into a dogfight with United States planes that had scrambled to protect the U-2.
Cuban air defense troops, acting under Castro's orders, broke away from Soviet command and control and began shooting at low-flying U.S. aircraft entering Cuban airspace.
At 10:21 A.M. the news came in to the president that a high-flying U-2 had been shot down over Cuba by a surface-to-air missile launched from a SAM site at Banes, near the eastern tip of the island.
Years later, it was learned that the plane had been shot down by the Russians under direct command of Major Georgy Voronkov pursuant to an order issued by General Stepan Naumovich Grechko, the deputy commander of Soviet Forces in Cuba.
There had been no orders from Moscow, and the shooting had been on initiative of the local commanders; but the American side couldn't know that at the time.
Air Force Chief of Staff Curtis LeMay, following standing orders, directed his command to launch a massive reprisal strike against Cuba.
The White House reached LeMay before the planes had been launched, and presidential aides insisted that LeMay wait for direct authorization from the president.
Kennedy decided to postpone for one or two days the retaliatory strike that had been decided upon if a U-2 were shot down.
Some believed that a limited retaliation, tit for tat, would convince the Soviets to back off.
Others thought a ""surgical"" strike could take out the Soviet strategic missiles, thus ending the crisis.
Still others, including the Air Force commanders, did not believe a limited surgical strike could work.
The Joint Chiefs planned for another six days of strikes, then advised an invasion.
The danger, as all Kennedy's advisers were aware, was that the Soviets would respond somewhere else in the world.
Secretary McNamara developed the scenario for Kennedy and his advisers to demonstrate that under certain circumstances a general nuclear war might occur.
Unknown to the United States at the time, the alert status of Soviet ICBMs and bombers was increased to intermediate level, then to combat readiness.
If it were shot down, the plans for some military action would then go forward.
The Soviets had been under no illusion that the crisis could be managed as a war game.
From the start, they were more interested in political negotiation, which they hoped would offset their weak military position.
By 26 October, from the Soviet perspective, it must have seemed as if the American ""hawks"" and the Cuban ""hotheads"" might take things into their own hands and escalate into all-out war.
He communicated to Khrushchev on the 26th in a ""document"" dictated to a bilingual Soviet officer, who relayed Castro's words to Moscow.
He thought the Soviets had a thousand or so ICBMs and dozens of tactical nuclear weapons on the island.
Khrushchev, under no illusions as to the real ""correlation of forces"" between the superpowers, already knew that an American U-2 had been shot down.
But he did not know that the Soviet air command in Cuba had authorized the shooting on its own initiative, without waiting for its request to fire to clear in Moscow.
Krushchev believed that Castro himself had ordered the shooting down of the plane.
Khrushchev understood that he no longer had full command of the military aspects of the confrontation.
If any more planes were shot down, the United States would attack the missile sites, and there was no guarantee that it might not launch a retaliatory attack in the next day or two for the prior incident.
He settled for private deal, even though a public deal would have been much better for him, in order to avoid any further delay.
As his aide Oleg Troyanovsky saw it at the time, the Soviets were convinced after Kennedy's evening meeting with Dobrynin on 27 October that the United States was about to invade Cuba and would do so if the Soviets turned down Kennedy's offer.
Khrushchev was convinced that the hawks in Washington were winning over the president.
Then they heard from their diplomats in the United States that Kennedy was going to make another speech to the American people within the day.
So Khrushchev made the deal because he was afraid the United States was about to go over the nuclear brink.
He assumed that forces within the Kennedy administration in favor of an invasion would get the upper hand.
Yet on the 27th he also believed that Kennedy did not want to invade Cuba (otherwise he already would have done so), and he believed that Kennedy would be amenable to a trade.
Such an invasion would have eliminated Castro and installed a more sympathetic regime, under the supervision of the civil affairs units of the invasion force.
In defending his decision, to deal before the Presidium, he called his removal of the missiles his ""Brest-Litovsk""-meaning a forced concession to the overwhelming military strength of the imperialists.
Even so, dealing from a weak hand, Khrushchev had won two concessions from Kennedy-a trade of missiles and a no-invasion pledge.
He was ahead of the game compared to his strategic position before introducing missiles, but could lose everything if the game continued.
Absent more attacks on United States planes, Kennedy was not about to invade Cuba, according to McNamara.
Had the Soviets stood firm on the 27th, the United States would have tightened the embargo and then repackaged the missile deal, presumably using the Cordier Channel, which allowed U Thant to go public with an offer to trade.
Then the United States could have accepted the U Thant proposal unilaterally in an effort to end the crisis.
Both Kennedy and Khrushchev misplayed their hands, but eventually they made a deal because by the final two days of the crisis they were frantically trying to keep the danger of nuclear confrontation contained.
Khrushchev at this point ordered Pliyev not to use nuclear weapons and also ordered him to send twenty-four warheads stored on board the Aleksandrovsk back to Moscow.
Neither leader was worried any longer that the other would prevail in a strategic game of one-upmanship or nuclear brinkmanship; neither was concerned that the other would gain a tactical advantage in the Western hemisphere, or a strategic advantage in the cold war.
Each, in Theodore Sorensen's phrase, looked down ""the gun barrel of nuclear war,"" and each was driven to end the crisis before events got completely out of hand.
THE BALANCE OF POWER Khrushchev failed to improve his strategic position when he put missiles in Cuba, and Kennedy failed to improve his when he got the Soviets to remove them.
Soviet strategic rocket forces were inferior before the crisis, and inferior thereafter.
The Soviets did not intend their missiles in Cuba to change the military balance, though Khrushchev clearly intended their placement to redress the imbalance favoring the Americans until his own ICBMs could be deployed in sufficient numbers.
Khrushchev gave strict orders to the military commanders in Cuba not to prepare these strategic missiles for firing, nor to ""mate"" them 65 Fursenko and Naftali, ""One Hell of a Gamble,"" 276.
The operational orders indicate that these missiles were not intended to alter the balance of strategic power in such a way as to ensure their continued placement.
They were at all times the object of the crisis, but not an independent factor helping to determine its resolution.
McNamara and Kennedy assumed that the Soviets had fifty to seventy-five strategic missiles, not the twenty or so they actually possessed.
Without realizing it, the Soviets already had a deterrent against a United States first strike, without having to place missiles in Cuba and without having to deploy missiles on their own territory.
Only they didn't know it, because they couldn't read their adversaries' minds.
Khrushchev and Castro failed to win iron-clad security guarantees for Cuba.
But the United States had not given the guarantees the Soviets had sought.
To understand why, it is necessary to review some of the efforts the United States had made to destabilize the Castro regime.
The United States had already attempted to overthrow Castro in the Bay of Pigs operation.
Subsequently, President Kennedy authorized Operation Mongoose, a covert operation to overthrow Castro run by a Special Group which reported to Robert Kennedy and Maxwell Taylor.
In early October 1961, McNamara had authorized new planning for an invasion by as early as 20 October 1962, but these were contingency plans, not likely to be approved.
Cubans were soon aware of Operation Mongoose and naturally assumed the worst about United States intentions.
On 4 October 1962, Edwin Lansdale got presidential approval to step up sabotage efforts against Cuban shipping.
On 16 October a further step-up in Mongoose activities was authorized by Robert Kennedy.
Throughout the year, the United States had conducted military exercises simulating an invasion of Cuba, including Lantphibex 1-62, simulating the overthrow of a dictator named ""Ortsac"" ; Operation Quick Kick, involving landings of 40,000 troops in a simulated invasion of Cuba; and Swift Strike II, involving 70,000 troops.
Another Marine amphibious exercise, Phibreglix, was planned for mid-October.
Most of these activities (other than the plotting for assassinations) were known to the Cubans and Soviets, who could easily believe that United States intentions were to go well beyond intelligence collection and into a fullscale destabilization campaign, though that was not what the United States intended at the time.
In fact, three new Mongoose operations in Cuba continued into November, even after Robert Kennedy ordered the enterprise suspended on 30 October, no doubt giving Castro even more reason to believe that the United States would continue efforts to overthrow him.
Khrushchev failed to get full assurances about Cuba, because Kennedy was determined not to give them.
At the ExComm meetings there had been some discussion about how to avoid such a pledge, with the president taking the lead in revising draft language to make sure no such guarantee would be given.
The United States could define a large number of actions by Castro as aggressive.
Clearly Kennedy still hoped to retain some freedom of action with regard to Cuba.
Although in early 1963 Mongoose was terminated, that summer new destabilization attempts, including efforts to assassinate Castro, resumed.
The resolution of the crisis caused a breech between Khrushchev and Castro.
In his response to Khrushchev's letters, Castro wrote of Cubans experiencing ""unspeakable bitterness and sadness"" at the Soviet lack of resolve.
He was bitter about his ""betrayal"" by Russians, who had not told him of the missile gap favoring the Americans, had not consulted him fully during the crisis, and had not informed him of the offer to permit UN inspection in Cuba.
But as a diplomatic negotiator, he might have gotten a more advantageous deal had he actually tried the Trollope ploy.
If he was willing to take any way out, a speedy reply to the offer of the 26th could have ended the crisis without a trade of missiles.
But it would have required a pledge not to invade Cuba, probably without any qualifications.
That Kennedy was unwilling to give, though clearly Khrushchev mischaracterized the ""no invasion"" pledge to the Politburo and to Castro.
It is hard to fault Kennedy for making the trade the following day, after the shooting down of the U-2 had demonstrated to both leaders that the crisis might soon get out of hand.
One can hardly blame Kennedy for seeking a speedy resolution on terms he had felt comfortable with from the beginning.
By seeking to portray the resolution of the crisis as an American victory, Kennedy left himself vulnerable in the future to Soviet blackmail.
At any time after the withdrawal of missiles from Turkey, Khrushchev could have revealed the trade, which would have seemed plausible to much of the world, even if Kennedy later denied it.
Of course, the Kennedys' insistence on no documents changing hands was designed to prevent that possibility.
That Khrushchev did not do so even after Kennedy's death probably had to do with the Soviet hope that the United States would honor what the Soviets still insisted was a noninvasion pledge.
Each side had more to lose than to gain by revealing the terms it had accepted.
The crisis did not usher in an era of detente, contrary to the claims of national security managers on both sides.
It also continued its escalation of commitments in Southeast Asia, another arena in which attempts at gamesmanship and compellence superseded efforts at a diplomatic resolution of issues in the region.
By 1964, Khrushchev was out of power, in part due to the simmering resentment in the Presidium over his Brest-Litovsk.
The lessons the Soviets also had learned was that military superiority-or at least perceived parity-would be needed to avoid a new defeat.
There were some efforts at detente, including the test-ban treaty and the hot-line set up between Washington and Moscow.
But until the end of the 1980s, the cold war was marked by rivalries and localized military conflicts far more than by detente.
What one can say, however, is that never again would either superpower play fast and loose with strategic missiles or threaten nuclear exchanges.
His own discussion in the ExComm and those of his colleagues indicate his belief in the rationality of a diplomatic solution.
From our post-cold war vantage point, the possibility that the world might have had to suffer a superpower nuclear exchange for want of a trade of missiles seems to be the ultimate folly-a point Kennedy and Lyndon Johnson both made, with some exasperation during the ExComm deliberations.
Perhaps our own expectations about national power and the presidency are the explanation.
We simply expected that the United States president, as leader of the free world, as the head of the most powerful nation on earth, could prevail in superpower confrontations.
The political dangers of seeming willing to compromise with the enemy had to be managed through the fiction that no compromise had occurred.
Kennedy was vulnerable politically, and he was prepared to preserve an illusion rather than pay political costs at home.
Yet Kennedy himself was aware of the issue that the fictionalized version would open.
He told Arthur Schlesinger the day after the crisis ended that people might draw the wrong conclusions, and that they would assume that the Russians would cave in if you pressured them.
Kennedy was willing to seek a political solution to a political crisis, and when his 82 Arthur Schelsinger, Jr.
And yet Kennedy's unwillingness to admit how the crisis had been resolved left an unfortunate legacy for his successors.
What should have been learned was the need to negotiate in such a crisis and the meaninglessness of the nuclear balance of power.
The lesson should have been that crisis management often does not work, that the experts are often wrong, that the military forces on both sides cannot be managed to prevent incidents.
The lesson should have been that political horsetrading is often a more effective way to resolve a crisis than situation room attempts at micromanagement.
He was not willing to make the terms public, for fear that negotiation would be taken for appeasement, that reasonableness would be taken for weakness.
The folly of such an assumption was laid to rest many years later by Robert McNamara himself.
If we can learn anything useful from Kennedy's performance, it is that the art and science of politics and diplomacy, not gamesmanship and the methods of crisis management, are the keys to successful resolution of nuclear crises.
