You will not be tested on these tenns, but should wish to review them, feel free to use the extensive glossary at the end of the book.
Eric Schulman Alexandria, Virginia December 16, 1998 XIV 10 -43 seconds after the Big Bang The Universe QUANTUM FLUCTUATION In Which Our Universe Begins o nee upon a time, long ago and far away, there was a universe very much like our own.
It had dogs, and cats, and people (some of whom preferred the dogs and some of whom preferred the cats), and Trigoencephalopodic Gnoccis, and other things of which you've never i heard because we haven't encountered them yet.
While the fundamental particle physicists frown at the lack of precision in this explanation, the rest of us may continue on to the next chapter, which discusses parking places. 6 10 32 seconds after the Big Bang The Universe EXPANSION In Which the Universe Continues to Expand, though not Quite as Quickly The Universe is expanding, but for some reason it never gets any easier to find a parking place.
Now the temperature was high, and the particles and the antiparticles were in equilibrium, and the Spirit of God was hovering b over the Universe. a Antiparticles are very much like particles, except that when particles and antiparticles meet they completely destroy each other and emit a burst of energetic radiation. b In a four dimensional sense; God does move in mysterious ways sometimes.
God called the photons “bosons” and the particles and antiparticles He called “fermions.” c And there was pair production and there was photon creation-the first 10‘ 43 seconds.
And there was vacuum energy density and there was inflation-the first 10"" seconds.
L He called some of the particles and antiparticles bosons as well, but that’s another story.
God blessed the particles and said, “Be fruitful and produce neutral atoms,” and the radiation became less energetic and the electrons combined with atomic nuclei.
And there was background radiation and there were neutral atoms-the first 380,000 years.
God made the clusters of galaxies according to their kinds, and the galaxies according to their kinds, and the stars according to their kinds.
White photons are hot. etectrows are gone, With photons cotot. etectrows come.
The Galaxy TURBULENT FRAGMENTATION In Which a Giant Cloud of Gas Fragments into Smaller Clouds, Which Become Protostars a stellar nursery IF YOU’RE LIKE ME, YOU’VE PROBABLY LOOKED UP AT THE SKY COUNTLESS TIMES TO ADMIRE THE BEAUTIFUL STARRY NIGHT and wished you could have the same effect in your own home.
Of course, knowing you, you'd probably have hung OUT WITH SOME LOOSE STAR, GOTTEN TOO MUCH MASS FROM THEM, AND BEEN COMPLETELY DISRUPTED IN A SUPERNOVA explosion.
THERE'S DUST EVERYWHERE AND YOUR MOTHERS AREN'T HERE TO CLEAN IT UP for you.
The Galaxy SUPERNOVA EXPLOSION In Which a Massive Star Ends Its Life by Exploding “Hum Parsec to Star Command, come in, Star Command.
After the formation process is mostly complete, I'm expecting an atmosphere to form from the emission of volatile gases 34 from volcanoes, as well as from comet impacts.
H I 0“ H-C-H H \ I I C C N-H / I I 0 H H L-alanine D-alanine 0"" H H \ I I C C N-H / I I 0 H-C-H H I H Your GenCod genetic code has been specially designed to be as error-free as possible-for example, if a mutation changed a GCA codon into a GCG codon, then no change in the protein would occur since they both code for alanine.
The Earth FERMENTATION In Which Bacteria Obtain Energy from Their Surroundings Polymers in the ocean get made When organic compounds are sauteed Bj lightning or heat, Ora UV-lighttreat, So that sugars like glucose pervade.
Eermentation reduced The glucose, and produced Ethanol, C0 2 , and some heat.
If we made otir own food, It would really be shrewdPhotosynthesis would be sublime.
If you can turn carbohydrates into energy, then you’ve got what I need, baby.
Endosymbionts Seeking Hosts Purple aerobic heterotroph wants to become a mitochondrion for a caring proteobacterium.
And a geologic era shall never go by, 30 From this day to the ending of the world, But we in it shall be remembered; We few, we happy few, we band of protists, For those today that change their metabolic processes with me Shall be my siblings: be they never so vile, This day shall gentle their condition.
For example, if I develop a more efficient method of locomotion, I want my sweetheart to be able to move in the same way.
Examples include the prairie-dog-like Lambdopsalis and the squirrel-like Ptilodus.
Simple nouns Compound nouns grunt, water grunt grunt, water buffalo grunt, buffalo grunt grunt, buffalo water Verbs Pronouns grunt, do grunt, / grunt, eat grunt, you Adverbs Conjunctions grunt, quickly grunt, and grunt, slowly grunt, but Adjectives Articles grunt, yellow grunt, the grunt, brown grunt, a 68 3.
The Earth RELIGION In Which a Diversity of Beliefs Arise Ceremonialism.
She said, It's really not my habit to intrude, Furthermore I hope my meaning won't be lost or misconstrued, So I repeat myself, at the risk of being crude, There must be fifty ways to loot your neighbor, Fifty ways to loot your neighbor.
Just put on your belt, Celt; make off with the loot, Jute; Set fire to the cot, Scot, then bring back the gold.
Go kill and maim, Dane, stop being humane, Hurt, wound, and stun, Hun, take all you can hold.
She said, If that's your final word, I'll acquiesce, Furthermore there is a plan that I like better, I confess And then she killed me, took my land, and became marquise.
There must be fifty ways to loot your neighbor, Fifty ways to loot your neighbor.
After spending 12 years in field research, Frank and I get together to compare notes.
Although the weapons-grade device will reliably release kilotons of energy, the reactor-grade device will have a less predictable yield of between ^Band HI kilotons.
Construct a spherical shell around this sphere with^^Bwedgeshaped grooves on the inside of the shel Th e grooves should be covered bya^B mm thick layer of gold and of polonium.
Then makeJd identical plutonium wedges and assemble them into a soccer ball shape surrounding the spherical shell.
Put conventional explosives around the plutonium shell and a^^Bcm thick shell of Uranium-238 around the explosives.
The chain reaction continues until between^% and ^|% of the plutonium atoms have been split, at which point so much energy has been released that the bomb (and much of the surrounding countryside) is vaporized.
I don’t believe that the Rumanians consider themselves dominated by the Soviet Union.
The Berlin Wall comes down “Today, Eastern Europe is again Central Europe-which it has always been historically, culturally and philosophically.” —Zbigniew Brzezinski, March 7, 1990 1990: Reunification of Germany “[Wjhat I see in Marxist ideology and the Communist pattern of rule is an extreme and cautionary instance of the arrogance of modern man, who styles himself the master of nature and the world, the only one who understands them, the one everything must serve, the one for whom our planet exists.
An' then one day, after drinking lots of beer, On his computer he wrote a Web browser.
Well, now it's time to say hello to Bill and Microsoft, Who never take it lightly if their market share is lost.
Internet Explorer may not be a pretty swap, But you'll need a lot of help getting it off your desktop.
After a few hours of work you realize that you're bored by the details of what you're doing and that you've got to do something different, even if only for an hour or so, or else you'll take “hit any key to continue” far too literally.
You are free to copy, distribute, display, and perform this work as long as you give me credit, do not use this work for commercial purposes, and do not alter, transfonn, or build upon this work.
Founded in 1914, it is the largest of the Christian Pentecostal traditions.
Born in Massachusetts and raised in Connecticut, he went on to become President of the United States of America in 1989.
Founded in the 16 th century A.D. by John Calvin, this sect of Protestant Christianity teaches that human beings have no free will and that who will go to Heaven is predetermined.
Born in Ecclefechan in 1795, this Scottish writer lived on a farm at Craigenputtock for six years; he hated and feared democracy.
Founded in 1844, Christadelphians believe that baptism by immersion after receiving knowledge of the Bible is crucial to salvation.
Prime Minister of England between 1940 and 1945, he should not be confused with Winston Churchill the American novelist and member of the New Flampshire legislature between 1903 and 1905.
Premier of France in 1906-1909 and 1917-1919, he was also a doctor, a teacher, a journalist, and a novelist.
The statements in computer languages are usually composed of a series of incomprehensible words and symbols that require a compiler to translate them into a series of incomprehensible strings of l's and 0's.
Appointed Chief of the French General Staff in 1931, he was named Commander in Chief of all French forces in June of 1939 and generalissimo of the Allied forces at the start of World War II in September, 1939.
The war didn't go too well for France, though, and he was replaced on May 19, 1940.
Founded in 1913, followers of Gurdjieff believe that all individuals need purification and that they must work on relationships by opening themselves to others.
Based on the spirit worship of Africans shipped to Brazil in the 1550s as slaves, Macumba teaches that humans have both a physical and a spiritual body, that the physical world is always being contacted by spirits, and that humans can learn to contact spirits for the purposes of healing and spiritual evolution.
Founded by Louis-Claude de Saint-Martin, Martinism teaches that one should not work for personal interest and that the sexes are equal in the ability to develop divine gifts.
Founded in 1526 as a sect of the Anabaptist faith, Mennonite churches exist as associations of people who are mature enough to make freewill decisions to join the church.
Founded in 1830 by Joseph Smith, the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-Day Saints teaches that people live as spirit beings with God before being born, that life on Earth serves as a test to determine whether people are worthy to return to God, and that the spiritual body is judged after death and if worthy is placed into one of three Heavens, depending on worthiness.
These prizes honor people whose achievements have conferred great benefit on humanity in the fields of physics, chemistry, physiology or medicine, literature, peace, and economics.
Founded in 1901, this is the fastest growing segment of Christianity in the world.
Not to be confused with his son, Ron Reagan, who played Frank in Soul Man and also appeared in the 1993 TV show The Positively True Adventures of the Alleged Texas Cheerleader-Murdering Mom.
President of the United States from 1901 until 1909, he should not be confused with Franklin Delano Roosevelt, who was President of the United States from 1933 until 1945.
The Ancient Mystical Order Rosae Cmcis was founded in 1915 by H Spencer Lewis.
He discovered oxygen in 1774 (independent of Joseph Priestly), chlorine in 1774, and molybdenum in 1778. von Schlieffen, Count Alfred: Chief of the German General Staff from 1891 until 1906, he borrowed a few ideas from Hannibal to create the Schlieffen plan for defeating France within six weeks.
Founded in the 1850's by Allan Kardec (the nom de plume of H Leon Denizard Rivail), spiritists believe that mediums can communicate with spirits that will answer philosophical and scientific questions.
Founded by Emanuel Swedenborg in 1744, this movement believes that the spirit world overlaps with the material world and that the spirits of the dead can communicate with the living.
One of the four fundamental forces of nature, this force holds the nucleus of atoms together and is very important for the stability of hair-care products.
The process by which oceanic crust is pushed under either oceanic or continental crust, usually resulting in volcanic activity as the newly melted rock makes its way towards the surface.
Developed in the late 10 th century A.D. within Islam, this mystical movement emphasizes a personal union of the soul with God, often through ascetic practices.
Founded in 1982 by Hue Dang Trinh (now known as Suma Ching Hai), this movement combines Christianity and Buddhism.
A group of dozens of clusters of galaxies that is held together by gravitational attraction.
Mutual cooperation between different organisms such that each benefit from the relationship.
Founded by Lao-tze in the 6 th century B.C., this philosophical religion teaches that the ideal state of being is freedom from desire, which can only be reached through mystical contemplation.
Founded in 1838 by Miki Nakayama , this movement believes that God created human beings in order that they would live joyous lives by helping and respecting others and by making them happy.
First espoused by Plato in the 4 th century B.C., this belief system teaches that divinity permeates all objects and that although absolute goodness exists, it is only knowable through intuition rather than through human experience or reason.
Founded in 1956 by Mehesh Prasad Varma (now known as Maharishi Mahesh Yogi), this Flindu movement teaches that people can reach an enlightened state through meditation, which will lead to increased intelligence, higher levels of resistance to disease, and better job performance.
It teaches that Urantia is an ancient name for the planet Earth, that Jesus is the sovereign of Earth's local universe, and that God the Universal Father is present in all universes, which are each guided by a different Son of God.
From one point of view, these particles and antiparticles don't really exist because they are created from nothing and go back to nothing in a very short period of time.
For example, in nuclear fusion protons are changed into neutrons via the weak nuclear force.
The fnst-and so far only-President of the United States to have earned a Ph.D., Dr.
The exchange of the Work for other copyrighted works by means of digital fde-sharing or otherwise shall not be considered to be intended for or directed toward commercial advantage or private monetary compensation, provided there is no payment of any monetary compensation in connection with the exchange of copyrighted works.
Licensor has secured all rights in the Work necessary to grant the license rights hereunder and to permit the lawful exercise of the rights granted hereunder without You having any obligation to pay any royalties, compulsory license fees, residuals or any other payments; ii.
Sections 1,2, 5, 6, 7, and 8 will survive any termination of this License.
Notwithstanding the above, Licensor reserves the right to release the Work under different license terms or to stop distributing the Work at any time; provided, however that any such election will not serve to withdraw this License (or any other license that has been, or is required to be, granted under the terms of this License), and this License will continue in full force and effect unless terminated as stated above.
