But they also had some disagreements because Americans were worried about Soviet communism, and people were worried about Russian leader Joseph Stalin.
After World War II, Russia was not allowed to be part of the international community.
During the Cold War, the United States and the Soviet Union were enemies.
They fought a lot and had many accidents that could have resulted in a nuclear disaster.
Read more about World War II The Cuban Revolution At the end of 1958, some people against Cuban dictator Fulgencio Batista began to fight him.
By New Year’s Day 1959, these rebels had taken over and become the leaders of Cuba.
They also did guerrilla warfare until finally, they won on New Year’s Day 1959.
Castro entered Havana slowly, visiting towns, cities, and villages along the way where he gave speeches to the cheering crowds.
Raul Castro and Ché Guevara were in charge of organizing people to find “war criminals” who tortured and killed people under the old regime so they could be brought to trial or execution.
When Fidel Castro took over in Cuba, he became friends with the Soviet Union.
The United States imposed an embargo that hurt Cuba’s people for many years.
During the Cold War, the United States and the Soviet Union had a terrible political rivalry.
They had debates on many issues, but they were generally about politics and economics.
The Missile Major Richard Heyser, the American U-2 spy plane pilot, flew over Cuba on October 14th, 1962, and photographed a Soviet SS-4 missile being assembled.
He traveled to the island and shot hundreds of images of new projects in the Cuban countryside.
As Heyser recalled, he was afraid he would be looked at as the man who started a war.
CIA analysts saw many things that show the Soviets were making sites to launch missiles that could hit targets across the United States.
Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev did not like the number of nuclear weapons that were pointed at him.
Another factor was that the United States and Cuba were not friends in the 1960s.
President Kennedy had already attacked the island once, so Khrushchev and Castro also built missiles to stop any more attacks from happening.
President John F Kennedy met with a team of advisers known as Ex-Comm, to decide how the United States should respond to the missile threat.
Robert McNamara, the secretary of defense, brought three choices to President Kennedy.
The president could talk to Cuban Leader Fidel Castro and Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev.The United States might impose a naval quarantine on Cuba.The third choice was to use soldiers on the ground to destroy the missile sites.
This might kill Soviet people and cause a counterattack.Kennedy did not like the idea of an attack.
He thought that quarantine was better because it would give time to negotiate with the Soviet Union about missiles.
Because a blockade was considered an act of war, JFK and his advisors avoided using the term.
Negotiations In a speech transmitted by American television, JFK said that he had “unmistakable evidence” of a missile threat.
The president said that the United States would not allow ships to take weapons to Cuba.
A letter was delivered via the United States ambassador to the Soviet Union, who also brought a message from John F Kennedy to Nikita Khrushchev.
Kennedy wrote back, telling Khrushchev that he started this crisis by sending missiles to Cuba.
Kennedy got a letter from Khrushchev saying that Kennedy was mean to the Soviet Union.
These ships were carrying supplies to Cuba, but they stopped because of what was happening.
Nevertheless, the oil tanker called Bucharest came into the United States quarantine zone.
Two American warships, the USS Essex and the USS Gearing prepared to intercept it.
But instead of stopping it like they should have done, President Kennedy let it through because it was not carrying anything bad inside.
Khrushchev, however, did not want this and replied that he wanted to work with President Kennedy to make sure we didn’t end up in a thermonuclear war.
On October 27, 1962, a U-2 pilot named Rudolf Anderson was shot down and killed over Cuba.
As the Soviet military tracked the intruding aircraft, they wondered if it was taking pictures of weapons near America’s Guantanamo Bay Naval Base.
The U-2 flew down to an island because it was hurt by shrapnel from the first missile that hit it.
The End of the Cuban Missle Crisis That night, the president sent his brother to meet with the Soviet ambassador and offer a secret deal.
The Soviets promised to take their missiles out of Cuba, and in return, America would remove its missiles from Turkey and not invade Cuba.
He wrote a letter to Kennedy saying that he would take his missiles away from Cuba.
One year later, the superpowers signed two treaties about nuclear weapons to make it less likely that something like this would happen again.
A hotline was created to talk between the Kremlin and the White House and the signing of the Limited Nuclear Test Ban Treaty.
The crisis convinced the Soviets to increase their investment into an arsenal of missiles that could reach America from Soviet territory.
It made President Kennedy look good, and it also helped to get people’s opinions of him better.
