Two days earlier, a United States encounter in the Cold War had begun. military surveillance aircraft had taken hundreds of After President Kennedy and key foreign policy and aerial photographs of Cuba.
CIA analysts, working national defense officials were briefed on the U-2 spy around the clock, had deciphered conclusive evidence plane findings, discussions began on how to respond to the challenge.
To avoid arousing public concern and tipping off the Soviets, the president maintained his official schedule, meeting periodically with advisors to discuss the status of events in Cuba.
Following many long and difficult meetings, Kennedy decided to place a limited naval blockade around Cuba.
The aim of this “quarantine,” as he called it, was to prevent the Soviets from bringing in DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE more military supplies.
He demanded the removal of the missiles already there and the destruction of the One of the first images of missile bases under construction shown to President Kennedy on the morning launching sites.
No one was sure how Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev “To the Brink” is made possible with generous would respond to the naval blockade and United States demands.
In a separate part of the agreement, which remained will take place on October 1, from 4:00m. to 7:00m. secret for more than twenty-five years, the United States Featured speakers will be historians James G Blight also agreed to remove its nuclear missiles from Turkey. and janet M Lang, co-authors of the new transmedia Although the Soviets removed their missiles from Cuba, project The Armageddon Letters; and Svetlana they escalated the building of their military arsenal; the Savranskaya, editor of the recently published missile crisis was over, the arms race was not.
H T he Kennedy Library will mark the 50th anniversary Registration is required.
Original docuthe country’s best known historians of the Crisis, that ments, artifacts and photographs will also be featured will take place on October 14, from 12:30m. to in the display.
For more information and to register, visit Archives in Washington, DC from October 12, 2012 www.jfklibrary.org/Events-and-Awards/Forums.
The display current events while addressing national of this artwork reflects the deep standards in social studies and language arts. conviction of both President and Students can win up to $10,000.
Kennedy that the artist can For complete guidelines, curriculum materials, speak to the human spirit in a and a link to a video, visit the Profile in Courage unique way.
The Pablo Picasso, Spanish Rape of the Sabine Women, 1963 Museum of Fine Arts, on display from October 4, 2012 deadline for submissions is January 5, 2013.
Boston Juliana Cheney Edwards Collection, Tompkins through January 6, 2013.
In this lesson plan, students consider some of the options discussed, what groups and which individuals supported each option, and the respective pros and cons of the alternatives.
Have students listen to Defense Secretary Robert Curriculum Frameworks McNamara’s 10/16/62 discussion of possible responses to USII.19 – Analyze the sources and, with a map of the the installation of missiles in Cuba.
This National Security Archives site includes a number of primary sources, including audio clips of ExComm meetings As a concluding activity, have students listen to JFK’s and photographs. late night recording of October 18, 1962.
H The Miller Center of UVA, Kremlin Decision Making Project millercenter.virginia.edu/scripps/digitalarchive/kremlin/index Links to minutes from Soviet meetings from 1954-1964.
An Activity on Presidential Campaigns and Elections Y our students can get a sense of the spirit and energy 2.
Introduce students to The President’s Desk exhibit, and specifically the JFK campaign office in the Campaign In the activity outlined below, students explore these and Button module.
Show them JFK’s speech announcing his other primary sources in order to gather information about candidacy . the key people in the 1960 election and identify the steps one takes in running for president.
Distribute a Game Board to each student and explain White House Game Board, they make the “trip” with JFK that, as they explore the Campaign Button module, they from the Democratic National Convention in Los Angeles, will be making the trip to the 1960 Democratic National CA to the presidential election on November 8th.
They Convention and then on to the November 8th election. “travel” around the Game Board, answering questions Assign either as homework or explore as a whole group posed on each square with information gleaned from the activity.
The final question may be answered with students’ previous knowledge or by clicking on January 20, 1961 For the complete lesson plan featuring a glossary of in the White House Diary . campaign terms and an activity on the steps involved in a presidential campaign, visit www.jfklibrary.org/Education/ On a separate piece of paper, have students jot down Teachers/Curricular-Resources/Elementary-School-Curricularwhat evidence helped them answer the question for Materials.
For more historical background, visit the each square of the Game Board.
Ask them to write a summary of the Procedure “trip” and comment on what portion was most memorable 1.
Familiarize yourself with the Campaign Button module for them and why. on The President’s Desk online exhibit (microsites.
The specific for grades 3 – 12, visit www.jfklibrary.org/Education/ sources students will need to complete the Game Board Teachers/Civic-Education-Programs-and-Materials.
H are listed in the Sample Game Board Answers . continued on page 6 2012 NATIONAL STUDENT/PARENT MOCK ELECTION The John F Kennedy Presidential curriculum packets featuring biobreak the record Library and Museum will once graphical information about the for votes cast by again coordinate the National candidates, their positions on the Massachusetts Student/Parent Mock Election for issues, and classroom activities.
This voter education Mock Election Day, students will cast participating in program actively engages students their vote for the candidate who best the Mock Election this in grades K-12 in state and national represents them.
Massachusetts teachers and campaigns, and emphasizes the their class’s results, and report them educators may register by emailing importance of voting and the to the Kennedy Library, which will their school’s information to Mock. power of their ballots. announce the results of the election.
Teachers and Mock Election Day is Thursday, Over 90,000 Massachusetts students educators outside Massachusetts November 1st.
As state coordinator, voted for president in the 2008 Mock may sign up and learn more at the Kennedy Library will distribute Election — an all-time record.
NASA ★ Directly following the flight, Shepard was flown to Washington in a helicopter to receive the Distinguished RICK FRIEDMAN Service Medal from President Kennedy.
In his oral history The Freedom 7 Mercury space capsule that carried the first American into ★ archived at the Kennedy Library, Shepard said “I was even space has landed at the Kennedy Library.
UPCOMING KENNEDY LIBRARY FORUMS OCTOBER Watch live-streaming webcasts of Kennedy Library Forums at www.jfklibrary.org/webcast.
If you are an educator and would like to attend, email jfkforums@nara.gov to reserve a place for you and/or your students.
James Fallows, Ryan Ellen Fitzpatrick on a new book highlighting the most significant Historians, journalists and policy Lizza and Martha tapes of the Kennedy presidency. makers will reflect on the events Raddatz will analyze Pulitzer Prize-winning journalist leading up to the Cuban Missile the 2012 presidential Tom Oliphant will moderate.
Crisis, how it was resolved, and race with Callie how lessons learned can be Crossley, host of applied to the nuclear challenges WGBH’s daytime show, facing us today.
New Frontiers 7 ★ 2012 JOSEPH P MOAKLEY PUBLIC SPEAKING INSTITUTE S tudents participating in the Moakley Public Speaking Institute gather at the annual banquet following the presentation of speeches they wrote on controversial issues and current events.
The two-week intensive summer program serves students from Upward Bound and other enrichment programs in the Boston area.
Publication of the New Frontiers newsletter for educators is generously supported by Comcast.
Closed Thanksgiving, Christmas, and New Year’s Day The Kennedy Library Department of Education and Public Programs offers free museum passes to teachers considering a field trip to the Library.
