Please note that the pagination of the online version will vary from the pagination of the print book.
It is generally regarded as the most serious incident of the Cold War, when the communist East and the democratic West came closer than ever to a mutual nuclear destruction.
The crisis emerged on October 14, 1962, when a United States Air Force–operated U-2 aircraft produced detailed aerial photographs of Soviet ballistic nuclear missiles installations being constructed in Cuba, and ended on October 28, when the United States and the USSR reached an agreement consisting of concessions on both parts.
The U-2 aircraft surveillance missions provided critical information to the United States administration in assessing the escalating situation.
In June 1962, Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev and Cuban leader Fidel Castro reached an agreement concerning the deployment in Cuba of Soviet mediumand intermediate-range missiles armed with nuclear warheads to deter the U.S. government from attempting another invasion of Cuba.
Uneasy with the vicinity of a communist-ruled Cuba that developed friendly relations with the USSR, the United States administration repeatedly and unsuccessfully tried to remove Castro from power.
It tried assassination, counterrevolution, economic blockade, and military invasion, but all of these attempts failed, and Cuba became the subject of intensive air reconnaissance.
Between October 1960 and September 1962, the United States government regularly sent U-2 surveillance flights over the island.
In August 1962, the United States government was already suspecting the deployment of Soviet weapons in Cuba, but several air reconnaissance missions in August and September failed to confirm such suspicions.
In September, United States officials thought to redirect the satellites programmed to fly over the Soviet Union in order to cover Cuba’s territory, but the idea was rapidly abandoned as reprogramming the satellites would have caused important delays in gathering intelligence.
Thus, the United States government continued to rely on the intelligence gathered by its Lockheed U-2 aircrafts—single-engine planes capable of flying at very high altitudes.
The Soviet missiles arrived in Cuba in September 1962 in the utmost secrecy.
Having a range of 2,000 to 4,500 kilometers, they could destroy the United States within minutes from launching.
President John F Kennedy and the Department of State were notified, and on October 16, an Executive Committee of the National Security Council was created to assess the situation.
Among the members of the ExComm were Secretary of Defense Robert S McNamara, Secretary of State Dean Rusk, Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff Maxwell D Taylor, CIA Director John McCone, Attorney General Robert Kennedy, Vice President Lyndon B Johnson, and National Security Advisor McGeorge Bundy.
The United States administration feared that a full-scale attack against Cuba could enable Khrushchev to respond with a nuclear strike or with a blockade against West Berlin.
This term suggested that the United States government wanted to “quarantine” offensive weapons only, without intending to block all materials from entering Cuba, which might have been seen as an act of war.
On October 22, President Kennedy appeared on television, declared that the construction of Soviet military bases in Cuba was an act of aggression that could not be tolerated, and announced the quarantine.
The next day, he signed the proclamation regarding the interdiction of the delivery of offensive weapons to Cuba.
Khrushchev designated the United States blockade as “an act of aggression” and instructed the Soviet ships to ignore it.
During the entire crisis, the United States continued to gather intelligence via air surveillance.
Receiving CIA reports that the installment of the Soviet missiles in Cuba continued unabated, on October 26, President Kennedy argued in an ExComm meeting that only an invasion could remove the Soviet missiles from Cuba.
The crisis continued to build up, aggravated by an incident that occurred on October 27, when a United States spy flight was shot down in Cuba and its pilot killed.
Following this incident, the United States Department of Defense proposed a military attack against Cuba, but this time, Kennedy rejected the proposal, hoping for a diplomatic solution.
However, had the negotiations failed, the United States was ready to employ its plans of invading Cuba.
By October 26, more than 100,000 troops stood ready in Florida, two aircraft carriers were heading toward Cuba, the Air Force was prepared for more than 1,000 aircraft attack missions, and 3,000 nuclear weapons were put on alert with a total of 7,000 megatons—enough to kill all life on Earth.
In the meantime, the Soviets transmitted through various official and nonofficial channels their willingness to negotiate an agreement.
On October 26, Khrushchev declared that the Soviet Union was disposed to remove its weapons from Cuba under the supervision of the United Nations, provided that the United States would remove its missiles from Turkey and Italy and would declare that it would not invade Cuba.
Thus, the U.S. administration responded that it was ready to lift the blockade and to give assurances that it would not invade Cuba, but it said nothing about the removal of its missiles from Europe.
Although there is no historiographical consensus, it is considered that after much negotiation and deliberation, Kennedy agreed to remove the missiles from Europe in exchange for the USSR removing its weapons from Cuba.
The United States aerial surveillance missions confirmed that the Soviets were removing the missiles systems from Cuba.
On November 20, the United States administration announced the end of the blockade.
The general perception, both in the West and in the East, was that Khrushchev had been defeated and embarrassed in this confrontation that he himself had initiated.
China severely criticized Khrushchev for his Cuban “adventure” and for giving in to U.S. demands.
The crisis also weakened the personal power of the Soviet leader, who, by the end of 1964, was removed from office.
However, the crisis consolidated the regime of Castro, which now had guaranties against a United States invasion.
The crisis proved that rapid, direct, and reliable communication between Moscow and Washington was necessary and of the utmost importance, and in 1963, a Moscow-Washington hotline using teletype equipment was established to ease tensions during international crises.
Surveillance Satellites in War and Peace.Berlin, Germany: Springer, 2008.
