Today there was a plotted assassination against my life by the United States government, using Cuban exiles to form a revolt against my regime.
The United States that it would be easy to overthrow me from the power I gained 2 years ago and have held on greatly.
These exiles were not able to get far into Cuba and create unrest as it was know that they would be coming.
From the intelligence that we have secured from communications from these exiles I was able to create the defenses necessary to defend my rule.
With this failure now our relationships between us and the Soviet Union can be secured and Cuba can join the super power against United States rule.-October 25, 1962 Tensions have been building with the United States, the Soviet Union and Cuba.
The United States has created images on the nuclear warheads being placed on Cuba an have begun retaliation.
If this is going to turn out the same as the assassination attempts then there is nothing to worry about.
Yet the people have become uneasy with both the shipments of nuclear missiles and the actions of the United States.
I fear that my rule may be interrupted yet I must remember that i have the Soviet Union standing with me.
So far Cuba has done well but the retaliation of the United States forces may cause even more damage.-October 28, 1962Today has gone completely unexpected from what I had originally believed would be the result of this crisis.
President Kennedy and Premier Khrushchev have discussed ways to defuse this entire situation with a nuclear crisis.
The worst part about this is that I have not been involved in any way with the negotiations considering Cuba was in the middle of this the entire time.
The Soviet Union better correct this with us with forms of reparations or this entire process has been an entire waste.
So far things between us have not gone horribly wrong but I hope that connections can still be made between us and Cuba can continue to become a competing power.
CDATA[ // Decorate any fastUI buttons on the page with a class of 'goog-button'. if { JOT_decorateButtons; } // Fires delayed events.
