He campaigned The years after World War II saw big as Eisenhower’s heir changes for the United States.
A generation apparent2, criticizing of Americans came home and after some his opponent’s lack of initial problems, the economy steadily grew. experience.
Our status as a superpower came with the Kennedy, a young responsibility of stopping the spread of senator from Richard Nixon communism around the globe.
As a result, Massachusetts. we went to war in Korea and by the end of Kennedy’s charm and the 1950s we were edging closer to another enthusiastic demeanor won over many war in Vietnam.
Kennedy’s religious background Rights Movement gained a momentum that as a Catholic did not really come into play as would continue in the turbulent 1960s. it had for 1928 Democratic candidate Al Smith.
Nixon Lesson 1 – insisted that his campaign not focus on Kennedy’s The New Frontier religion.
A new change in What is unique about this election is that it marked Washington ushered in a spirit of new the first televised debate possibilities a ""Camelot1 Era” that between presidential sadly ended in tragedy.
The role of television in electing a Election of 1960 president took on great importance and this The 22nd amendment limited continues to this day.
This both candidates were well prepared and did meant that a new president would certainly good jobs.
Kennedy turned out to be another close one and the appeared calm and assuring.
Nixon looked result signaled that the country was ready to haggard and his makeup was not good. move toward a new, youthful direction.
Chapter 24 – The Turbulent Sixties 2 time and place, to friend and foe alike, that the torch has been passed to a new generation of Americans – born in this century, tempered by war, disciplined by a hard and bitter peace, proud of our ancient heritage – and unwilling to witness or permit the slow undoing of those human rights to which this nation has always been committed, and to which we are committed today at home and around the world.
His domestic program was became the youngest man elected president known as the “New Frontier.” at age 43 and the first Catholic to hold that office.
JFK appointed his brother, Robert Kennedy to the President Kennedy position of Attorney Kennedy came from a wealthy General in his Massachusetts family.
Robert Kennedy had built his wealth in the stock played an important market before the 1929 crash.
He had been role in JFK’s decision appointed the Chairman of the Securities making throughout Attorney General and Exchange his presidency.
The that a new object of this generation of organization was to bring Americans aid to the neediest was looking underdeveloped toward a new America.
Ask what you • To help the people of interested can do for your country.
Let countries and areas in meeting the word go forth from this their needs for trained workers; Chapter 24 – The Turbulent Sixties 3 • To help promote a better 1961 at a location called The Bay of Pigs.
A group of the part of the peoples served; Cuban exiles was trained to lead a counter• To help promote a better revolution against Castro.
Unfortunately, the understanding of other peoples on information gathered by the CIA and the the part of Americans. plan it ultimately put forth was flawed.
The agency had miscalculated that there was a When it came to foreign affairs, large amount of popular resistance among Kennedy had some hard lessons to learn.
He expanded Although his administration was Eisenhower’s commitment to South Vietnam embarrassed by the incident, Kennedy by sending more Americans to serve as accepted full responsibility for the failure. advisors in that country’s fight against communist rebels.
But his first test in foreign affairs came in Cuba and it was one in which the president would admit failure.
Bay of Pigs By January 1961 the new Cuban leader, Fidel Castro had embraced communism.
Before leaving office, President Eisenhower broke off diplomatic relations with Cuba.
The Central Cuban dictator Fidel Castro receives a Intelligence Agency , under directions hug from Soviet leader Nikita from Eisenhower had been planning an Khrushchev. invasion of Cuba by a force of anti-Castro Cubans.
The two had Castro’s new ties met in Vienna, Austria in June 1961 and to the Soviet Khrushchev came away from the meeting Union, the CIA felt believing that Kennedy was overmatched in that the plan had to the area of diplomacy.
The world and go into effect Khrushchev would learn that this was not quickly, before the case by the fall of 1962.
Castro could be supplied with We need to go back to the concept of Soviet weapons. the Cold War and the growing nuclear threat Cuban poster warning of to understand what happens next.
The an invasion President Soviet Union felt threatened by the growing Kennedy was United States nuclear arsenal placed in Western informed of the plan and ultimately gave his Europe.
The invasion took place in April any future war would undoubtedly involve nuclear weapons and missile technology Chapter 24 – The Turbulent Sixties 4 exposed Soviet cities to possible nuclear annihilation from the West.
In response to this, the Soviets concentrated on improving their nuclear arsenal and balancing the tables by exposing American cities to the same nuclear annihilation.
The Bay of Pigs incident drove a larger wedge between Cuba and the United States.
As Castro leaned more upon the Soviets for aid, it was clear that the island could be used as a strategic base to benefit the Soviet Union.
This combined with Khrushchev’s belief that Kennedy was President Kennedy goes on television to inform diplomatically weak, led the Soviets to begin Americans of Soviet missile bases in Cuba. setting up bases in Cuba for intermediate range nuclear missiles.
On October 27, the Soviet ships were On October 14, 1962 a U2 took nearing the United States quarantine zone near photographs of the Soviet bases being Cuba.
Kennedy was faced with United States would not invade Cuba or support any a huge crisis and had to do something about future anti-Castro invasion.
He met with members of the National sent his brother Robert Kennedy to inform Security Council to weigh his options.
The the Soviets that he would pull the U.S. choices were reduced to either a full-scale missiles out of Turkey.
On October 28, the invasion of Cuba or a naval blockade Soviet ships turned around and the crisis combined with the threat of attacking Soviet ships trying to deliver the missiles to Cuba.
The possibility that this could develop into a major nuclear conflict, the beginning of World War III, was very real.
Kennedy went on television to address the American public on October 22.
Kennedy condemned the Soviets for their actions and the United States ambassador to the United Nations called upon the Soviets to admit they had placed nuclear missiles in Cuba.
Khrushchev sent letters to Kennedy claiming that the Soviets were only interested in peace and preventing any U.S. invasion of their Cuban ally.
What Khrushchev really wanted was for the U.S. to pull their intermediate-range nuclear missiles out of Turkey.
Internationally, Kennedy gained the reputation of standing up to Khrushchev but both sides initially considered the compromise a failure.
To improve communications in the future, a phone line was set up between the White House and the Kremlin.
Hopefully with this form of instant communication, a potential nuclear misunderstanding could be avoided.
President Kennedy’s limousine moments before his assassination in Dallas.
Assassination in Dallas first shot is believed to have struck the By the end of 1963, President president as well as Governor Connally.
Kennedy was preparing to run for reelection The second shot struck the president in the the following year.
First Lady Jacqueline Kennedy was position in world affairs during the Cuban splattered with fragments of skull and brain Missile Crisis.
The motorcade sped off to Parkland made speech at the Berlin Wall condemning Hospital where the president’s death was the Communist government of East officially announced at 1:38m.
Germany for building the wall in 1961 to essentially keep East Berliners from A massive manhunt began escaping to West Berlin and the freedom immediately.
Officer Tippit had stopped Oswald walking down the street for Texas had a state that he had questioning. narrowly won in the 1960 election.
So Kennedy shot the officer came to Dallas on November 22, 1963 with several times, wife, Jacqueline.
He rode in a convertible killing him limousine with the top down alongside instantly.
Oswald Texas governor John Connally and his wife, was later arrested Nellie.
The presidential motorcade traveled in a movie theater through downtown Dallas on its way to the and was charged Dallas Trade Mart where Kennedy was to with Tippit’s killing deliver a speech. as well as Police mug shot of Lee President Harvey Oswald after the At about 12:30m.
It was involvement in the assassination. then that at least two shots rang out.
Two days later, on November 24, 1963, Oswald was being transferred to a nearby jail.
Reporters gathered in the basement garage of Dallas Police headquarters as Oswald was being moved.
Then, captured on live television, Dallas nightclub owner Jack Ruby walked up to Oswald and shot him point-blank in the stomach.
Oswald was taken to Parkland Hospital where he was later declared dead.
Ruby had ties to organized crime but had friends in the Dallas Police Department.
Martin Luther King, Jr. greets marchers on the steps while awaiting his new trial, Ruby entered of the Lincoln Memorial on August 28, 1963.
Parkland Hospital for pneumonia, later dying at the famous hospital on January 3, 1967.
Lesson 2 – The Kennedy assassination Civil Rights continues to be a focal point for conspiracy theories.
The 1950s saw the Johnson ordered the formation of the beginning of a Civil Rights Movement Warren Commission to investigate the that would grow in the 1960s. assassination.
The commission, named after Supreme Court Justice Earl Warren, Civil Rights Movement concluded in September 1964 that Oswald The Civil Rights Movement that had acted alone in the assassination of began in the mid-1950s gained momentum President Kennedy. in the 1960s.
During the Kennedy administration, civil rights reformers pushed the government to right the wrongs of decades past.
The American South became a battleground for change as the Chapter 24 – The Turbulent Sixties 7 conservative registering for classes.
National bigotry of old used Guardsmen, under orders from President every means Kennedy forced the governor aside. possible to keep African Americans That same month in Mississippi, civil from gaining social, rights leader and NAACP member Medgar economic and Evers was shot to death in his driveway of political equality. his house.
Martin of the 16th Street Baptist Church in Luther King, Jr., the Birmingham, killing four black Sunday leader of the school children.
Nearly a year later in Montgomery, Philadelphia, Mississippi, the bodies of three Alabama bus civil rights workers were discovered.
Martin boycott in 1955, had believed that law enforcement officials may Luther King in the Birmingham Jail. become the most have played a role in the killing. prominent leader of the Civil Rights Dr.
He advocated civil disobedience national stage in his march on Washington, and nonviolent protest.
I over its injustice, is in reality have a dream that one day expressing the highest on the red hills of Georgia the respect for law. sons of former slaves and the sons of former slave owners Americans around the country were horrified will be able to sit down to watch on television as Birmingham police together at a table of officers turned powerful fire hoses and brotherhood.
I have a dream police dogs on peaceful demonstrators. that one day even the state of Such images alerted people around the Mississippi, a state sweltering world to the plight of blacks struggling for with the heat of injustice, freedom in a land that proclaimed to be the sweltering with the heat of home of the free. oppression, will be transformed into an oasis of Conservative white backlash freedom and justice.
The march on Washington was designed to pressure Congress into action on civil rights 1. 1963 was a bad year for civil rights legislation.
Provide two wait until after the nation mourned its young examples of this. president’s assassination just a few months 2.
Martin Luther King mean later. when he said that someone who breaks a law “that conscience tells him is unjust” is Two key civil rights landmarks really “expressing the highest respect for followed in 1964.
Southern states had used poll taxes to keep blacks from voting since the end of Lesson 3 – Reconstruction in the 1870s.
The other Conflict in Vietnam landmark was the Civil Rights Act of 1964.
American foreign policy and on July 3, 1964 President Johnson was focused on containing Soviet signed it into law.
The U.S. racial discrimination in public facilities, strategy turned to Southeast Asia. government, employment, voting registration and within any federally funded program.
President Kennedy’s administration increased the amount of advisors and aid.
However, President Kennedy was frustrated by the South Vietnamese leader Ngo Dinh Diem.
Diem had become a dictator and was taking advantage of United States support.
He instituted a violent crackdown on Buddhist monks who had protested his policies.
To demonstrate this to the rest of the world, several monks practiced self-immolation4 – President Johnson signs the Civil Rights Act of 1964 images of which were broadcast around the while Dr.
Martin Luther King, Jr. & members of world, embarrassing the United States for its support Congress look on. of such a dictator.
Chapter 24 – The Turbulent Sixties 9 generals House; only two overthrew Diem United States Senators and killed him voted against it). just a few weeks The resolution before Kennedy’s gave President assassination.
Johnson the power “to take all Both necessary steps, Presidents including the use Kennedy and of armed force,” Johnson felt that in defending the the United States freedom of South had to support Vietnam.
A Buddhist monk sets the government Congress had himself on fire to protest the in South Vietnam given LBJ the policies of South in order to stop authority to send Vietnamese dictator Ngo Dinh Diem. the spread of United States troops to fight the communists in communism in Vietnam.
Increasing military personnel in Southeast Asia would personnel was seen as the logical way to do skyrocket. this.
By the end of July 1964, President Johnson had increased the number of American military advisors to 21,000.
Gulf of Tonkin Incident On August 2, 1964 two United States Navy destroyers were in the waters off the coast of North Vietnam.
Two days later A B-52 bomber drops bombs over North Vietnam. another attack, completely unprovoked The B-52 was designed to carry nuclear bombs.
America in Vietnam The year 1965 saw the United States President Johnson, who was seeking take a far more active role in the war in reelection in November, went on television Vietnam.
The goal of United States foreign policy and informed Americans of the attacks.
His regarding Vietnam was originally to support Secretary of Defense, Robert McNamara a pro-democratic government (antiwent before Congress claiming to have proof of a second attack.
North Vietnam wanted a united Throughout the early 1960s, the country, free from foreign amount of advisors and supplies influence or control.
By 1965, concept that appealed m however, the United States ore to the Vietnamese than the became the primary force in the prospect of a so-called actual fighting of the war.
At the democratic government in the beginning of the year, there were south. less than 25,000 troops in Vietnam.
By the end of the year more than The United States strategy 184,000 troops were there. was to stop the flow of communist guerillas known as Let’s remember the the Viet Cong, from moving into objective – defeat the communists Ho Chi Minh – leader of South Vietnam from the north. in Vietnam and therefore prevent Communist North The Viet Cong and their the spread of communism (domino Vietnam supplies moved down the Ho effect) in Southeast Asia.
In March 1965 the United States began have been relatively easy to defeat a Operation Rolling Thunder – a series of population that was unable to produce its bombing raids on targets in North Vietnam own weaponry.
But that was not the case. intended to stop re-supply of the Viet Cong The United States did not adequately and force the North Vietnamese to the understand the situation and as a result negotiating table.
This bombing was found itself in a war that it could not win stepped up in June 1966 when B-52 regardless of the size and superiority of the bombers began bombing the port of American military.
Instead, they were forced to French had ruled Vietnam as a colony for use guerilla tactics.
By even further, China had ruled there for August of 1966, Johnson had authorized an hundreds of years.
The saw no great difference in the United States. cost of the war was going up considerably.
You must also remember that the government in South Vietnam was more interested in remaining in power than in the rights of the people they were supposed to be protecting.
A South Vietnamese police chief executes a Viet Cong suspect in the street.
Images like these caused Americans back home to protest United States military action in Vietnam.
Lyndon Baines Johnson personnel going to Vietnam increased, so too did the number of protests against the had to follow in the footsteps of an war.
He wanted to Vietnamese people should decide their own make significant changes to help fate and that United States soldiers should not be Americans, but the Vietnam War risking their lives half-way around the world. would continue to frustrate him.
The draft process was also unfair, since one could be exempt from the draft by going to college.
Critics of the war argued Johnson had come to Washington in 1937 that the government we were supporting as a New Deal Democrat from Texas.
Stories and images of the 1948 he became a Senator from Texas and inhumane actions of the South Vietnamese by 1954 he was the Democratic Majority government caused the number of war Leader in the Senate.
By the end of the elected JFK’s Vice President. decade the anti-war movement became a huge political force in the United States.
It was a difficult time after the The role of this group in determining the assassination.
LBJ was sworn in as outcome of the war is still debated today. president on Air Force One next to a shaken Jacqueline Kennedy.
He tried to honor JFK’s legacy but had difficulty getting support for his own ideas.
He clashed with Chapter 24 – The Turbulent Sixties 12 outlined his plan, which was to be an extension of the FDR’s New Deal and Truman’s Fair Deal.
He wanted to focus on helping those Americans who could not help themselves.
The Great Society was supposed to provide assistance to the neediest of American Society.
LBJ’s Great Society plan was made up of a number of different government programs.
This meant the creation of a number of government welfare programs designed to lower the number of Americans living below the poverty line.
Lyndon B Johnson takes the oath of office on • Job Corps – a vocational training board Air Force One after the assassination of program aimed at disadvantaged President Kennedy. youth.
But in 1964 income preschool children he ran on his own for a full term as • VISTA (Volunteers in Service to president.
America) – domestic version of JFK’s Peace Corps, provided educational & vocational training for poor people.
LBJ won 61% of the popular up a large vote and carried a huge mandate into his percentage of first full term as president.
Great Society • Medicare – medical insurance The centerpiece of LBJ’s presidency program that was added to the Social was to be what he called the Great Society.
One who demonstrates an actively aggressive or combative attitude, as in an argument.
Chapter 24 – The Turbulent Sixties 13 are receiving social security benefits. injured, 4000 people arrested and over $100 Today it covers approximately 41 million in property damage. million Americans.
In addition, the Great Society looked at Militant African-Americans attack police cars helping poor Americans without health care and other vehicles after the shooting of a coverage: black man during a police chase.
Rioters • Medicaid – program funded and chant “Black Power,” a phrase coined by managed by the federal and state Stokely Carmichael, leader of the Student governments to provide health Non-Violent Coordinating Committee. insurance for people with low incomes.
Carmichael is blamed by Atlanta’s mayor for Today, approximately 43 million inciting the riot.
Critics of Johnson’s Great Society Police officers arrest 82 people drinking have complained that the program did not illegally at a bar on 12th Street on Detroit’s work and that it created a class of lazy, West Side.
However, some arrested were black people), a group began statistics show that the percentage of breaking windows in a nearby department Americans living below the poverty line store.
Rioting lasts over five days despite dropped nearly 10% as a result of this the presence of National Guard troops. program.
American Cities Up in Smoke The rioting caused President Johnson The 1960s is also a decade to form the National Advisory Commission remembered for the incredible violence that on Civil Disorders.
In February 1968 this took place, resulting in loss of life and commission reported that the United States destruction of property in a number of United States was “moving toward two societies, one cities.
Most of these riots were sparked by black, one white, separate and unequal.” the amount of racial tension They found that white racism in certain areas.
As we’ll learn arrested for drunken driving further along, 1968 would and is allegedly beaten by turn out to be another year of police officers in the Watts major rioting. neighborhood of Los Angeles, California.
The allegations of police brutality touch off six days of rioting in predominantly AfricanPolice officers arrest a black protestor American Watts.
In 1967 this amendment was The first is the 1966 Miranda Arizona ratified, making clear the order of case.
The Supreme Court ruled succession to the office of 5-4 that a suspect must be president.
Prior to passage of informed of his or her rights, this amendment, the office of including the right to have a vice president remained vacant lawyer present, prior to if that person moved up to the questioning by the police.
This presidency due to the death of was a result of an appeal by a the president.
Now, a new vice convicted rapist in Arizona, president would be nominated Ernesto Miranda.
His lawyers by the president and win argued that he was denied his confirmation with a majority 5th Amendment right when confessing to his vote of both houses of Congress. crime.
You’ve probably heard the The last years of President Woodrow routine on television… Wilson’s term served as the inspiration for this part.
If the president is unable to serve, • You have the right to remain the vice president will assume the duties of silent and refuse to answer the president until he is able to resume questions.
Also, if the vice president and • Anything you do say may be a majority of the cabinet believe that the used against you in a court of president is unable to serve, then the vice law.
This • You have the right to consult an way the office of president will be occupied if attorney before speaking to the a president undergoes surgery or should police and to have an attorney have some sort of illness that could cause present during questioning now him or her to be incapacitated.
Name a Great Society program, explain attorney present you will still what it does and why it was so important. have the right to stop answering 2.
What did President Johnson’s National at any time until you talk to an Advisory Commission on Civil Disorders attorney.
Chapter 24 – The Turbulent Sixties 15 Lesson 5 – so that all Vietnamese could celebrate but 1968 was different.
A Very Bad Year The Viet Cong launched attacks in Main Idea: So many bad things almost every South Vietnamese city.
Most of these attacks were defeated quickly by happened in 1968 that it deserves United States and South Vietnamese forces. study all by itself.
Television crews Death and mayhem are two words showed communist forces attacking the U.S. that could describe 1968.
The ancient represented a turning point for the United capital city of Hue was taken over by States.
The reality of the war in Vietnam hit communist forces for nearly a month. home in the United States when it became Americans back home were shocked by the clear that the war wasn’t as close to over as boldness of the attack and protests against the government had been predicting.
Many Americans who assassinations of key political figures led to had backed the war were horrified that a grief and violence.
The campaign for nearly defeated enemy could still wage a president showed how our country was massive attack like this.
They launched the attack commanding American general in Vietnam, hoping to spark support from within the cities had claimed he “could see the light at the and the opposite resulted.
The United States forces end of the tunnel” regarding the eventual killed or captured many of the communists. victory of American and South Vietnamese When the fighting was over nearly 50,000 forces in the war.
The claim that the war communists were dead with another 6,000 was nearly over was shattered in January captured.
Their ability to continue their 1968 as the Viet Cong and North guerilla efforts was damaged severely.
But Vietnamese launched a massive attack the impact of their attacks swayed American during the Vietnamese New Year public opinion and resulted in the celebration of Tet.
Ultimately, the United States would begin lowering the number of troops in Vietnam as protests at home increased.
Johnson Will Not Run The popularity of President Johnson had hit a low point after the Tet Offensive.
In March, Minnesota Senator Eugene McCarthy came in a close second to the American soldiers pinned down by Viet Cong and president in the New Hampshire Democratic North Vietnamese forces in the ancient capital of Primary.
Chapter 24 – The Turbulent Sixties 16 expected to He will win the forever be Democratic remembered nomination. as a By the end of champion of the month, human Johnson rights.
King’s shocked the contributions nation when to the civil he went on rights President Johnson announces television and movement he will not run for president in 1968. said he would will be Dr.
King’s supporters point in not seek or remembered the direction of the where the accept his forever and shot that killed Martin Luther party’s nomination for another term as he is King was fired. president of the United States.
Clearly honored as one of our country’s greatest Johnson felt unable to pursue his goals for Americans. the Great Society at the expense of the country’s deepening conflict in Vietnam.
Robert F Kennedy A number of Democratic candidates After President Johnson pulled out of surfaced upon Johnson’s withdrawal.
His the presidential campaign, Robert F. vice president, Hubert H Humphrey of Kennedy became the front-runner.
Unfortunately and ran a campaign that focused on ending 1968 would not be a very good year for him the war in Vietnam, aiding the urban poor either. and bringing an end to racial violence and discrimination.
Martin Luther King, had just won two big Democratic primaries Jr. was in Memphis, Tennessee to support a in South Dakota and sanitation workers strike.
King stepped out early morning hours on to the balcony of his hotel and was shot of June 5, he gave a in the neck.
An escaped convict by the name Ambassador Hotel in of James Earl Ray was convicted of King’s Los Angeles, assassination.
After the rest of his life to withdraw his plea and delivering the get a new trial.
It never happened. speech, he walked through the kitchen King’s assassination led to a wave of to greet some riots in more than 60 cities across the supporters on his Senator Robert country.
King’s fundamental belief in nonviolence. immigrant by the Chapter 24 – The Turbulent Sixties 17 name of Sirhan Sirhan fired two shots that demonstrators from around the country had killed Robert Kennedy.
Daley refused to allow permits for the King, shocked the country. protestors.
As the protests continued regardless, the mayor sent in riot police to subdue the crowds.
The chaos and violence surrounding the convention left many Americans disillusioned with the Democrats.
American In August the Democrats held their George Wallace was Independent nominating convention in Chicago, Illinois. the Democratic Candidate George The party was divided after the dropping out governor of Alabama.
Wallace of President Johnson and the assassination He was upset with the of Robert Kennedy.
The two main party’s support of desegregation in the candidates were Minnesota Senator Eugene South so he decided to run as a third-party McCarthy who campaigned on ending the candidate for president.
He he became the also hopped to Democratic force candidate. concessions by the federal The bigger news government on seemed to be desegregation. happening outside Democratic Candidate Republican Candidate of the convention.
The Richard Nixon Hubert Humphrey Anti-war Republicans, Chapter 24 – The Turbulent Sixties 18 meanwhile, ran former California Senator and former Vice President Richard Nixon.
Lesson 5 Review Questions – (write Nixon ran a “law-and-order” campaigned answers in complete sentences on a designed to appeal to Americans who were piece of loose-leaf paper). shocked and outraged by the violence occurring across the nation.
Even though the Tet Offensive was a was close but Nixon won and the disaster for the communists, how did this Republicans took control of the White House fundamentally change the view of the for the first time since 1961.
Wallace winning 4 key southern states, Nixon easily had enough electoral votes to win the election.
The Eagle Has Landed: Man Walks On the Moon Vietnamization President Kennedy had challenged During the election of 1968, Nixon the country in his inauguration speech in had promised “peace with honor” regarding 1961to put a man on the moon by the end of the Vietnam War.
That challenge was met on July he planned to do this and Humphrey alleged 21, 1969.
The National Aeronautics and that Nixon must have a “secret plan” to end Space Administration had spent the the war.
Upon becoming president, Nixon years following Kennedy’s challenge by presented the “Nixon Doctrine” – a policy of building rockets and spacecraft with the turning over the main fighting of the Vietnam ultimate goal of landing on the moon.
The Apollo XI mission began with American troops were gradually called home blastoff from Cape Kennedy, Florida and by 1971 the responsibility fell on the on army of South Vietnam.
Chapter 24 – The Turbulent Sixties 19 There would be further trips to the Ali.
In 1967 Ali is stripped of his title as moon but this mission was the first and champion when he refuses to register for demonstrated how technically advanced our the draft.
Music Her death was caused by a suicidal drug • 1963 – Bob Dylan debuts as a folk singer overdose. with Blowin’ In the Wind, an anti-war • 1966 – Walt Disney died at age 65. song.
Disney introduced America to Mickey Mouse and created a movie empire and theme park.
Sports • 1960 – Montreal Canadiens capture their 5th Stanley Cup in a row, dominating the National Hockey League.
Their music starts Yankees breaks Babe Ruth’s single a craze and influences musicians for season homerun record by 61 homeruns. generations.
Clay Francisco attracts 50,000 with bands like successfully defends The Doors, the Grateful Dead, Buffalo his title in 1965 in a Springfield, The Who, and Jimi Hendrix. rematch.
Do some research explain what happened and its effect on the American public.
