Castro had overthrown the proAmerican government in Cuba and had announced he was a communist in 1961 following the failed Bay of Pigs Invasion by Cuban exiles.
Long-range missiles launched from Cuba could reach major American cities.
At the same time, America prepared to invade Cuba if the Soviet ships did not turn back.
When Soviet ships continued to sail towards Cuba after Kennedy imposed a naval blockade, the world watched expecting war.
Kennedy had considered a nuclear attack as an option when responding to the photos of missile sites in Cuba.
During the crisis, there were moments when the possibility of war was highonce when Cubans shot down a U2 plane and once when Americans stopped and boarded a Soviet ship containing nuclear bombs.
The crisis actually resulted in an attempt by the USA and USSR to reduce tension  The crisis made the superpowers realise how close they had come to war with each other and they became determined to never let a crisis escalate in the same way again.
Prepare for your assessment by learning the content on the next few pages.
However the crisis actually resulted in an attempt to reduce tension & limit the arms race because they had got so close to war.
Czechoslovakia 1968 In 1968 Dubcek became leader of Czechoslovakia and tried to make communism more Democratic.
Brezhnev responded to these changes by invading Czechoslovakia and removing Dubcek from power.
During WW2 the Nazis took over Czechoslovakia and later the Red Army liberated them from Nazi rule.
However in 1948 the communists forced their way to power and Czechoslovakia became a satellite state of the Soviet Union.
Living conditions in Czechoslovakia were poor and in the 1960s protests and demands for change grew.
He wanted to increase the standard of living, trade with the West and have more freedom, including free elections and allowing opposition parties.
However, Dubcek promised Brezhnev that he would not leave the Warsaw Pact.
Brezhnev believed the reforms, known as the Prague Spring, still threatened the security of the Soviet Union because they would lead to demands for change in other satellite states and possible demands to leave the Warsaw Pact.
Brezhnev also felt that if Czechoslovakia increased trade with the West, Czechoslovakia may be closer to the USA than the USSR thus creating a gap in the Iron Curtain.
The Czechoslovakian radio told people not to fight back and only protest peacefully to avoid a repeat of the violence that had occurred in Hungary in 1956.
Dubcek was removed from power and replaced by Husak who withdrew the reforms of the Prague Spring.
As a result of the Prague Spring, Brezhnev issued the Brezhnev Doctrine which stated the Soviet Union would not let any communist country abandon communism and would use force to keep them communist.
The USA had welcomed Dubcek’s reforms but did not intervene to help because they did not want to interfere and risk war with the Soviet Union.
If Brezhnev allowed Dubcek to introduce democratic reforms in Czechoslovakia other satellite states may also want reforms and this would weaken the Soviet Union’s control over them.
Soviet security was dependent on maintaining tight control over its satellite states.
The Soviet Invasion of Afghanistan  In the 1970s a Soviet-backed communist group was in power in Afghanistan.
They introduced reforms that went against the Muslim culture of Afghanistan.
Reagan’s Policies  Ronald Reagan became President of the USA in 1981, determined to be tough on communism.
Success Criteria WWW EBI  You have re-written content in a new format (e.g.
The first one has been done for you. 1970s Cuba telephone Détente was a period of lessening tension during the late 1960s and 1970s.
