Six years later I was combat aircrew, flying recon patrols for the Navy squadron that was first on the scene, on the first day of the blockade.
Props for the Jed Bartlet prototype. posted by timsteil 15 users marked this as a favorite .push; Totally unnecessary event.
JFK actually didn't know that prior to discovering the missiles in Cuba.
I believe ours were Thors which were unreliable turkeys who were placed there to make our allies feel good.
The Russians won that one, because we secretly agreed to remove the Thors and not attack Cuba as we were planning before the incident.
According to Wikipedia we had Thors in the UK and Jupiters in Italy and Turkey.posted by kirkaracha at 6:03 PM on October 16, 2012 Thirteen Days is indeed a bit of a remake, although with some additional declassified details and focuses much more on the events as seen through Ken O'Donnel's eyes, with a lot less Jack & Bobby than Missiles featured.
Turns out, as he told me about 10 years later, his base was one of the ones large enough to accommodate the United States missiles that were in Turkey, and so he was needed to help plan the pullout of the missiles to his base if his base wound up being used.
They wound up not using his base , but for a number of years Dad was one of the few who knew the truth about the deal we made to pull our missiles out of Turkey.
He said, if I remember correctly, it had not been considered that big a deal to do that, since we were already planning to get rid of the missiles in Turkey anyway, so it was felt it was more important to get the deal worked out to get the missiles out of Cuba, and to avert a potential catastrophic conflict.
He always wondered why the truth of that story did not come out sooner or get more attention.
JFK standing ""eye-to-eye"" against Khruschev and the Soviet leader ""blinking"" in the face of steely and muscular American resolve.
As scary as the fictional Kennedy account is, the truth was even worse.
Kennedy had seen some combat in WW2 so he knew a little bit of what war was about.
Both of these men the Soviet leader in particular had an understanding of the fog of war and the terrible consequences that can come from miscalculation and this made them cautious and sanguine and careful which is what really served everyone so well in the end.
Caro demonstrates again and again that Kennedy was improvising as he went along, and frequently bended the rules to give his adversary more time.
Dobbs also basis much of his argument on his own analysis of where the ships actually were.
Fascinating, but he's just one man, and when revising history, most historians rely on peer review for this sort of research.
But I definitely want to read Dobbs' books now.posted by KokuRyu at 4:54 AM on October 17, 2012 My mother was in the Navy and stationed here at NAS Jax during the missile crisis and has talked about it just in the last few years.
She was a nurse and at dinner she and several friends made plans to go to the beach in the morning, when they woke up all the men were gone from the base except for MP's guarding the gates and one doctor.
They were all told that they were confined to base until further notice.
Nobody knew where they went for several hours until they were told in small groups privately that the nation was at war with Cuba and to prepare for the casualties, specifically radiation wounds.
I asked her if she worried about her family and she said no, they just all really expected to die and she just hoped it would be quick and painless everyone.
It's amazing to me how fatalistic everyone was-but they were given reason to believe that Florida was going to be hit with an atomic bomb at any minute.
Oddly enough, after the crisis, my mother received orders for Bethesda and was on duty when JFK was shot and was again confined to the hospital when they brought the body back from Dallas.
THAT story is tear inducing when she tells it.posted by hollygoheavy at 7:17 AM on October 17, 2012 The Jupiters in Turkey were obsolete, and their management a cause for concern, but Turkey felt that having them and thus being a nuclear power by proxy was both a deterrent to Soviet aggression and an assertion of national prestige.
In terms of the ability to launch nuclear attacks on Russia, decommissioning them made very little difference, as the United States had plenty of long-range missiles.
The reality is he took stunning risks to impose American hegemonyposted by homunculus at 4:28 PM on October 17, 2012 Any time I feel down, or if I just want to scare myself, I can wonder how a Nixon Administration would have dealt with all of this.
Here's a link to info about the most interesting book I've seen lately on the Crisis...posted by dr. zoom at 5:13 PM on October 17, 2012 What no one knew at the time, and wasn't declassified until 2001, is that there were four Foxtrot class subs that left Russia bound for Cuba, with authority to fire nukes, without Kremlin approval.posted by timsteil at 8:11 PM on October 17, 2012 Well, FSVO nukes.
A typical weblog is one person posting their thoughts on the unique things they find on the web.
