Both the USA and USSR viewed each other’s expanding nuclear arsenals with suspicion.
Each development one superpower made would be followed by the development of new weaponry by their opponent.
National Pride & Personalities Nuclear capabilities became a symbol for national prestige.
Superiority was needed to impress emerging third world countries of the relative successes of capitalism and communism.
Eisenhower was pushed towards nuclear stockpiling, as he thought it would increase his domestic support.
The emergence of nuclear weapons provided wealth and influence for those involved in their construction.
In Russia, nuclear technology allowed the military to extend its influence over the USSR’s defence policy.
In America, manufacturers, development teams and the military also became increasingly influential as a result of nuclear development.
This made it hard for any President to cut down nuclear technology development, as it risked creating unemployment.
The complex also created fear and paranoia around the Soviets’ nuclear capabilities.
This was reciprocated by the Soviet military, perpetuating the escalation of tensions and nuclear development. 3 of 81 Timeline of Nuclear Development #1 July 1945 – the Manhattan Project.
August 1949 – The Soviets explode their first atomic bomb in Kazakhstan.
It was developed with such speed thanks to the activities of Soviet moles, and kidnapped German scientists.
November 1952 – American insecurity following the Berlin Blockade and Chinese Revolution lead to the development of the first H-bomb – vastly more powerful than the Atomic bomb dropped on Japan. . 4 of 81 Timeline of Nuclear Development #2 August 1953 – The USSR test the first Lithium bomb.
It is first launched in Kazakhstan. . 5 of 81 Timeline of Nuclear Development #3 October 1957 – Sputnik is launched.
It creates fear in the United States over the possible military applications for space technology.
A malfunction leads to the dog’s death, but the United States is even less successful.
The early 1960s – By July 1960, Kennedy launches the first submarine launched ballistic missile.
Kennedy also commits to putting a man on the moon by the end of the decade.
A range of delivery systems have been developed: planes, submarines and missiles.
Both sides are capable of launching attacks and, from 1962 onwards, counter-attacks on each other.
Since Cuba's independence from Spain in 1898 it had essentially been a puppet state of the United States.
He oversaw a pro-American dictatorship, where much of the population lived in extreme poverty and where much of the land was owned by United States corporations.
However, Batista was overthrown by the 26th of July Movement, lead by Fidel Castro, in 1959.
His regime instituted major reforms; illiteracy was almost eradicated, and Cuba created one of the best health cares in the world.
The Mafia was also driven from Cuba, when it had once dominated the country. 7 of 81 Cuban-US Relations.
In 1961, amidst increasing tensions, ordered that all American property be seized.
The USSR also gave support for Castro's fledgling Government; it gave Cuba a lot of cheap oil, but the refineries in Cuba, which were all American owned.
In response, the United States cut the amount of sugar it imported from Cuba.
This could have had disastrous consequences for Cuba; sugar exports were a major source of income for the country.
In retaliation, Castro nationalised even more American-owned companies and tied Cuba's economy to that of the USSR's even more.
The CIA also developed a plan to arm Cuban exiles who would stage an invasion of Cuba.
Kennedy was assured the plan would succeed, and that the exiles could quickly defeat Cuba's army.
Kennedy gave the plan his blessing and the Bay of Pigs Invasion began in April 1961. 8 of 81 The Bay of Pigs Invasion.
Ships that were designed to supply the rebels were sank by the Cuban army, and the invasion was quickly invaded.
Castro was politically strengthened, and the CIA resorted to launching several hundred assassination attempts on him.
Khrushchev wanted to help Castro, who feared another United States invasion attempt, for a number of reasons.
For one, Castro was trying to expand Communism into Latin American countries.
Khrushchev also wanted to portray himself as a defender of the rights of small countries against American imperialism.
Kennedy establishes a committee of the National Security Council to advise him on the crisis.
He explained that the Soviet military presence in Cuba is solely designed to protect Cuba from United States aggression.
The United States offers to withdraw its missiles in Turkey in return for the Soviets withdrawing their missiles from Cuba.
He offers to dismantle the sites in return for the blockade being lifted and Kennedy agreeing not to invade Cuba.
A day later, Khrushchev sends another telegram, demanding Kennedy dismantle United States missile bases in Turkey.
This explains why he was so vehement about the USSR withdrawing its missiles from Turkey.
Kennedy makes a statement saying that he would lift the blockade and not invade Cuba in return for Khrushchev dismantling Soviet bases in Cuba.
Russian bombers leave Cuba and Kennedy lifts the naval blockade. 12 of 81 Key turning points of the Crisis.
Khrushchev begins to place medium-range ballistic missiles in Cuba; U2 planes detect the building sites.
The Hot Line telephone link was established between the White House and the Kremlin.
It was designed to provide direct communication between the President and Premier in times of crisis.
The Nuclear Test Ban Treaty was signed in 1963, banning all nuclear testing except those conducted underground.
Khrushchev does not over-react when a U2 enters Soviet airspace and Kennedy doesn't when a U2 is shot down over Cuba.
Khrushchev could claim he had secured an American promise to not invade Cuba.
This increased his standing, and meant he could present himself as a defender of the rights of small countries.
The success of a nation became much more concerned with their military might.
Khrushchev's compromise was attacked by the military; he was dismissed as Soviet leader in 1964.
The Arms race intensified, albeit under the limits established by US-Soviet treaties, like the Nuclear Test Ban Treaty. 17 of 81 How did the Cuban Crisis improve Superpower relati The crisis led to an increased awareness about the dangers of nuclear war and the dangers of threatening each other's spheres of influence.
Both administrations would henceforth be more considerate about not violating these spheres of influence.
The hotline telephone link was established between the Kremlin and White House.
Such legislation was indicative of improved relations between superpowers.
However, Kennedy was torn between improving US-Soviet relations and working with the Civil Rights movement.
This meant that in the event of a nuclear strike, it was likely that both sides would be destroyed.
Following the failure of flexible response, mutually assured destruction became central to Kennedy's foreign policy.
Although the Soviets never used the term, it also underpinned their tactics.
Both sides tried to limit conflicts so that they did not escalate into a nuclear war.
Stalin never committed his own troops, Truman fired McArthur for wanting to deploy nuclear weapons and the United States kept the combat zone to Korea.
The United States withdrew its missiles from Turkey, the Soviets did the same in Cuba and the United States made no intervention in the Hungarian crisis.
The Sovier acquistion of a nuclear bomb in 1949 lead to the Americans developing the Hydrogen Bomb, in turn leading to the Soviets developing the Lithium bomb.
The culture of secrecy led to fears that each side had superior capabilities.
The Gaither Report created fears in the United States about a non-existent bomber gap.
The cost of nuclear weapons put massive strains on both countries' economies.
Khrushchev made up for this weakness with an increasingly aggressive foreign policy towards the West, and his decision to place weapons Cuba can be seen as an economic choice.
Nuclear weapons did not stop the Soviets and United States competing for influence in other regions.
The Soviet Union commits no troops, but Mao is inferior to Stalin in terms of decision-making.
He does not consult Mao on this beforehand, and Mao persists in pursuing Stalinist policies.
Khrushchev criticises the Great Leap Forwards, especially the backyard production of steel.
This is heavily criticised in China, which has promoted itself as an anti-imperialist force hostile to the United States.
The dispute over the Sino-Soviet border leads to two clashes at Damansky Island in the Ussuri River. 22 of 81 Sino-Soviet Relations Timeline #3 September 1969: Zhou Enlai, China's Foreign Minister, and Kosygin, the USSR's Prime Minister, have a difficult meeting in Beijing.
The USA withdraws diplomatic support from Taiwan, and gives it to China. 23 of 81 Sino-Soviet Relations in 1949: Mao had a great deal of respect for the USSR, the world's first Marxist-Lenninist state.
He was especially reverent to Stalin, whom he saw as the leader of the revolutionary movement.
Mao believed that such an alliance was key to preventing American aggression, and to stopping the development of anti-communist forces within China.
Mao also wanted the help of Soviet experts in developing Socialism in China.
He had only supported the Chinese Communists in the Civil War once their victory was assured, and only came out in public support for Mao once the War had finally been won in 1949. 24 of 81 Sino-Soviet Treaty of Friendship and Mutual Assist Negotiations began in the summer of 1949 in Moscow, before the civil war had even been fully won.
The Chinese communists were willing to put themselves in a position of deference from the start.
Mao and Stalin met face to face in late 1949, and the treaty was signed in 1950.
It agreed that the Soviet Union would provide China with economic support worth $300 million.
Soviet experts were also sent to China to provide technical assistance.
The Soviets helped the Chinese build new aluminium plants, a cable factory and modernise industry.
However, the only non-natives allowed into the area were Soviet citizens.
Stalin also forced Mao to drop his support for Ho Chi Minh and the Vietnamese communists. 25 of 81 The Hundred Flowers Campaign.
In the early years of Communist China, a process of rapid industrialisation took place, overseen by Soviet specialists.
Hundreds of thousands moved to the cities; by 1956, the number of people living in Cities had more than doubled.
Conditions were generally very poor, and there was widespread dissent over people's living conditions.
Zhou Enlai, the Chinese foreign minister, proposed a programme of liberalisation, allowing Chinese citizens even anti-communist intellectuals to voice their opinions and views about the policies pursued by the Chinese Government.
It was designed to create a more accountable, open Government with greater popular support.
Mao, who was worried about the lack of peasant involvement in new developments, encouraged the idea.
Mao became the figurehead for the campaign, making regular speeches about the campaign.
Criticism was slow coming at first, but by 1957 criticism of the Government became increasingly widespread and increasingly heated.
Soon, millions of people were writing in to Government officials, criticising many aspects of Government policy.
The Hundred Flowers Campaign became the “anti-rightist campaign” hundreds of thousands of people who had criticised Mao during the period were purged.
However, an alternative position has suggested that from its very inception, the campaign was designed to flush out dissidents and that it was never intended to liberalise Chinese society. 26 of 81 The Great Leap Forwards.
The Great Leap Forwards was a campaign instituted by Mao that aimed to rapidly transform China from an agrarian, peasant society to an industrialised, socialist state.
It was not at all dissimilar to the programme of Five Year Plans instituted by Stalin in the 1930s.
Perhaps the most fundamental change to the nature of Chinese society was the collectivisation of agriculture.
This increased production, but the materials were of very poor quality.
The production of these materials took people away from agricultural production.
New experimental agricultural methods were pursued, which further destabilised the agricultural process.
Successive years of poor weather made agricultural problems even worse.
The Cultural Revolution was initiated in 1966 as a way to re-impose Maoist values following the Great Leap Forward, which had significantly undermined Mao.
Mao encouraged the purging of all bourgeois and 'backwards' traditional Chinese elements from society.
Young people were encouraged to form Red Guard to hunt down “revisionists” a wide range of people from liberals to communists sympathetic with Khrushchev’s reforms.
The zeal with which the Red Guards took to the persecutions was beyond what even Mao predicted.
Millions of people were persecuted; people were publicly humiliated, “re-educated”, imprisoned and tortured.
The upper echelons of the Communist party were also affected; many were purged from positions of seniority.
Mao hoped to further reinforce his cult of personality, and eliminate anyone who was not totally loyal to his personal rule.
Soviet-Chinese cooperation in the Korean War perhaps marks the high point of Sino-Soviet relations.
Mao supported Kim Il-Sung's belief in Korean reunification, but thought that the North Korean Invasion in 1950 was premature.
He feared that it would lead to the USA expanding its influence in south-east Asia.
Stalin was key to Mao's decision to commit Chinese troops to the North Korean War.
He convinced Mao that a South Korean victory would create a domino effect, leading to the collapse of other communist powers including China.
Indeed, by the time that Mao ordered 500,000 Chinese troops into North Korea, the UN forces were only miles away from the Chinese border.
Mao also hoped that Chinese support for the North Koreans would show China's commitment to the international revolutionary struggle.
The Soviets were clearly the senior partners in terms of planning the war effort; for the most part, Stalin left Mao alone, but he would occasionally intervene and overrule Mao.
Chinese and Soviet commanders frequently clashed, but it was the Soviets who always prevailed.
China emerged as a world player as a result of the war; despite being a junior partner in the Sino-Soviet alliance, Mao began to believe that China had a duty to assist other Communists if the USSR would not. 29 of 81 Taiwan Straits Crisis.
It was home to the Nationalists, who still claimed to be the legitimate Government of China.
Mao had wanted to invade Taiwan for a long time, but Stalin's reticent attitude prevented him from taking any action.
The blockade had been established to prevent conflict between China and Taiwan.
The lifting of the blockade meant that Chiang Kai Sek could intensify Taiwanese pressure on China.
Mao saw this as an opportunity to “liberate Taiwan”, and galvanise the Chinese people.
Although the Soviets had not been informed, Khrushchev was willing to support Mao's venture.
The crisis therefore had the danger of escalating into a full-blown China-USA war.
The Nationalists abandoned the Taschen Islands to the Communists, but kept control of Quemoy and Matsu.
The crisis ended only when the Soviet began to take a more moderate stance, and engaged in peace talks with the Taiwanese. 30 of 81 The Second Taiwanese Straits Crisis.
Tensions re-emerged in 1958, when Mao ordered a new wave of shelling of Quemoy.
He wanted to stir up revolutionary sentiments on the mainland, tie the USSR into military support for China and test the US' commitment to Taiwan.
The USSR seriously disagreed with China's tactics, but felt they had to present a united communist front.
The second crisis came to an end when Mao and Khrushchev decided that leaving Quemoy and Matsu in the hands of the nationalists gave them a tactical advantage.
This angered Mao; he had not been consulted on the speech, and was pursuing Stalinist policies in China.
Mao was deeply angered by the speech, and began to see Khrushchev as a revisionist.
Mao considered this process of reconciliation as ideological revisionism.
This criticism was especially heightened during Khrushchev’s visits to the USA in 1959.
Mao believed that Khrushchev was showing weakness against a capitalist power, and that he was abandoning millions of comrades resisting imperialism.
Mao considered himself to leader of the anti-imperialist movement, and wanted to take a much aggressive, anti-American stance.
Mao had willingly accepted Stalin as his superior, but he was highly critical of Khrushchev.
He saw Khrushchev as his inferior, and wanted to position himself as leader of the worldwide revolutionary movement.
He felt that as leader of the USSR, he should be leader of the world revolutionary movement.
Neither trusted each other, and both try outdo each other when they met.
One famous anecdote relates that at one meeting, Mao invited Khrushchev to go swimming.
Mao was famous for being a skilled swimmer, and he deliberately humiliated Khrushchev, who could hardly swim.
National Interest National interests were a key factor in the deterioration of Sino-Soviet relations.
Spheres of influence were a particular matter of contention; the USSR prevented China from expanding its influence into North Korea.
Khrushchev also refused to reduce its ties to Mongolia, which Mao saw as a natural part of China's sphere of influence.
The Soviet invasion of Czechoslovakia in 1968 also deteriorated relations.
However, perhaps the most important national issue in the Sino-Soviet split was the border between China and Russia.
China demanded territorial concessions from Russia, and this increased tensions over the border.
He believed that this would help affirm China’s position as a World Power.
The USSR was hesitant about assisting China; they tried to persuade the Chinese that Chinese nuclear weapons were redundant, as China was under the Soviet Union’s nuclear umbrella.
Soviet reluctance to help China develop a nuclear bomb developed, and in 1960, they withdrew all support for China’s nuclear programme.
This increased fear and paranoia in China over the USSR’s intentions towards them.
In turn, China refused to sign the Nuclear Test Ban Treaty in 1963 and developed its own nuclear bomb in 1964.
The possession of a nuclear weapon by the Chinese increased fear and tension with the Soviet Union, and further helped to deteriorate Sino-Soviet relations. 35 of 81 Damansky Island Dispute #1.
The Damansky Island dispute is a prime example of how tensions over the border lead to the Sino-Soviet split.
The Ussuri River region in the Sino-Soviet border was particularly contentious, as it flooded often and so it was hard to establish a definitive border.
The Damansky Island was in the Ussuri River and Khrushchev offered to cede it to China.
However, when Mao declared that it would be the first of many territorial concessions, Khrushchev withdrew his offer.
Tensions were heightened by the appointment of the USSR's former deputy of Strategic Rocket Forces as a commander in the region.
These tensions were further escalated in 1968, when the USSR invaded Czechoslovakia.
China feared that the USSR might attempt an invasion of China, and that the Ussuri river would be a weak spot in such an eventuality.
The Chinese therefore adopted a tactic of “active defence”, whereby China would pre-emptively strike the Soviet Union and prevent it from launching its own attack.
By this point, both countries possessed nuclear weapons, so there was a real threat of nuclear war. 36 of 81 Damansky Island Dispute #2.
They appeared to the Soviet troops to be unarmed, but soon charged on the Soviet troops, engaging in hand-to-hand combat.
Eventually, the Soviets withdrew their troops from the Island completely.
The Chinese then began to mass their troops on their side of the border.
The Soviets then attacked the Chinese troops, claiming a high number of casualties.
On the 13thAugust 1969, a violent clash lead to the destruction of a whole Chinese Brigade.
Kosygin, the Soviet Prime Minister, met Zhou Enlai in Beijing Airport, returning from the funeral of Ho Chi Minh.
Accordingly, he sought a rapprochement with the USA. 37 of 81 Reasons for Pro-American rapprochement.
To the east lay India, who had gone to war with China over a border dispute in 1962.
To the west lay Taiwan, which claimed to be the legitimate Government of mainland China, and South Korea, a strong capitalist nation.
Japan was also growing in terms of economic strength and Mao instinctively feared its resurgence; it had invaded China only thirty years before.
Mao feared that it would lead to an increased American presence in the south-east.
And, of course, to the North was Russia, where border disputes and ideological conflict threatened war.
He hoped to curtail Soviet influence by exploiting Sino-Soviet tensions.
Mao feared a resurgent Japan it had invaded China only three decades before, and there was years of mutual hostility and tension between the two countries.
The military situation in Vietnam was also an issue; America was deeply entangled in the conflict, and China was providing vast amounts of support for the Vietcong.
The US' diplomatic and military support for Taiwan was also a major source of tension in China. 39 of 81 Ping-pong diplomacy.
In 1971, the United States Ping Pong team were invited to play the Chinese team.
This was a monumental event; he was the first American President to visit Communist China.
It was seen as a success by both parties; a communiqué was produced once the visit was over stressing the ideological differences of Maoism and American capitalism, but also stressing the similarities between the two countries. 40 of 81 Impact of rapprochement.
Trade increased not just with America, but with other western countries as well.
It began to criticise human rights abuses in South Korea and withdrew diplomatic support for Taiwan, expelling it from the UN security council.
Soviet leaders had not expected rapprochement; they were forced to see the world in multi-polar terms.
In 1973, Egypt and Syria, supported by surrounding states, invaded Israel.
OPEC decided to raise the price of oil to all countries supporting Israel, such as the United States and United Kingdom.
This created the possibility of a recession and lost economic growth across much of the west.
In response, the United States organised the Washington Energy Conference, which harmonised Western Energy policies.
The United States also lifted controls on the banks, letting them exploit the surplus of dollars.
The threat of an economic crisis pushed the United States towards détente.
It made people reconsider whether exorbitant defence spending was actually good for the economy.
The USSR was actually strengthened by the oil crisis; its own oil exports became more valuable and its strategic position was strengthened by the US' weakness.
The USSR was spending a vast amount of money on arms spending and armament production constituted a large part of the economy; 30% of Soviet workers were involved in armament production.
Furthermore, much of the Soviet economy was focused on heavy industry, and consumer goods were largely neglected.
Were the Soviets able to divest funds away from armaments, they would be able to invest in consumer goods more.
Another major drain on the Soviet economy was the amount of economic support the USSR was providing to communist allies.% of the hard currency earned by the Soviet Union was being given to Communist allies abroad. $1 billion a year was given to Vietnam and $4 billion a year was given to Angola and Ethiopia.
Willy Brandt, Social Democratic Chancellor of Germany, was keen to develop links between East and West.
Tensions were still high following the 1968 invasion of Czechoslovakia.
He saw the stabilization of relations as essential to maintaining European well-being, and to economic growth.
Ostpolitik, meaning “East Politics”, was the policy designed by Brandt to open up channels between East and West.
He encouraged Western European countries to open up relations with the Eastern Bloc.
There was a real threat of war with China, and China's rapprochement with the USA forced the Soviet Union to improve relations with America.
The USSR also wanted the west to recognize the legitimacy of the Eastern Bloc to secure Soviet hegemony in the region.
Rapprochement, it was felt, would also help the Soviet Union limit the US' power.
In the early 1970s, the two superpowers had nuclear parity, but the Soviets were aware they couldn't keep up in the arms race indefinitely.
The USSR sought to maintain this parity through arms limitation treaties.
Kennedy's threats to create a nuclear war also caused considerable anxiety.
The Treaty of Warsaw and Treaty of Moscow, 1970 lead to West Germany accepting the Oder-Neisse line as Poland's border.
The Four Powers Agreement, 1971 confirmed France's, the US', the UK's and the USSR's administrative zones in Germany.
These had originally only been temporary divisions, but they were made formal by this agreement.
The Basic Treaty, 1972 was an agreement between the German Democratic Republic and the Federal Republic of Germany.
In the treaty, the FRG accepted the existence of the GDR and formally recognised it as a legitimate state.
The crisis showed the dangers of nuclear war, and had already led to the Test Ban Treaty and the hotline.
There was significant obstacles for the superpowers to overcome in signing the treaty, most specifically the Czechoslovakian invasion, which stopped negotiations in 1968.
Furthermore, it was hard to compare the USA's and USSR's arsenals, which were incredibly different.
The USSR was finally pushed towards signing the treaty by Nixon's visit to Beijing in 1972.
It showed increased cooperation, and both superpowers were clearly committed to preventing nuclear war.
This was a significant change from the period when Massive Retaliation dominated foreign policies.
The USA was developing MIRVs, which were not legislated for, and which were capable of holding multiple warheads.
The Basic Principles Agreement established the terms of conduct in the event of nuclear war.
SALT II set equal limits for the number of missile bombers and strategic bombers, but not cruise missiles.
It was only signed in 1979, after Ford had attempted to limit the number of Soviet Missiles.
However, it was rejected by the Senate, as America felt increasingly vulnerable and conflict in Angola, Afghanistan and Iran made it seem like the USSR was expanding its sphere of influence. 55 of 81 Helsinki Accords, 1975.
The Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe comprised of countries from NATO and the Warsaw Pact.
The Accords encouraged improved and encouraged trade across the Iron Curtain.
The Warsaw Pact promised to protect human rights and submitted to being observed by objective institutions.
The West hoped this would undermine the communist regimes by encouraging dissent.
The Accords were criticised by the American right-wing as it was seen as an act of complicity with Soviet tyranny.
The USSR was still expanding its sphere of influence into the third world such as Angola, Afghanistan and Mozambique.
Some interpret it as having prolonged the war, and having given the USSR time to recover. 57 of 81 Carter.
Carter became President in 1977, and didn't really have a clear line on foreign policy.
Previously to this point, his experience had been largely in domestic policy.
He was keen to focus on human rights in Eastern Europe, but was also influenced by other factors.
Neo-conservatism was rising in popularity and particularly pressured Carter into resuming the arms race.
His national security adviser, Brezinski, wanted to take an increasingly hard line. 58 of 81 Soviet Invasion of Afghanistan #1.
The Soviet invasion of Afghanistan can be seen as beginning the end of détente.
Afghanistan was considered a place of strategic importance for the Soviets; it divided Pakistan and Iran, two major regional powers.
It was close to the Arabian sea and the strait of Hormutz, a key passageway in the transport of oil to the West.
A friendly Afghanistan would give the Soviets influence over this area of tactical importance.
They immediately alienated themselves from the religious elite, who were immensely influential in Afghan society.
Land was redistributed from wealthy landlords to the landless poor, women's rights and education was heavily promoted, the wearing of headscarves was discouraged and women were enrolled in literacy classes.
Protests spread to other Islamic countries, especially Iran, where it lead to the revolution of 1979. 59 of 81 Soviet Invasion of Afghanistan #2.
They felt the Soviets might exploit the crisis to gain influence in the area and seize oil supplies.
The United States started giving aid to the Mujahadeen in 1979, when they were provided with communication equipment.
He sought to expunge political dissidents through drastic and draconian reforms.
The Afghan Prime Minister Mohammed Taraki wanted to oust Amin, and end the repression and radical reforms.
The attempted coup made Taraki realise he had little support in the USSR, and he began to increase relations with the West.
Andropov, KGB chief, argued that if the USSR did not commit troops to help save the Communist regime, Amin would claim the USSR was abandoning its responsibilities and would look to the United States for support instead.
Members of the Politburo suggested that the USSR should invade and topple Amin, as had worked in Hungary in 1956.
When NATO deployed even more nuclear weapons, it was felt that the Soviets had nothing to lose from invading Afghanistan.
Soviet expansionism into the third world, particularly Mozambique, Angola etc, was used by neo-conservatives as evidence of a need to take a more aggressive foreign policy.
Carter expanded aid given to anti-communists in El Salvador and Nicaragua.
Soviet violations of human rights, in contravention of the Helsinki accords, troubled many Americans.
He could only function whilst heavily medicated having had a heart attack in the late 1970s and this led to Soviet diplomacy becoming more confused.
In November 1979, American hostages were taken captive by Islamists in the United States embassy in Tehran.
They weren't released until 1981, leading neo-conservatives to claim it showed American impotence in world affairs.
It was seen by neo-conservatives as an act of Soviet expansionism that American impotence had been unable to stop.
There was growing criticism of detente in the Politburo, who were angered by American criticism of their human rights record.
The military also pushed for a resurgence in the arms race, believing it would increase their influence and support Soviet hegemony in the Global South. 62 of 81 Reagan's Foreign Policy.
Regan argued that the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan and the deployment of **-20 nuclear missiles in Eastern Europe were signs of increased Soviet expansionism and that it necessitated a change in foreign policy.
The Militarised Counter-Revolution saw defense spending increase 13% in 1982 and by eight percent in each of the following two years.
New ways to deploy nuclear weapons became prevalent; strategic planes and trident were developed.
Reagan knew that the U**R would never be able to match the USA in a new cold war, but that they would be forced to.
The most important development under the Reagan Administration was the Strategic Defense Initiative, or “star wars”, an incredibly complicated and technologically advanced anti-ballistic missile system in space.
The Star Wars system clearly contravened the Anti-ballistic Missile System Treaty. 63 of 81 The Reagan Doctrine.
The Reagan Doctrine was a policy that armed and supported anti-communist Governments or rebels fighting left-wing Governments.
Military support was sent to right-wing Contra rebels in Nicaragua fighting the Sandinista Government.
An unpopular, right-wing Government in El Salvador facing a left-wing insurrection was also supported.
A notable exception was Grenada when the New Jewel Movement, lead by Bernard Coard, was overthrown by military troops.
Stinger anti-aircraft were also provided to the Mujahadeen in Afghanistan.
Furthermore, economic sanctions were often used; when Solidarity was banned in Poland in 1981, the United States cut loans and bank credit to Poland and instituted tariffs on Polish exports.
It was seen as neo-imperialist and intervening in the affairs of small western countries.
Furthermore, many of the regimes in the Phillipines and El Salvador were anti-democratic and violated numerous human rights. 64 of 81 Thatcher and Reagan.
She was fervently anti-communist and committed to the US-UK special relationship.
The fact that the United States had missiles on European soil significantly increased the pressure on the USSR. 65 of 81 Gerontocracy.
In the early 1980s, the USSR was a gerontocracy, governed by old, ill and often incapable leaders.
Reform, especially of the economy, was badly needed, but the leaders in this period were unable to provide such change.
He made the SALT II agreement with Ford in 1979, but by this time, it's doubtful as to whether he fully understood what was happening.
He began some reforms, starting domestic reforms and beginning half-hearted attempts to withdraw from Afghanistan.
The Foreign Minister refused to comment on the incident, only warning that if any other aircraft entered Soviet airspace without permission, it too would be shot down.
Andropov was too old and weak to make a face-to-face meeting with Western leaders about it.
He was considerably younger than his predecessors; only just in his fifties and the only Soviet leader to not have been born in Imperial Russia.
Gorbachev argued of the need to reform communism, making Soviet Government more accountable and ending conflict with the USA, which he saw as destructive and destabilizing.
He felt this would let him reduce arms spending without making the USSR vulnerable to American aggression, thus appeasing the fears of the Soviet military.
Shevardnandze, Gorbachev's foreign minister, launched a charm offensive with the west, seeking to improve relations with Western leaders.
It dragged on indeterminably, highlighting the inefficiencies of supporting foreign communist Governments.
Geneva, November 1985: Little actual change was effected by the Geneva summit, but it established amicable relations between Reagan and Gorbachev.
Gorbachev offered to phase out all of the USSR's nuclear missiles in exchange for the United States abolishing the Star Wars programme.
Reagan declined, but the offer shocked Washington and showed that Gorbachev was a radical alternative to his predecessors.
The Intermediate Nuclear Forces agreement lead to the immediate withdrawal of Nuclear Missiles.
It was also the first time Gorbachev met George Bush in a formal capacity, who would later succeed Reagan as President.
It established good relations between the two and they declared that they had “buried the cold war at the bottom of the Mediterranean.” 69 of 81 Gorbachev's domestic policy.
These policies encouraged more criticism of the USSR, and demands for greater liberalization.
Demands ranged from greater liberalization to a full rejection of Communism.
This encouraged similar reformers within Soviet satellite states in Eastern Europe.
The first non-communist Government was elected in Poland, when Solidarity won all but one seat in the legislature.
Throughout the 1980s, there were pressures produced by ineffective rule, economic problems and greater calls for freedom.
There was a lack of prosperity in these countries; they were unable to match the wealth and prosperity of the west.
In the East, there was a continued focus on heavy industry which was inefficient, unprofitable and that often took the focus away from consumer goods and light industry, unlike in the West where financial industries, in particular, were booming.
Pollution was becoming very severe as a result of such a focus on heavy industry; people's health suffered.
Technology was increasingly outdated – there were few computers, videos or robotics in the East.
People were also becoming increasingly aware of the advantages of a materialist, consumerist society. 71 of 81 Fall of Communism in Poland #1.
Resistance to communism became increasingly prevalent following Pope John Paul II's visit to Poland in 1979.
Throughout 1980 – 1981, an illegal Trade Union called Solidarity became increasingly important in Polish society.
Lead by Lech Walesa, Solidarity wielded significant influence over industrial workers, especially the shipyards in Gdansk.
He hoped that by making concessions with Solidarity, he would be able to make them cooperate with the Communist Government.
Soviet troop movements along the Polish border convinced Polish General Jaruzelski that, in accordance with the Brezhnev Doctrine, a Soviet invasion was imminent.
Hoping to appease Soviet fears about Solidarity, he declared Marshall Law, outlawing Solidarity and using the army to quell dissent.
Solidarity continued to operate illegally and was well supported due to popular discontent at continuing economic stagnation.
The Government was still unable to reform the economy and a price hike in July 1985 created deeper resentment.
In 1987, the Government held a referendum on instituting economic reform but it failed.
In 1988, a 110% price increase was instituted, creating widespread anger.
Following the repression of demonstrations in March 1988, steel-workers went on strike in April.
The troops intimidated many workers into returning to work. 72 of 81 Fall of Communism in Poland #2.
In August, mineworkers from mines across Upper Silesia went on strike, surprising the secret intelligence service.
They were succeeded by 10,000 workers going on strike and occupying Stalowa Wola Steelworks, demanding the legalisation of Solidarity.
This particularly concerned the authorities, and Lech Walesa – fearing violent repression – called the action off.
Jaruzelski also legalised Solidarity – although this was largely opposed by other members of Government.
In the agreement signed in April 1989, it was agreed that semi-free elections should be held in June.
Solidarity won all but one seat in the senate and all the seats they were allowed to contest in the Sejm.
Despite Solidarity winning the elections, the Communists maintained control over the military.
Solidarity compromised with the Communists, agreeing that Jaruzelski be allowed to continue as head of state.
The Communist Prime Minister resigned and a Solidarity MP was elected PM the Eastern Bloc's first non-communist head of Government.
The election of a non-communist Government in an Eastern Bloc country had massive ramifications; it inspired people in other Soviet satellite states to begin to call for an end to communist rule, beginning the process that would end communist rule in Eastern Europe. 73 of 81 Gorbachev and Poland.
In July 1989, Gorbachev said that the USSR would no longer involve itself in the affairs of Eastern Europe.
This reinforced calls for an end to communism elsewhere in Eastern Europe. 74 of 81 Fall of Communism in Hungary.
Throughout the 1980s, as in many Eastern European states, there were widespread economic problems throughout Hungary.
The reformists who replaced Kadar instituted wide reaching political reforms.
For the first time since the rise of communism, multiparty elections were allowed to be held.
In September 1989, the borders with the East were opened, fatally undermining the German Democratic Republic.
Thousands of East Germans could now escape to the Federal Republic of Germany via Hungary.
It was a surveillance state; the Stasi kept records on hundreds of thousands of East Germans.0,000 employers were employed along with 300,000 employees.
There were significant economic problems in Eastern Europe, and people were increasingly aware of the benefits of a materialist lifestyle as a result of receiving Western television.
East Germany was an artificially constructed country – it was a product of Cold War tensions, and attempts to create a sense of national identity lead to prominent athletes becoming rich and pampered.
Police brutality against protestors was only ended when Krenz, of the East German Politburo, claimed that such repression would lead to a bloodbath.
Honecker refused to deal with the mass emigrations from the GDR and was replaced by Krenz in October, 1989.
Krenz's talk of democracy encouraged further demonstrations and protests.
Krenz encouraged the opening of the Berlin Wall; it fell in November 1989.
They were initially resisted by Gorbachev, but he finally agreed on the condition the USSR be given economic aid. 76 of 81 Fall of Communism in Czechoslovakia.
Protesters were angry at declining living standards and called for economic reforms.
Protests quickly dispersed and the organisers were purged by the ŠtB, State Security.
Public expressions of anger and discontent were further encouraged by the occupation of the West German Embassy in Prague by East Germans keen to escape the GDR, the fall of the Berlin Wall in November, and Czechoslovakia's neighbours overthrowing Communist Governments.
On November seventeenth, 1989, students took the streets to commemorate the fiftieth anniversary of the death of Jan Opletal, a Czech martyr murdered by the Nazis.
The attack lead to trade unions, civic groups, actors and playwrights joining together to form the Civic Forum.
The leader of the Forum was Vaclav Havel, an activist in the 1968 Prague Spring, and a playwright.
The Forum employed non-violent tactics; plays and art were used to convey their message, public assemblies were held, protesters waved Czechoslovakian flags.
Many of these non-violent protests were met with police violence; protesters handing policemen flowers were attacked.
On the twenty-fifth and twenty-sixth, 750,000 people attended a demonstration in Prague.
Strikes were also used; on the twenty-seventh of November, 75% of Czech workers took part in a General Strike.
On the tenth of December the Communist President, Gustav Husak, handed power to a non-communist administration and resigned.
In June 1990, the Civic Forum won nearly 50% of the vote in Czechoslovakia's first democratic elections since 1946. 77 of 81 Fall of Communism in Bulgaria.
Bulgaria had not experienced the same economic problems as other countries, as it had been a popular tourist destination for people in the Eastern Bloc.
The leader of Bulgaria, Zhikov had never been as Stalinist as many other leaders, but his regime was quite autocratic – especially after the death of his liberalizing daughter under controversial circumstances.
In 1989, Zhikov forcibly expelled Bulgarian Turks, causing a massive downturn in agricultural output in Southern Bulgaria.
Outcry over the break up of an environmental protest lead to wider protests for change.
Zhikov was replaced by Foreign Minister Maldenov, but this only stopped demonstrations for a while.
Maldenov promised reforms, perhaps even free elections, but this did little to stop rising discontent.
The Romanian Revolution is distinct in that it is the only one of the 1989 where violence was organized and widespread.
Of all Communist states, his was perhaps the most Stalinist and dictatorial.
The state police, the Securitate, ruthlessly eradicated opposition; censorship was so complete that all typewriters in the country had to be registered.
He alienated Romanians even further by destroying whole villages to make way for agro-industrial complexes.
Ceausescu intended to ride the revolutions out; he was re-elected for another term in 1989 and felt secure enough to leave the country for Iran.
The fall of Communism was triggered by the arrest of a Priest called Tokes, who had broken the law by allowing poetry to be read during his service.
Rumors surrounding the event and at a rally in Bucharest the next week Ceausescu was drowned out by the booing crowds.
Ceausescu and his wife fled Bucharest in a helicopter but were arrested and shot by the army.
Loyal to the end, the Securitate continued in street battles until Ceausescu’s death on Christmas Day 1989. 79 of 81 The Collapse of the USSR #1.
His economic reforms had failed to improve the Soviet economy, and living standards remained low.
Food queues, strikes in strategic industries, inflation and rocketing crime had become commonplace by 1988.
This was coupled with increasing freedom of expression as a result of Glasnost, meaning vocal criticism of the CPSU was becoming more and more common.
The policy of Glasnost lead to greater transparency in the Soviet media, and the abuses of the Soviet Government became more apparent.
The reforms instituted by Gorbachev ran out of control in 1991, when the monopoly of the CPSU ended and reformists were legally able to establish the Democratic Reform Movement. 80 of 81 The Collapse of the USSR #2.
Conservatives who feared the break up of the Soviet Union, and Liberals demanding greater change.
In August 1991, the Conservatives launched a coup against Gorbachev and held him under house arrest.
The coup failed in the face of mass protests led by Boris Yeltsin, the Russian President.
Rising nationalist sentiments in the Baltic states had led to their declaration of independence by the end of 1990.
