SOURCE 1A This extract is from an article written by The Editors of Encyclopaedia Britannica entitled Brinkmanship Foreign Policy.
Brinkmanship, foreign policy practice in which one or both parties force the interaction between them to the threshold of confrontation in order to gain an advantageous negotiation position over the other.
The technique is characterised by aggressive risk-taking policy choices that court potential disaster.
Whereas the interaction between states had previously been predicated on the balance of power—largely based on a state’s economic and military power and the desire to prevent any major shifts in the *status quo—a state’s possession of nuclear weapons created an entirely new set of foreign policy tools, which it could use to influence others.
Perhaps the best-documented case of brinkmanship was the Soviet placement of nuclear missiles in Cuba in 1962 and the United States response, which is now referred to as the Cuban missile crisis.
Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev sought to defend Cuba from the United States and to extend Soviet strategic power in the region by secretly placing mediumand intermediate-range ballistic missiles in Cuba, which threatened much of the continental United States.
Instead of gaining a *leveraged position over the U.S., Khrushchev’s brinkmanship almost brought the United States and Soviet Union to nuclear war.
The crisis concluded after United States President John F Kennedy revealed the presence of Khrushchev’s weapons and ordered a naval “quarantine” around Cuba, which resulted in the Soviet Union withdrawing its missiles.
I call upon him further to abandon this course of world domination… … He has an opportunity now to move the world back from the abyss of destruction… … and withdrawing these weapons from Cuba… But it is difficult to settle or even discuss these problems in an atmosphere of intimidation.
You wish to us to the rights that every state enjoys, you are trying to in questions of international law, and you are violating the universally accepted norms of that law.
Between October 16 and October 28 the world waited as it appeared that both leaders were willing to risk nuclear war.
In reality, both men worked diligently behind the scenes through personal communications to prevent war and preserve peace.
Kennedy and Khrushchev knew that ""pushing the button"" would not end well for either country or the world.
During the summer of 1975, the Soviet-supported MPLA was able to consolidate power in Luanda and oust the USAsupported FNLA from the capital, but the FNLA continued to attack.
When MPLA leader Aghostino Neto announced November 11, 1975 as the day of Angolan independence, Lisbon decided to withdraw its troops on that day.
In response, Castro sent Cuban Special Forces to halt the South African advance and succeeded in drawing attention to the fact that the United States had provided support to a group that now accepted assistance from an apartheid government.
By the end of 1975, Cuban troops in Angola numbered 36,000, and in April of the following year, the Cubans had pushed the South Africans out of Angola.
From 1981 to 1987, the South Africans launched bruising invasions of southern Angola from their base in Namibia at the time, Namibia was under the control of South Africa.
It was a stalemate until November 1987, when Castro decided to push the South Africans out of the country once and for all.
On March 23, 1988, the South Africans launched their last major attack against the southern Angolan town of Cuito Cuanavale, where South Africa had cornered the best units of the Angolan army.
The Cubans demanded that Pretoria withdraw unconditionally from Angola and allow UN-supervised elections in Namibia, which they did, leading to the independence of Namibia in 1990.
General Geldenhuys said that the South African Defence Force had strictly limited objectives when its forces became substantially engaged with UNITA in south-eastern Angola in July 1987.
If our operations so developed that Cuito Cuanavale fell into our lap and we could capture it without fighting for it, then our troops could occupy it.
Geldenhuys said there were several ways in which to argue about who won the war for Africa.
Five decades later, the activist spirit and in-your-face energy of Black Power is alive in the Black Lives Matter movement.
The front line symbols of the current hydra of criminal justice — the police and their actions—have been a prime focus of Black Lives Matter and other new civil rights groups, just as law enforcement was targeted during the Black Power movement.
Certainly the iconic image of the raised, black-gloved fists of John Carlos and Tommie Smith on the medal stand at the 1968 Summer Olympics in Mexico City caused whites to catch their collective breath.
After their breakup, Brown began working for the radical newspaper Harambee.
Brown helped to establish the first Free Breakfast for Children Program in Los Angeles, Free Busing to Prisons Program and Free Legal Aid Program.
In 1971, Brown replaced Eldridge Cleaver in the position of Minister of Information.
Although women had been a dynamic force for social and racial justice, they had often been overshadowed by men.
No woman had led the NAACP, the Southern Christian Leadership Conference or the Student Non-Violent Coordinating Committee.
Despite her struggles as a female leader, the party made a few important strides under her leadership.
Hoover created a secret agency to destroy the party with a mission to “expose, disrupt, misdirect, discredit or otherwise neutralize” party members, according to FBI records.
By 1970, many of the party’s leaders had been imprisoned or killed in gun battles with police, including Bobby Hutton, who was shot more than 12 times by Oakland police after he had surrendered and stripped down to his underwear to prove that he was not armed.
On Dec., 1969, Fred Hampton, 21, and Mark Clark, 22, were gunned down by Chicago police as they slept in an apartment, according to the Chicago Tribune.
It was at once a lion to be tamed and a terrible sword of freedom to be honed.
