Winston Churchill and Nikita Khrushchev called it ""Operation Anadyr,"" after the Anadyr River in Russia, and it was designed to justify a first strike United States thermonuclear attack on Russia.
The small island of CUBA is named after Cuba in Portugal–the birthplace of Portuguese Christopher Columbus.
A thermonuclear attack on Russia would have ended all life on earth as the Soviets were ready to deploy their Doomsday Device.
In the novel, Armageddon is narrowly averted by an Eisenhower-like President in the White House.
In the book, a hotline existed between Washington and Moscow, which did not exist in 1962.
Now I am going to give you the information which was passed on to me by my predecessor.
It is a quite simple idea, but if you look at it carefully you will see it really is the ultimate deterrent.
They don't need to be bombs, no airplane is going to be called on to carry them.
You jacket those devices in cobalt, and you bury them in a convenient mountain range.
The first ominous step to Armageddon was taken in July 1946 when President Truman appointed an Edomite named Lewis Strauss to the 6-man commission.
Edomite Lewis Strauss was appointed to the Atomic Energy Commission in 1946.
A rabid Russia hater, he was the driving force behind the development of the hydrogen or thermonuclear bomb.
Former shoe salesman Strauss didn't even have a college degree, a usual requirement for high positions in the government.
From the time of his appointment, his only goal in life was to drop thermonuclear bombs on Russia.
Anybody who stood in his way was blacklisted or murdered. 2 of his main henchmen were Senators Joseph McCarthy and Brian McMahon.
Because fellow Edomite J Robert Oppenheimer was not working zealously on the ""Super,"" Strauss had the FBI put him under surveillance; he was accused of being a ""Communist,"" and lost his top secret security clearance.
Due to the all-pervading influence of Strauss, a kindred evil spirit was appointed head of the Strategic Air Command.
The Strategic Air Command was originally established by the United States Army Air Forces in 1946, and was considered part of the United States Army.
Ruthless French Canadian General Curtis ""Mad Bomber"" LeMay was the driving force behind the creation of SAC as an ""independent"" command.
During WWII, ""Iron Eagle"" LeMay was responsible for the firebombing of Tokyo and 67 other Japanese cities.
Total casualties in the firebombing of Japan exceeded all the deaths from the atomic bombing of Hiroshima and Nagasaki.
Prior to 1948, SAC HQ was located in Washington City, but was moved to Offutt Field in Omaha, Nebraska, when general LeMay assumed command.
The ostensible reason for the move was to provide more time to respond in case of a ""Soviet"" nuclear attack.
The real reason was to be far away and independent of Presidential and civilian control when the nuclear attack on Russia began.
By 1956, LeMay had built up an awesome first strike ""peaceful"" thermonuclear arsenal.
Add to that the 20 Polaris submarines, 5 aircraft carriers, and the missiles stationed in Britain, West Germany, Italy, Turkey etc., etc.
LeMay called this first strike capacity his ""Sunday Punch"" but in reality it was his ""Sunday Suicide"" as the Russians had 20 hydrogen cobalt bombs hidden in the Ural Mountains.
General Curtis ""Mad Bomber"" Le May used the fake Russian missiles and Sputnk 1threat to build up his bomber fleet.
All during the Eisenhower Presidency, Edomite Lewis Strauss urged the President to launch an atomic attack on Russia.
Eisenhower resisted such madness and he had a ""heart attack"" and ""stroke"" during his Presidency.
LeMay was confident that the 1956 Suez Canal Crisis would provide an opportunity to use his arsenal.
It was done with the advise of 10 Downing Street, and Pinewood Studios near London.
Consequently, he had to maneuver the Russians into firing the first shot in the nuclear war.
The 1956 Suez Canal Crisis and the Hungarian Revolution looked like a good opportunity for LeMay to use his bombers.
However, that crisis was resolved peacefully by the President when he forced the British and French to back down.
Pope Pius XII had to ""retire"" in order for JFK to enter the White House.
JFK needed the black vote but Pope Pius XII requested that General Mark Clark not use black troops during the 1944 United States occupation of Roma.
The previous Pope John XXIII was deposed at the Council of Constance in 1415.
With the help of his father's millions, Jack Kennedy was ""elected"" President and inaugurated on January 20, 1961.
His brother Bobby was attorney general and Robert McNamara was secretary of defense.
British Secret Service agent Nikita Khrushchev was already premier of the Soviet Union when ""Communist"" Fidel Castro came to power in 1959.
Ukrainian Nikita Khrushchev came to power after the sudden death of Joseph Stalin in 1953.
UKranian Nikita Khrushchev embraced fellow agent Fidel Castro during his visit to the United Nations in September 1960.
Ominously, after he became President, Kennedy was ordered to appoint the ""Mad Bomber"" as Air Force Chief of Staff.
With his hand on the Bible, LeMay was sworn in as Air Force Chief of Staff.
To the amazement of many, General LeMay was appointed Air Force Chief of Staff by President Kennedy.
Alarmingly, his position as head of SAC was taken by an even more dangerous lunatic named General Thomas Power.
As Air Force Chief of Staff, LeMay was part of a 4-man commission called the Joint Chiefs of Staff, with HQ at the Pentagon.
The commission consisted of a chairman, the Chief of Staff of the Army, Air Force, and Confederate Naval Operations.
The only 2 people above them was secretary of defense Robert McNamara . . . and President Kennedy.
Unlike President Eisenhower, Kennedy was in over his head and he was clueless about reading high altitude spy maps.
British Secret Service agent John McCone was head of the CIA during the Cuban false flag operation.
British Secret Service agent Arthur Lundahl was his ""expert"" on aerial photo reconnaissance.
On October 16, Lundahl presented his ""proof"" of Soviet ballistic missiles in Cuba to President Kennedy.
President Kennedy was shown high altitude photo reconnaissance images of Cuba taken from a U-2 spy plane.
Little did the President realize that the Russian ""nuclear missile"" sites were just dummies constructed by the Argentine army.
Except on submarines, nuclear weapons were never permitted outside Russia.
The only nuclear weapons that the Russians allowed out of their great country were on submarines.
The United States intelligence community was in agreement that the KGB was responsible for guarding the nuclear warhead storage depots in the Soviet Union, involving elaborate security measures to prevent unauthorized or accidental use of nuclear weapons.
One of the features of nuclear installations in the Soviet Union seen on overhead photography was a series of heavily guarded internal security fences.
It was believed that KGB officers would exercise even more caution and physical security when such weapons were deployed outside the Soviet Union.
It was also postulated that extensive security would be employed in Cuba, since there would be fear that the United States could mount a special-operations mission to capture the warheads or that they would have to be in a secure area in the event of a United States invasion.
It was also believed that the Soviets did not have the equivalent sophisticated Permissive Action Links system, electronic or mechanical locks that prevent unauthorized use of the weapons, and that there would be a Soviet command organization near the weapons.
Additionally, many of the ships carrying ""nuclear missiles"" to Cuba passed through the Turkish controlled Dardanelles and the British controlled Straits of Gibraltar unmolested.
Bahía de Guantánamo) is a bay located in Guantánamo Province at the southeastern end of Cuba.
It is the largest harbor on the south side of the island and it is surrounded by steep hills which create an enclave that is cut off from its immediate hinterland.
The base was established to make sure that millions of Latinos made it safely from Cuba and Puerto Rico to Florida.
All during the Cuban false flag operation, Fidel Castro made sure that the base was supplied with electricity and fresh pure drinking water.
Guantánamo Bay Naval Base ""Gitmo"" was acquired by the Confederate Navy in 1903 following the Spanish-American War.
Incredibly, that war was started by another false flag operation when the USS Maine was blown up in Havana Harbor in 1898.
In Norfolk, Admiral Dennison ordered the evacuation of dependents of Navy and Marine Corps families from the sprawling Guantánamo base, which covered almost forty-five square miles of eastern Cuba.
At 10 A.M. on Monday, October 22, word was spread around Guantánamo that there would be an immediate evacuation.
Everyone on the base had known that it would eventually happen, and no one was surprised.
Evacuees were told to pack one suitcase per person, to tie up pets in their yards, to leave keys to their houses on the dining room tables, and to stand in front of their houses ready to board buses.
All were under way by 5 P.M., en route to the Norfolk-Little Creek area.
After the evacuation, about 8,000 military personnel remained on the base.
On the evening of October 22, a heavily-drugged President Kennedy made one of the most dramatic addresses ever made by a United States President.
CIA Jackie was a close"" friend"" of Fidel Castro and was in Cuba at the time of the Castro coup d'etat.
President Kennedy never mentioned that the Soviet presence in Cuba was a violation of the Monroe Doctrine.
If he had, Khrushchev could have demanded that the British evacuate Canada.
Additionally, Kennedy ordered a strict quarantine of the island and increased close surveillance.
Just 2 days after the President's speech, without authorization, general Power broadcast the DEFCON-2 order to the Strategic Air Command.
All that was necessary for World War III to begin was the false flag operation in Cuba . . . and that looked like it would happen very soon.
The Russians would not even give up control of any of their anti-aircraft missiles to the Cubans.
On the night of October 26, a fierce firefight occurred between the Russians and Cubans for control of a surface to air missile site.
There were 18 Russian casualties as the Cubans got control of the SAM battery and used it to down a U-2 spy plane piloted by major Rudolf Anderson.
Back at the Pentagon, General Curtis was very eager to avenge major Anderson's death and he was preparing for an immediate strike on the SAM site.
Though they hated to acknowledge it, all the Joint Chiefs were subject to civilian control, with the President as their Commander-in-Chief.
One of the best decisions that President Kennedy made was appointing Robert McNamara as secretary of defense.
The President's brother Robert also saw eye to eye with McNamara on the need to control the Pentagon.
Robert McNamara postponed Armageddon when he refused to give LeMay permission to invade Cuba.
The Joint Chiefs had an operational plan to strike the Cuban SAM site at least 2 hours after a U-2 shoot-down.
The White House, realizing that there was a standing order for the immediate destruction of a firing SAM site, frantically contacted General LeMay and asked if the strike aircraft had been launched.
Not only was LeMay eager to attack the SAM site, but Jesuit Fidel Castro was also eagerly awaiting for the attack to occur.
An Argentine cruise missile was fitted with a 14-kiloton Pentagon nuclear warhead.
The stage was set for the perfect false flag operation if the United States invaded Cuba.
A small Argentine nuclear warhead, fitted to a ""Soviet"" cruise missile, was aimed at Guantánamo Naval Base.
The stand-down of U-2 flights over Cuba continued, pending an investigation of Major Anderson's shoot-down.
Early on the morning of October 28, United States Air Force RF-101's and United States Navy F-8U low altitude reconnaissance planes were again over the missile sites.
This time, however, they were escorted by fighter aircraft armed to the teeth–both alongside and prowling offshore.
There was no attempt to disguise the mission of the escort aircraft, which were prepared, on orders, to strike any antiaircraft gun or surface-to-air missile site that fired on the unarmed reconnaissance aircraft.
There were not only a substantial portion of his bombers in the air, but SAC and TAC crews were on alert status in ready rooms, their aircraft fueled and loaded with appropriate ordnance, including nuclear weapons.
To the great disappointment of Castro, LeMay, Power, and SAC, Robert McNamara refused to allow the invasion, so the false flag operation had to be cancelled.
President Kennedy, his brother Bobby, and Robert McNamara were the 3 men who postponed Armageddon in October 1962.
Of the trio, only Robert McNamara lived to old age and died a peaceful death.
Robert Kennedy was not a Cold Warrior, and he was not anxious to start WWIII because he had 11 children.
President Kennedy is shot by British Secret Service agents as his wife looks on.
LeMay said that Kennedy ""chickened out again"" by refusing to order the invasion of Cuba, so LeMay gave the order for the President's assassination.
Robert Kennedy ran for President in 1968 but he was the last person in the world that LeMay wanted in the White House.
President Kennedy was assassinated by his British Secret Service Praetorian Guard in Dallas, Texas, on November 22, 1963, and Presidential candidate Robert Kennedy was assassinated in Los Angeles on June 5, 1968.
As a Presidential candidate, Robert Kennedy was also entitled to ""protection"" by the British Secret Service.
Robert Kennedy might have been President In 1968 but LeMay wanted Republican Nelson Rockefeller in that position.
Right after the assassination of the President, the Rockefeller Amendment was introduced which almost allowed Nelson Rockefeller to become President by appointment only.
Had Rockefeller reached the White House he would have have definately ordered a first strike on Russia.
Remember, Remember, the 22nd of November Portuguese Christopher Columbus References Bryant, Peter, Red Alert.
