Hoping to correct what he saw as a strategic imbalance with the United States, Soviet Premier Nikita S Khrushchev began secretly deploying medium range ballistic missiles and intermediate range ballistic missiles to Fidel Castro's Cuba."",""long_description"":""In the fall of 1962, the United States and the Soviet Union came as close as they ever would to global nuclear war.
Once operational, these nuclear-armed weapons could have been fired against cities and military targets in most of the continental United States.
The United States Navy played a pivotal role in this crisis, demonstrating the critical importance of naval forces to national defense.
Navy aerial photographic and patrol aircraft played a vital part not only in observing the deployment of Soviet offensive weapons into Cuba but monitoring their withdrawal by sea.\nThe purpose of the series is to inform today's naval personnel and other readers of the contributions made by the naval service to the nation, in war and peace, since 1945.
During this period, the Navy contained Soviet and Communist expansion, deterred nuclear and conventional attack on the United States, protected American trade at sea and ashore, strengthened regional alliances, and fostered the growth of democratic and free market institutions worldwide.
More In the fall of 1962, the United States and the Soviet Union came as close as they ever would to global nuclear war.
Navy aerial photographic and patrol aircraft played a vital part not only in observing the deployment of Soviet offensive weapons into Cuba but monitoring their withdrawal by sea.The purpose of the series is to inform today's naval personnel and other readers of the contributions made by the naval service to the nation, in war and peace, since 1945.
They are designed to provide a convenient user-friendly reference work to uniformly present authoritative knowledge that can be rapidly read, reviewed or searched.
Vast archives of important data that might otherwise remain inaccessible are available for instant review no matter where you are.The e-book format makes a great reference work and educational tool.
Smashwords allows erotica and other types of adults-only books, but they must be marked adults-only for the protection of our under-18 users and as a courtesy to our adult users who find such material offensive.
