Here are some examples: Officers and Directors 2 Navy News ..................2 Presidents Report.
The world's largest international maritime exer cise, RIMPAC provides a unique training opportunity that helps participants foster and sustain the co operative relationships that are critical to ensuring the safety of sea lanes and security on the world's oceans.
Attended by 83 shipmates, spouses and guests, the city of Norfolk was shown in full display.
We enjoyed two wonderful, very informative tours, including boarding and touring the USS Wisconsin, visiting the MacArthur Memorial and Museum, and touring the Naval Station Norfolk, which is the largest such base in the world now that it has physically combined the 4) Naval Air Station.
We drove past our old, refurbished pier 7, got a view of the new, radically designed destroyer, USS Zumwalt, and were hosted for a lunch at the Breezy Point Officers’ Club.
Some folks took time opportunities to drive out to Virginia Beach, on what is now an eight lane highway rather than the two lane road of 50s and 60s.
There were many enjoyable sites, but, disappointedly, none of East Main Street.
The Color Guard from Maury High School’s Navy Junior ROTC unit honored our banquet gathering with the Presentation of Colors.
Attendees enjoyed an evening of dining, dancing, prize drawings and long distance calls to missed shipmates Andy and Flo Ulichney, and Les and Sharon Mayer.
Some Business Housekeeping…he 2016 Business Meeting included the election of Directors for the service period of 2016-18.
Due to the lack of volunteers at the time of seeking new Directors, two Directors, Tom Welch and Steve Schermerhorn, were carried over from previous terms.
At the Board of Directors’ Meeting following the Business Meeting, a motion was made and voted upon affirmatively that the Director carry-over pattern must cease and new candidates must be sought.
As such, newly elected carry-over candidates Tom Welch and Steve Schermerhorn volunteered to step down to be replaced by new volunteers Dan Moffett and George Betts.
George and Dan join earlier elected candidate, Al Sedler, as Association Directors for the service term 2016-18.
Wes took over during the challenging period of late Spring with the influx of dues payments and incoming registrations for the Norfolk Reunion.
He handled it expertly and, additionally, also enhanced the financial reporting system and documents.
President John F Kennedy, after learning that the Soviet Union was sending ballistic missiles to the island nation, had proclaimed a quarantine against ships carrying offensive arms there.
They were responding to a Cold War confrontation that had begun in September 1960 when the Soviet freighter Atkarsk arrived at Nikolaev, the Black Sea port used for exporting weapons and military equipment from the Soviet Union.
Strengthening his bond with Cuban Prime Minister Fidel Castro, Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev was arming the country 90 miles from American shores less than a year after Castro had led a revolution that toppled the U.S. backed regime of dictator Fulgencio Batista.
Eventually the arms transported to Cuba would include nuclear weapons, and the day would come when a wrong move by ships such as the Sumner could launch a nuclear war.
Not since the Cold War had begun would so much depend on the ships and men of the United States Navy.
As the NSA tracked the Atkarsk , President Dwight D Eisenhower responded to the rapidly strengthening SovietCuban alliance by preparing to proclaim a trade embargo of Cuba, barring all exports except medical items and food.
President Eisenhower’s decision came as Cuba was becoming a major issue in the presidential campaign of Vice President Richard M Nixon and then-Senator Kennedy.
The Central Intelligence Agency revealed to the president-elect that covert plans authorized by Eisenhower spanned “a range of possible paramilitary operations” against Castro, including a “combined sea-air assault by trained Cuban exiles coordinated with the guerrilla activity generated on the island”—a U.S.-managed invasion of Cuba.
This Newsletter is dedicated to all the men who served on this extraordinary ship in service to their country whether in time of war or peace Page 5 Chief of Naval Operations Admiral George Later Anderson clashed with Secretary of DeAnderson was responsible for planning the Nafense Robert McNamara over the blockade’s enval quarantine of Cuba as well as preparing for forcement.
That potential fire began to smolder in the summer of 1962, when the CIA picked up rumors in Miami’s Cuban émigré community that Khrushchev was deploying nuclear missiles in Cuba.
McCone was the successor to Allen Dulles, who had been forced to resign after the Bay of Pigs debacle.
According to a CIA assessment of the time, McCone “was virtually alone” in his belief.
On 29 August, photographs taken by a U-2 spy plane revealed eight surface-to-air missile sites under construction.
By then there was no doubt that thousands of Red Army soldiers—“technicians,” said the Soviets—were pouring onto the island.
The Navy spotted a Soviet-built missile patrol boat off the Cuban port of Mariel, and photographs showed others moored nearby.
But, determined to get photographic proof to confirm reports that Soviet medium-range ballistic missiles had arrived in Cuba, the National Security Council eased restrictions.
And, because the Kennedy administration wanted a military officer at the controls, a CIA U-2 was piloted by Air Force Major Richard S Heyser when the spy plane took off from Edwards Air Force base in California near midnight on 13 October.
Four and a half hours later, at 0731 on Sunday, 14 October, Heyser began his pass across a cloudless Cuba, 72,500 feet below.
Twelve minutes after that, he veered eastward to land at Mccoy Air Force base (present-day Orlando International Airport), Florida.
Two rolls of film were swiftly transferred to an aircraft, which flew them to the Naval Photographic Intelligence center in Suitland, Maryland, where the film was developed and positives made.
The next morning, a Navy truck pulled up to a nondescript seven-story building in a run-down Washington neighborhood.
They carried it into the building, which had no outer sign that it housed the CIA’s National Photographic Interpretation center.
NPIC photo interpreters leaned for hours over light tables, peering at frames of the U-2 film through magnifying glasses and stereoscopic viewers.
They were convinced they were looking at evidence that could prove the Soviet Union had delivered MRbMs to Cuba.
Once operational, the missiles would be capable of hitting United States cities with nuclear warheads.
On the morning of Tuesday, 16 October, CIA officers presented blowups of the photos to Kennedy and briefed him about the interpreters’ findings.
This Newsletter is dedicated to all the men who served on these extraordinary ships in service to their country whether in times of war or peace Members and Non MemUSS Mount McKinley Financial Statement June 30th 2016 Page 6 bers reported deceased since 06/30/2016 Assets 2015 Year end Additions Additions Subtractions 2016 YTD Bal.
Aboard Mt Mac ‘54-’59Last ResiAccounts 1/1-8/31/16 8/31-9/30/16 YTD dence New Haven, Mo Wells Fargo ckg.
Date passed 12/’09 recent notification Wells Fargo $M $ 21,212.93 $ 10.26 $ 0.46 $ 4,000.00 $ 17,223.65 Report for heavenly duty.
If you have Webb $ $ 357.45 $ 357.45 personal remembrances Bank Charges $ $ 5.00 $ 5.00 from your time on the Mighty Mac.
I must admit that I have cheated on you twice, since you’ve been gone, and it’s not fair to either of us.
The soldier, with hurt feelings, asked his fellow soldiers for any snapshots they could spare of their girlfriends, sisters or ex-girlfriends.
In addition to the picture of Becky, Ricky included all the other pictures of the pretty gals he had collected from his buddies.
