Identify the Cold War Hot Spots Around the World Do Now: a) Bridge the Gulch Political Cartoon Analysis Do Now: Bridge the Gulch Political Cartoon Poster Board Group Activity The class will be divided into six groups.
Poster Board Group Activity Complete your own charts using the text based evidence the group highlighted and discussed from the text.
Construct a poster board with the important information contained in the document and create a visual representing the Cold War conflict.
Each group will then present and the class will complete their charts based on the groups’ presentation of their text based evidence.
Berlin • West Berlin, was an outpost of Western democracy and economic success deep within the communist zone – like a capitalist island within communist East Germany • The Berlin Blockade was an attempt to starve West Berlin into submitting to the communists • The Allied airlift signalled the West’s determination to use all resources to defend Berlin.
Chiang Kai-shek – Communists: Mao Zedong • Unite to fight WW2… temporary • People’s Republic of China – Mao’s Communists – Chou En-lai Premier • Republic of China – aka Taiwan – Chiang’s Nationalists – Recognized as official govt The Korean War • Japan occupied Korea from 1910-1945 • Post WW2, Korea divided at 38th Parallel – USSR in North – United States in South • Goal: reunification UN in North Korea • USSR refuses UN-sponsored elections… – Republic of Korea in Seoul, S Korea – Democratic People’s Republic of Korea in Pyongyang, N Korea (Kim Il Sung) • Occupying troops withdrew 48 & 49.
Congo Civil War The Congo Civil War, or Congo Crisis, was a complex political tumult that began just days following Belgium’s granting of Congolese independence in 1960.
Lasting four years, the associated violence claimed an estimated 100,000 lives including the nation's first Prime Minister, Patrice Lumumba, and UN Secretary Dag Hammarskjöld, who was killed in a plane crash as he attempted to mediate the crisis.
Escalating with the secession of the southernmost province of Katanga, the conflict concluded five years later with a united Congo emerging under the dictatorship of Joseph-Désiré Mobutu.
Congo Civil War The conflict also became the site of a dangerous Cold War “proxy” contest between western powers led by the United States and the Soviet Union-led Communist bloc.
Under pressure from western nations and in exchange for UN support, President Kasavubu purged his government of radical elements including Prime Minister Lumumba.
The ultra-nationalist Lumumba, though supported by the Congolese, was viewed by Western business leaders as an obstacle to their continued investments in Congolese diamond mines.
Fearing Lumumba was secretly a Communist, the United States was particularly adamant about his removal from power.
Any hostile action from Cuba would require the United States to attack Soviet Union.
Cartoonists may use simple objects to represent larger ideas or concepts.
Cartoonists may compare a simple image or concept to a more complex situation, in order to help the viewer understand the more complex situation in a different way.
