Two world superpowers, equipped with over 4,000 nuclear warheads in total, are flirting with a dangerous escalation of what had so far been a Cold War, one fought without direct confrontation.
Both the United States and USSR have placed missiles in third countries close to each others’ borders, pointed directly at enemy soil.
An American U-2 reconnaissance plane is shot down over Cuba, where the Soviet missile bases have been built up, and Kennedy is urged to retaliate militarily directly against the Soviets.
Meanwhile, American warships drop depth charges to force a Soviet B-59 submarine to surface.
The submarine’s officers are unaware they are violating a United States naval blockade, and interpret the maneuvers of the United States warships as an act of war.
What the Americans don’t know is that the Soviet submarine being threatened is carrying a nuclear-tipped torpedo… Had two men made different decisions, that could easily have been the day the world exploded into nuclear war.
Since the Monroe Doctrine, the United States had increasingly asserted its power and influence over the Western Hemisphere.
With the Soviet bloc a declared ideological enemy, the United States was especially vigilant about communism penetrating the West.
This sphere of influence would be tested in 1959, when young revolutionary Fidel Castro took power in Cuba after waging a guerilla war against US-backed military dictator Fulgencio Batista.
He quickly converted the nation to communism, further angering United States politicians who were engaged in a political conflict and arms race with the most powerful communist nation of all at the time.
Dwight D Eisenhower, the United States President at the time, deemed Castro’s administration in Cuba unacceptable.
Kennedy had second and third and fourth thoughts about the planned invasion.
The strategy of sending in Cuban exiles had come about to 1) make it seem it wasn’t a United States government invasion of Cuba and 2) to keep the invading group small and clandestine, so they could infiltrate the island nation and win the support of even more anti-Castro Cubans.
Kennedy worried that the group was too small to be militarily effective, and too large to keep secret.
The United States government had severely underestimated Castro’s forces and severely overestimated Cuban nostalgia for a United States puppet government on the island.
Within 24 hours, the US-trained Cuban exiles had been defeated, and Kennedy’s administration was humiliated.
Nevertheless, the effort to dismantle Castro’s regime continued with foiled assassination attempts throughout the year.
Even though many top United States officials advised Kennedy that Cuba wasn’t much of a threat to the United States at all, Kennedy had told voters he would be tough on communism, and in politics, appearances matter most.
Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev wanted to assist the newly formed Communist government in Cuba against United States interference, while also looking for a possible bargaining chip to gain influence in West Berlin.
As he said, “we had to establish a tangible and effective deterrent to American interference in the Caribbean.
In addition, USSR and United States nuclear capabilities were vastly different at this time, and Khruschev sought to bridge the gap.
The Soviets, in contrast, had good medium-range ballistic missiles and intermediate-range ballistic missiles, though relatively unreliable ICBMs, aka intercontinental ballistic missiles.
After all, the United States had already placed Jupiter missiles in Turkey pointed at the USSR, so Khrushchev figured missiles in Cuba would be an effective response.
From July to October of 1962, the Soviets started secretly transporting troops and equipment to Cuba.
Though the operation was hardly a secret from Cuban civilians 41,902 soldiers were deployed unconvincingly disguised as “agricultural specialists”, while at one point Marshal Sergey Biryuzov suggested disguising the missiles as palm trees the CIA wouldn’t discover the nuclear plot until October, as it had withdrawn most of its presence after the Bay of Pigs.
Though the United States had noticed a Soviet military buildup in Cuba, it was on October 14, 1962 that U-2 spy plane pilot Major Richard Heyser photographed a Soviet SS-4 medium-range ballistic missile being assembled.
This started the clock on one of the most tense, harrowing periods in United States history.
The next day, Kennedy sees the photos and calls his closest advisors to a meeting in order to discuss United States options.
He forms a group called the Executive Committee of the National Security Council, or EXCOMM for short, consisting of five close advisors and nine members of the National Security Council.
Suggestions thrown out in the meeting are all over the map, ranging from a stern warning to the Soviet Union and Cuba, to an air strike and outright invasion of the island.
Kennedy, ignoring his hawkish Joint Chiefs of Staff, reflecting on humiliating previous interventions in Cuba and rightly considering that a direct attack and invasion may lead to disaster, chooses another path.
He decides the United States will conduct a naval blockade of the island, although he calls it a “quarantine” instead.
Because a blockade is technically an act of war, and this one word difference would actually further escalate the situation.
JFK dictates a letter to Khrushchev announcing that the United States will not permit Soviet shipments of weapons to Cuba.
The President further demands that the Soviet Union dismantle the current Cuban missile bases and return all weapons to Moscow.
That night, Kennedy makes a serious public announcement regarding the crisis to the US public.
The same day, the Joint Chiefs of Staff upgrades the US’ military readiness status to DEFCON 3; not full readiness yet, but increased vigilance with the Air Force ready to mobilize within 15 minutes.
While Kennedy is taking this bold, powerful stance in front of the American people, another discussion entirely is taking place behind closed doors in EXCOMM meetings.
The Soviets already had missiles capable of attacking the United States from longer distances.
The fact that the longer-range missiles were somewhat more unreliable didn’t mean much in the long run.
However, the Kennedy administration knows that optics are important, and after the humiliating events of the last two years in Cuba, the US cannot afford to look weak in the face of an aggressive Soviet act.
Meanwhile, halfway across the world, Khrushchev receives Kennedy’s letter and sees his television appearance announcing the quarantine.
However, even while Khrushchev publicly condemns the US’s actions, he is unwilling to have weapon-carrying ships breach the United States quarantine line.
Soviet ships are turned back by the US, except for a few carrying no weapons.
The tensions between the two Cold War superpowers are being felt all around the world.
China starts publicly announcing its support of Cuba, while the citizens of West Berlin fear their freedom will end up trampled in any Soviet-US conflict.
Though Khrushchev is unwilling to breach the quarantine line, more United States spy planes inform Kennedy that the Soviets’ missile site on Cuba is still being worked on and almost ready.
Seeing that his calls to dismantle the site have gone unheeded, Kennedy and his administration upgrade the readiness status of Strategic Air Command to DEFCON 2.
DEFCON 1, the highest level of military readinessincluding its nuclear forces-, has in fact never been called for in United States history.
So the upgrade to DEFCON 2, meaning war is imminent, underscores the grave nature of the crisis.
On October 26, Kennedy starts seriously considering the option of a United States invasion in Cuba and a direct strike on the missile site.
Predicting that this will cause global mayhem, he wants to give his diplomatic option more time to work, while facing extreme pressure from both Congress and EXCOMM to take military action.
That same evening, around 2 AM Moscow time, Khrushchev sends a long, emotional message to Kennedy, in which he details his fears of the current situation resulting in nuclear apocalypse.
In a private, heartfelt letter to the United States President, the Soviet leader writes, “If there is no intention to doom the world to the catastrophe of thermonuclear war, then let us not only relax the forces pulling on the ends of the rope, let us take measures to untie that knot.
Khrushchev promises to remove the missiles in exchange for a simple United States assurance that they will not invade Cuba.
However, the next day on October 27, Khrushchev, apparently over whatever dark night of the soul caused him to reach out to Kennedy the night before, goes back on his conciliatory stance.
Soviets tracking an American U-2 spy plane conducting a reconnaissance mission over Cuba become increasingly concerned the United States will learn too much as the pilot spends well over an hour near secret locations of Soviet nuclear weapons.
Even though only the commanding general is supposed to authorize a surface to air missile launch, he is nowhere to be found.
Lieutenant General Stepan Grechko gives the order to shoot the plane down instead.
Two missiles are fired; one of them manages to find its target, bringing down the plane and killing United States pilot Rudolf Anderson.
A hush falls over Kennedy’s meeting with his team as the killing of Anderson reaches their ears.
In Moscow, Khrushchev hears of the attack and starts to realize the situation is quickly careening out of control.
It was never his intention to come so close to nuclear war, a possibility which now seems increasingly likely, and is about to become an even closer call.
At the same time the two leaders are deciding their next move, there is a problem at the quarantine line.
The United States Navy is dropping a series of signaling depth charges close to a Soviet B-59 submarine to force it to surface.
Unbeknownst to them, the submarine is equipped with a nuclear-tipped torpedo, one that it has orders to use if the submarine is fired on.
Unfortunately, the submarine has been too deep in the ocean for too long to know the current status of the crisis.
Captain Valentin Grigorievitch Savitsky assumes the charges being dropped on the B-59 are an attack, and that the United States and USSR are already at war.
However, all three officers on board need to sign off on the decision to launch a nuclear weapon from the submarine.
One man, Vasili Arkhipov, holds out, believing the situation might be a misunderstanding; the torpedo remains unlaunched, and a nuclear strike is, once again, very narrowly averted.
Back in D.C., with news of the U-2 plane being shot down all over the White House, Kennedy’s advisers are clamoring for revenge.
Kennedy, however, correctly suspects that Khrushchev did not authorize this air strike against a United States plane.
Kennedy decides to ignore Khrushchev's second, angrier letter, as promising to withdraw missiles from Turkey would show United States weakness and risk NATO alliances.
Ignoring the existence of an official enemy demand in a crisis is definitely a bold move, but one that Kennedy feels will pay off.
JFK also realizes that to preserve United States status and alliances, he has little other choice at this point.
Little do the EXCOMM members know that JFK has also been secretly playing another hand this whole time.
As the missile crisis is escalating, RFK is functioning as the President’s de facto chief of staff.
Unbeknownst to the rest of the EXCOMM members, while the team publicly drafts JFK’s response to Khrushchev a promise not to attack Cuba in exchange for the removal of Soviet missiles JFK has sent his younger brother on a mission.
Robert F Kennedy secretly meets with Soviet Ambassador to the United States Anatoly Dobrynin.
He informs the ambassador that the United States will, in fact, remove their Jupiter missiles from Turkey, and that they were planning to do so anyway.
However, he emphasizes the fact that for the sake of optics and alliances, this removal cannot be part of any public deal between the United States and the Soviet Union.
Dobrynin conveys the message to Khrushchev, who is already fearful of an imminent war between the two nuclear superpowers.
Upon hearing the United States will accept the Soviets’ demands, even in secret, the Soviet premier decides to put an end to this crisis once and for all.
Though Castro is angry with what he perceives as the Soviets backing down in the face of US intimidation, most of the world breathes a sigh of relief.
The Soviet Union started dismantling their missiles, and on November 20, after Kennedy was satisfied that all missiles had been removed, he ended the quarantine of Cuba.
Six months later, in April of 1963, the US removed its Jupiter missiles from Turkey, though the world wouldn’t know this was part of the US-USSR pact for years.
Since this part of the deal was kept a secret, Kennedy won praise for his resolution of the crisis while Khrushchev ended up viewed as somewhat weaker, having given in to United States demands in exchange for a simple reassurance of peace.
However, one good effect of the crisis was the installation of a “hotline” between D.C. and Moscow, to prevent another similar conflict from ever taking place.
It is terrifying to think that were it not for a few moments of hesitation on the parts of Kennedy and Khrushchev, or the actions of one man on a submarine such as Vasili Arkhipov, the world could have erupted in nuclear war in October of 1962.
