Share This Article On Wednesday, February 3, the United States and Russia extended an uneasy truce over nuclear proliferation.
Washington and Moscow currently possess the lion’s share of the world’s nukes — and the New START seeks to impose limits to the nuclear arsenals of both nations.
Americans are used to the narrative that on October 16, 1962, President John F Kennedy and his team of advisors were blindsided by the news that the Soviet Union, without provocation, were installing nuclear-armed mediumand intermediate-range ballistic missiles off the Florida coast in Cuba.
After a tense 13 days, the Soviets blinked, and a nuclear holocaust was averted.
In a three-part memoir, Khrushchev Remembers, first published in 1971, the former Soviet leader counters this perception — detailing life under Stalin and the key years of the Cold War.
At the time of the crisis, the nuclear balance heavily favored the United States.
By that year the United States possessed “about nine times as many nuclear weapons as the U.S.S.R.,” writes The Atlantic.
Furthermore, the quality and deployment capability of the United States arsenal was also far superior to that of the Soviets, a fact that Khrushchev was keenly aware of.
His solution — “nstall nuclear warheads in Cuba without letting the United States find out they were there until it was too late to do anything about them”— was a tit for tat trade off and sent the world hurtling towards Armageddon.
However, in the end, Kennedy had secretly accepted the quid pro quo missile swap that Khrushchev himself proposed on October 27.
A fact that only came to light in the late 1980s and after Khrushchev’s death in 1971.
Both leaders, clearly shaken by the apocalyptic possibilities avowed for greater nuclear deterrence.
In 1972, both Washington and Moscow signed the 1972 Anti-Ballistic Missile Treaty and then seven years later, the Strategic Arms Limitation Treaty I and SALT II, in an attempt to curb nuclear proliferation.
The agreement signed this February simply follows a history of point, counterpoint agreements that were set in place by the 1962 crisis.
