HomeAbout Comments Policy RSS Feeds The Life & Death of JFK—A GPO Collection November 19, 2015 “A man may die, nations may rise and fall, but an idea lives on.“ –President John F Kennedy John F Kennedy was the 35th President of the United States , the youngest man elected to the office.
Just as JFK’s purposeful idealism moved and shaped our nation, his November 22nd, 1963 assassination was a defining moment in American history.
Amid the aftershock of that dreadful day, President Lyndon B Johnson directed an independent commission to investigate Kennedy’s death.
In 1964, GPO employees proofed, printed, and bound the official President’s Commission on the Assassination of President Kennedy, commonly known as the Warren Commission Report.
The free digital edition of the Warren Commission Report is available online through GPO’s Federal Digital System.
From 1960s print to modern day digital, GPO’s information products are a permanent tribute to a presidential legacy imprinted on the annals of United States history.
Our guest blogger is Chelsea Milko, Public Relations Specialist in GPO’s Public Relations Office.
Last year, I blogged about the various editions of the Constitution available as Government publications.
This time around, I’ve been thumbing through another publication that helps to put the Constitution, the Declaration of Independence, and a variety of other documents, speeches, and even songs and poetry, into the bigger picture of what it means to be – or become – an American citizen.
It’s an extremely useful collection of songs , poems , symbols , complete texts or extracts from notable American speeches , notable Supreme Court decisions and much more.
Although the complete text of the Mayflower Compact, the Declaration of Independence, the Constitution, and other documents are not included, the brief sections on each put them into context so readers can perceive the continuum of American democracy through time.
For new and aspiring citizens, a series of brief biographies of famous Americans who were not born in the United States makes for interesting reading.
The Citizen’s Almanac is a terrific, well-illustrated source for all kinds of information about American history and citizenship.
It’s also an interesting read and a book that’s perfect for Constitution Day or any other day when you need information about this country of ours.
You can browse through The Citizen’s Almanac here, buy a single copy or a package of 25 for schools and civic organizations, or locate it at a library.
America the Beautiful, Bob Hope, Brown v Board of Education, Celia Cruz, Citizen's Almanac, citizenship, Concord Hymn, Constitution, Gettysburg Address, God Bless America, Great Seal of the United States, I Hear America Singing, John F Kennedy, Marbury v Madison, Marlene Dietrich, Martin Luther King, Mayflower Compact, Robert C Byrd, Ronlad Reagan, Star-Spangled Banner, The New Colossus, United States Constitution, USCIS | Permalink Posted by govbooktalk Hawks vs.
