In the four titles under review here, underutilized sources of information and new interpretive emphases make additional excursions over those familiar historical trails worth the time and effort.
John Kennedy reportedly asked the National Security Council in late 1962.
By the time JFK won the Democratic nomination in July of that year, the Intelligence Community was moderating its ominous predictions of the immediate Soviet nuclear threat, and some senior Eisenhower administration ofﬁcials had even concluded that there was no gap.
Kennedy received classiﬁed brieﬁngs on those ﬁndings and in public continued touting the unnerving forecasts of panicky pundits and worst-case warﬁghters.
Eisenhower’s recent experience with the ‘bomber gap’ controversy steeled him to rely on his best judgment about what the Soviets would do to develop and deploy nuclear missiles.
In contrast, Kennedy stressed what they could do, and he and assorted kindred spirits accused the Eisenhower administration of politicizing intelligence for economic reasons – in Sen.
Increased defense spending, including crash programs to close the missile gap, would energize the sputtering economy, provide the means to pay for domestic programs, and raise America’s stature in the post-Sputnik world.
In a useful background chapter, Preble presents Kennedy’s case as an amalgam of complaints that Democrats, intellectuals, economists, and dissonant military ofﬁcers had been making for several years, but which had had little impact on their own.
With that as his philosophical plinth, Preble approves of Eisenhower’s suspicion of what he famously called the ‘military-industrial complex’ and sees a direct link between Kennedy’s missile gap alarmism and his application of counterinsurgency doctrine in the Third World.
The New Look may have been cheaper, and Kennedy was enthralled with military special forces and clandestine operations, but Ike’s foreign policy was hardly less adventurous than JFK’s; the 1950s were a very busy time for the CIA’s covert action ofﬁces.
Kennedy and the Missile Gap is a worthy addition to the ‘Kennedy as Cold Warrior’ literature.
A published dissertation, it is well organized, clearly written, and solidly researched.
Preble shows better than previous authors how much political mileage Kennedy got out of the missile gap, using the alleged one to get into the White House and the real one to resolve the direst predicament he faced while there – the Cuban missile crisis.
The same can be said about historians and the United States’ victory-of-sorts over the Soviet Union in October 1962.
Cohen’s iconoclasm obviously is not widely shared, as the missile crisis remains a staple of publishers’ lists and academic journals.
The tapes of meetings of the NSC Executive Committee during the missile crisis, and their transcriptions, have become both indispensable material for scholars and a matter of disputation among them.
They argue over the signiﬁcance of omissions and inaccuracies in the published versions, as well as about the overall utility of tapes vis-á-vis other primary sources.
This difference of opinion pervades Averting the ‘Final Failure’ by Sheldon Stern, historian at the John F Kennedy Library until 1999.
The latter two historians and Stern have engaged in a running disagreement about errors in their respective renderings and interpretations of the tapes.
Their exchanges at times have taken on a snippy tone that suggests they have ‘issues’ beyond documentary accuracy.
He further states that he came up with the idea for his own book nearly a quarter of a century ago when he ﬁrst listened to the then-classiﬁed ExComm tapes, and that after they were declassiﬁed, he took early retirement as soon as he could to work on his book.
Stern has produced an accessible, readable story that breaks no new interpretive ground but is the best single volume on the ‘Thirteen Days’ episode.
The book’s introduction is an excellent overview of the historical setting in which the crisis played out, worthy of stand-alone use in the classroom.
Stern’s version makes clear that the Kennedy brothers’ ‘preoccupation, if not an obsession’ with getting rid of Castro helped bring on the crisis, but that JFK was cagily realistic in ﬁnding a way out of his conundrum.
The ExComm was important both for its positive and negative contributions to the outcome of the crisis.
In contrast to the missile gap, concerning which JFK embraced the military brass’s scare-mongering about nonexistent Soviet missiles, during the Cuban crisis he spurned their belligerent counsel on what to do about an actual strategic threat.
Stern presents his book as a corrective to ﬂaws in the published transcripts.
In many instances that is so, but he adds his own slant to the ExComm proceedings when he summarizes what he regards as non-germane material and strings together excerpts from long quotes with his own interpolations, descriptors, and segues.
Stern rightly observes that there is no substitute for listening to the tapes, and he enlivens the often-tedious transcripts by describing the atmospherics of meetings and the mood of ExComm members.
Characterizing someone’s tone or attitude is a subjective exercise – other listeners may hear the ‘verbal body language’ differently – but given that Stern probably has listened to the tapes more than anyone else, readers can defer to his judgment until they put on the headphones themselves.
During the 26 October discussion about UN ambassador Adlai Stevenson’s proposal to trade away the Jupiter missiles in Turkey, Stern identiﬁes the participant who most vehemently disagreed as John McCloy.
However, Undersecretary of State George Ball, who was present, said in his memoir that the speaker was McCone.
It is a historiographical oddity that an event of such Zeitgeist-altering proportions as the JFK assassination has received so little scholarly attention.
Instead, in an intellectual corollary to Gresham’s Law, bad historical writing has driven out the good, and even the mediocre.
The conspiracist literature, in contrast, is voluminous, numbering thousands of books, articles and tracts that posit almost every theory imaginable, crop up on publishers’ new titles lists with amazing frequency, and range enormously in reliability.
Journalist Max Holland has been one of the few dependable JFK assassination scholars.
His articles on the subject have appeared in opinion and historical journals and national-circulation newspapers, and his study of the Warren Commission – some of which is previewed in The Kennedy Assassination Tapes – is eagerly awaited.
Lee Harvey Oswald was a lone, deranged gunman who killed JFK for his own reasons, and the Warren Commission did a creditable, though rushed and at times slipshod, job in investigating the murder and concluding that Oswald did it by himself.
Tapes is a collection of annotated transcripts of assassination-related telephone conversations between Lyndon Johnson and the dead president’s family and entourage, his own advisers, the directors of the FBI and CIA, journalists, and others.
The tapes have been available in raw and published form for some time, but there is value in having transcripts on this unique subject collected in one place.
Holland’s background sections and annotations are clear and helpful, and his use of the present tense imparts a ‘you-are-there’ quality that adds to the voyeuristic aspect of ‘listening in’ to what other people were saying.
From the standpoint of over 40 years later, Tapes shows what a remarkable amount of time and worry American leaders spent on minutiae like the ‘missing Bible’ used at LBJ’s swearing-in (it actually was a Catholic missal and never was lost), who ordered Air Force One to stay on the ground until Johnson had taken the oath (which constitutionally and legally he did not have to do), and the Kennedys’ insistence that he had been uncivil and insensitive toward the grief-stricken Jackie.
Tapes affords many insights into LBJ’s personality and preoccupations that go beyond the ambit of this journal, but several will interest its readers.
Johnson overcame his initial reluctance to form a blue-ribbon investigatory panel out of fear that free-wheeling congressional and state inquiries – conducted amid swirling rumors of communist, right-wing, and underworld plots – would point accusingly at the Soviet Union and Cuba and force him to respond in ways that risked superpower conﬂict barely a year after the missile crisis.
When deciding whom to ask to serve on the Warren Commission, LBJ naturally asked Robert Kennedy to recommend someone.
RFK chose former DCI Allen Dulles, most likely counting on him to steer the investigation away from the CIA’s ‘regime change’ operations in Cuba.
Johnson uncritically accepted what he heard about the assassination from FBI director J Edgar Hoover – his preferred intelligence source, who on the tapes is a fount of misinformation, including that the CIA had photographed Oswald at the Soviet embassy in Mexico City just before he went to Dallas.
That claim – characteristic of what Holland calls Hoover’s ‘false omniscience’, and shown to be wrong by Agency documents declassiﬁed under the JFK assassination records act – would become ammunition for a battalion of conspiracists in years to come.
One of the drawbacks of a book like Tapes is its deliberately narrow optic.
Reading it is like peering through a keyhole of one door in a large house; the viewer should not draw many conclusions about what is going on elsewhere inside.
In that sense, Michael Beschloss’s eclectic collections (Taking Charge and Reaching for Glory) give a better, broader view of LBJ’s leadership and psychology – although Holland rectiﬁes some important transcription errors and misinterpretations in them.
While the JFK assassination presented Johnson with a slew of difﬁcult personal and political problems, it was the war in Vietnam that imparted the most striking ironies to his twisted relationship with the Kennedys.
JFK bequeathed to him a substantial and growing troop build-up that was making a satisfactory United States exit strategy hard to devise, notwithstanding Kennedy’s insistence two and a half months before he died that the war was South Vietnam’s to win or lose.
He tacitly assented to plots to oust President Ngo Dinh Diem; after that occurred just three weeks before his own death, South Vietnam fell into a spiral of instability that, it seemed, could only be forestalled by more United States troops and a wider war.
Lastly, Kennedy’s death, when viewed in the context of later events in Vietnam, raised the intriguing possibility that had he lived, the United States might have avoided the quagmire altogether.
That is the thesis of Howard Jones’s Death of a Generation, as declared in its subtitle, How the Assassination of Diem and JFK Prolonged the Vietnam War.
Jones’s is the latest of several hefty, deeply researched narratives on early United States involvement in Vietnam that includes David Kaiser’s American Tragedy and Robert Mann’s A Grand Delusion.
Like Stern’s book, Death addresses the unintended consequences of a Kennedy administration foreign policy.
Unlike in Cuba, however, JFK was not around to deal with the problems his course reversal contributed to.
For years, his defenders and detractors have debated what he would have done about Vietnam had he lived.
The most persuasive argument that he would not have withdrawn US troops is Noam Chomsky’s Rethinking Camelot.
Besides begging the question that JFK would have won the election – as of late 1963, by no means certain – Jones does not prove his case despite imposing documentation (the notes and bibliography comprise one-sixth of the book) that leads him to say both too much and too little.
Death covers much the same historical ground as Kaiser and Mann did, and its Kennedy counterfactual has been examined several times elsewhere – most recently, and more modestly, in Robert Dallek’s An Unﬁnished Life.
At that same meeting, JFK noted that ‘he more difﬁcult question is what means are we going to use to bring pressure to change the political atmosphere’ in the United States – a clear acknowledgement that he might not be able to get away with his decision.
The other condition, apparently unrecognized by Kennedy and the NSC, was some measure of stability in South Vietnam, which the administration was undermining by its simultaneous endorsement of coup plotting.
However, or if ever, JFK’s plan of extrication might have been put into practice, it became moot after Diem’s death at the hands of US-inspired conspirators.
What seems more arguable from the mass of evidence that Jones and his fellow tome writers have gathered is that as of late 1963, Kennedy and his best and brightest remained as muddled about what to do in Vietnam as the unclear intelligence picture they were receiving.
That he and some of his advisers suborned the coup that killed Diem shows how badly they misread the ‘ground truth’ in South Vietnam.
Had Kennedy lived, given his fascination with counterinsurgency and covert action, he almost certainly would have approved Operations Plan 34A, the expanded joint covert offensive by the CIA and the military that would soon be on the books, offering a tempting low-proﬁle way to try to stabilize the South in the months before the presidential election.
The political exigencies that compelled LBJ to expand the war would also have affected JFK in his second term.
Asked a few years later if the United States would have sent in more troops to prevent South Vietnam’s defeat, Robert Kennedy, who knew his brother’s thinking better than anyone, said they would have faced that when they came to it.
What emerges from Jones’s exhaustive narrative is the story of a war founded on a mishmash of ideology, social science, murky intelligence, and shortterm political calculation, and run by a coterie of assertive but uncertain overachievers who were formulating policy on the ﬂy.
LBJ’s abiding bitterness over Diem’s ouster and the troubles it caused him was evident more than two years later in taped Oval Ofﬁce conversations that Holland mentions.
In one, Johnson asserts that ‘We all got together and got a goddamn bunch of thugs and assassinated him.
If Johnson thought that the CIA had been the Kennedy administration’s ‘agent’ in eliminating Diem and thus – albeit unintentionally – had contributed to the chaos that followed, there is little wonder that he ignored the Agency’s analyses that indicated his Vietnam policy was failing and tuned out the DCI who was telling him so.
Speaking truth to power can be hazardous when the powers that be do not like what they hear.
It was a lesson that subsequent DCIs painfully had to relearn – in some cases, too well.
