Later Anderson clashed with Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara over the blockade’s enforcement.
Twelve minutes after that, he veered eastward to land at Mccoy Air Force base , Florida.
The president sat at the head of a conference table in the cabinet Room.
As the briefing began, he touched a hidden switch under the table, activating a tape recorder.
This was the beginning of the first meeting of what would be called the excomm, which consisted of members of the National Security council and other government officials to whom Kennedy turned for advice, including his brother, Attorney General Robert Kennedy.
McNamara deferred to General Maxwell Taylor, chairman of the Joint chiefs of Staff, who outlined potential military actions.
The Joint chiefs of Staff, believing cuba would continue to be a potential cold War flashpoint, had directed Admiral Robert L Dennison, commander-in-chief of the United States Atlantic command, to develop what became OPLAN 312.
Antisubmarine-warfare exercises also were scheduled, putting more ships and aircraft into the Caribbean.
Admiral George W Anderson, chief of Naval Operations, told all fleet commanders to be ready to order as many ships to sea as possible on a 24-hour notice.
The Joint Chiefs ordered the strengthening of air defenses in the southeastern United States, and Air Force bases and shore-based Navy and Marine Corps squadrons prepared for a possible invasion of Cuba.
Gromyko insisted that Soviet aid to Cuba was defensive and did not threaten the United States.
Kennedy, without revealing what the U-2 had discovered, merely reiterated his warning.
Anderson ended his day working on the legal and logistical issues involved for a sea blockade of Cuba.
Secretary of State Rusk suggested that “blockade” be replaced by “quarantine” because the latter “avoids comparison with the Berlin blockade,” the Soviet attempt in 1948–49 to block Allied access to the divided city.
When Kennedy said the vessel might be unintentionally sunk, Anderson replied that a ship could be disabled and stay afloat.
The oldest carrier in the Navy, she had been launched in 1942 and soon sailed into the Pacific, where she fought in several battles and survived a kamikaze attack.
Overhauled at the Brooklyn Navy Yard, she had departed in September 1962 with up-to-date sonar and electronic countermeasure equipment.
For some lucky members of her crew, the day after arrival at Gitmo was to have been a liberty day.
At 0330 on 21 October reveille sounded for a surprised crew, and the Essex steamed toward her quarantine station.
She was one of 44 ships in Task Force 136, under the operational control of Vice Admiral Alfred G “Corky” Ward, commander of the 2nd Fleet.
Of the ships heading toward cuba, Ward was told, at least one “had missiles in her hold” and had to be intercepted.
At the northern end of the crescent was the guided-missile cruiser Canberra with two destroyers; at the southern end were the cruiser Newport News and two destroyers.
Meanwhile Task Force 135, built around the carriers Independence andEnterprise and including 32 ships, took up stations off cuba’s southeastern shore.
On 22 October, Guantanamo’s Navy families were handed notices telling them that “Higher authority has directed theimmediate evacuation” of all dependents.
The only women allowed to stay were Navy nurses, who might be needed in the darkening future.
At 1630 that day, four Navy ships transported 2,400 people to the Norfolk Naval Station, where service families took them in.
Other Marines were airlifted in, joining a motley defense force that included Seabees from Naval Mobile construction battalions 4 and 7 and cuban volunteers from the civilian work force.
By now, people beyond Gitmo knew there was some kind of crisis. but newspapers were not getting any reliable information from Kennedy or the tight-lipped members of excomm.
Finally, as the Gitmo refugees packed their suitcases, the White House announced that at 1900 the president would make an important statement that would be carried on television and radio.
In concert with President Kennedy’s quarantine proclamation, the Joint chiefs ordered United States armed forces to DeFcON-3, an increase of readiness beyond normal.
The United States Strategic Air command went to DeFcON-2, a state of readiness short of war that put SAc bombers aloft carrying nuclear weapons—a clear sign to the Soviet Union that the United States was not bluffing.
There, Navy photographer’s mates removed film from the Crusaders’ cameras for processing and delivery to the NPIC in Washington.
Commander William B Ecker, who led the mission, was ordered to refuel and continue to Andrews Air Force Base near Washington.
A helicopter flew him to the Pentagon, where he was met by Admiral Anderson and General Taylor.
Ecker, noting that his flight over the target area had been shorter than 30 seconds, advised the chiefs to wait for the photographs.
Accounts vary about their encounter at the Navy’s Flag Plot command center in the Pentagon on 24 October.
But aerial photography showed that the Soviets were still constructing missile sites and assembling IL-28 bombers.
Then a Soviet surface-toair missile shot down a U-2, killing its pilot, Air Force Major Rudolph Anderson Jr.
Though President Kennedy decided not to retaliate, the NSA wanted proof that the Soviets had done it.
A Navy-NSA hybrid, the USS Oxford was the security agency’s first signal intelligence ship—and one of the strangest-looking vessels in the Navy.
Three masts, each bearing tiers of antennas, sprouted from a main deck.
On the fantail was a 16-foot dish-shaped antenna that could bounce microwave signals off the moon to a ground station.
Operators picked up signals from Spoon Rest, the NATO designation for Soviet early warning radar.
With the quarantine working, on 28 October the Soviets agreed to remove the ballistic missiles.
The United States agreed that it would not invade cuba. 37 eventually details of a secret agreement emerged.
They indicated that the United States was dismantling several American air and missile bases in Turkey that had been rendered obsolete by the commitment of Polaris submarines in the region.
The freighter Atkarsk, which had left Soviet waters in September 1960 bound for cuba and was tracked by the NSA, was back in cuba during the crisis.
And, according to recent revelations, top Kremlin officials ordered the Atkarsk to carry the last tactical nuclear warheads out of cuba on 20 November 1962.
Allen M Sumner DD-692, Sea Stories—chapter 5, www.dd-692.com/ sea_stories_-_chapter_5.htm.
Of several estimates of the invasion force, 1,400 is the number that appears frequently in accounts of the invasion.
The Naval Quarantine of Cuba, 1962, Naval Historical center. www.history . navy.mil/faqs/faq90-5.htm.
Stern was a historian at the John F Kennedy Presidential Library from 1977 through 1999.
The library began declassifying and releasing the secret Kennedy tapes in 1973.
Ray S Cline, “A CIA Reminiscence,” Washington Quarterly , Autumn 1982, 91.
At the time of the cuban Missile crisis, cline was the cIA’s deputy director for intelligence.
The dialogue between President Kennedy and Admiral Anderson has been quoted by many sources without the specific time and place provided by Stern, who is the leading authority for the White House tapes’ content.
Polmar and Gresham, DEFCON-2 , Appendix c, “ United States Naval Forces in the caribbean,” 309.
A resolution commemorating the dedication of the Strategic Air command Memorial during the 20th anniversary of its stand-down, 5 June 2012, www.govtrack.us/congress/bills/112/sres479/text.
