I'm the executive director of the Davis Center for Russian and Eurasian Studies.
And it's my enormous pleasure, once again, to be having a book talk with Professor Serhii Plokhii from the history department in Harvard's Ukrainian Research Institute.
But the way you describe the book, in fact, the fog of deception, mutual suspicion, unreliable and outdated information, made it so that we could barely see the other guy, let alone see his eyeballs.
They might even be completely undressed, and yet this book is here and provides some new information on the crisis.
What's new here? Well, first of all, thanks for this wonderful introduction.
And I'm certainly happy to be back on the platform provided by the Davis Center and again answering your questions and having this discussion, so thank you.
And when I was looking at the literature on the crisis and I was interested in the crisis for a number of reasons, including some personal, I lived on the street in Dnipropetrovsk where every single ballistic missile that was delivered to Cuba was built, so there was this interest.
There was an enormous amount of literature and I was started, of course, with the Robert Kennedy's ""Thirteen Days"" it was going from there and eventually I got lost.
And then I went to something that I normally do, I went to the primary sources.
And what I saw there was actually very different from what I read in most of the books that I consulted.
So what I saw there was a lot of confusion, a lot of uncertainty, a lot of miscommunication, and that's not the dominant narrative that at least exists in our literature.
It's about the young but wise president and he was young, and occasionally he was wise, but there were a lot of mistakes and missteps on both sides and that's what I'm trying to bring you in terms of interpretation.
But another new thing that is there is the degree to which I am relying on the memoirs coming from the Soviet side.
Again, they're not entirely new, but certainly they're not part of the mainstream either of the Russian/Soviet writing on the crisis of the American one.
And those are supplemented by the recently released or declassified KGB documents that I probably was the first historian to consult and maybe still is the only person who worked with those.
They come from the former KGB, now State Security of Ukraine Archive in Kyiv.
So Crimea, and Odessa, and Nikolayev and so on and so forth, and they're now in Kyiv.
So from that point of view, I got access to this view from below that only KGB reporting could provide.
And, again, that was something really, really interesting on a number of levels, I'll be happy to talk about that in more detail.
First new is maybe my really dissatisfaction with the literature that is there and presentation of a new take on the crisis as a ""March of Folly,"" really.
I wanted to use that title from Barbara Tuchman's book, but it was already taken, so I went instead for, ""Nuclear Folly"" but it's clearly a nod towards her book. Actually that's one of the things that's so interesting is the references to Barbara Tuchman's book ""The Guns of August,"" are everywhere in the book.
He was extremely disturbed by this idea of sleepwalking into World War I by miscalculation and not understanding the other side and kinda getting caught up in events.
And yet in so many ways, they seem to be making the same mistakes. Exactly.
That is unbelievable because the impression is that Kennedy was actually waking up and going to bed is this idea of misunderstanding, miscalculation.
He was talking about that to Khrushchev when they met in Vienna, roughly a year or a year-and-a-half before the crisis in 1961.
He didn't want to talk about misunderstandings and miscalculations, he was pushing the world revolution and was trying to regress the disbalance in nuclear weapons.
But for Kennedy, it was a big idea and a big thing, but it's amazing to what degree that they couldn't really read rightly the signals that they were sending to each other.
Kennedy, it never occurred to him why Khrushchev decided to put the nuclear missiles on Cuba.
When during one of the discussions, one of the aides to Kennedy tells him that, well, but we have missiles in Turkey.
And he meant that of times of Eisenhower and also the times when the US didn't have enough ballistic missiles, not any kind, but long-range ballistic missiles.
Khrushchev never was able to figure out, of course, like it was the case with Stalin and was every Soviet leader.
That yes, you can bully unexperienced American president and try to get from him this and that and that American president can be even scared at some point and be prepared to give you what you want.
Kennedy was caught on tape saying that, in the middle of the crisis, saying that, well I agree in McNamara and with others that the Soviet missiles in Cuba didn't change the balance.
What was really a major threat to the United States but she said that, well, last week when we were asked what we were going to do about that.
So Khrushchev who was making decisions on his own, his very little advice coming from anybody.
Couldn't imagine the circumstance in which Kennedy worked and function and what democracy was about.
So this is just a couple of examples of really not being able to understand the other side where the other side was coming from.
And on the top of that, of course, there were, it was taken more than one day for letter from crucial to high in the White House.
It's just, you read that you return you go back to the sources, you again maybe didn't understand something now that how much time it was needed to convey a message.
Yes, the other guy did blink but they couldn't, they didn't know that it happened. They didn't notice for 24 hours right.
They turned around. Kennedy was still agonizing rather to give an order to attack the Soviet ships.
And those ships actually turned back 24 hours before that he was trying to make the decision.
So again, one of the examples that again we were dealing with a very different world in terms of the information technologists.
And you see over and over Robert Kennedy is trying to meet with some of the Russians in Washington to figure out what's going on.
And he's just unable to get any kind of clarity from those meetings. Yeah, absolutely.
And the main reason was that the Debrynin was the last guy to learn about what was going Grambling.
So when he was getting some communications on public radio must give them instructions, specific instructions going to him.
And that just shows you the way how really Khrushchev operated and was able to get away with that.
And then he spent no time at all conveying what was going on to Castro.
Kennedy is agonizing for days and days how to sell the idea of removing American missiles from Turkey to the NATO allies in Europe, and still can't figure out how to do that.
And Khrushchev didn't spent just one second on thinking how he would tell Castro what was going on.
The assumption was that he was a junior member of the communist club which was in line, that he would literally almost follow the orders coming from Moscow.
And Castro refused, causing them a major major new crisis in that whole story.
Again, it's known to experts, especially working on the Soviet side of the history with Mikoyan but its not part of the American narrative.
American narrative is still very much defined by ""Thirteen Days"" written by Robert Kennedy.
When in fact there were 13 days, but the entire crisis was going for more than one month.
And it was resolved only on November 20th, 1962, partially because Castro just refused to go along and wanted to grab the Soviet tactical weapons that were on the Island and the United States knew nothing about. It's interesting also from the very beginning though that the Soviets make this plan to put these nuclear weapons in Cuba and don't talk to Castro about it until very late in the game.
They've already decided they're gonna do it and then someone decides they should check with Castro to make sure it's okay.
And even while articulating the whole anti-imperialist anti-colonial language, they take a decision and then they practically send out the ships before they checked with the Cubans. Yes, exactly that what happened and then the person who was sent to convince Castro to take the missiles.
And so the name of that person who was doing this, the sale job was Marshall Biryoizor.
So he was successful salesmen in terms of convincing Castro to take the weapons, but then he gave Khrushchev what Khrushchev wanted him to tell him, that there was no way of, that was very easy there was no problem of hiding the missiles, which were more than 20 meters long under the palm trees which I don't know are five meter tall, seven foot tall, I don't know how tall they were. And practically naked as they point out. Right.
But he went back to Moscow and told Khrushchev that there was no problem with that.
Mikoyan was the only member of the raw allegedly decision making body that should have visited Cuba and knew what the landscape look like. The role of Mikoyan in Khrushchev's inner circle is really, he's very much out of step with the yes men that are surrounding Khrushchev here.
From the beginning, I mean, he might not be called dovish but he was definitely much more skeptical of the entire Cuban adventure than everyone else.
Do you think that we've learned something new about the decision-making around Khrushchev or in the presidium that there was the capacity for significant descent or is it the opposite that in fact it shows you could descend but you would be overruled anyway, it didn't matter. Well, for me, that was really a very interesting experience.
Looking at that again, I assumed that in the early part of Khrushchev staying here, of course, he had a lot of issues and problems with monitoring in particular, so with the old guard that he inherited from Stalin.
His secret speech at the 20th party Congress that was also part of his struggle for power within the political.
But after 1957, I assumed that he had really full control over Political.
And on a certain level this is true, but as you said there was at least one person who was not afraid to voice his opinion.
And the minister of defense Marshal Rodion Malinovsky, he was fully playing on Khrushchev side.
So the irony of all of that was that Mikoyan was the only member of the procedural, who didn't betray Khrushchev two years later in 1964.
And another thing that I was thinking about was, I couldn't help, but think about that comparison to the American and the Soviet system.
Well, in the American system these members of the EXCOMM, Executive Committee, they mean a serve at the pleasure of the president.
But the level of degree of of the disagreements, the level of the discussion.
So they could just tell probably not indefinitely but certainly more than once to the president that they didn't agree with him, that they would have to look for the tactics, they would have to look for the words, but clearly they were real discussions and real debates where Kennedy would find himself more than once on who's inside.
In a Soviet case, none of those people are technically aids, they're all elected by the Central Committee.
But the system is designed in the way that for them saying no to Khrushchev was really politically almost impossible.
So only Mikoyan, who, who was more senior than than Khrushchev in terms of his services at the highest level of the party, and the state could afford to do that and even then to a degree.
So one model was the rational actor, these countries and their leaders are acting rationally and doing what they can to protect their interests.
That each institution has its own interests and is advancing them and that's what constraints the choices.
And the third one is I think what he calls governmental processes or government politics, which is basically that the leader is dependent on his entourage, both for information and in terms of providing the representatives of stakeholders that keep him elected or keep him in position.
And obviously Khrushchev and Kennedy come from very different positions.
Is that an accurate way of describing where you come down? Well, it is and again, Graham Alison wrote a wonderful book and it's amazing how many things he got right because the book was written before the Kennedy tapes really became available.
And certainly he didn't know what was going on on the Soviet side, all this information came much later.
Again, they revised the book with Philip Zelikow, but once the Kennedy tapes became available.
But again, they were pretty much working very much in the dark on many things.
In terms of Khrushchev, yes, absolutely, it's a great man making policy.
She wasn't controlled to a degree that, I don't know, maybe Stalin was at some point already waiting in his tenure, maybe late.
But basically it was Khrushchev's vision, Khrushchev's idea and Khrushchev's responsibility.
And Miss Kennedy again, it's a little bit more complex because again, he was not in the situations where he was not overruled but out voted by the members of his executive committee.
He would go along with an issue and either response to Khrushchev or the public statement that wouldn't be in line with whatever the consensus was around the table.
And she would invite only people whom she liked, whose position who she liked.
We also know that if that mission to Debrynin would turn out to be not effective, there was another plan that was ready, going to the United Nations and actually asking the General Secretary of the United nations to propose this slap of the missiles.
And the EXCOMM served not really as a decision making body, but as an advisory body to the president. One thing that I noticed in your discussions of the EXCOMM, the American EXCOM, is that the Americans were obsessed with Berlin.
And the two were inextricably linked to the point where I think National Security Advisor, Bundy was worried that like, if we do a blockade of Cuba, then we'll have a blockade in Berlin.
And for the Americans, these two issues are really very tightly linked.
Or was it again a question of miscalculation? Well, I am afraid that is another question of misunderstanding and miscalculation and lack of good intelligence.
What we have is that Khrushchev really believed that the government question was solved with the building of the wall.
So for him, that was even this the most dramatic moment that we all talk about, one of the most dangerous allegedly moments in the history of the cold war with episode at a Checkpoint Charlie, for Khrushchev that wasn't a big event.
He already decided that again, there was the wall, he was not allowed to be pushed by Olbrich by the middle of his Germany to do anything else.
And Kennedy believed that that was real, that that was for true that another flare up another major crisis was coming in Berlin before the end of 1962.
So through most of the crisis, Berlin was the key factor on Kennedy's agenda.
And his thinking part of his thinking that why he was actually much more hawkish during the first week of the crisis than we believe he is.
Because again his brother did an excellent job portraying him as as a wise and dovish and so on and so forth.
Well, he was hawkish during the first week of the crisis, because he was advocating the idea that there should be surgical strike against the Soviet missiles in Cuba, against McNamara, against everyone else.
And one of the reasons why he was pushing for that solution was that, he believed that once the blockade was introduced another step that Khrushchev would respond with blockade desperately.
And then he envisioned in nuclear war over Europe not much nuclear war in the Sargasso Sea, or in the Caribbean.
So again, it's another case of how Khrushchev was playing the Berlin card really Kennedy believed that that was for real.
Now, the interesting thing is that the Soviets fell victims of their own deception, as well.
We know now from the records of how Mikoyan was explaining what was going on to Castro, who was really upset by the way how things were going.
Khrushchev himself believed that Kennedy could not be serious about Berlin, that Kennedy was playing Berlin card against, Khrushchev.
One of our questions here ask the extent to which both sides, the Americans and the Soviets kept their allies in NATO and the Warsaw Pact in the loop of what was going on.
What were they involved in any way or was it really just the two superpowers in dialogue? It was mostly two superpowers in dialogue.
And the Soviets really acted, Khrushchev in particular, didn't spend much time thinking about informing Castro or the East European allies.
Because the expectation was that Europeans would never understand the American reaction.
Europeans would think that will be overreaction to the Soviet missiles in Cuba.
And Kennedy knows that his advisors know that they openly discussed that Europeans were living next door to the Soviet union, to the Soviet missiles for years and years in and out.
So why Americans would get paranoid about a couple of missiles in Cuba, that was beyond European allies understanding.
Add on top of that, there was Turks who agreed to take the American ballistic nuclear tipped missiles, Jupiters.
For whom it was a major issue of prestige, the one into NATO, a major issue of security and so on and so forth.
So at the end, Kennedy never told either Europeans or Turks or anybody else that she was withdrawing missiles from Turkey.
So it was part of the secret deal, so he never got enough courage to go there and to tell them what was going on. You dropped a teaser at the very beginning of our conversation about the unexpected things you saw in the KGB archives that you got in Ukraine.
So I have one question that's asking here, what the role of the KGB was in the crisis, and whether the communications that you reviewed gave you any idea of how the Soviets might have better understood Kennedy than we expected.
I personally was very interested to see the low morale of the 40,000 Soviet troops that were kept basically underwater for this terrible crossing of the Atlantic.
But what is it that you discovered in those KGB archives that we didn't know before? Well, the book by Fursenko and Naftali that appeared 20 years ago was really a breakthrough in terms of opening to us some key issues about the decision-making process in framing and KGB report.
And what emerges from there is actually that KGB was not a major player.
And the Ministry of Foreign Affairs had Debrynin, in Washington and he was directly talking to Bobby Kennedy.
Military intelligence had it's communication with the White House and the KGB had nothing.
He was also very, very low in terms of what's keeping a low profile in Khrushchev's government.
So his main question was actually to cut KGB in terms of the numbers, in terms of the influence.
So KGB was really a secondary player in that story compared to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, compared to the military intelligence.
But what KGB was really good at is reporting about what was happening around them.
The major concern that the term of their service would be extended beyond three years.
By the way, yesterday, I got an email from one of the readers, actually viewers of one of my presentations about the book who was saying that that was also the main concern of him and his friends were in the National Guard.
The fact that the Soviets were able to bring to Cuba 43,000 people, not 10,000 as it was.
The ballistic missiles were not located on the Island until it was too late and until the end of the cold war the United States never learned about the tactical missiles.
So the KGB report and explains to us how the Soviets actually were able to hide all those people.
As you said, keeping between decks, underwater, almost suffocating and prepared that people would die on the ship from appendicitis or something like that but not allowing them to go to the hospital in the Debrynin.
The irony of that particular case, thank God the guys survived, but the irony was that he didn't know where the ship was going, no one on the ship knew where he was going but to the KGB and others, they were ready to keep him on the ship if he dies he dies, but no information would go.
So that is the intelligence failure on the part of the US and KGB documents help us to explain how it happened.
And another major contributing factor is the understanding of the level of humiliation that the Soviet military experienced as the result of withdrawal from Cuba.
Not withdrawal per se but the fact that they were ordered to show to the American airplanes and ships and so on to open that Windex, to show their missiles, to show what they had there.
And the Minister of Defense Rodion Malinovsky, who was close as possible ally to Khrushchev during the crisis.
Once Khrushchev was removed and he had to explain to his commanders how him Minister of Defense became the part of the plot against the commander in chief.
His explanation was that never in history of the Russian army or the Soviet army actually went through that kind of humiliation.
I don't think anyone paying too much attention to that but what I learned from the KGB files really helped them to understand that it wasn't an excuse that he was basically talking to those commanders to something that they deeply felt, felt really really humiliated and independent, by the way how it was done.
That contributor to a degree, I don't overstate my case but that contributes to our story of Khrushchev in 1964. So on the one hand, there's an incredible failure of intelligence from the United States.
And then on the other hand, you have Gary Wills who writes that Kennedy behaved recklessly.
Now the argument is that Kennedy behave recklessly on the basis of the information that he had available.
But in fact, the information was much worse than what he had available.
And perhaps the argument then is that it wasn't at all reckless to be very firm in this situation, even though it created this crisis.
Basically one thing that I want to bring up as part of this recklessness not is the Bay of pigs.
Another one was that the Bay of Pigs situation spoiled relationship between Kennedy and the military commanders to a degree that it was almost impossible to repair.
Because Kennedy was actually not prepared to follow our chief's advice after what happened the Bay of Pigs.
Again, it's a big question who was to be blamed there but they were in groups with each other.
And what that meant that the idea of the invasion of Cuba but it was the most dangerous of the possible scenarios was supported by Bobby Kennedy.
So again, recklessness of Kennedy during the first week when he was advocating that the strike you can call it recklessness but also it's the issue of lack of the information and intelligence.
The Kennedy joins the blockade or the quarantine group of his advisors.
Once he gets intelligence information that the missiles are probably solid missiles are probably ready to fire so he changes his position, he goes for..., again for him the biggest risk is brigade of West Berlin but he realizes that it's less of a risk than attacking, the launchpads and the missiles on the Island.
I know you're teaching a class on the international history of the nuclear age, and that you're very concerned with the fact that the United States and Russia is gradually dismantling all of the arms control treaties that were put in place since the days of the Soviet union.
And the second one is whether you can draw lessons from your crisis as we're calling it to to give us insights or ideas about how to avert the impending us China confrontation over Taiwan? Okay.
I never thought about that in those terms, in a sense that there is this belief in that for Russia or at least in Russia, that Ukraine is so close geographically and otherwise as Cuba was for the United States.
The difference of would it be of that as far as I know there are no plans to put American ballistic missiles in Ukraine.
And this is a big difference despite the dismantling of course the cold war era agreements despite the fact that all of those agreements had gone by now 2019 was the year August of 2019 When the last agreement signed by Gorbachev and Reagan was gone.
So we are in the middle of the new nuclear arms race maybe not in the middle, but certainly in the beginning.
Yeah, there are parallels between Ukraine and Cuba but there are also significant differences.
I have no recipes on Taiwan but I can tell you that is something that I really was surprised to learn when I was writing conclusions to the book and was trying to look for whether there are any lessons that applicable today I was surprised to learn that now or 30 or maybe more years after the end of the cold war the nuclear world didn't change much.
We still have two nuclear superpowers, and there are still the United States and they're Russian and another is Russian.
So they really in a difficult, in a different group in a different class.
And it's very difficult to get them in, get involved and engaged in the agreement to control nuclear weapons or to reduce nuclear weapons where there are these two heavyweights Russia and the United States.
So that means that some other ways have to be looked at how to handle nuclear China, which is different and probably the format would be different from this format of relations, nuclear relations in particular between the United States and Russia.
Now, in terms of the, of things that are not nuclear, it is interesting and we can see that, we can't see that in the 1960s but we see that certainly in '70s and then during the the signing between Nixon and Brezhnev the first Salt 1 Agreement that nuclear politics and the politics that the geopolitics sometimes actually can be quite autonomous from each other.
And what we heard a few months ago that despite very intense relations between the United States and Russia, Biden and Putin agreed to promulgate for another five years, then New Start Agreement.
This is the one of the examples that the nuclear politics can be much completely independent, but can be quite autonomous from the rest of the politics.
And I think that autonomy should be certainly kept in the case of American genius politics.
So I was here really on the thin ice. All right, let me pull you to shore with a different question. Okay. One of the things that you point out as being very different from the situation in the 1960s is that nuclear weapons have become a bit banal.
The same way people were in the '60s mutually assured destruction is kind of out of fashion.
So the one thing that comes through that you're quite thankful for, from both the Kennedy and Khrushchev is that they're both terrified of nuclear war.
And even though there are tactical nuclear weapons like the thought of actually using them in conflict is almost unconscionable.
And that seems not so much to be the case now in if I'm reading what you were saying towards the end of the book correctly. Okay.
Yes, I am strong believer in fear as is not just a negative thing that forces you to act irrationally.
There is a lot of that, but also something that that can be put to good use.
And on the answer to the question of why the... despite all this missteps, despite all this misunderstanding, this recklessness on the both sides, but most learn the crucial side.
And the answer was that there was one thing that Khrushchev and Kennedy shared, that one thing was fear, fear of the nuclear war.
Both Kennedy and Khrushchev belong to the generation that lived through Hiroshima and Nagasaki.
So custom Bravo, through Castle Bravo the first hydrogen bomb which went wrong with tar bomb, but the biggest hydrogen bomb ever tried in the world's history, it was all there.
Now, if you look at the exchange between some of the American leaders and North Korean leaders in the last few years, you ask yourself a question, whether that's understanding of how dangerous the nuclear weapons are is still part of the thinking of today's political elites, 30 years after the war.
Again, I don't know the answer, but what I know for sure that certainly this is not part of the public discourse that it should be.
The world is in some form of a nuclear arms race at least since the 2002 when the us abandoned the anti-ballistic treaty signed by Brezhnev and Nixon back in 1972.
So we... there, and I don't think that there is much of a discussion of that beyond the circle of really experts in the field.
That means that the public has as a whole doesn't have this degree of a healthy fear.
If I can use that term that again nuclear weapon system was that their are still two nuclear super powers in the world.
That the plans are made for the years tactical nuclear weapons in the limited war.
Again, I leave that to the experts to decide whether this is reasonable supposition that there can be a local nuclear exchange in nuclear war as a historian.
I know that the American president who had a lot of experience with warfare, General Eisenhower didn't believe that there is such thing as a limited nuclear war, nuclear exchange because he believed that once you're in the battle, you just throw everything you got to get where you want to be or to save yourself.
So, again I, and this was a question mark it's living that really two experts to discuss that and to decide on that.
But one thing that I am absolutely sure that we all not experts in to date development of the nuclear weapons.
And I remember when for the Davis Center's anniversary, a couple of years ago we did a big visualization of channels of communication between the United States and the Soviet union and United States and Russia.
So I hope that it doesn't take it a very big precipice in order to get us back to that healthy fear that you're talking about and to increase dialogue, because surely, despite the fact that Biden and Putin are prolonging start, new start, there's shrinking channels of communication between the United States and Russia, at least since 2012. Yeah.
And that was the beginning then the Non-Proliferation Treaty in '68 and Salt 1 and Salt 2 in the 1970s.
So it really gave a major, major impulse to this process of establishing some degree of trust and establishing the degree of control of the nuclear weapons.
And again, I really hope that we will not need another crisis of that proportion really, to return back to the negotiation table.
So we are really in precarious by the missile crisis situation with uncontrolled arms race, there are very few agreements that are still in place that are left and you don't know what to expect from the other side.
And we are in a situation where the number of the nuclear States is quite limited, nine.
Kennedy was afraid that by the end of 1960s there would have been at least 20, but if you count the countries that basically have nuclear capability and can turn it into a bond within few short months maybe year or two, there are 40.
And that presents a very different kind of a challenge today compared to what the situation was during the cold war.
Again, still two nuclear superpowers, but much more countries that are new or can become Ukraine. So we're both in the business of education and hopefully educating experts on Russia, Ukraine and all sorts of countries.
Do you think that the, the dangerous posed by all of these extra drivers on the nuclear road are at all mitigated by the fact that we now have at least more access to information to travel, to exchanges with people from these other countries than we did in the 1960s.
It doesn't take 24 hours now to send a note from the Kremlin to the White House. Absolutely no.
The improvement of IT technology, this is something that potentially is very helpful, but the the rise of cyber warfare is very dangerous sign that again, the things can be communicated very fast but not the kind of things that come from the place that you believe are coming.
We are talking about a shorter period of time that communication can take place.
But there is miscommunication, the potential of miscommunication also arise in as well.
And in terms of people traveling here and there, I think this is a very important factor, as long as the countries that are there are democracies.
Because that means that contacts on the personal level, on the human level with others can also be somehow communicated to the decision makers.
If the countries are much democratic or imprisoned authoritarian, and so and so forth, again, the ability of this personal contacts on the non-governmental that will influence the position of the government is diminished.
But it doesn't that actually we should keep trying because that's as citizens as people who are not maybe directly making those decisions or influencing in those decisions that's our only channel that we have to influence to influence the governments. Serhii, I'm so grateful that you keep writing books and we keep having this opportunity for this personal contact, maybe not in person but at least virtually.
So I highly recommend that everyone read the book because ""Hedgehogs"" make a very important appearance several times in the book.
Thank you very much, Serhii Thank you to our audience members and... Well, thank you.
It was a pleasure and yes, I certainly encourage everyone to buy the book and read about hedgehogs that maybe is the most interesting part of the story.
