Late the night before, the CIA had produced detailed photo intelligence identifying Soviet nuclear missile installations under construction on the island of Cuba, some ninety miles off the Florida coast; now the president and his men confronted the dangerous decision of how the United States should respond.
His strategy proved successful; the Soviets withdrew the missiles end nuclear war was averted.
Three decades later, however, Soviets, Cubans, and Americans learned how close the world had come to a nuclear conflagration.
LEARNING ABOUT THE MISSILE CRISIS Thirty-six years after the respective actions of the United States, the Soviet Union, and Cuba brought the world to the brink of the unthinkable, new and important information about the Cuban missile crisis continues to emerge.
Despite the passage of time, the United States government refused to declassify these documents, citing reasons of national security.
In the aftermath of the missile crisis, the papers from all the national security agencies involved were scattered throughout the executive branch.
This mini-archive of approximately three thousand records, totaling ten thousand pages in all, included contingency plans, military scenarios, minutes of Kennedy's Executive Committee, intelligence reports, analyses, chronologies, cables, and a wide variety of other highly sensitive State Department, Defense Department, National Security Council, and Central Intelligence Agency documents on the missile crisis.
In April 1987, the National Security Archive filed a series of FOIA requests for these files.
Since the publication of that collection in 1990, the Archive has continued to pursue and obtain the declassification of hundreds of important State, Defense, CIA, and NSC documents relating to the Cuban missile crisis.
REVISING THE HISTORY OF THE CRISIS The availability of previously classified material has enabled scholars both to challenge the conventional wisdom and to revise long-standing historical interpretations of the events that took place before, during, and after October 1962.
Similarly, scholarly works on the crisis were dominated by Graham Allison's seminal book, Essence of Decision, which drew heavily on the official memoirs to cast the episode as the ""classic"" model of crisis management.
The declassified United States records have allowed scholars to highlight the inevitable distortions, limitations, and inaccuracies in the narratives of former Kennedy administration officials, and to augment and supplement these officials' memories.
The result was a new body of information that provides a much fuller picture of events and fundamentally alters how the scope and meaning of the missile crisis has been and will be considered.
A series of letters between Kennedy and Khrushchev, declassified and released to the National Security Archive in January 1992, demonstrates that the crisis lasted through late November of 1962, at the very least.
New revelations about the missile crisis have also undermined its image as a paradigm of successful crisis management.
This combination of unauthorized military and covert actions, misinterpreted military and political signals, and significant failures in intelligence—all of which threatened to set a war in motion—not only challenges earlier depictions of this event as a model of a ""controlled crisis"" but calls into question the fundamental assumption that severe international crises can, in fact, be ""managed"" at all.
The new documentation, combined with recent testimony by Soviet and Cuban officials, also sheds light on what is perhaps the most important puzzle of the missile crisis, namely, what motivated the Soviets to deploy nuclear weapons in Cuba.
A declassified military history of the Jupiter system reveals that the rockets became operational in April 1962—an event that may have contributed to Khrushchev's proposal, made the very same month, to deploy similar weapons in Cuba.
In addition, the documents lend credence to Khrushchev's claim that a primary Soviet motivation was the defense of Cuba against a United States invasion.
In the end, United States officials preferred free rein to intervene in Cuba over an international accord that would settle the Cuban missile crisis.
USING THIS DOCUMENTS READER This book is an effort to tell the story of the Cuban missile crisis through a selection from the many documents that were generated by these extraordinary events.
Those who want to study the crisis further are urged to consult the comprehensive bibliography included in this volume, and to make use of the National Security Archive's holdings of over four thousand documents, totaling some eighteen thousand pages.
Important documents generated by the Soviet and Cuban governments are also included.
Those readers who prefer to start with a comprehensive overview of events are urged to read the chronology at the back of the book in order to place the individual documents in the broader context of events.
Admittedly, the documents reproduced here do not present a complete picture of the extraordinary events surrounding the missile crisis.
Until these nations' archives are opened to the public, U.S., Soviet, and Cuban historians will be unable to present anything approximating a full account of the crisis, and books on the crisis will necessarily remain incomplete.
Public discourse on the Cuban missile crisis, however, need not wait, for there is more than enough accessible information to advance our collective education and sustain an ongoing discussion on how to prevent similar confrontations in the future.
The requests were filed in the name of Professor Philip Brenner, a Cuba specialist and member of the Archive advisory board.
