December 19, 1960 Cuba openly aligns itself with the Soviet Union and their policies.
January 3, 1961 The United States terminates diplomatic and consular relation with Cuba.
April 12, 1961 President Kennedy pledges the United States will not intervene militarily to overthrow Castro.
April 17, 1961 Backed by the U.S., a group of Cuban exiles invades Cuba at the Bay of Pigs in an attempt to trigger an anti-Castro rebellion.
The invasion fails and more than a thousand Cuban rebels are captured by Castro's forces.
July 27, 1962 Castro announces that Cuba is taking measures that would make any direct United States attack on Cuba the equivalent of a world war.
He claims that the U.S.S.R. has invested greatly in helping defend his country.
August 31, 1962 Senator Kenneth Keating tells the Senate that there is evidence of Soviet missile installations in Cuba.
September 11, 1962 In a speech to the UN, Soviet Foreign Minister Andrei Gromyko warns that an American attack on Cuba could mean war with the Soviet Union.
October 9, 1962 Kennedy orders a U-2 reconnaissance flight over western Cuba, delayed by bad weather until the 14th.
October 10, 1962 Senator Keating charges that six intermediate-range ballistic missile bases are being constructed in Cuba.
October 14, 1962 A U-2 flying over western Cuba discovers missile sites.
Photographs obtained by this flight provide hard evidence that Soviets have missiles in Cuba.
October 15, 1962 A readout team at the National Photographic Intelligence Center reviews photos taken during the U-2 flight and identifies objects similar to MRBM components observed in the U.S.S.R. at San Cristobal.
McGeorge Bundy decides after hearing about the discovery of missiles in Cuba not to inform the president until the next day.
McNamara is shown the photographic evidence of the MRBMs at San Cristobal.
At that meeting Kennedy and his advisors discuss possible diplomatic and military courses of action.
Robert Kennedy and Theodore Sorensen meet the President at the airport and fill him in on what he had missed during that day's deliberations.
Throughout EX-COMM's discussions, the Joint Chiefs of Staff and especially the Air Force strongly argue for an air strike.
After another U-2 flight on the night of the 17th, the military discoveres intermediate range SS-5 nuclear missiles.
October 19, 1962 Kennedy departs Washington for scheduled campaign speeches in Cleveland and the West Coast.
The full operation is reviewed and approved, and the President's television address is scheduled for the next evening.
October 21, 1962 Kennedy is told by General Maxwell Taylor that an air strike could not guarantee to destroy all Soviet missiles in Cuba.
Another U-2 flight that day reveals bombers and Migs being rapidly assembled and cruise missile sites being built on Cuba's northern shore.
October 22, 1962 Congressional leaders assemble at the White House for a meeting with Kennedy.
They are shown the photographic evidence of the Soviet missile installations.
The President addresses the nation in a televised speech, announcing the presence of offensive missile sites in Cuba.
October 23, 1962 Kennedy orders six Crusader jets to fly a low level reconnaissance mission.
Organization of American States unanimously approves of the quarantine against Cuba.
Late in the evening, the President sends Robert Kennedy to the Soviet embassy to talk with Ambassador Dobrynin.
October 24, 1962 Soviet ships en route to Cuba with questionable cargo either slow down or reverse their course except for one.
October 25, 1962 Kennedy sends a letter to Khrushchev laying the responsibility for the crisis on the Soviet Union.
EX-COMM discusses a proposal to withdraw United States missiles from Turkey in exchange for the withdrawal of Soviet missiles in Cuba.
October 26, 1962 The Soviet ship Marucla is cleared through the quarantine.
During an EX-COMM meeting, Kennedy says that he believes the quarantine alone can not force the Soviet government to remove its offensive weapons from Cuba.
A CIA report from that morning states that there was no halt in progress in the development of the missile sites and another reconnaissance flight reveals the Soviets were also attempting to camouflage the missiles.
Aleksandr Fomin, who was known to be the KGB station chief in Washington, requests a meeting with ABC News correspondent John Scali.
Fomin proposes the dismantling of Soviet bases under United Nations supervision in exchange for a public pledge from the United States not to invade Cuba.
Khrushchev sends another letter to Kennedy proposing removing his missiles if Kennedy would publicly announce never to invade Cuba.
Plans for United States airstrikes on the missiles in Cuba and for an invasion of Cuba go forward.
October 27, 1962 A new letter from Khrushchev arrives, proposing a public trade of Soviet missiles in Cuba for United States missile in Turkey.
An American U-2 is shot down over Cuba killing the pilot, Major Rudolf Anderson.
U-2 accidentally strays into Soviet airspace near Alaska nearly being intercepted by Soviet fighters.
Dobrynin and Robert Kennedy meet and discuss the price of removing the missiles from Cuba.
Kennedy writes Khrushchev a letter stating that he will make a statement that the United States will not invade Cuba if Khrushchev removes the missiles from Cuba.
RFK secretly tells Dobrynin to tell Khrushchev that the United States would remove its missiles from Turkey within five months but that that could not be part of the formal agreement that would be announced to the world.
October 28, 1962 Khrushchev announces over Radio Moscow that he has agreed to remove the missiles from Cuba.
