He didn&#8217;t live to see the impact of his presidency, or to fulfill all he set out to accomplish when he entered the White House in 1961.
Since his death in 1963, scholars and writers have clashed over everything from his responsibility for the United States military\u2019s long entanglement in Vietnam to his role in the Civil Rights Movement\u2014some arguing that Kennedy stifled the movement, others arguing that he expedited its progress.
Other remarkable aspects of Kennedy&#8217;s presidency, however, lent themselves to consensus.
Besides being the first Catholic and the youngest president elected he was different in spirit than those who preceded him.
Succeeding Dwight Eisenhower, the oldest president elected since James Buchanan in 1857, Kennedy brought a dose of youthfulness and energy to the job that captivated the nation and made him, despite his early stumbles, an extraordinarily popular president.
As a consequence of timing too, Kennedy had his hands in some of the most significant events of the 20th century.
From Space Exploration to the Bay of Pigs A look back at JFK's abridged time in the White House—from his Bay of Pigs blunder to his ambitious plan to send man to the moon.
By Emily Feldman • Published May 30, 2013• Updated on May 26, 2017 at 2:45 pm President John F Kennedy was in office less than three years before his tenure came to an abrupt and bloody end.
Kennedy came into office in 1961 at age 43, the youngest president ever to take office and the first Catholic president.
Succeeding Dwight Eisenhower, the oldest president elected since James Buchanan in 1857, Kennedy brought a dose of youthfulness and energy to the job.
He was the first peacetime president in more than two decades, but Kennedy inherited Cold War tensions, a sluggish economy and simmering social unrest.
In his inaugural address, Kennedy acknowledged the profound challenges that lay ahead.
It was a responsibility that Kennedy took to heart and one that quickly led him into perhaps the biggest blunder of his presidency.
Just four months into his first term, Kennedy signed off on a plan to oust Cuban leader Fidel Castro.
The United States provided training and supplies to Cuban exiles who were supposed to swiftly invade Cuba through the Bay of Pigs and topple its communist leader.
Instead, the rebels found themselves outgunned and lacking critical intelligence.
Their surrender was an embarrassment to Kennedy and a blemish on his early record in office.
The following month he delivered an unexpected State of the Union address, recalibrating in the wake of his failure.
In the speech, which he said was warranted by the ""extraordinary challenge"" of upholding freedom, Kennedy laid out a vision of using aid and other peaceful measures to stanch the spread of communism.
The speech was not a turning point, but his success, months later, in steering the United States from the brink of nuclear war, certainly was. in October 1962 Kennedy managed to strike a deal with Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev that prevented the installation of nuclear missiles in Cuba, just 90 miles from the United States.
The Soviets nixed their plan in exchange for the United State’s removal of missiles from Turkey.
Kennedy's ability to appear cool and level-headed amid such a high-stakes crisis bolstered his image on the international stage.
United States & World News from around the country and around the globe Russia-Ukraine War 10 hours ago Dozens Feared Dead as Russian Shell Hits Ukrainian School Ukraine 5 hours ago Jill Biden Pays Surprise Visit to Ukraine, Meets First Lady Meanwhile, Kennedy was also navigating the growing conflict in Laos and Vietnam, which were steadily falling into the sphere of communist influence.
He aimed for a measured approach, boosting United States aid and military presence in the region, without entering United States forces into combat.
We can help them … but they have to win it, the people of Vietnam against the Communists,” he said, adding that he also did not believe the United States should withdraw.
On the domestic front, Kennedy found himself the target of criticism from both civil rights proponents and segregationists who were engaged in a fiery fight over the future of America.
Though he ran on a pro-civil rights platform, once elected, he was reluctant to push too hard or too early for legislation that would dismantle the country's system of racial inequality.
Civil rights leaders were particularly critical of Kennedy’s appointment of southern conservatives to federal judgeships and his failure to introduce a civil rights bill early in his presidency.
Kennedy ordered federal marshals to escort a black student, James Meredith, into the school amid massive protests that later turned violent.
He finally submitted a civil rights bill toward the end of 1963 but died before its passage.
He did live long enough, however, to see other significant goals accomplished.
Though he died before Neil Armstrong and the Apollo 11 crew landed on the moon, making his vision a reality, Kennedy did live to see John Glenn orbit the earth.
He was also able to watch the rapid development of the Peace Corp., which he established by executive order in 1961.
In its first years, hundreds of Americans traveled to developing countries, bringing with them Kennedy’s vision of peace, friendship and service—a vision he consistently hammered in his major addresses.
In his final speech, which he never had the chance to deliver, Kennedy was to tout America’s strength, but emphasize that strength should only be used in the pursuit of peace.
