For instance, books typically address how the Kennedy administration deftly, without triggering a nuclear war, forced Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev ‘to blink’ and remove the missiles from the Caribbean island.
Little, however, has been explored in terms of the Soviet and Cuban perspectives of events during this time, in particular how it impacted relations between the Cuban leader Fidel Castro and the Kremlin.
The author presents a narrative based on the experiences of his father, the Soviet diplomat Anastas Mikoyan , who dealt with Castro before, during, and after the crisis.
In addition, the author, who served as his father’s secretary, was a first-hand witness to some of the events described in the book.
These three elements give an insight into the Soviet and Cuban perspective of the crisis that has never been presented to an English-speaking audience.
Chapter two introduces the Cuban Revolution and explains how ‘anti-American sentiments grew’ and how, in the words of Castro, ‘In 1959-60 the North Americans prepared our nation for socialism’ by snubbing the new regime.
As relations with the Americans soured, Castro turned to the Soviet Union.
Originally, the Soviets were going to quietly allow the tactical nuclear weapons to remain on the island because they were sceptical of the American pledge to not invade Cuba.
Unfortunately for Castro, his reckless talk, erratic behaviour and unpredictability prompted Mikoyan to conclude that prudence required their removal as well.
This action on the part of Moscow strained relations between Cuba and the Soviet Union, but Mikoyan’s diplomatic skills prevented a major rupture from occurring.
Importantly, the author is to be credited with providing a fuller picture of the crisis, but it should be pointed out that this was made possible only due to the Soviet Union’s demise.
The documents section of the work come from Sergo Mikoyan’s own personal archives and the Russian Foreign Ministry Archive.
They only cover, however, the November Soviet-Cuban Crisis of 1962, not the early Soviet-Cuban relationships or the October US-Soviet crisis.
Nonetheless, the transcripts, telegrams, and official documents are insightful and show the difficulty of Anastas Mikoyan’s task in convincing Castro that the USSR’s decisions were the correct ones.
