We choose to go to the moon in this decade and do the other things, not because they are easy, but because they are hard, because that goal will serve to organize and measure the best of our energies and skills, because that challenge is one that we are willing to accept, one we are unwilling to postpone, and one which we intend to win, and the others, too.
THE BAY OF PIGS INVASION The Bay of Pigs Invasion was an unsuccessful attempt by United States-backed Cuban exiles to overthrow the government of the Cuban dictator Fidel Castro.
Increasing friction between the U.S. government and Castro's leftist regime led President Dwight D Eisenhower to break off diplomatic relations with Cuba in January 1961.
Even before that, however, the Central Intelligence Agency had been training anti-revolutionary Cuban exiles for a possible invasion of the island.
The invasion plan was approved by Eisenhower's successor,John F Kennedy.
On April 17, 1961 about 1300 exiles, armed with United States weapons, landed at the Bahía de Cochinos (Bay of Pigs) on the southern coast of Cuba.
Hoping to find support from the local population, they intended to cross the island to Havana.
It was evident from the first hours of fighting, however, that the exiles were likely to lose.
President Kennedy had the option of using the United States Air Force against the Cubans but decided against it.
By the time the fighting ended on April 19, 90 exiles had been killed and the rest had been taken as prisoners.
The failure of the invasion seriously embarrassed the young Kennedy administration.
Some critics blamed Kennedy for not giving it adequate support and others for allowing it to take place at all.
Additionally, the invasion made Castro wary of the United States He was convinced that the Americans would try to take over the island again.
From the Bay of Pigs on, Castro had an increased fear of a United States incursion on Cuban soil.
FLEXIBLE RESPONSE The New Look policy, though initially useful, quickly became obsolete with the introduction of Intercontinental Delivery Systems that undermined the credibility of a deterrence threat.
The cornerstone of United States and European defense strategy was then threatened as the United States could no longer rely on nuclear threats to provide security for it and its allies.
Improvements in communication and transportation meant United States forces could be deployed more effectively, quickly, and flexibly than before.
Advisers persuaded Kennedy that having multiple options would allow the president to apply the appropriate amount of force at the right place without risking escalation or losing alternatives.
This would improve credibility for deterrence as the United States would now have low-intensity options and therefore would be more likely to use them, rather than massive retaliation's all-or-nothing options.
Flexible Response was implemented to develop several options across the spectrum of warfare, other than the nuclear option, for quickly dealing with enemy aggression.
In addition, the survivability of the retaliatory capability was stressed, leading to the diversification of the strategic force, development of the strategic triad, and half the Strategic Air Command force being put on permanent alert status.
The Kennedy doctrine did not include the ability to fight nuclear wars because of the idea that it would undermine deterrence was technologically unworkable, would fuel the arms race, and was not politically feasible.
Importance was also placed on counterinsurgency and the development of unconventional military forces ,unconventional tactics, and “civic action” programs like the Peace Corp.
Luckily, thanks to the bravery of two men, President John F Kennedy and Premier Nikita Kruschev, war was averted.
In late April 1962, Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev conceived the idea of placing intermediate-range missiles in Cuba.
Ever since the failed Bay of Pigs invasion in 1961, Castro felt a second attack was inevitable.
For the United States, the crisis began on October 15, 1962 when reconnaissance photos revealed Soviet missiles under construction in Cuba.
On October 22, Kennedy announced the discovery of the missile installations to the public and his decision to quarantine the island.
He proposed removing Soviet missiles and personnel if the U.S. would guarantee not to invade Cuba.
A U-2 was shot down over Cuba and EX-COMM received a second letter from Khrushchev demanding the removal of U.S. missiles in Turkey in exchange for Soviet missiles in Cuba.
Attorney General Robert F Kennedy suggested ignoring the second letter and contacted Soviet Ambassador Anatoly Dobrynin to tell him of the U.S. agreement with the first.
Further negotiations were held to implement the October 28 agreement, including a United States demand that Soviet light bombers be removed from Cuba, and specifying the exact form and conditions of United States assurances not to invade Cuba.
