Soviet freighter Omsk arrives in Cuba with the first shipment of MRBMs.
For the first time in two weeks the clouds don't block the view, and Air Force Major Richard S Heyser returns with photos of Soviet nuclear missiles being transported in Cuba.
The photos shot over Cuba are analyzed at the National Photographic Intelligence Center.
United States Ambassador to the UN, Adlai Stevenson, sends a letter to President Kennedy.
The count of missiles believed to be stationed in Cuba stands at 40 IRBMs.The public still does not know about the missiles.
Kennedy meets with Soviet Foreign Minister Andrei Gromyko in the White House but does not reveal that he is aware of the missile build up in Cuba.
General Walter Sweeney, commander-in-chief of the Tactical Air Command, tells President Kennedy that no air strike will destroy all the missiles in Cuba.
President Kennedy sends the first of a series of letters to Khrushchev.
Fidel Castro announces a general mobilization and war alert throughout Cuba.
President Kennedy broadcasts a live message to the nation and the world:""This Government, as promised, has maintained the closest surveillance of the Soviet military buildup on the island of Cuba.
Within the past week, unmistakable evidence has established the fact that a series of offensive missiles sites is now in preparation of that imprisoned island.
Kennedy responds in another letter that the crisis is the fault of Moscow.Khrushchev sends another letter to President Kennedy.
The Organization of American States , at the request of the US, approves a resolution calling for the removal of the missiles by unanimous vote The United States detonates an atomic bomb in Johnston Island, South Pacific, but President Kennedy is not aware of the nuclear test until after the fact.Cuba calls for a meeting at the United Nations Security Council to discuss the crisis.
General Thomas Power, commander-in-chief of the Strategic Air Command, raises the alert level to DefCon 2 , without approval from President Kennedy.
Construction on the missile sites in Cuba continues at an accelerated pace.
United States Ambassador Adlai Stevenson presents evidence at the United Nations.
In his syndicated column, journalist Walter Lippmann suggests a Cuba-Turkey missile trade.
An offer comes through ""an old, trusted friend"" of Khrushchev through ABC reporter John Scali.Castro authorizes Cuba's air-defense forces to fire on all American aircraft within range.
Castro authorizes Cuba's air-defense forces to fire on all American aircraft within range.
Fidel Castro sends a letter to Khrushchev, who mistakenly interprets it as an appeal for a Soviet nuclear first-strike.
Another letter from Khrushchev emerges, adding the removal of missiles from Turkey as a condition, and signaling a possible political coup in the Soviet Union.
President Kennedy decides to accept the October 26 letter and ""pretend"" the October 27 letter doesn't exist.
He adds that the United States will deny such a claim if it is publicized.
Soviet Ambassador Anatoly F Dobrynin sends a cable to the Soviet Foreign Ministry, describing his conversation with Bobby Kennedy.
Aside from sharing his concern that the crisis was spiraling out of control, the Soviet leader accepts the proposal in the president's October 27 message.
Soviet Foreign Minister Gromyko sends a telegram to Ambassador Dobrynin requesting that he contact Kennedy to assure him that Khrushchev is ready to remove the missiles from Cuba.
In a letter to Khrushchev, Castro explains his thinking in ordering to shoot down the American spy plane.
Cuban troops take up positions around the Soviet nuclear missile sites.
Khrushchev sends Castro a letter trying to justify his lack of consultation prior to the decision to remove the missiles.
UN Secretary General U Thant travels to Cuba to request Castro's cooperation.
Kennedy ends the naval quarantine after hearing from Khrushchev that the IL-28 bombers will be removed from Cuba in 30 days.
