He shared his impressions of that showdown from a Soviet perspective and the lessons for current and future leaders.
The largest misconception was the idea that America thought this crisis was about defending Cuba against possible invasion some broader implications with relations to Germany or infiltration into South America . . . theories that have nothing to do with reality.
The missiles in Turkey were the same as the missiles in Italy and Great Britain.
They are the just the first step in a standoff confrontation in 1962 when both sides began to deploy missiles in their own territories.
Those missiles in Turkey would be removed from Turkey anyway in two or three years.
The enemy at the gate, missiles on your borders—like anything—is part of their historical experience.
The American bases that surrounded Soviet Union—and when Americans placed missile bases in Turkey or any other European country—didn’t create any panic because the obligation of the government was to deal with the opposite side.
I would compare Americans to a tiger that grew up in the zoo and then was sent into the jungle.
In 1962 found they could be killed just the same as any others because of the crisis.
I’m not talking about the military, I’m not talking about the government, I’m talking about ordinary people.
There was the Sputnik crisis, where President Eisenhower, with all his wisdom and authority, could not convince Americans that Soviets would not launch a missile against them tomorrow because they have this technical capability.
Americans really believed that caveman bin Laden could destroy their country.
It is very difficult to understand the mentality of the other countries—the Russians, the Chinese, the Indians.
Because Americans were lucky that they didn’t have natural enemies like Europeans and Asians through their millennia. all the time exaggerate the outside threat because they’ve never experienced that threat before.
The Soviet Union had a 20th century with three major wars that fully destroyed their country.
There was a very different understanding of the enemy on their borders.
On 9/11 some caveman terrorist was lucky to have destroyed buildings in the United States.
But if you look in Washington, D.C., you see fortification around every governmental building, around the Congress, on the different agencies.
Only one thing could have successfully resolved the crisis—negotiation.
For Americans it was a unique crisis, because it was the first time in all their history they realized they could be killed.
They experienced threats many time in history starting with the Mongolian invasion.
The uniqueness of the North American civilization, they were protected by nature.
The first and only invasion on American soil was by the British in 1812, which has not made an impact.
And the Russians experienced these invasions all the time in their history.
So it was very different for the nation to their relationship with war or their possible destruction.
I am not talking about military leadership, which understood the threat and took all the measures to protect their country.
American political leadership understood that missiles in Cuba didn’t change anything.
The Soviets deal mostly with the government—with the president—not with the public.
It was the American president’s responsibility to deal with his own public.
They had information on a limited basis given the centralized control of the media.
There was information that Soviet armed forces and the armed forces and the forces of the Warsaw Pact had to be prepared.
There were no apocalyptic pictures in the newspapers, that tomorrow you could be killed.
But it’s important to know through your adversary where war would tip because of a mistake.
You can’t step back because if you take one step back, your adversary will make one step forward.
Americans did not know at that time there were 94 tactical nuclear weapons on the island and if the United States invaded at the time those weapons would have been used.
Kennedy showed himself to be a very reasonable and very pragmatic politician.
After the meeting in Vienna, my father had a high opinion about Kennedy.
It was a superficial conclusion that Khrushchev thought Kennedy was weak and could be manipulated.
You will be able to explain to them and understand their position and sooner or later find some peaceful resolution.
Imposing sanctions and unconditional surrenders it is not really a productive way to negotiate.
I think it is a good lesson with our current confrontation with Iran or China or any other country.
He has covered legislation, acquisition and operations for the Sea Services since 2009 and spent time underway with the United States Navy, United States Marine Corps and the Canadian Navy.
