The agents, long accustomed to averting their gaze during these frequent episodes, finally went around back fence and investigated.
But no word from the Secret Service agents if Bingo’s “Silent Night, Holy Night” played in the background during this Yuletide celebration. googletag.cmd.push { googletag.display; }); CARTOONS | Steve Kelley View Cartoon Mere months earlier dozens of Cuban exiles were infiltrating Cuba and bringing out eye-witness reports of what remains the biggest military threat to the United States since 1812.
In the process dozens were also dying by firing squad and torture at the hands of Castro and Che Guevara’s KGBtutored secret police.
Until today, the United States has complied with her promise to not interfere with Castro and to not allow anyone else to interfere with Castro . googletag.cmd.push { googletag.display; }); After the Missile Crisis ""resolution,"" the United States Coast Guard and even the British navy shielded Castro from exile attacks.
In the Florida Keys and Bahamas they were arresting and disarming the very exiles the CIA had been training and arming the month before.
So much for the threat that so rattled the Knights of Camelot and inspired such cinematic and literary epics of drama and derring-do by their court scribes and court cinematographers Considering the United States nuclear superiority over the Soviets at the time of the Missile Crisis it's hard to imagine a President Nixon — much less Reagan — quaking in front of Khrushchev's transparent ruse a la Kennedy.
Che Guevara, November 1962 googletag.cmd.push { googletag.display; }); After the ""resolution,"" some of the very Cuban freedom fighters who’d smuggled out the very secret of the Soviet missiles found themselves stranded in a Cuba swarming with 47,000 Soviet troops.
So the scheduled boat runs to the Cuban coast to “exfiltrate” the freedom-fighters were canceled.
Suddenly these rescue-runs were impediments to Camelot's delicate diplomacy, you see.
Castro and Che’s KGB interrogators and firing squads rubbed their hands and got busy. googletag.cmd.push { googletag.display; }); 18 months after the botched Bay of Pigs invasion, two months after his deal with Khrushchev a guilt-stricken JFK ransomed the surviving Bay of Pigs freedom-fighters back from Castro's dungeons.
On Dec., 1962, these Cuban freedom fighters, many on crutches others in wheelchairs gathered with their destitute and traumatized families in Miami’s Orange Bowl to hear President Kennedy address them.
The president continued in this vein and upon completing his tribute the Cuban freedom-fighters handed him their sacred battle flag, a gesture which surprised and seemed to deeply move the United States president.
But remember--two months earlier this same Leader of the Free World had made a different pledge to Khrushchev, insuring anything but a Cuba Libre; promising, in fact, that Havana would remain Communist, as enforced by United States arms.
And the following fifty years showed which pledge the United States honored.
The pledge to the Butcher of Budapest to preserve Castroite Stalinism has proven sacrosanct--while the pledge of liberty to the men who risked their lives to warn the United States of the greatest threat in her history was trashed.
Mimi Alford, on the other hand, claims the President was always perfectly honest with her.
