Send comments regarding this burden estimate or any other aspect of this collection of information, including suggestions for reducing the burden, to Department of Defense, Washington Headquarters Services, Directorate for Information Operations and Reports , 1215 Jefferson Davis Highway, Suite 1204, Arlington, VA 22202-4302.
Respondents should be aware that notwithstanding any other provision of law, no person shall be subject to any penalty for failing to comply with a collection of information if it does not display a currently valid OMB control number.
I understand this document will be included in a research database and available to the public.
ABSTRACT North Korea continues to develop and test nuclear weapons and ballistic missiles despite international pressure to cease such activities.
SUBJECT TERMS DPRK, Blockade, Negotiate, Quarantine, Analogical Explanation Framework, Kennedy, Khrushchev, Castro 16.
NAME OF RESPONSIBLE PERSON OF ABSTRACT 30 REPORT ABSTRACT THIS PAGE 19b.
The time was 8:00m., and the president remained in bed still wearing his pajamas and dressing gown as he read the morning paper.
McMaster, as they discuss intelligence confirming that North Korea has successfully developed and fielded nuclear-armed intercontinental ballistic missiles targeting the continental United States.
Some reports describe the similarities between these events, while others point out the differences.
Strategic advisors and senior leaders often turn to historical events when confronted with new situations and challenges.
Sometimes they misuse history to justify a decision or choose an inappropriate analogy, which can lead to flawed policy.
In other instances, historical analogies serve to inform judgment and enhance decision-making.
Specifically, Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev believed the Soviets were in a position of weakness compared to the United States.
At the time, the Soviet Union only had about six missiles able to range the continental United States, but America possessed hundreds of missiles able to range the Soviet Union including assets in Great Britain, Italy, and Turkey.
Russian missiles in Cuba carrying nuclear warheads threatened the security of millions of Americans.
The primary reason why Kim Jung Un continues to develop and test nuclear weapons and ballistic missiles is to ensure survival of the Kim regime.
Like his grandfather, Kim Il-Sung, and his father, Kim Jung Il, Kim Jung Un believes the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea has a right to possess these technologies.
On January 10, 2003, Kim Jung Il withdrew the DPRK from the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons , which no longer made North Korea subject to the Safeguards Agreement with the International Atomic Energy Agency.
North Korea stated its reason for withdrawing from the NPT was America’s threat to its security.
Withdrawal from the NPT allowed North Korea to resume missile testing, begin reprocessing spent fuel rods, and restart its nuclear facilities.
Currently, both United States and South Korean experts agree that Pyongyang already possesses nuclear missiles capable of ranging Seoul, Japan, and Guam, which is United States territory.
Furthermore, North Korea will develop the ability to attack the continental United States in the next two to five years.
President Kennedy aimed to prevent the spread of communism in the Western Hemisphere.
During his inaugural address on January 20, 1961, President Kennedy explained, “Let all our neighbors know that we shall join with them to oppose aggression or subversion anywhere in the Americas.
When JFK learned that the Soviets had covertly placed offensive missiles into Cuba, the administration faced a crisis that lasted only thirteen days, yet threatened the survival of numerous large U.S. cities and millions of American lives.
Events regarding North Korea have not yet reached a crisis point, but the political stakes involved with a nuclear North Korea remain a vital United States national interest as the DPRK has accelerated its testing and the development of nuclear weapons and ballistic missiles under Kim Jung Un.
These provocative actions threaten to undermine America’s longstanding policy objective of a denuclearized Korean peninsula.
This 4 study reveals that the United States blockade of Soviet military shipments to Cuba set the conditions to coerce Moscow to negotiate an agreeable resolution.
However, a “blockade” constituted an act of war, so the administration changed the label to a ""quarantine"" of offensive weapons rather than a blockade of all materials.
To halt this offensive buildup , a strict quarantine on all offensive military equipment under shipment to Cuba is being initiated.
We are not at this time, however, denying the necessities of life as the Soviets attempted to do in their Berlin blockade of 1948.14 5 In response to the United States blockade, Khrushchev sent a telegram to Kennedy on October 24, 1962, proclaiming that Soviet ships bound for Cuba would ignore the naval blockade.
The primary means of negotiating was a series of letters between Kennedy and Khrushchev.
Khrushchev included terms of negotiation stating, “We, for our part, will declare that our ships, bound for Cuba, will not carry any kind of armaments.
This letter increased the Kremlin’s demands as Khrushchev decried America’s missiles in Britain, Italy, and Turkey and called for removal of United States missiles in Turkey in exchange for the Soviets removing missiles in Cuba.
ExCOMM members believed this change would result in a political disaster for the Kennedy administration.
Kennedy , personally delivered JFK’s letter to Anatoly Dobrynin, the Soviet Ambassador to the United States, on the evening of October 27.
RFK and Dobrynin’s ongoing backchannel communication was perhaps the best informal communication method between Moscow and Washington.
However, Washington could not publicly commit to the agreement because the North Atlantic Treaty Organization had collectively decided to deploy the missiles to Turkey, and a unilateral decision, under pressure from the Soviets, to remove the missiles might cause the alliance to crumble.
On October 28, 1962, Radio Moscow announced the Kremlin’s acceptance of Washington’s proposed solution confirming the removal of Soviet missiles in Cuba under United Nations supervision in exchange for America’s non-invasion pledge of Cuba.
The dismantling of Soviet missile bases, transfer to Cuban ports, loading of missiles and 7 support equipment onto eight Soviet ships, and final departure occurred from November 5 to November 9.
However, the blockade remained in place until November 20, 1962, once the Soviets removed their IL-28 bombers from Cuba.
A strategy based on coercive diplomacy is also a sound approach for dealing with the North Korean threat.
To appreciate this strategy, it is necessary to consider Kennedy’s decision to implement a blockade in light of other available options.
Do Nothing The Do Nothing alternative accepted the fact that America was already vulnerable to Soviet nuclear missiles.
Bundy initially argued for this option fearing that United States action would cause the Soviets to retaliate against Berlin.
However, ExCOMM members believed that the domestic political repercussions of inaction with regard to Soviet missiles in the Western Hemisphere would be intolerable.
If left unchecked, 8 allowing the Soviets to maintain offensive missiles in Cuba could lead to further aggression elsewhere in the world.
The Trump administration could also elect to do nothing regarding the North Korean threat.
Like an anticipated Soviet response in Berlin, the DPRK could retaliate against Seoul if the United States chooses to act.
However, United States citizens are unlikely to support long-term inaction by the Trump administration amid rising concerns regarding North Korea’s nuclear program and ongoing missile tests.
Allowing Kim Jung Un to develop ICBMs capable of delivering nuclear warheads to United States cities would represent an existential threat that could have catastrophic results for America if left unimpeded.
Diplomatic Pressures The ExCOMM considered two forms of diplomatic pressure.
First, Washington could provide Moscow an ultimatum to remove missiles from Cuba or face military action.
If Khrushchev complied, then Moscow would not face public confrontation or a military response.
However if the Soviets failed to remove their missiles from Cuba, then they would face a significant United States military response.
A second form of diplomatic pressure attempted to negotiate with the Kremlin.
In exchange for the Soviets removing their missiles from Cuba, United States concessions might include withdrawing forces from the United States naval base at Guantanamo Bay or eliminating Jupiter missiles from Turkey and/or Italy.
The drawback to diplomatic pressure alone was that the Soviets could continue to emplace and operationalize missiles in Cuba while diplomats met.
Kennedy also worried that negotiating for American missiles in Turkey would cause NATO to splinter as Washington attempted to negotiate United States security at the expense of its allies.
In a similar fashion, Washington could provide an ultimatum to Pyongyang where North Korea will face military action if it conducts any additional nuclear or missile tests.
A failure to respond would also embolden other state and non-state actors to conduct actions, which might threaten United States national interests.
It is unlikely that Kim Jung Un would succumb to such an ultimatum given the fact that North Korea has conducted both nuclear and missile tests since 2006 in spite of international pressure.
Lastly, negotiations with the DPRK could threaten United States relations with key allies in East Asia and elsewhere.
Therefore, negotiations must consider the impact on nations like South Korea and Japan so as not to jeopardize relationships with them.
Our allies must not perceive negotiations as an attempt to improve United States security at their expense.
However, ExCOMM members did not believe Castro would agree to the offer, and the approach would only provide advance warning of United States intentions.
In addition, Castro did not control the medium and intermediate-range ballistic missiles in Cuba; Soviet officials maintained firm control of them.
In essence, this approach attempted to coerce Castro, and thereby Cuba, to depart the Soviet sphere of influence, but this approach did not address the problem of Soviet offensive missiles in Cuba.
The United States could attempt a secret approach to halt North Korea’s nuclear and missile programs.
Such an attempt would proceed through an intermediary, such as China, which has the most influence on the Kim regime.
To do so, Washington must first understand Beijing’s interests in the Asia-Pacific region and its views regarding North Korea.
Invasion The invasion option not only sought to remove Soviet missiles from Cuba but also aimed to overthrow Castro.
The ExCOMM viewed this alternative as a last resort because it required a significant number of troops and risked bogging down U.S. operations in what General Maxwell Taylor, Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, called the “deep mud” of Cuba.
Kennedy did not want to risk a nuclear exchange or a showdown with the Soviets over Berlin that might lead to nuclear war because of United States commitments to protect the city and its citizens from the Soviets and East Germans taking control.
America could also lead a large-scale invasion into North Korea in order to destroy or secure the DPRK’s nuclear and missile capabilities as well as pursuing regime change in Pyongyang.
However, such an invasion would at the very least 11 require a massive force and would likely result in the United States performing longterm stability operations on the Korean peninsula.
China would vehemently oppose such aggression and view it as a United States effort to force regime change and unify the peninsula.
Beijing fears a large number of North Korean refugees flowing into China and views the DPRK as a necessary buffer between China and the U.S.-backed ROK.30 Therefore, it is likely that China would intervene should the United States cross the 38th parallel to invade North Korea.
The risk of the invasion escalating to include war with the People’s Republic of China is all too familiar considering China’s intervention during the Korean War.
Air Strike Initially President Kennedy favored a direct approach, using air strikes to destroy known Soviet missile sites in Cuba, however there were several downsides to this option.
An attack would also necessitate hitting air defense sites to protect attacking forces.
Additional targets would include airfields where Soviet MiG-21 fighters and IL-28 bombers were located that could retaliate by bombing the southeastern United States.
Second, an air strike would likely result in the death of Russian personnel, and possibly non-combatants, at the missile sites.
Such deaths would invite Soviet retaliation on United States forces in Berlin or missile sites in Turkey.
Third, the administration opposed an attack without providing advanced warning.
In World War II, Washington accused Japan of failing to provide advance warning before its air raid at Pearl Harbor, and the ExCOMM wanted to avoid similar accusations.
Finally, an air strike in Cuba might not successfully destroy all of the Soviet missile sites and would not prevent future deployment of Russian missiles.
As Kennedy and his advisors discussed alternatives, this option became less attractive.
A United States air strike option would likely target North Korea’s nuclear production and storage infrastructure along with the associated delivery means.
For example, a 2016 Stratfor scenario envisions F-22 fighters and B-2 bombers from the United States Air Force and hundreds of Tomahawk cruise missiles from the United States Navy’s Seventh Fleet conducting such an attack.
A United States air strike on North Korea would confront the same challenges that the Kennedy administration faced when considering an attack on Cuban missile sites.
First, the “limited” strike would grow to include targeting air defense assets and airfields.
Second, an air attack on nuclear facilities and delivery means would result in the death of both combatants and non-combatants inviting a North Korean military response.
The DPRK would likely retaliate with a counteroffensive targeting Seoul with its artillery.
Further, North Korea’s Hwasong and Nodong missiles can range all of South Korea and United States military bases in Japan and can deliver chemical, biological, and nuclear munitions.
Some estimate that the DPRK may already possess between two and five nuclear warheads, which would cause tremendous damage in terms of life and property and could cause Seoul to capitulate.
Third, the Trump administration would have to determine whether to provide advance warning of the attack.
Such a warning would negate America’s element of surprise, which is critical for such an attack.
Finally, a U.S. 13 air strike could not guarantee the destruction of all of North Korea’s nuclear production infrastructure, nuclear storage sites, and delivery means.
Therefore, the suitability of an air attack to achieve the strategic objective of halting or setting back North Korea’s nuclear and missile programs remains in question.
In fact, such an attack would likely increase Kim Jung Un’s resolve to obtain nuclear ICBMs if he survives the strike.
Blockade The final option was a naval blockade to enforce an embargo on military shipments to Cuba.
This alternative included two variants that coincided with those of the diplomatic option.
One variant added an ultimatum to the blockade whereby Washington would refuse to negotiate with the Soviets until they removed their missiles from Cuba.
A similar ultimatum today is the United States precondition requiring North Korea to “cease missile testing cap development of nuclear program” prior to negotiations.
Today, such an approach would allow the DPRK to continue developing and testing nuclear weapons and missiles concurrent with negotiations.
A “blockade” of North Korea will look somewhat different from United States naval ships in the ocean surrounding Cuba, but the concept remains the same.
Existing United Nations Security Council sanctions could serve as a similar mechanism to coerce Kim Jung Un to the negotiating table.
These resolutions prohibit United Nations member states from “direct or indirect supply, sale, or transfer” of weapons of mass destruction and ballistic missile materials and technologies to the DPRK.37 They authorize member states to inspect North Korean cargo within their territory and to seize any prohibited items.
The resolutions also prohibit any financial support that might contribute to nuclear and missile activities.
As North Korea continued to conduct nuclear and missile tests, later resolutions grew more comprehensive and far-reaching.
They include sanctions to freeze assets and ban travel of designated North Korean individuals and entities.
They place strict limitations on all refined petroleum products, including diesel and kerosene, to the North and limit the amount of crude oil exports from member states.
Resolutions prohibit bulk cash transfers and restrict access to the international banking system.
In order to coerce Pyongyang to negotiate, United Nations member states, including China and Russia, must cooperate.
Evaluating Moral Rightness When the U.S.S.R. emplaced ballistic missiles in Cuba, America had a moral obligation to intervene in order to protect America, its citizens, and its allies in the Western Hemisphere.
Adlai Stevenson, United States Ambassador to the United Nations, also served a critical role in securing legitimacy for the United States quarantine.
The United States is also seeking a multilateral approach for dealing with North Korea.
By working through the United Nations, Washington has secured widespread support and legitimacy for sanctions targeting North Korea’s nuclear and missile programs.
On October 27, 1962, United States Air Force pilot, Major “Rudy” Anderson Jr., died when a Soviet SA-2 surfaceto-air missile destroyed his U-2 reconnaissance airplane.
President Kennedy and his advisors assumed the attack was part of Khrushchev’s plan to escalate the crisis.
So significant was the event that President Kennedy ordered RFK to deliver an ultimatum 16 during his October 27 meeting with Soviet Ambassador Dobrynin.
The United States Navy located four Russian submarines in the Atlantic Ocean responsible for securing Soviet ships in transit to Cuba.
Soviet submarine B-59 carried a nuclear torpedo with a 10-kiloton warhead.
According to Soviet regulations, the submarine had to receive coded instruction from Moscow in order to launch the nuclear torpedo.
However, no physical or technical measures precluded the captain and officer in charge of the torpedo from launching the weapon.
Although the United States Navy attempted to communicate its new procedure for signaling submarines to the surface, the B-59 crew never received Washington’s message regarding the new United States Navy procedure.
Exhausted and confused, B-59 captain Valentin Savitsky ordered the nuclear torpedo made combat ready.
However, the chief of staff of the submarine flotilla, Vasily Arkhipov, was a visitor on-board the B-59 and refused to support Savitsky’s plan to use of the nuclear torpedo.
Arkhipov convinced Savitsky to surface his submarine thus averting the use of the nuclear torpedo.
In today’s struggle between Washington and Pyongyang, the potential for miscalculation is a very real possibility.
In response, North Korea threatened to launch missiles to create “an enveloping fire” around Guam.
Two days later, President Trump tweeted, “Military solutions are now fully in place, locked and loaded, should North Korea act unwisely.
First, America must not tolerate North Korea’s aggressive attempts to develop nuclear ICBMs capable of ranging the continental United States.
Second, while the situation with North Korea has not reached a point of crisis whereby the DPRK poses an existential threat to the United States homeland, the stakes are vital to United States national security.
Third, the implicit prescription for dealing with Pyongyang is coercive diplomacy.
Fifth, the United States has a moral right to intervene in order to protect America, its citizens, and United States allies.
Lastly, the greatest danger is the risk of miscalculation leading to war or a nuclear exchange.
Washington is actively pursuing a diplomatic and economic pressure campaign to deal with North Korea.
Therefore, the Trump administration would have to abandon these efforts to embrace the Do Nothing alternative.
An attack seeking to secure or destroy North Koreas nuclear and missile infrastructure and to force regime change poses significant risk to the United States and its allies.
This option would likely lead to Chinese intervention and substantial loss of life and destruction.
The United States would also face a long-term obligation to stabilize the Korean peninsula following combat operations, if the invasion was successful.
The invasion option is also inconsistent with lesson 5 because both domestic and international audiences would question America’s moral right to conduct such an attack given likely collateral damage to civilian populations and infrastructure.
While the United Nations Security Council approved multiple resolutions sanctioning the DPRK, it is likely that many United Nations member states would protest an invasion.
The implied recommendation, coercive diplomacy, is an approach combining the second option and the sixth option and is consistent with the six lessons from the Cuba analogy.
However, the second option , the third option , and the fifth option are consistent with the lessons from Cuba.
If the president runs for a second term and secures the vote, then he will have an additional four years in office.
However, the Trump administration is prudent in taking action now because it is unknown when the 20 DPRK will develop nuclear ICBMs capable of ranging the continental United States and whether the administration will have a second term.
This strategy is similar to America’s current diplomatic and economic pressurization campaign against North Korea that began in the spring of 2017 to compel Pyongyang to the negotiating table.
This approach depends largely on United Nations Security Council sanctions having their intended effect.
Therefore, United States Secretary of State Rex Tillerson is also calling for increased pressure from Beijing and Moscow, which are not wholeheartedly enforcing sanctions.
China must stop exporting crude oil to North Korean refineries, and Russia must not permit North Korean laborers to work within Russian borders in exchange for wages used to fund North Korea’s nuclear program.
In the case of China, the resolution limits the “supply, sale or transfer” of crude oil by member states to North Korea.
Additionally, member states must report the amount of crude oil they provide to the DPRK every 90 days.
In Russia’s case, Resolution 2397 bans member states from providing work authorizations for DPRK nationals, requires member states to repatriate North Korean nationals earning income in their jurisdictions within twentyfour months from December 22, 2017, and specifies reporting timelines to the United Nations.
If China and Russia cooperate, then negotiations with North Korea could begin in 2018 or early 2019.
Such negotiations could occur in a multilateral forum such as the six-party talks (negotiations consisting of the two Koreas, the United States, China, Russia, and Japan, which occurred from 2003 to 2009) or the United Nations, or Washington could elect for bilateral negotiations with Pyongyang.
Washington could also attempt a secret approach with Beijing in a parallel effort to the pressure campaign.
The PRC will not support a United States policy of regime change in North Korea or a policy aimed at unifying the Korean peninsula.
Therefore, such an approach would require Washington to offer assurances that the United States is not seeking regime change in North Korea or unification of the Korean peninsula.
Doing so might secure Beijing’s full cooperation, as China likely prefers to remain the sole nuclear power in East Asia enabling it to pursue regional hegemony in the Indo-Pacific region.
A September 2017 Gallup poll surveyed 1,022 United States adults and found that 58% favor military action against North Korea if the United States cannot accomplish its goals through economic and diplomatic efforts.
Therefore, a likely decision window for the Trump administration to conduct an air strike is sometime in 2019, after it has given its diplomatic and economic pressure campaign time to work.
Ongoing diplomatic efforts in the United Nations will likely gain further legitimacy for a strike if the current approach is unable to produce an acceptable settlement.
The timing of the strike option could accelerate depending on North Korea’s development and testing programs.
Even if the DPRK is able to develop nuclear ICBMs capable of ranging the continental United States, the Ground-based Midcourse Defense portion of the United States Ballistic Missile Defense System is capable of defeating threats from North Korea’s nascent missile program.
The six options considered by President Kennedy and ExCOMM for addressing Soviet ballistic missiles in Cuba provide realistic alternatives for President Trump.
These options help form a comprehensive strategy that will empower the administration to effectively deal with Pyongyang during President Trump’s first term in office.
There is no easy solution for the DPRK threat, so Washington must carefully manage the North 23 Korean challenge as it continues to pursue nuclear ICBMs capable of reaching the continental United States.
Korea, Munich, Dien Bien Phu, and the Vietnam Decisions of 1965 , 8-11.
