NO INTERNATIONAL CRISIS IN AMERICAN history has been written about in more complete detail so soon after the event than the Soviet-American confrontation over Cuba in the fall of 1962.
He gives more of the letter than did either of the two insiders, Theodore Sorensen and Arthur M Schlesinger Jr., in their books on the Kennedy era.
But one must conclude that the definitive book on the missile crisis has yet to be written.
The latter two provided many details Abel lacks and be has an outsider’s perspective they could not have.
It is evident that the Kennedy debacle at the Bay of Pigs and the President’s behavior at the Vienna meeting with Khrushchev led the Soviet leader to take the great gamble of putting missiles into Cuba.
The lesson of strength, and it can be applied to today’s problem in Vietnam and Southeast Asia, is that a major power such as the llUnited states must act on Vits own vital interests, sometimes in disregard of what other people and other governments think.
President Kennedy was lucky that the missile crisis was highly condensed in time.
Every President has the power to surrender a vital liijtficsst, with or without /Senate ratification.
THE KENNEDY triumph was that in such an age he sought the path between war and surrender; that t6 find it he took, and fought to keep, direct personal control of every detail and action.
We hear the calm advise of Llewellyn Thompson, but we also hear him concede that “he just didn’t believe” the Russians would try to put missiles in Cuba.
And here is Robert Kennedy, the tough guy who nonetheless argued and won the case for the immorality of a surprise air strike at Cuba. fAnd here, too, is Defense Secretary McNamara, operationally great but once again showing a lack of international political sensitivities.
Abel, for the first time, relates McNamara’s attempt on the President’s behalf to guide the naval blockade A and Adm.
And so the Admiral was not reappointed Chief of Naval Operations the following June.
The missile crisis emerges from the Abel account, as from most others written by Americans, as a vast American victory and a milestone in Moscow-Washington rela| tions.
Some, both at home and abroad, have begun to question that conclusion, but what has happened in the postcrisis period supports the majority view.
