FUTURE OF FREEDOM VOLUME 28 | NUMBER 10 OCTOBER 2017 He who moves not forward, goes backward. — Johann Wolfgang von Goethe FUTURE OF FREEDOM The Future of Freedom Foundation is a nonprofit educational foundation whose mission is to advance liberty and the libertarian philosophy by providing an uncompromising moral, philosophical, and economic case for individual liberty, free markets, private property, and limited government.
Believing in the power of ideas on liberty to shift the course of society toward freedom, our methodology is based on sharing sound principles of liberty with others.
The price is $25 for a one-year print subscription, $15 for the email version.
Our operations are funded primarily by donations from our supporters, which are invited in any amount.
In fact, given the widespread popularity among the Cuban people of Cuba’s new leader, Fidel Castro, the CIA knew that the success of the invasion would require United States air support.
What the CIA figured was that faced with the impending defeat of Cuban freedom fighters at the hands of CasJ tro’s communist forces, Kennedy ohn F Kennedy came into the would be put into a position where presidency in 1961 as a stanhe would have to “save face” by prodard Cold Warrior.
Like most viding air support and then doing Americans, he had bought into the whatever else was necessary to entire rationale for the Cold War — make the operation succeed. that is, that communism and the The CIA-sponsored invasion Soviet Union posed a grave threat took place at the Bay of Pigs three to the United States and, therefore, months after Kennedy became that it had been necessary for the president.
When it became clear United States government to become a nathat the operation was in danger of tional-security state and for the failing, the CIA asked the president United States to stop the spread of for air support, fully expecting that communism all over the world. he would say yes.
But Kennedy Soon after he became president, stuck by his guns and refused to the CIA presented Kennedy with a provide it.
Castro easily defeated plan for a violent regime-change opthe invaders, killing or capturing eration in Cuba, one that entailed an more than 1,200 men. invasion by CIA-trained Cuban ex“Rage” would be a good word to iles.
Following the CIA’s successful describe the reaction of the CIA, regime-change operations in Iran in Cuban exiles, and the conservative Future of Freedom 2 October 2017 Jacob G Hornberger movement in the United States.
By Cuba, one that would entail a fullrefusing to come to the aid of the scale United States military invasion of the Cuban freedom fighters, Kennedy island.
Called Operation Northwas viewed as a coward and a traiwoods, the plan called for terrorist tor.
By refusing the requested air attacks and plane hijackings to be support, he had, his critics felt, becarried out by secret agents of the trayed the cause of freedom and CIA who would be posing as agents had doomed the Cuban exiles to of communist Cuba.
The plan, death or imprisonment at the hands which would entail killing innocent of the communists.
Even worse, he Americans, would provide a pretext had ensured that Cuba would refor invading Cuba and effecting remain under communist rule, where gime change on the island. it would continue to be a grave threat to United States national security.
Kennedy is said to have vowed By the same token, Kennedy rethat he would “splinter the CIA alized that the CIA had set him up into a thousand pieces.” and had tried to manipulate him into providing the needed air supKennedy rejected the plan, to port.
He also fired Failure to approve Operation the revered director of the CIA, AlNorthwoods, they were convinced, len Dulles, and his deputy director, meant that Cuba’s communist reCharles Cabell. gime would continue to pose a great It was the start of a war between threat to United States national security.
The idea was It is not difficult to imagine the that, since the United States had vast ire of the national-security estabnuclear superiority over the Soviets lishment.
If Kennedy had approved at that time, a surprise United States attack Operations Northwoods, they no could knock out most of the Soviet doubt felt, America would not be in Union’s retaliatory capability.
If their purpose defeat a full-scale United States invasion, the had been to start a nuclear war with Cubans turned to the Soviets for the United States, however, they help.
To deter the United States from would have been fired. invading Cuba, the Soviets installed Another consideration is that nuclear weapons on the island.
Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev Future of Freedom 4 October 2017 Jacob G Hornberger authorized Soviet commanders on It all goes back to the severe the ground to fire the missiles only anti-communist and anti-Soviet as a defensive measure in the event mindset that had held the United of a United States invasion of Cuba.
Given that the comThe United States national-security munists were hell-bent on world establishment brought the world conquest, peaceful coexistence with to the brink of extinction. the communist world was considered an impossibility.
In the minds Finally when Kennedy vowed of CIA and Pentagon officials, there that the United States would no was going to be a war to the finish, longer invade Cuba as part of the most likely a nuclear war, with only deal struck to resolve the crisis, the one victor at the end.
It that they conspired to remove Caswas instead the United States national-securitro from power in Cuba, including, ty establishment — specifically, the later, attempting to assassinate him.
Pentagon and the CIA — and their It’s why they would conspire to reobsession with bringing about remove the democratically elected gime change in Cuba — that brought Allende from power in Chile — bethe world to the brink of extinction. cause, like Arbenz, he too reached That brings us to why the CIA out to the Soviet Union and Cuba. and the Pentagon were so insistent Mossadegh of Iran, Arbenz, and on regime change in Cuba in the Allende were all considered grave first place.
Why importance compared with Cuba, the demand on Kennedy to bomb which was located only 90 miles and invade Cuba during the Cuban away from American shores.
The document, dated grave danger if the Cuban commuOctober 16, 1962, called for demonist regime were permitted to relition of a railroad bridge and port main standing. facilities in Cuba, a grenade attack The irony in all this is that hardagainst the Chinese embassy in Haly any American ever bothered to vana, mining of Cuban harbors, deask who was the aggressor and who molition of a power plant, demoliwas the defender in the ongoing tion of a Soviet surface-to-air hostility between the United States missile site, sabotage of a cooling and Cuba.
The fact is that Cuba tower, and gunfire destruction of an never attacked the United States or oil tanker in a Cuban harbor. even threatened to do so.
It never initiated any acts of terrorism or Cuba never initiated any acts of sabotage within the United States.
It terrorism or sabotage within the never attempted to assassinate any United States.
It was the United States — spebeen the response of the United cifically the CIA and the Pentagon States if Cuba or any other nation — that did all those things to Cuba. did those things here in the United They attacked and invaded Cuba at States.
They committed ing that the Chinese embassy in acts of terrorism and sabotage inHavana constituted sovereign soil side Cuba.
The processes lay not with the Joint Chiefs of Staff believed that Soviets, Cubans, and communists. the way that Kennedy handled and resolved the crisis was “appeaseThat wasn’t the end of the conment” — in fact, worse than Chamflict between Kennedy and the U.S. berlain’s appeasement of Hitler at national-security state.
Kennedy’s resolution of the achieved a “breakthrough” which crisis was considered a grave defeat enabled him to see the entire Cold at the hands of the communists, esWar and the United States anti-communist pecially since it effectively put a crusade for the fiction they had alpermanent end to the United States nationalways been. security state’s regime-change opBy that time, Kennedy also unerations against Cuba. derstood what President EisenhowIn one sense, the national-secuer had come to realize — that the rity establishment was right.
While real grave threat to the freedom and United States public-school teachers have democratic processes of the Amerilong taught American students that can people lay not with the Soviets, Kennedy prevailed in the crisis and Cubans, or communists but rather that Khrushchev had “blinked,” it with the United States national-security eswas actually the opposite.
Kennedy unKennedy who “blinked” by vowing doubtedly remembered Eisenhownot to invade Cuba, thereby leaving er’s Farewell Address, which warned the island’s communist regime perthe American people of the threat manently intact as a supposed perthat the military-industrial competual threat to United States national secuplex posed to their freedom and rity.
Kennedy also Future of Freedom 7 October 2017 The National-Security State and JFK played an instrumental role in the also ordered a partial withdrawal of making of the novel Seven Days in United States troops from Vietnam and told May, which posited a military reaides that he would order a comgime-change operation in the Unitplete withdrawal after his reelection ed States, into a movie.
Change of direction It was one of the most dramatic On June 10, 1963, Kennedy and remarkable changes of directhrew down the gauntlet in one of tion in United States history.
Needless to say, the most remarkable presidential Kennedy’s actions sent shockwaves speeches in United States history, one that he throughout the United States national-secuprepared without consulting or adrity establishment.
Not only was he vising either Pentagon or CIA offichallenging the official anti-Soviet, cials.
In what has gone down in hisanti-communist, pro–Cold War tory as his Peace Speech, Kennedy mindset that had guided the United told an audience at American UniStates since World War II, his turn versity that he had decided to end in direction also connoted a grave the Cold War.
The United States threat to the long-term financial would henceforth live in peaceful well-being and perhaps even surcoexistence with the Soviet Union vival of the entire national-securityand the communist world.
He exstate bureaucracy and ever-growing pressly reached out to the Soviet army of contractors and subconcommunist regime in a spirit of tractors that had become and would peace and friendship.
The presicontinue to be dependent on the dent’s speech was broadcast all Cold War and the permanent antiacross the Soviet Union, the first Russia foreign policy. time that had ever happened.
Most ominous for Kennedy, A few months later, over the vehowever, was the fact that he was hement objections of the Pentagon doing what Arbenz and Castro had and the CIA, the United States endone and what Allende would do tered into a nuclear test-ban treaty that made them targets of regimewith the Soviet Union.
By reaching Future of Freedom 8 October 2017 Jacob G Hornberger out to the Soviet Union, he, like and its budgets have never stopped them, was committing a cardinal growing.
Official hostility against sin according to the United States nationalRussia has been made a permanent security establishment. feature of America’s foreign policy.
On November 22, 1963, KenKennedy’s assassination was nedy was assassinated, thereby blamed on a communist. bringing his conflict with his national-security establishment to an Jacob Hornberger is founder and end.
His successor, Lyndon Johnpresident of The Future of Freedom son, resumed the old direction, Foundation. continuing the Cold War, which would ultimately morph into the war on terrorism.
Louisiana by James Bovard Homeland Security grant recipients spent $2,400 for a lapel microphone and $2,700 for a teleprompter.
Fort Worth, Texas, spent $24,000 of a federal anti-terrorism grant on a latrine-on-wheels.
Other Texas local governments spent Homeland Security grants on “a hog catcher for Liberty County, body bags, garA bage bags, Ziploc bags and two fter the 9/11 attacks, Con2011 Camaros at $31,000 apiece,” as gress and the Bush adminisa Senate report revealed. tration pretended that unDHS approved a Michigan polimited federal spending was one of lice department’s spending $6,200 the best ways to thwart terrorist of its grant on 13 sno-cone mathreats.
DHS also asserted Emergency Management Agency that the machines were “dual pur, into the new megapose” because they “could be used department.
As a Techdirt analysis sponse training,” as a Senate investipointed out, “Broadly defined ‘susgation reported.
This type of fedpicious behavior’ is a great way to erally subsidized mass-shooting make every citizen a suspect ... and rehearsal did not spur any protests justify every violation of personal from anti-gun groups. privacy.
If you need warrantless DHS handouts make state and wiretaps or a reason to indefinitely local law-enforcement agencies detain United States citizens, all you have to more intrusive and punitive.
DHS do is start listing everyday activity has given a number of grants to as ‘suspicious.’” purchase license-plate readers for police patrol cars.
Two years ago, DHS solicAnti-terrorism funding has ited proposals for private compaproven to be a boon for the travel nies to create a national database on industry.
Many DHS grant recipilicense-plate data that could disents paid to send their employees close exactly when and where citito the HALO Counter-Terrorism zens drive.
The subsequent fireSummit in 2012, which took place at storm caused DHS to temporarily the Paradise Point Resort & Spa on back off from its proposal but it was an island near San Diego.
The highlight ing exactly where and when each of the conference was a “zombie vehicle travels.
The grants also paid Future of Freedom 11 October 2017 Homeland Security’s Multibillion-Dollar Comedy Show for stationary cameras that recordObama publicly fretted about the ed license plates passing on nearby militarization of police.
A Senate report most a total failure at nailing violent noted, “‘Militarized’ vehicles and criminals or car thieves or terrorbomb detection robots top the list ists.
Instead, almost all the licenseof ‘must have’ equipment being plate alerts involve scofflaws who purchased by law enforcement failed to take their cars in for manteams around the country.” datory vehicle-emissions tests.
Local governments and agencies in the Chicago area spent $45 milMany police departments use lion in Homeland Security grants to DHS grants to purchase the same set up a network of surveillance type of armored personnel carriers cameras known as “Project Shield.” used by the United States military.
The most The system was justified as an antipopular model is the BearCat — an terrorist measure but was shut down acronym for Ballistic Engineered after it was recognized as a boonArmored Response Counter Attack doggle.
Some of its equipment failed federal funds to purchase a BearCat to function in hot or cold weather. because of rowdiness at a local Almost 20 percent of the equippumpkin festival.
Idilice department used a BearCat to otic decisions were made in where carry out a raid on a cockfight orto place the surveillance cameras ganizer.
A police department in — in police-station lobbies for exWashington state used its BearCat ample.
The Quigley denounced Project Clovis, California, Police DepartShield as “corruption which makes ment displayed its BearCat at a lous less safe.” cal Easter egg hunt.
Unforby making a loud and intense sound tunately, there is no way to deter that is capable of damaging hearing.” police departments from spending Pittsburgh used $88,000 of DHS federal dollars to intimidate local grant money to buy a “long-range taxpayers. acoustic device” and used it on proPolice departments are also ustesters at a 2009 international suming DHS grants to buy drones to mit in Pittsburgh, leading to at least conduct surveillance over their enone lawsuit from a victim claiming tire domains.
Senator Coburn warned, “The deployment of Federal anti-terrorism grants these types of surveillance maare also spurring pointless intruchines raises important questions sions around the nation.
The Washabout American citizens’ constituington, D.C., subway system has tional rights and the appropriate been plagued by high-profile viobalance between improving securilent attacks by riders (as well as horty and freedom.
Metro officials insisted that Federal grant money is enabling the searches were no big deal belocal police to buy other militarycause they would be very brief — style devices.
As a Senate report notunless, of course, police found a ed, “Long-Range Acoustic Device reason to arrest someone or detain machines were originally him for questioning.
The police The Trump administration has search teams are not deployed in proposed curtailing some antiresponse to any credible threat; interrorism grants to state and local stead, they are simply sent out to governments but it remains to be establish police presence.
This is seen whether Congress gets on akin to the “security theater” that board.
But the war on have been a great political success terrorism has been an unmitigated regardless of pervasive waste, fraud, victory for Leviathan and politiand abuse.
I saw that ignorance firsthand back when I taught American Government to high-school seniors.
Most of them had absolutely no clue about federalism, the separation of powers, the differences between the House and Senate, or anything the Constitution actually said other than “sepaH ration of church and state,” which, aving just finished reading of course, is a phrase not found in a new biography of H.L. the Constitution.
But, as Andrew Mencken, I was intrigued Rudalevige made clear in his “Monwhen I discovered that the Washkey Cage” post, ignorance of the ington Post had an online section Constitution is not limited just to about politics called “Monkey high-school seniors.
Rudalevige is the Thomas Brackett “Monkey Cage’”s mission “is to Reed Professor of Government at connect political scientists and the Bowdoin College in Brunswick, political conversation by creating a Maine.
He “specializes in the study compelling forum, developing pubof American political institutions, licly focused scholars, and building primarily the presidency and the an informed audience.
But it was Jimmy Kimmel, have sent camera Future of Freedom 15 October 2017 What Americans Should Know about the Constitution crews onto the sidewalks in major interviewed, evenly divided becities and asked random pedestrians tween men and women.
Only 58 questions about United States history and percent could identify the Constigovernment, including questions tution as the document that “estababout the Constitution.
Thirty percent thought that the right to petition Last year the PoliTech political the government for redress of grievstudent group at Texas Tech Univerances, which is part of the First sity released a video titled “PoliticalAmendment, was not one of the ly Challenged” in which students at freedoms protected in the First the university were asked very simAmendment.
Of course, the students ple, for the people” in the Constituhad no trouble naming famous action and more than 50 percent tors or the actors’ television shows. thought it appeared in the DeclaraA few years ago an Americantion of Independence.
Three hundred college graduates The purpose of Rudalevige’s between the ages of 21 to 34 were post was to introduce a small atFuture of Freedom 16 October 2017 Laurence M Vance tempt by Bowdoin College to remeducational institution that receives edy American ignorance of the Federal funds for a fiscal year to Constitution.
Yet, sor began posting a 15-lesson eduin spite of that, and as Rudalevige cational video series dedicated to wrote, too many Americans know civics titled “Founding Principles.” too little about the Constitution.
The series, which Rudalevige narThe United States was set up as a rates, “provides an introductory federal system of government overview and basic understanding where the states, through the Conto American government, but one stitution, granted a limited number that is crucial to building citizenof powers to the national governleaders, promoting civic engagement.
It “lays out what the Constiproposed Constitution to the tution says; why it says it; how (and Federal Government, are few how well) it works now; and how and defined.
Although they do a ments are numerous and ingood job of telling Americans what definite.
The former will be the Constitution says, they are inexercised principally on exteradequate to really inform Amerinal objects, as war, peace, necans what they should know about gotiation, and foreign comthe Constitution. merce; with which last the power of taxation will for the The Constitution most part be connected.
The Another Constitution Day has powers reserved to the several come and gone.
September 17 is States will extend to all the obdesignated Constitution Day bejects, which, in the ordinary cause it is the anniversary of the course of affairs, concern the signing of the United States Constitution in lives, liberties and properties 1787.
Federal law requires “each of the people; and the internal Future of Freedom 17 October 2017 What Americans Should Know about the Constitution order, improvement, and ferior to the Supreme Court prosperity of the State.
Everything else is reserved and make rules concerning to the states — even without the adcaptures on land and water dition of the Bill of Rights and its • To raise and support Tenth Amendment. armies Most of these powers are listed • To provide and maintain a in the 18 paragraphs found in Secnavy tion 8 of Article I on the Legislative • To make rules for the govBranch.
The Constitution has some States, or in any Department or Ofnotable omissions that Americans ficer thereof.” should know about.
Elsewhere in the Constitution, Americans should know that Congress is given the authority to the Constitution gives the federal admit new states into the Union; government no authority to wage propose amendments to the Conwar on drugs.
The Constitution is not a long document, it is not an obscure docAmericans should know that ument, and it is not a document the Constitution gives the federal that any American with a computer government no authority to have or smart phone couldn’t access in a anything to do with education.
Children ; Commodity SupAmericans should know that plemental Food Program ; the Constitution gives the federal or Elderly Nutrition Program, and government no authority to have no refundable tax credits. anything to do with medicine.
That means no Medicare, Medicaid, Americans should know that the State Children’s Health Insurance Constitution gives the federal Program , vaccination progovernment no authority to have grams, HIV/AIDS-prevention inianything to do with medicine. tiatives, federal laboratories, National Institutes of Health, or Americans should know that Department of Health and Human the Constitution gives the federal Services, and no regulation of medgovernment no authority to have ical schools, drugs, hospitals, nursanything to do with a retirement or ing homes, medical devices, or phydisability program.
Social Security, Supplemental SecuAmericans should know that rity Income , or Social Security the Constitution gives the federal Administration, and no Social Segovernment no authority to have curity payroll taxes. anything to do with insurance.
That Americans should know that the means no National Flood InsurConstitution gives the federal govance Program, no unemployment ernment no authority to make guninsurance, no regulation of insurcontrol laws.
That means no gunance companies, and no mandate dealer licensing; no National Instant that Americans must have health Criminal Background Check Sysinsurance. tem; no Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Americans should know that the Firearms, and Explosives ; and Constitution gives the federal govno regulations concerning guns, ernment no authority to have anyammunition, magazines, gun shows, thing to do with charity.
That means gun manufacturing, or gun sales. no welfare programs, means-tested And all of that would be true even or otherwise, such as food stamps, without the Second Amendment.
Future of Freedom 20 October 2017 Laurence M Vance Americans should know that Housing Administration , or the Constitution gives the federal VA loans, and no Department of government no authority to have Housing and Urban Development. anything to do with labor.
That Americans should know that means no minimum-wage laws, the Constitution gives the federal job-training programs, overtime government no authority to have requirements, Equal Employment anything to do with agriculture.
Opportunity Commission , That means no subsidies, guaranDavis-Bacon Act, or National Latees, loans, Rural Development bor Relations Board, and no DeAgency, dietary guidelines, or Department of Labor. partment of Agriculture.
Americans should know that Americans should know that the the Constitution gives the federal Constitution gives the federal government no authority to progovernment no authority to have vide security for private businesses. anything to do with housing.
That means that airports and airlines should handle their own secuAmericans should know that rity just like any other business and the Constitution gives the federal the Transportation Security Adgovernment no authority to fund ministration should be abolresearch or the arts.
All subsumed under the States;... authority to spend for the general welfare.
But as Michael Maharrey of the Tenth Amendment Center points The general welfare.
There is out, “The fact that the Framers folno adjective or adverb qualilowed up the general welfare clause fying that authority.
Nothing is Confederation, where it was more natural nor common always understood as nothing than first to use a general more than a general caption to phrase, and then to explain the specified powers, and it is and qualify it by a recital of a fact that it was preferred in particulars.
But the idea of an the new instrument for that enumeration of particulars, very reason as less liable than which neither explain nor any other to misconstruction. qualify the general meaning, and can have no other effect And in a letter written years latthan to confound and miser in 1831, lead, is an absurdity which as we are reduced to the dilemWith respect to the two words ma of charging either on the general welfare, I have always authors of the objection or on regarded them as qualified by the authors of the Constituthe detail of powers connected tion, we must take the liberty with them.
To take them in a of supposing, had not its oriliteral and unlimited sense gin with the latter. would be a metamorphosis of the Constitution into a charAnd in a letter written in 1792 acter which there is a host of just a few years after the adoption of proofs was not contemplated the Constitution, by its creators.
If Congress can do whatever Clearly, the general welfare in their discretion can be done clause does not give Congress carte by money, and will promote blanche to make any law or spend the general welfare, the Govmoney on anything it pleases.
The ernment is no longer a limited enumerated powers in Article I, one possessing enumerated Section 8, of the Constitution limit powers, but an indefinite one the federal government’s spending subject to particular exceppower to specific things.
It is to be remarked that collected and any money spent the phrase out of which this must be for the benefit of the Unitdoctrine is elaborated, is coped States as a whole — not for indiied from the old articles of vidual, regional, or special interests Future of Freedom 23 October 2017 What Americans Should Know about the Constitution — but only within the scope of the ate), their continual votes to fund authority granted to the federal the welfare/nanny state show that government by the Constitution. they don’t have a clue about what the Constitution says or doesn’t say.
The most ignorant Libertarians don’t claim that the Yes, too many Americans know Constitution is perfect, ideal, or a too little about the Constitution. libertarian document.
But they do But the most ignorant of Amerimaintain that the Constitution is cans when it comes to the Constituadequate as a check on the welfare/ tion are the very people that one nanny state — if it were just folwould expect should know the lowed.
Segregation Were To undergird his claims, RothFederal Programs stein adduces an impressive body of evidence, surveying a range of govby David D’Amato ernment policies and court decisions that he says show the government’s official “imposition of racial segregation,” both forceful and purposeful.
In his book The Color every stage, stamping the “badge of of Law, the Economic Policy Instislavery” on official actions of the tute’s Richard Rothstein argues that government.
This systematic segrenot only have Americans forgotten gation and (as Rothstein admirably the true legacy of segregation, does not hesitate to call it) ghetthey have also forgotten its princitoization was neither an accident pal cause.
Rothstein contends that nor the spontaneous development the polite, embarrassedly eupheof private prejudices, even if those mistic story we find in the mainplayed a role.
If Roth“does fall into the category of open stein is right and that is true, then it Future of Freedom 25 October 2017 Slavery and Segregation Were Federal Programs follows that the government ought in the discourse, popular and scholto provide appropriate remedies. arly, about race in America, reafFor libertarian readers, Rothfirmed constantly, and held above stein’s book immediately falls into a inquiry.
To question the notion that much broader, older conversation the federal government is the source about the inability of the defective of racial justice, to suggest that poleft-right political paradigm to litical centralization is in fact the make sense of the uniquely odious cause of serious social and economhistory that surrounds race in ic problems, is to brand yourself a America.
That paradigm unthinkreactionary or worse, a racist. ingly places the small and anti-govSomehow, the government’s ernment positions of libertarians role in creating, perpetuating, and on its far right wing, grouped with protecting slavery, America’s ultiracists and segregationists of all mate disgrace, is simply forgotten, stripes.
The whole of the conversaas if slavery were an example of tion about the relationship between free-market fundamentalism from race and politics in the United which benevolent federal power States rests on a historical mistake rescued the nation.
Similarly, con— that government power has ventional wisdom has it that in the tended overwhelmingly to ameliotime since slavery was officially rate the lot of black Americans. abolished, aggrandizement of federal power to the detriment of the The government’s role in creating, states has generally benefitted black perpetuating, and protecting Americans.
Once considered, it is slavery, America’s ultimate perplexing that the Left should disgrace, is simply forgotten. want to pursue this line of hypothecating, should want to absolve In this version of history, the fedgovernment power of its crimes eral government is rendered coexagainst black Americans.
But the tensive with the exalted, if largely federal government as enemy — mythological, legacy of Abraham which is to say, the truth — doesn’t Lincoln, the Great Emancipator — fit the narrative of the present moand thus reimagined as a source not ment, which casts Washington, of abusive centralized power but of D.C., as the savior of black people freedom and justice.
That story, false throughout American history, from though it may be, is deeply ingrained the Civil War to the civil-rights era.
Future of Freedom 26 October 2017 David D’Amato Slavery Our calls for economic freedom The Color of Law vindicates liband political decentralism are just ertarians, though of course it coded language. doesn’t set out to.
That is omits any mention of the fact that an extremely unfashionable view. exponents of liberal political econoProgressives and socialists have my were among the earliest, most made blaming libertarians for active and outspoken enemies of America’s brutal history of racial inthe slave trade and slavery in genjustice a favorite pastime. eral.
That fact simply doesn’t fit In a representative article in Smith’s stylized version of history, Aeon, Blake Smith claims that “the which of course is not history at all original laissez-faire economists but merely an unsophisticated anti– loved slavery” and argues, “the free-market polemic.
Today’s politibirth of modern capitalism decal Left will go to any lengths to pin pended not only on the labour of America’s disgraceful history of raenslaved people and the profits of cial injustice on the champions of the slave trade, but also on the exlimited government and economic ample of slavery as a deregulated freedom.
Hundreds of the free market seem like so many books and articles prosecute this propitiations to the gods of good most absurd case — that because taste; their connections to historical actually existing American capitalreality aren’t as important as their ism was built on the backs of slaves, propaganda value.
The relationship today’s free-market libertarians are between the philosophical quesapologists for an essentially racist tions surrounding slavery and the political and economic program.thand 19th-century free-trade Future of Freedom 27 October 2017 Slavery and Segregation Were Federal Programs tradition as we actually find it in serve the more important, underlyhistory undoubtedly remains coning goal of individual liberty.
Yet liberthe group surrounding noted raditarians are somehow blamed for cal free-trade campaigner Richard slavery and its inhuman restrictions Cobden.
The Supreme Court “got facts Easily avoided errors wrong” in believing “that The arguments in The Color of residential segregation was Law play out against this backdrop; mostly created by private choices.” one cannot fully understand Rothstein’s arguments without underLibertarians argue that, in genstanding the historical debate eral, mechanical or institutional sketched above.
An accurate picconstraints on government power ture of the historical record is espefunction more effectively than do cially important here insofar as words on paper.
Readers who Future of Freedom 28 October 2017 David D’Amato believe with Rothstein that such Libertarians will be familiar “segregation was created by state with this easily avoided mistake.
It’s action” will find themselves puzzled what happens when one has studat the author’s proposed solutions, ied discrete public-policy problems all of which call for more state acwithout considering the deeper tion.
At times, Rothstein too readily questions that precede them, that is, indulges his impulse to blame conquestions of political theory.
Had crete, coercive government action, Rothstein a more solid understandeven to this libertarian reader.
For ing of the theory — the political example, in his chapter “Private philosophy — that is necessary to a Agreements, Government Enforceworthy task such as his book’s, he ment,” Rothstein argues, as the title would be able to see the difference of the chapter implies, that even between mere enforcement of a prigenuinely private contractual oblivate contract and, for instance, acgations are a form of governmenttive Federal Housing Administrabacked discrimination.
That claim, In his good-hearted, if naive, strong enough on its own merits, is desire for appropriate remedial acseriously undermined by Rothtion, Rothstein accepts the fallacy stein’s confusing of private conthat we are the government or are tracts with government action — in some way responsible for its acexactly what he promises not to do tions, even those hundreds of years at the outset. in the past.
That is among of the power to rule others, behave the worst and most dangerous of all much worse, not better, corrupted fallacies, the kind of reflex collectivby that power rather than elevated ism that can only aggravate existing by it.
This poisonous thinking power that we no longer see its true naturally drives the policy prescripcorrupting nature.
Progressives tions that The Color of Law recomsuch as Rothstein fall again and mends “to provide an adequate enagain into the trap of believing that vironment for unchallenged political authority integration efforts,” among them, can be a tool used for good.
It is asfailed socialist ideas such as “a full tonishing to see The Color of Law employment policy, minimum call for a laundry list of destructive wages that return to their historic government actions even as the level and keep up with inflation, book’s own words argue that federal and a transportation infrastructure programs are “reinforcing racial that makes it possible for low-inisolation” even today.
As a correccome workers to get to jobs that are tive to the country’s “comfortable available.” delusions” surrounding race, The We must assume that Rothstein Color of Law is a welcome addition is simply unaware of minimumto the literature.
But, as is so often wage laws’ own racist history, their the case, as a formula for solving the goal of full unemployment for black problem as described, it shoots Americans and other undesirables. wide of the mark.
How often we see Progressives’ policy proposals undermining their David S D’Amato is a policy advistated goals.
If the Supreme Court’s sor at the Future of Freedom Founjurisprudence has been, as Rothdation, an attorney, and an adjunct stein contends, based on a misreadlaw professor.
He is also a regular ing of the facts, then so are his hastcontributor at the Cato Institute’s ily drawn remedies, which ignore Libertarianism.org and a policy adthe empirical record of state intervisor at the Heartland Institute. vention.
Future of Freedom 30 October 2017 Felix Morley, capitalism in myriad ways, Morley argued, including the public’s inChampion of the creased dependency on government American Republic and increased skepticism toward free-market solutions; the system by Wendy McElroy war truly promoted was socialism.
As an advocate of limited government, Morley believed the centralization of power during war and preparation for war was the core dynamic by which America had moved from a republic to an empire.
The Mexithat the United States retained can War caused extension of slavmany of the characteristics of a war ery, military government and economy, including what today is central administration of concalled “the military-industrial comquered territories.
Capitalism was shored up by greatly expanded civilian and milicontinued military spending, he artary bureaucracy.” gued.
A war economy crippled grams through which the governFuture of Freedom 31 October 2017 Felix Morley, Champion of the American Republic ment assumed massive control of ing into the politics of other nations the economy.
Morley had a frontbecame policy, with greatly expandrow seat from which he delivered ed surveillance of both foreign and his criticism. domestic threats.
America had reached funding, America slowly became a a tipping point in the tension bepermanent war economy with preptween Republic and Empire.
He bearation for war substituting for the lieved Americans almost instincreality of it.
Common ing conflict was called the Cold War. sense tells us that the republic was never designed to run an empire.
An Encyhowever, Empire had gained the clopedia, by Bruce Frohnen, Jeremy upper hand.
They did not very forces that our own ‘diplomaquietly surrender to empire. cy’” had released.
To prepare “an interventionist Freedom and Federalism, the true America” for war, massive indusAmerica tries were created and funded by Morley’s book Freedom and war-level defense spending.
IntrudFederalism is both a ringing Future of Freedom 32 October 2017 Wendy McElroy defense of the federal system of target not only because its ecogovernment and an indictment of nomic system is communistic the centralizing power of war.
Russia could against their instincts and history, revert to free enterprise, or rethere had to be an enemy of which store an hereditary Czardom, they were so horrified that freedom tomorrow; and still our Secrewould be sacrificed for security. tary of State would be comThe Soviet Union was perfect. pelled to question her bona Its economic and political system fides.
Peaceful co-existence were antithetical to the American with Russia is impossible not tradition.
It had joined (albeit temsimply because of Communist porarily) with Hitler against the Alplotting but because our econlies, and it still challenged America omy apparently needs the confor dominance around the globe. stant stimulus of a threat of The Soviet Union was also militalarge-scale war.
Morley did not consider the SoThere had to be an enemy of viets to be either an immediate which Americans were so threat or a threat to the American horrified that freedom would be mainland, but he knew it would be sacrificed for security. viewed as such.
If private jobs interest in preparation for war. were not plentiful enough, then govIt has become necessary for us ernment would become a de facto to have a powerful enemy.
Soemployer with the military-indusviet Russia is currently our trial complex playing a pivotal role.
Future of Freedom 33 October 2017 Felix Morley, Champion of the American Republic • Without a forced overproservices on “a gigantic scale” creatduction, a chain reaction would ed the permanent war economy shake the economy.
He wrote, “Because of the trein automobile production will ... mendous vitality of our economy threaten the employment both of we have guns without abstaining steel workers and of salesmen.
Grocomment is ominous because the cery sales go down and newspapers process cannot go on forever.
There is er or later, the vitality of the private no end of it....” sector will be drained beyond its • Industries that rely on deability to pay for both guns and butfense spending would have to close ter.
As the to make a handsome profit, in a economy teeters, the war establishround-about manner. ment will turn to its “go to” solution — ramping up the permanent war Conclusion economy.
Capitalistic societies experience But, first, it needs an enemy. a contraction after a war largely because of the suspension of military Wendy McElroy is a fellow of the Inspending.
And they sucby George Leef ceed with what Kwak deems “simplistic” concepts.
Bad Economics and the Many years ago, I taught introRise of Inequality by James Kwak ductory college economics courses.
In his view, the United States ment policies by smearing those of is being held back from addressing us who oppose them.
That apthe crucial issue of rising inequality proach appeals greatly to Progresbecause economism has indoctrisives who think that they are virtunated so much of the population.
Future of Freedom 35 October 2017 A Bad Attack on Libertarian Economics The “elegant model” of supply what Kwak is doing.
He derides and demand, Kwak writes, “requires writers such as Henry Hazlitt for arthat all suppliers offer the same guing that the world obeys ecoproduct — there are no differences nomic laws.
Because the model studies after implementing them, of a perfectly competitive market is and if any study finds an apparently unrealistic, Kwak argues, it follows beneficial result, that’s adequate justhat the basic teachings derived tification for it.
Naturally, he points from it are not reliable policy guides. to outlier academic studies finding We really can’t be sure about the imlittle or no harm from minimumpact of a mandated wage increase, wage increases and little or no benfor instance, and it’s therefore wrong efit from tax cuts to make his case to instruct impressionable students that the world is too complicated that there are any necessary implicafor mere theory. tions from it or other interventionist Where does economism have its policies.
If it superficial familiarity with those weren’t for the simplistic notions economists.
Throughout the book, implanted in people’s minds about he mentions Adam Smith, Ludwig those principles, we would have advon Mises, Friedrich Hayek, Milton opted a host of regulatory and tax Friedman, and others.
It takes “simplistic” economic Rather, his contention is that their concepts and repackages them into theoretical notions, while not necop-eds and videos and radio comessarily wrong, have been pulled mentaries designed to get Ameriout of their books and impressed cans to believe that free markets are into the service of rich Americans always good and government interwho were unhappy that the New ference with them is always bad.
Deal had slightly reduced their In making his argument, Kwak share of national wealth, and wantis relentlessly uncharitable toward ed some means of fighting back.
They’re depicted as for example, Charles Koch cites mean-spirited people, all about Milton Friedman on the benefits of money for themselves, never about deregulation in an op-ed, that’s bad principled economic and philoold economism at work — using sophical arguments against governsimple, merely theoretical ideas to ment coercion.
LeonKwak never ventures a direct ard Read, founder of the Foundaassault against free-market ideas. tion for Economic Education, was just a business executive looking for In Kwak’s version of history, ways to put business back on top, America had settled into a comfortnot a man with a deep philosophic able and relatively fair equilibrium commitment to liberty.
Americans under the enlightened policies of who oppose the minimum wage Franklin Roosevelt, which sensible merely want to keep down labor Republicans continued under costs for business and those who arDwight Eisenhower.
But then a few gue for tax cuts do so only because people on the far Right decided that their deep pockets could hold a few the New Deal’s big administrative more dollars. state was an obstacle to their wealth Kwak can’t even resist a dig at two maximization, so they created a Nobel laureates who provide ammumovement to counter it, a movenition for the practitioners of econoFuture of Freedom 37 October 2017 A Bad Attack on Libertarian Economics mism.
I don’t think I While Kwak claims that he isn’t have ever before seen the intellectrying to say who is right and who is tual sincerity of Hayek or Friedman wrong in policy debates and only called into question, but Kwak feels wants deeper and more-enlightened the need to suggest that they were debate, that’s hard to take seriously. part of the right-wing cabal against He never indicts any of the equally the Golden Age of Progressivism. simple arguments that come from Progressives.
For every instance of Kwak has to ignore some economism — let’s say a Wall Street inconvenient facts.
Who opposes crony capieconomism for you” any time they talism that lines the pockets of the encounter an argument that’s prempolitically connected rich and who ised on supply and demand, incenopposes the government schooling tives, efficiency, or other concepts of monopoly that so harms the chancbasic economics.
Again, those of us who leftists to believe that free-market have absorbed the basics of Econ arguments are just a mask for greed.
Future of Freedom 38 October 2017 George Leef Objections barrier of economism, the United Besides the book’s tactic of imStates has kept right on increasing pugning the motives of those who the power of the state to interfere in argue for free markets and nonintermarkets.
Demonstrating that tariffs; it didn’t keep states from enwould seem to be crucial to Kwak’s acting laws against price gouging. case, but he never even bothers to try.
Nor has the government repealed Only a small percentage of Ameriany of the laws that people infected cans ever take an economics course with economism have long railed (they are required at very few collegagainst.
He declares that it prevents alleged market failures and the need Americans from even considering a for intervention than to the adverse single-payer national health policy, consequences of tampering with but many politicians and policy adprices.
Most ly to be imbued with egalitarian and Americans seem to have concluded statist ideas than to hear anything that single-payer would be a big that reinforces supply-and-demand mistake.
If “economism is so dominant; it’s because mism” affects American thinking, the case for a federal health-care its impact is far, far smaller than monopoly is so poor.
What this book boils down to is The second obvious problem is the author’s complaint that the that despite the supposedly gigantic world of policy debate doesn’t operFuture of Freedom 39 October 2017 A Bad Attack on Libertarian Economics ate to his satisfaction.
He praises Amartya Sen for implicit assumptions and asserted saying that we should care about conclusions.
When commentators “the richness of human life” and not and politicians say that a higher just “the richness of the economy.” minimum wage will increase unFine.
Writers who rely on trade-offs their preferences would economism are just as apt to know require.
They need not be fair and they’re making “contested claims” can make their arguments with as Progressive writers are to know simplistic notions.
When they adthat they’re doing the same thing vocate coercion (as they almost inwhen they advocate interventionist, evitably will) we libertarians will redistributionist policies.
People on oppose them as we think best. any side who seek to shape public In fact, writers have been trying opinion couldn’t possibly include to sell people around the world on a and respond to every objection that “less is more” philosophy for thouhas been lodged against the posisands of years.
Perhaps Kwak’s next book policy debate is still an will argue that Americans should even field of battle and Kwak’s lachange to a sharing ethic, since we ment that economism gives greedy already have enough stuff.
To break the grip of econoCarolina. mism, Kwak wants to fight the idea that “the overriding objective Future of Freedom 40 October 2017 SUPPORTING THE FUTURE OF FREEDOM FOUNDATION Our work advancing freedom depends on the financial support we receive from people who share our commitment to the moral, philosophical, and economic principles of a free society.
A donation in any amount you choose by means of a recurring monthly charge to your credit card.
A donation of stock, the full market value of the stock being tax-deductible.
Naming The Future of Freedom Foundation as a beneficiary in your will or living trust, charitable gift annuity or trust, or life-insurance policy.
Over the years, planned giving has played an important role in sustaining our operations.
