The author contends that in our understanding of the Kremlin’s motivations in the Cuban missile crisis, we have come to over-rely on disparate pieces of ‘evidence’, which, at closer investigation, turn out to be onesided, undocumented, or demonstrably false.
Keywords communist ideology, Cuban missile crisis, inadvertent war, Khrushchev, Soviet security The Cuban missile crisis has become one of the most written-about events in the history of the twentieth century, a subject of seemingly endless scrutiny in scholarly accounts of widely varying quality, in memoirs and fiction and in documentaries and Hollywood blockbusters.
But while the factual basis for understanding the events of October 1962 has dramatically expanded, in particular in the last 20 or so years, we are as far as ever from definitive answers about key aspects of the crisis.
As a result, most historians resort to the safety of multicausality to paper over the uncertainties born of the glaring gaps in the record.
It was one of the first questions John F Kennedy put to the participants of the inaugural ExComm meeting on 16 October 1962.
When, 6 days later, JFK went on air to announce the United States naval ‘quarantine’ against Cuba, Moscow offered several explanations, including that the missiles were there to defend Cuba against a United States invasion – something many a Kremlinologist refused to accept as a valid reason rather than a mere ploy of Soviet propaganda.
Alternative answers included the ‘quick fix’ proposition – that is, that Moscow made up for its inferiority in InterContinental Ballistic Missiles by putting shorter range missiles right off the United States coast – as well as the idea of a calculated gambit, designed to trade Cuban missiles for United States Jupiter missiles in Turkey, or at least for concessions in Berlin.
All these possible explanations were broached at that first ExComm meeting and were soon accepted as the must-mentions of informed public discussion of the subject.
Nearly 10 years passed before any serious new evidence emerged on the Soviet role in the crisis.
It came in the form of Nikita Khrushchev’s memoirs, smuggled to the West and published in multiple volumes beginning in 1971.
The Last Testament became about all there was on the Soviet side of the story for over 15 years, even though it was impossible to surmise, as indeed with any memoir, the accuracy of what Khrushchev remembered, and where he misremembered, and to what extent he engaged, consciously or unconsciously, in afterthe-fact rationalizations.
With the end of the Cold War, the paucity of sources yielded to fabulous wealth.
Soviet veterans of the crisis hastened to tell their stories for the first time, reshaping and informing this nascent historiography.
Much of the new testimony confirmed the weathered Soviet claim about defending Cuba as a socialist bridgehead, with strategic concerns trailing far behind.
The notable exception to the change of emphasis was General Dmitrii Volkogonov’s path-breaking book, Sem’ Vozhdei, which leaned to the side of the strategic imperative.
This anecdote later made its way to the Englishlanguage literature and, occasionally furnished with imagined historical detail, now appears in a dozen books on the subject as evidence in support of the strategic character of Khrushchev’s decision.
Even so, the calculating, strategic-minded Khrushchev of old has practically vanished from scholarly accounts.
He has been replaced by a new Khrushchev, the passionate believer in Communism, the defender of the Cuban revolution.
Among Russian historians who did the most to advertise the ‘new’ Khrushchev was late Sergo Mikoyan, the son of Khrushchev’s close confidant and Cuban trouble-shooter Anastas Mikoyan.
Mikoyan Jr. became one of the favorite commentators on the crisis for Western audiences.
In that interview, as in many subsequent interviews, Mikoyan argued that Khrushchev sent missiles to Cuba to defend the island against a United States invasion.
For, if Mikoyan was right about Khrushchev’s motives (and – in the words of Thomas Patterson – he was ‘well-positioned to know’), then one could conceivably blame the United States for causing the Cuban missile crisis by resorting to covert and overt actions to destabilize Castro’s regime.
In the early 1990s, when the history of the Cuban missile crisis was being rewritten, thanks to new revelations on the Soviet side, no one could answer this question with any degree of certainty.
Now we can, however, thanks to the publication of Sergo Mikoyan’s own seminal work on the Cuban missile crisis, Anatomi’ia Karibskogo Krizisa.
In this thousand plus page volume, Mikoyan devotes a full chapter to the discussion of Khrushchev’s motives, arguing in somewhat unequivocal terms that the ‘main reason’ for sending missiles was to save Cuba from invasion.
Fortunately, Mikoyan provides detailed references for his claims so that rather than assuming his insider knowledge we can try to understand how Mikoyan became so convinced of the correctness of his position, and whether his sources truly justify such conviction.
Most of the evidence comes from Sergo Mikoyan’s notes of conversations with his father, all of which postdate the crisis – we are not told by how much.
Even before the trip to Bulgaria he conveyed to me his worry about a possible attack by the USA, which I fully shared.
But this was not expressed for now in the development of a concrete plan of action.
This would be a great blow for the world communist movement, for all socialist countries, for all that is progressive.
This would throw back, just as it was getting under way, the struggle of the peoples of Latin America, and not only of Latin America but also of Africa.
However, one would expect Mikoyan to confirm to the Soviet officers the truthfulness of the Soviet propaganda about defending Cuba and scoring a great victory as a result of Kennedy’s noninvasion pledge.
The same reservations may apply to Sergo Mikoyan’s third piece of evidence – his father’s assurances in discussions which took place with Cuban leaders in early November.
We took a great risk, because at the moment of utmost tension there really was the danger of the unleashing of a thermonuclear war … All of this was necessary for Cuba, first and foremost, and not for us.
However, we would not really expect Mikoyan to tell Castro – who was already furious over becoming a trading chip in Soviet–American relations – that the rationale for placing missiles in Cuba was to close the missile gap with the United States.
Yet it happens to offer the best support for his line of argument about defending Cuba.
The first fragment is that of the meeting on 21 May 1962, where Khrushchev initially broached the question of sending missiles to Cuba.
This evidence, when tallied with the other information assembled in Mikoyan’s book, would warrant the conclusion that defending Cuba was one of the concerns on Khrushchev’s mind, but it would not support the unequivocal interpretation that it was the only or even necessarily the primary concern.
What one sees in recent years, however, is the increasing prevalence of the opposite point of view – the line of argument that emphasizes Khrushchev’s irrationality, his romanticism, and idealism.
This has happened despite the fact that, as demonstrated above, there is no real evidence for making unequivocal statements to this effect.
An example of this tendency is the highly influential, and in many respects pathbreaking, work by Vladislav Zubok and Constantine Pleshakov, Inside the Kremlin’s Cold War.
The authors argue, It was not the temptation to use the Cuban Revolution as a chance to improve the Soviet position in the strategic balance of the superpowers that brought the Soviet missiles to San Cristobal, Cuba; rather, it was a new strategic capability that emboldened Khrushchev to launch an overseas operation to save the Cuban Revolution.
If we check the reference to this particular statement, we see that it is merely a 1993 interview with the former Soviet diplomat Oleg Troianovskii.
Ironically, Troianovskii later published memoirs, in which he gave equal weight to Khrushchev’s preoccupation with strategic balance.
Zubok, however, appears to have softened the ‘revolutionary’ side of his revolutionary–imperial paradigm with the recent book, The Soviet Union and the Cold War from Stalin to Gorbachev.
This more nuanced view also draws on Oleg Troianovskii for evidence – a good example of how the same kind of evidence may be used to support opposite interpretations.
Gaddis is far from understanding the psychology and the method of thinking of the Soviet leaders …’22 If Mikoyan had read his later book, The Cold War, he would come away with a more sympathetic impression, for Gaddis now claims that Khrushchev, far from being desperate, intended his missile deployment chiefly as an effort, improbably as this might seem, to spread revolution throughout Latin America.
It seems that Mikoyan actually said, ‘I had a feeling that my youth has returned’.25 Minor points aside, the important issue here is that one somewhat mistranslated remark by Mikoyan , made in a context that is far from clear, has appeared time and again in the literature as evidence for the Soviet leader’s ‘ideological romanticism’, becoming almost a must-mention and a counterpart to Volkogonov’s hedgehog anecdote.
David Priestland, for instance, mentions Mikoyan’s ‘childhood’ moment to argue that the Soviet leaders sought to ‘infuse some youthful spirit into the ageing body of Soviet Communism’.27 The same remark appears in Odd Arne Westad’s highly acclaimed Global Cold War,28 citing from Piero Gleijeses, who cites in turn from Fursenko and Naftali,29 who cite from a cable sent by the Soviet intelligence agent in Havana, Aleksei Alekseev, on 10 February 1960.
Whatever the reasons, Mikoyan’s chance remark has come to signify for many the strength of Soviet ideological commitment to Cuba.
We have been waiting all our lives for a country to go Communist without the Red Army, and it happened in Cuba.
For instance, Hal Brands cites it to support his argument that the Soviets were ‘thrilled’ by the Cuban revolution ‘in an ideological sense’.30 Lebow and Stein use the same snippet to emphasize Mikoyan’s ‘sentimental attachment’ to Cuba.
Mervyn Bain resorts to Mikoyan’s remark to argue that Khrushchev had a ‘close personal affinity’ with Castro.
The point here is not at all to argue that Mikoyan was lying to Rusk or to his close associates (if anything, the coincidence suggests that he was saying about the same thing to both the friend and the foe), but to point out that we have come to depend heavily on such snippets of information to paint a picture of the Soviet involvement in the Cuban missile crisis as heavily colored by ideological imperatives.
Many historians of the Cold War now emphasize ideology as the primary motivation for Cold War decision makers.
The Cuban missile crisis serves as merely one of the case studies for illustrating the role of ideology in Soviet policy making.
There are, no doubt, other case studies to draw upon, but one should certainly be aware of the potential pitfalls in overreliance on uncertain scraps of evidence.
Fifty years on, we are still struggling with this essential and perhaps impossible question.
This of course makes it difficult to draw sweeping conclusions from the existing literature.
Khrushchev withdraws The second important question that has multiple answers in the existing literature of the Soviet side of the Crisis is how – and why – Khrushchev, after taking the gamble to secretly deploy Medium-Range Ballistic Missiles and Intermediate-Range Ballistic Missiles to Cuba, decided to withdraw those same missiles from the island.
One, a private one, on 26 October, and two letters on 27 and 28 October, respectively, which were broadcast by Radio Moscow.
In the first letter, Khrushchev proposed – although arguably only implicitly and in somewhat vague terms – that the Soviet Union would withdraw missiles from Cuba in return for Kennedy’s noninvasion pledge.
These twists and turns of policy within the space of 2 days can now be understood much better, because of the release of key documentation on the Russian side.
The most important development was the declassification of the Malin notes for October 1962.
These were first introduced in Fursenko and Naftali’s One Hell of a Gamble, though it was not until the publication of Khrushchev’s Cold War, by the same authors, that this evidence was utilized in full.
The Malin notes are quite fragmentary, missing the records of the Presidium discussion on 23 October.
In general, the subplots of the various secret meetings and backchannels have animated accounts of the Cuban missile crisis since the 1960s.
Perhaps the most famous story concerns contacts between the KGB rezident in Washington, Aleksandr Feklisov, and the ABC journalist John Scali at the height of the crisis – known for many years and long understood to have played a crucial role in brokering a peaceful settlement of the crisis.
Feklisov and Scali met on 26 October, and either the former or the latter proposed the withdrawal/noninvasion pledge compromise.
Kennedy had assumed that the proposal came directly from Khrushchev, and it seemed to square with, and complement, in more concrete terms, his 26 October letter.
However, some documentation emerged in the 1990s, which suggests that Feklisov may have been acting on his own initiative.
Until now, this question has not been settled, although it could presumably be cleared up when the cable traffic between the KGB and Feklisov is declassified in full, which one hopes will not require another 50 years.
For now, one issue that we can at least say with certainty is that the Feklisov/Scali exchange was basically irrelevant to Khrushchev’s decision making between 25 and 28 October.
It certainly does not explain why Khrushchev changed his mind and added Jupiters into the settlement formula on 27 October.
Fursenko and Naftali explain this change of mind by invoking Walter Lippmann who had just proposed the Turkey/Cuba exchange in a newspaper column on Thursday 25 October – an article Khrushchev is said to have read.
Khrushchev’s comments at the Presidium on 27 October show that he thought that it was possible that the United States would agree to the ‘liquidation’ of their bases in Turkey, as well as Pakistan – which would make the Soviet Union ‘the winner’ – but also that he was already resigned to scaling back these demands in case the White House refused to give way.
In addition, it has now become clear from the Russian record that the one concession, which scholars believed had swayed Khrushchev into agreeing to withdraw missiles – Kennedy’s private promise, made through Robert Kennedy via Ambassador Anatolii Dobrynin – that Jupiters would be withdrawn eventually, played no role in Khrushchev’s capitulation on 28 October.
Khrushchev simply panicked in reaction to what appeared to be indications of an imminent United States attack on Cuba.
He was also greatly exercised by a letter from Fidel Castro that appeared to call for a first strike on the United States.
Indeed, when faced with the prospect of escalation, the Soviet leader preferred to back down and cut his losses.
Mikoyan was promptly dispatched to Havana to salvage the wreck of the Soviet–Cuban alliance.
The Chinese exploited the rift to the full, unleashing a propaganda campaign to discredit the embattled Soviet leader in the eyes of the Cuban and the Third World audience.
Release of new documentation on the Russian side shows that Khrushchev could not stomach a confrontation with the United States and the politico-military risks this entailed.
At a subsequent ‘critical oral history’ conference of United States, Soviet , and Cuban veterans of the affair , in Havana in January 1993, new troubling details seeped into the public domain.
It turned out that the Soviet force on the island had been equipped with tactical nuclear weapons, and – it was even said – the General in Charge, Issa Pliev, had predelegated authority on their use in case of a US invasion and loss of communications with Moscow.
This claim gave added weight to the argument that the chief danger of the Cuban missile crisis was not in what Kennedy or Khrushchev did or did not do but in how far they actually controlled the action on the ground.
The prospect of a nuclear Armageddon as an unexpected, indeed, accidental, consequence of a United States invasion of Cuba appeared more possible in retrospect.
The evidence was patchy then, and Mark Kramer argued that it was wrong to claim that the crisis was ‘more dangerous than it actually was’, and he insisted that Khrushchev in fact expressly forbade the use of nuclear weapons in case of a confrontation with the Americans.
In the 20 or so years that had passed since those early debates, we know both more and less but there is a certain degree of clarity concerning key documents.
Thus, we know that Khrushchev never approved the instruction prepared by the Ministry of Defense in early September 1962 which would have given Pliev the authority to use tactical nuclear weapons in case of a United States invasion and if he could not contact Moscow.
Khrushchev withheld his authorization even as he approved the shipment of additional tactical nukes to Cuba on 7 September.
Indeed, Gribkov retreated from his previous sensationalist claims in his book Operation Anadyr, co-authored with US General William Smith.
On the other hand, the same Gribkov claimed a few years later, in a different publication, that when Khrushchev saw Pliev before the latter’s departure for Cuba, the Soviet leader, after thinking about it for some time … gave the right to the commander of the Group [of forces] to use the Luna rockets as he deems fit when defending the island … This right is given to him in case of the lack of communications with Moscow.
We know, however, that at the outset of the acute phase of the crisis, on 22 October, Khrushchev ordered Pliev not to resort to the ‘weapons of Statsenko’s and of all Beloborodov’s cargo’, which is understood to refer to all – including tactical – nuclear weapons.
The order to refrain from any use of nuclear weapons was restated ‘categorically’ in another cable from Malinovsky to Pliev on 27 October.
But if Pliev was clear about his orders after 22 October, it is still impossible to tell whether he had the authority, implied or explicit, to use tactical nuclear weapons before that date.
Even if Pliev had no authority to use tactical, or strategic, nuclear missiles, the question remains whether he, or officers under his command, could have used them nonetheless, for instance, in the heat of battle.
This version of events has been particularly popular since the revelation that it was a Soviet officer who ordered to shoot down a U-2 over Cuba on 27 October 1962 – without any authorization from Khrushchev, the General Staff in Moscow, or even Pliev in Cuba.
Sensationalist media has of course hijacked the story for their purposes.
There were other similar moments throughout the crisis, most notably, the accidental overflight of Soviet territory in the Far East by another American U-2 plane, also on 27 October, due to a navigational error.
This incident, Dobbs and others now speculate, could have been misinterpreted by the Soviets as an intelligence mission before a first strike, or even the first strike itself.
But – and here is where we run into a wall on the Russian side – very little evidence has surfaced that would shed light on the Soviet reaction to the misdirected U-2, so it is difficult to make any conclusions as to how the military – or Khrushchev – interpreted these developments, and whether the moment was as dangerous as Dobbs would make us believe, or as Khrushchev claimed in his letter to Kennedy.
Yet again, the paucity of evidence has hardly proved to be a barrier for journalists.
The Globe and Mail, for instance, in reviewing Dobbs’ book, confidently stated that the U-2 was not shot down by Soviet MiGs, because they could not reach the required altitude.
And so, just as we learn more about the Cuban missile crisis with every new revelation, new myths are being born and the old myths are resuscitated.
It is actually difficult to argue, just on the basis of the shooting down of U-2 over Cuba, that the Soviet chain of command over tactical, much less strategic, nukes was in danger of a breakdown.
By the same token, while it is certainly interesting to have learned, from Dobbs’ carefully assembled evidence, that the Soviets deployed nucleartipped cruise missiles to the vicinity of the Guantanamo base, and were poised to strike the base in case hostilities broke out, Dobbs himself notes that the order to strike would have had to come ‘from the general staff in Moscow’ – something we have long known.
It should be said that most of his evidence on the Soviet side – certainly useful in many ways – is basically hearsay.
There is more evidence that has come to light in the last decade or so that has strengthened the hand of those who argue that the world came closer to the brink than most people realized.
The key development here was the elaboration of the story of the four Soviet submarines on a mission to protect these Soviet shipments to Cuba.
The revelation first came to light in Russia in a 1995 article by Aleksandr Mozgovoi who later authored a study, based mainly on extensive interviews with crew members of the four submarines dispatched to the vicinity of Cuba in the run-up to the crisis.
Orlov claimed that the captain of the submarine Vitalii Savitskii – who was ‘totally exhausted’ from days of United States antisubmarine warfare harassment – decided to use a nuclear torpedo against his American pursuers and was only dissuaded from doing so at the last moment, having been persuaded by the Second Captain, Vasilii Arkhipov.
The Americans had no idea that this submarine or the other hunter-killers were equipped with nuclear-tipped torpedoes, and dropped depth charges to make them surface.
These revelations caused further controversy in the West, when they were picked up by scholars and journalists in 2002.
Although it had earlier become known to scholars that the four submarines had been equipped with nuclear-tipped torpedoes, the new evidence suggested that these could well have been used without authorization.
Subsequent investigation by Svetlana Savranskaya, based on oral history, disagreed as to whether such authorization had been given, with some of the submarine captains claiming to have been told that they could strike back if attacked by the Americans.
Recently, Dobbs drew on the same testimony in making the argument that the world neared the brink.
Both Savranskaya and Dobbs make a reservation to the effect that many details in this story are unclear.
It is especially difficult to corroborate Orlov’s story, seeing that Savitskii, Arkhipov, and other key witnesses are already dead.
All the same, Vasilii Arkhipov has now entered the literature as the ‘guy who saved the world’.63 There is even a Wikipedia article devoted to this important, if, for all intents and purposes undocumented, feat.
Conclusions Since the end of the Cold War, we have come to learn a great deal about the Soviet side of the story of the Cuban missile crisis.
Important details have come to light through increasing declassification and oral history; in particular, through the efforts of individual scholars noted here and scholarly enterprises such as the Cold War International History Project and the National Security Archive, among others.
But it is fair to say that we have still only seen the tip of the iceberg.
Key documentation remains inaccessible to this day in the archives of the Russian Ministry of Defense, and of the Navy, in the Presidential Archive, in the archives of the intelligence services (in particular, the SVR), and the Foreign Ministry Archive.
Though Fidel Castro has released a smattering of materials, mostly in connection with the international oral history conferences he hosted in Havana in 1993 and 2001–2002, Cuban documents remain mostly sealed off.
CWIHP has continued its efforts to obtain, and translate, new documents on the crisis, most recently those of the Chinese.
This effort is not attracting as much attention or funding as it once did in the 1990s.
On the other hand, there is much that we have learned about the Cuban missile crisis since the Soviet side of the story began to emerge.
It was also Khrushchev who made the decision, at the 11th hour, to withdraw missiles from Cuba.
Earlier, Kremlinological analyses tended to ponder the role of various factions within the leadership and bureaucratic and institutional interests.
We have learned, thanks to the disclosures on the Soviet side, that such pressures were evidently not a serious determinant of Khrushchev’s actions.
On the other hand, it has become clear that one cannot understand how Soviet foreign policy was made without taking into account the role of personality.
With a confused personality like Khrushchev – flamboyant and romantic here, calculating and rational there – it has proven difficult to understand the twists and turns of Moscow’s policy toward Cuba, and, for this matter, its foreign and defense policy in general.
Hence, the new literature on the Cold War has come to emphasize irrationality and emotions, which colored perceptions and influenced policy making on the Soviet side.
Indeed, we have seen that scholars embraced this new, ‘ideological’, aspect of the Soviet Cold War experience with remarkable zeal.
Yet no amount of zeal, occasionally born of suspect evidence, has served to undermine the longtime argument that Khrushchev stepped back ‘from the brink’ because he was afraid of a nuclear war.
His revolutionary spirit, his love of Castro, and so on – none of that sufficed to bolster Khrushchev’s willingness to stand firm in the face of United States pressure.
Indeed, new evidence has shown that Khrushchev had blinked even earlier than it seemed at the time.
Now, what exactly that means in terms of historical lessons is less clear.
One could either argue that it proves that containment worked and, just as George Kennan would have predicted, the Soviet Union retreated when faced with superior force.
Or, it may prove nothing, except that Khrushchev personally did not have the nerve for toughing out a standoff with the Americans.
The strong personal and subjective element in Soviet/Russian decision making suggests that it just as likely that Stalin, Brezhnev, or Putin would have acted the same way as that they would have acted differently.
Some of the same reservations also apply to United States decision making during the crisis but, comparatively speaking, Soviet/Russian foreign policy has proved more likely to suffer from zigzags and unexpected reversals, often due to the absence of strong institutional constraints.
Furthermore, we have learned a lot about the details of the Soviet operation in Cuba – the logistical arrangements, the nature of military plans, and so on. – including the startling revelation of the tactical nuclear weapons, deployed both in Cuba and aboard the submarines, which caused, and continue to cause, controversy among scholars and the general public.
Disclosure of these sensational details over the last 20 years has not produced great clarity as to whether these weapons could, and would, have been used.
The ‘brink’ theory has won plenty of adherents, from Allyn, Blight, and Welch in the early 1990s to Michael Dobbs most recently.
Voices of skeptics have not been heard quite as loudly, although the evidence has not been unequivocal, especially in the case with the submarines incident.
It has become fashionable, on the basis of the new Russian literature on the Cuban missile crisis, to argue that the world had come very close to a nuclear war and that the main danger was not even in what Kennedy or Khrushchev thought or did, but in the inadvertent escalation of hostilities.
Khrushchev was apprehensive about the prospects of an accidental nuclear war, and did his best to keep control of the ‘red button’, figuratively speaking.
The command and control structure was not well integrated, and much dependent on the actions of individual commanders who decided for themselves how to interpret instructions from Moscow.
Clearly, One Hell of a Gamble and Khrushchev’s Cold War by Fursenko and Naftali and, more recently, Anatomi’ia Karibskogo Krizisa by Sergo Mikoyan have advanced our knowledge to a considerable degree.
Scholarly debates have raged intermittently in conferences and in print.
Few of the big debates of the early 1990s have been satisfactorily resolved.
Michael Dobbs, in One Minute to Midnight, remarks that he was greatly surprised how much more new evidence he had been able to unearth.
Even so, his book has served as another reminder of how many things he – or others – have not been able to unearth.
A lot hinges on the declassification process in Russia, which has now slowed down to a crawl.
New evidence continues to emerge year after year, but the crucial pieces of the puzzle are still missing.
Fifty years anniversary of the Crisis serves to remind us that we have only just scratched the surface.
Acknowledgement The author would like to thank Len Scott, Kristan Stoddart, James Hershberg, and two anonymous reviewers for comments on the earlier draft of this article.
This should be read with Mark Kramer’s cautionary remarks on the use and abuse of Cuban missile crisis oral history.
Dmitrii Volkogonov and Harold Shukman, Autopsy for an Empire: The Seven Leaders Who Built the Soviet Regime , 236.
Lebow and Stein, however, do not wholeheartedly endorse this view, leaving ample room for strategic concerns.
Mikoyan does not actually draw on this piece for evidence in defense of his view.
Westad, however, errs on the side of caution, suggesting that saving Cuba was only one of Khrushchev’s ‘key purposes’ – a much more careful argument than, for instance, the claims in Gaddis’s latest book, or in Zubok and Pleshakov.
Unfortunately, the idea that the authority had been delegated persists in certain historical or semi-historical writing; it is mentioned, for instance, in Peter Huchthausen’s October Fury , which is actually a fictional account advertised as history.
But there is no information on the internal Soviet deliberations on the matter.
His current research interests focus on the history of international relations of the Asia Pacific.
