AP Photo 2 of 17 The world stood at the brink of Armageddon for 13 days in October 1962 when President John F Kennedy drew a symbolic line in the Atlantic and warned of dire consequences if Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev dared to cross it.
This is a low level photograph made Oct., 1962 of the medium range ballistic missile site under construction in the San Cristobal area of Cuba.
AP Photo 3 of 17 An American U-2 spy plane flying high over Cuba had snapped aerial photographs of Soviet ballistic missile sites that could launch nuclear warheads with little warning at the United States, just 90 miles away.
AP Photo/ Richard Heyser private collection 4 of 17 Soviet Foreign Minister Andrej Gromyko, left, meets with President John F Kennedy in the White House Oct., 1962.
Gromyko lied to Kennedy, telling him the Soviet Union had no missiles in Cuba.
AP Photo 5 of 17 President John F Kennedy makes a national television speech October 22, 1962, from Washington, informing the American pubic about the existence of the missles.
He confronted the Soviet Union by announcing a naval blockade of Cuba until the missiles were removed.
AP Photo 6 of 17 Secretary of Defense Robert S McNamara, seen at a news conference at the Pentagon, Oct., 1962, announced he had ordered all Navy and Marine Corps enlistments and duty tours extended for up to one year to support the arms blockade of Cuba.
AP Photo 7 of 17 President John F Kennedy is surrounded by photographers, as he sits at his desk in the White House, in Washington, D.C., on October 23, 1962, shortly after signing a presidential proclamation concerning the Cuba crisis.
AP Photo 8 of 17 Cuban President Fidel Castro replies to President Kennedy's naval blockade via Cuban radio and television on October 23, 1962.
AP Photo 10 of 17 Soviet ships carrying nuclear equipment steamed toward Kennedy's ""quarantine"" zone around the island, but turned around before reaching the line.
This aerial view shows a Soviet ship carrying eight canvas-covered missiles and transporters, visible on decks.
AP Photo 11 of 17 The United States destroyer Barry pulls alongside the Russian freighter Anosov in the Atlantic Ocean, November 10, 1962, to inspect cargo as a United States patrol plane flies overhead.
AP Photo 12 of 17 ""We're eyeball-to-eyeball, and I think the other fellow just blinked,"" United States Secretary of State Dean Rusk famously said, a quote that largely came to be seen as defining the crisis. 13 of 17 In the five decades since the nuclear standoff between Washington and Moscow, much of the long-held conventional wisdom about the missile crisis has been knocked down, including the common belief that Kennedy's bold brinksmanship ruled the day.
The Soviet freighter, Bonronec, sails an Easterly course away from Havana on Nov., 1962.
AP Photo 14 of 17 Historians now say it was behind-the-scenes compromise rather than a high-stakes game of chicken that resolved the faceoff, that both Washington and Moscow wound up winners and that the crisis lasted far longer than 13 days.
AP Photo 15 of 17 Attorney General Robert F Kennedy met secretly with the Soviet ambassador on Oct. and conveyed an olive branch from his brother: Washington would publicly reject any invasion of Cuba, and Khrushchev would withdraw the missiles from the island.
AP Photo Advertisement 17 of 17 A soldier pauses to look at the outer casing of an old empty Soviet missile on exhibit as he works to paint it at the military complex Morro Cabana which is open to tourists in Havana, Cuba, Saturday, Oct., 2012.
AP Photo Next slideshow Beautiful day for a race: Images from the 126th Boston Marathon 16 photos Advertisement Advertisement Next slideshow Beautiful day for a race: Images from the 126th Boston Marathon 16 photos 1 of 17 President John F Kennedy, right, confers with his brother Attorney General Robert F Kennedy at the White House in Washington, D.C., on Oct., 1962 during the buildup of military tensions between the United States and the Soviet Union that became Cuban missile crisis later that month.
AP Photo The world stood at the brink of Armageddon for 13 days in October 1962 when President John F Kennedy drew a symbolic line in the Atlantic and warned of dire consequences if Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev dared to cross it.
AP Photo An American U-2 spy plane flying high over Cuba had snapped aerial photographs of Soviet ballistic missile sites that could launch nuclear warheads with little warning at the United States, just 90 miles away.
AP Photo/ Richard Heyser private collection Soviet Foreign Minister Andrej Gromyko, left, meets with President John F Kennedy in the White House Oct., 1962.
AP Photo President John F Kennedy makes a national television speech October 22, 1962, from Washington, informing the American pubic about the existence of the missles.
AP Photo Secretary of Defense Robert S McNamara, seen at a news conference at the Pentagon, Oct., 1962, announced he had ordered all Navy and Marine Corps enlistments and duty tours extended for up to one year to support the arms blockade of Cuba.
AP Photo President John F Kennedy is surrounded by photographers, as he sits at his desk in the White House, in Washington, D.C., on October 23, 1962, shortly after signing a presidential proclamation concerning the Cuba crisis.
AP Photo Cuban President Fidel Castro replies to President Kennedy's naval blockade via Cuban radio and television on October 23, 1962.
AP Photo Soviet ships carrying nuclear equipment steamed toward Kennedy's ""quarantine"" zone around the island, but turned around before reaching the line.
AP Photo The United States destroyer Barry pulls alongside the Russian freighter Anosov in the Atlantic Ocean, November 10, 1962, to inspect cargo as a United States patrol plane flies overhead.
AP Photo ""We're eyeball-to-eyeball, and I think the other fellow just blinked,"" United States Secretary of State Dean Rusk famously said, a quote that largely came to be seen as defining the crisis.
AP Photo Historians now say it was behind-the-scenes compromise rather than a high-stakes game of chicken that resolved the faceoff, that both Washington and Moscow wound up winners and that the crisis lasted far longer than 13 days.
AP Photo Attorney General Robert F Kennedy met secretly with the Soviet ambassador on Oct. and conveyed an olive branch from his brother: Washington would publicly reject any invasion of Cuba, and Khrushchev would withdraw the missiles from the island.
AP Photo A soldier pauses to look at the outer casing of an old empty Soviet missile on exhibit as he works to paint it at the military complex Morro Cabana which is open to tourists in Havana, Cuba, Saturday, Oct., 2012.
AP Photo 1 of 17 President John F Kennedy, right, confers with his brother Attorney General Robert F Kennedy at the White House in Washington, D.C., on Oct., 1962 during the buildup of military tensions between the United States and the Soviet Union that became Cuban missile crisis later that month.
AP Photo GET LOCAL BREAKING NEWS ALERTS The latest breaking updates, delivered straight to your email inbox.
