He has not been seen publicly since July 2006, when he underwent intestinal surgery, and is presumably no longer alive as of December 2009; the communists running Cuba have no incentive to risk challenge to their power by announcing that he passed away.<ref>'''', Brian Goodman, ''CBS News'', September 22, 2009.</ref> After a long absence from the public eye, he was purportedly shown in photographs in June of 2010, released by the Cuban State News Agency.
In that sentence he told us the entire story of Cuba, and Castro. -Ronald Reagan ” Contents 1 Early years of Castro 2 In Power 3 Death and purported sightings 4 References 5 Other Sources 6 See also 7 External links Early years of Castro There is much that is not known of Castro's rural youth.
In the mountains the guidance of the bandit Cresencio Perez, and and a few communist sleepers who had been placed in the Sierra for some time under the direction of stalinist agent Fabio Grobart was important.
The support of the United States State Department, mediated by William Weiland was significant from the time of the Bogotazo, through the Bay of Pigs.By 1958, military attacks against Batista's army were having some success, and the revolution was gaining national support.
The revolution finally succeeded in late 1958, and on January 1st 1959, Batista left the country.
Castro, who had been in regular contact with the KGB since 1956 and who used Soviet arms during his guerilla war, welcomed the presence of Soviet nuclear weapons in Cuba to deter an American attack.
Castro, all the while maintaining an ""anti-imperialist"" political posture, would intervene extensively in the internal affairs of African nations through violence and war.
On May 1, 2007, Castro did not attend Cuba's annual celebration of May Day, leading many to believe that he had died.
While Castro allegedly met with Brazilian President Luiz Inacio Lula da Silva on February 25, 2010, there is no independent confirmation that this was not in fact a body-double.
In September of 2011, it was reported that a Venezuelan reporter had interviewed Castro , but independent media have not confirmed that this was not actually a doppelganger standing in for the long-deceased Castro.
In February 2012 the mainstream media reported that Castro met with Brazilian President Dilma Rousseff.
