Kennedy is remembered for a composed and tactful approach to defusing the conflict, prompting Khrushchev to remove the Soviet nuclear missiles from Cuba.
Less well known are the United States’ Jupiter nuclear missiles that were in Turkey at the time of the crisis, much less their role in precipitating it.
Despite their brief existence and tactical inferiority to other weapon systems such as the Polaris nuclear submarines, the Jupiters presented both major diplomatic problems and solutions for Kennedy.
On the one hand, removal of these Jupiter missiles from Turkey was secretly part of the compromise that resolved the most tense and celebrated war of nerves between the United States and the Soviet Union.
Even though the Jupiters had little military value and were limited in their ability to deter Soviet attacks, in the end they carried significant diplomatic value as bargaining chips for Kennedy.
However, they were also sticky, problematic weapons that were obsolete even when deployed.
The Kennedy administration was never impressed by the Jupiter missiles, yet it followed through with Eisenhower’s commitment to Turkey in 1959 and installed these nuclear weapons.
Roger Hilsman states that Kennedy had ordered the removal of the missiles from Turkey several times prior to the crisis.
He stipulates that the State Department did not act as forcefully as the President had This paper was written for Dr.
Charles Hanson’s Advanced Placement United States History class in the spring of 2014.
As his administration pushed forward with the installation of the missiles, Kennedy continued to explore his options, but never ordered removal.
Kennedy avoided giving an order for the extraction of the missiles from Turkey for two key reasons.
Second, he did not wish to disturb the United States’ relations with Turkey and NATO, as both disapproved of withdrawing the missiles.
Problems with the Jupiters It would be naïve to say that Kennedy had never wished to remove the Jupiters from Turkey before October 1962; they were obsolete, had no retaliatory value, and they increased the risk of war by miscalculation.
Therefore, some historians and memoirists suggest that Kennedy ordered removal prior to the missile crisis because of the inherent problems with the weapons.
President Kennedy considered the cancellation of the Jupiter program even before any of the nuclear missiles were delivered to Turkey.
According to a National Security Council memorandum dated April 6th, 1961, Kennedy questioned the scheduled deployment of the Jupiter intermediate-range ballistic missiles at an NSC meeting on March 29th.
The NSC memorandum confirmed that Kennedy had his doubts regarding the Jupiters, and contemplated the possibility of reneging on Eisenhower’s commitment to Turkey.
It is undeniable that the Jupiter missiles were technically obsolete, with operational and security flaws.
In February 1961, a month after Kennedy’s inauguration, the Joint Committee on Atomic Energy called for an Executive Session to discuss the vulnerabilities and flaws of the Jupiter missiles.
THE MENLO ROUNDTABLE 35 By law, the nuclear warheads were under American possession, with a two-person rule in place to prevent unilateral action.
However, this arrangement could be bypassed as easily as hitting the American “on the head with a blackjack” to acquire the key for launching the missiles, presenting the possibility of unauthorized firing of the missiles6.
In addition to these custodial or security questions, the missiles were extremely vulnerable; a “$1.75 rifle” could render the missile inoperative.
At the time of the meeting, the Jupiters were not delivered to Turkey yet.
Based on the instability of the Turkish government, the JCAE identified Turkey as a poor location for the deployment of the Jupiters and suggested that a Polaris submarine should be deployed instead.
The JCAE raised important concerns that most likely played a part in Kennedy’s wishes to remove the Jupiter missiles from Turkey.
The Jupiter IRBM’s were also highly provocative, as they were positioned directly across from the USSR on the edge of the Black Sea.
The Jupiters took hours to fire and were unreliable, making them only useful for an offensive surprise strike; this fact, combined with their provocative nature, suggested that the missiles only invited attacks instead of deterring them.
The Soviets could be expected to either destroy the Jupiters themselves or take offensive action elsewhere in the world.
Khrushchev However, Kennedy recognized the importance of being firm with the Soviets so as to not look weak to the rest of the world.
On the heels of these two crises, Kennedy traveled to Vienna in the first week of June for a two-day summit with Khrushchev.
However, the summit meeting turned out to be a brutal experience for Kennedy.
The new President was no match for the sixty-seven year old Soviet leader, who chastised Kennedy for the Bay of Pigs invasion, pointing to the hypocrisy of American foreign policy.
The President knew that the Jupiter IRBM’s were flawed and contemplated the cancellation of their deployment to Turkey, but the Vienna Summit all but ruled out this possibility.
On June 22nd, 1961, eighteen days after the conclusion of the summit, George McGhee of the State Department delivered a memorandum to the President’s national security adviser, McGeorge Bundy, regarding the Jupiter missiles.
It is important to note that President Kennedy had simply asked McGhee to “study and report on the matter” of the Jupiters instead of ordering him to take action.
McGhee suggested that the President should continue with the deployment of the IRBM’s to Turkey, “primarily” because the termination of the Jupiters’ deployment would imply that Kennedy had acceded to Khrushchev’s threatening attitude at Vienna.
THE MENLO ROUNDTABLE 37 Moreover, through the use of the phrase, “projected deployment,” McGhee established that the missiles were not deployed to Turkey as of June 1961.15 This reveals that even though Eisenhower had put the Jupiter plan in place through an agreement with Turkey, Kennedy’s administration eventually installed the missiles after June 1961.
The President’s embarrassment at the hands of Khrushchev in June caused a change.
Had he terminated the Jupiter program after the Vienna Summit, cancellation would no longer be viewed as a reasonable step prompted by the Jupiters’ real problems.
Rather, the cessation of the program would have been seen as the result of Soviet pressure on the United States, displaying to the world Khrushchev’s dominance over Kennedy.
He kept the terms of the Turkey-Cuba missile trade a secret not only to the public, but also to Turkey and even to former President Eisenhower.
On October 28th, the same day that Khrushchev publicly agreed to dismantle and remove the missiles from Cuba, Kennedy called Eisenhower and intentionally refrained from telling his predecessor about the Jupiter-Cuba missile trade, which was part of the deal between Kennedy and Khrushchev.
However, even before the Vienna Summit, Turkey and NATO strongly opposed removal; thus, removal could endanger the alliance and damage America’s credibility.
In April 1961, after the President raised the question of the deployment of the Jupiters at a National Security Council meeting on March 29th, NATO’s General Lauris Norstad voiced strong support for the continuation of the Jupiter deployment to Turkey in a telegram to Secretary of Defense McNamara.
One of the notable arguments in the JCAE report that he attempted to disprove was the control problem, which stipulated that the Turks could easily gain control over the missiles and unilaterally fire them at the Soviet Union.
He stated that “substantial United States manning” of the missiles for the “useful life of the Jupiter squadron” would prevent the possibility of unilateral action by the Turks.
However, his argument failed to address the fact that there was not a reliable system in place to prevent Turkish takeover of the weapons.
The Turkish government also diametrically opposed any suggestion of cancellation by the Kennedy administration.
At the NATO meeting in May 1962 in Oslo, Norway, Secretary of State Dean Rusk and Assistant Secretary of Defense Paul Nitze met with the Italian and Turkish Foreign Ministers to discuss the merits of withdrawing the Jupiter THE MENLO ROUNDTABLE 39 missiles.
He stated that even though Turkey was unable to assess the military value of the Jupiters, the missiles were vital for psychological and political reasons.
According to Undersecretary of State George Ball, Kennedy did not want to harm the already vulnerable state of American relations with Turkey by removing the missiles.
McGhee’s memorandum referred to above also addressed Sarper’s and Norstad’s viewpoints.
Either is plausible, but a key fact to notice is that in the summer of 1961, Polaris submarines were expected to be in short supply for several years.
Therefore, there were no readily available nuclear alternatives to the Jupiters for Turkey, and this is probably why Norstad viewed the Jupiters as militarily important in 1961.27 The Kennedy administration also recognized the Polaris shortage problem.
At a Congressional hearing in 1963, McNamara explained that there would have been a “psychological loss to the West” if the Jupiter program had been simply cancelled but not replaced with another “modern system” such as the Polaris submarines in 1961.
McNamara mirrored Sarper’s and Norstad’s views, and as Kennedy’s Secretary of Defense, probably heavily influenced Kennedy’s own thinking during the summer.
However, such a promise was insufficient to Kennedy’s needs or Turkish expectations, as the Polaris submarines were not readily available.
Without a tangible and simultaneous alternative to the Jupiter IRBM’s, the President’s reputation would be diminished in the face of Soviet pressure and the Turks would lose the symbolic token of American commitment.
Kennedy could not risk weakening the NATO alliance and offending a key ally in the Middle East.
Turkey and NATO still objected to removal, the United States and the Soviet Union were still in a Cold War, and the problems with the Jupiters still existed.
The big change was the threat of nuclear escalation and decimation, a risk that was more important than Kennedy’s political standing or his allies’ opinions.
Overall, the Cold War was intriguing to me as well, because this oneupmanship and back and forth conflict between the two superpowers of the world occurred only a few decades ago.
Thus, when I first started on this research project in October, I decided to cover the deal between Kennedy and Khrushchev that ended the crisis in 1962.
In one interpretation, Kennedy ordered removal before October 1962 but his bureaucracy thwarted him; in another, Kennedy simply contemplated withdrawal, but never ordered his administration to do so.
THE MENLO ROUNDTABLE 41 Through the process of writing this research paper, I have discovered several notable truths about historical research.
As evidenced by the term itself, ‘re-search’ demands a tenacious mindset to repeatedly search for information on the question or topic at hand.
Another approach that was very useful was ‘raiding’ secondary sources to find insightful primary sources.
Some of my best sources were found when I traversed through the footnotes of my secondary sources, which also gave me specific keywords to look for.
As I found new information, I had to change my research question and my own viewpoint on the topic.
Selim Sarper, “An indispensable token…” in The Missile Crisis, by Elie Abel , 190.
Bibliography Primary Sources Ball, George W The Past Has Another Pattern.
