All Things Considered How Kennedy Stepped Back From The Brink Of War By editor • Oct 14, 2012 Related Program: All Things Considered TweetShareGoogle+Email View Slideshow 1 of 11 Kennedy with the Joint Chiefs of Staff on Jan., 1962.
This surveillance photograph was used in Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara's special briefing on Feb., 1963.
JFK Library and Museum, Boston View Slideshow 3 of 11 President John F Kennedy gives his TV announcement of the Cuban blockade during the missile crisis in a department store in California in October 1962.
Ralph Crane/Life Magazine / Time & Life Pictures/Getty Image View Slideshow 4 of 11 Kennedy meets with Soviet Chairman Nikita Khrushchev at the United States Embassy residence in Vienna, Austria, June 3, 1961.
AP View Slideshow 6 of 11 A meeting of the Executive Committee of the National Security Council, advisers to Kennedy, in the Cabinet Room on Oct., 1962.
JFK Library and Museum, Boston View Slideshow 7 of 11 Kennedy signs the Cuba Quarantine Proclamation Oct., 1962, in the Oval Office.
Robert Knudsen, White House / JFK Library and Museum, Boston View Slideshow 8 of 11 A P2V Neptune United States patrol plane flies over a Soviet freighter during the Cuban missile crisis in 1962.
MPI / Getty Images View Slideshow 9 of 11 A meeting of the Executive Committee of the National Security Council, advisers to President John F Kennedy, in the Cabinet Room on Oct., 1962.
JFK Library and Museum, Boston View Slideshow 10 of 11 A map prepared by the CIA shows areas and cities within range of nuclear missiles launched from Cuba in October 1962.
Rudolph Anderson Jr. was shot down and killed over Cuba during the October 1962 crisis.
On Oct., 1962, the national security adviser handed President John F Kennedy black-and-white photos of Cuba taken by an American spy plane.
The sites were close enough — just 90 miles from the United States — and the missiles launched from there could reach major American cities in mere minutes.
For a two-week period, Kennedy consulted with his closest advisers about what to do.
The president's group of advisers would later be known as the ""Ex Comm,"" short for the Executive Committee of the National Security Council.
Four days after learning about the missile sites and meeting daily with the Ex Comm, Kennedy had made up his mind.
This so-called quarantine would keep the Soviets from bringing in any more military supplies.
That same day, Kennedy came clean to the nation about what was happening.
Oct., 1962, marked the first time the president spoke publicly about the missile crisis.
No one can see precisely what course it will take or what costs or casualties will be incurred,"" Kennedy says in the televised speech.
Rudolf Anderson Jr. was shot down during a reconnaissance mission over Cuba.
And in secret, the United States agreed to remove all of its missiles from Turkey, which bordered the Soviet Union.
We can be grateful for Kennedy's clear, disciplined thinking that pulled us back from the precipice, she adds.
It then moves to the John F Kennedy Presidential Library and Museum in Boston from April 12 through Nov., 2013.
On October 16, 1962, the president's national security adviser handed him black-and-white photos of Cuba taken by American spy planes.
Here, President Kennedy asks CIA analyst Arthur Lundahl about the discovery.
The sites were close enough just 90 miles from the United States to reach major American cities in mere minutes.
For a two-week period fraught with tension, President Kennedy consulted with his closest advisers about what to do.
Today, we know what they said, because the president had a secret tape recorder rolling.
It showcases the audio as well as documents and artifacts from the Cuban missile crisis.
Because with each passing moment, those missile sites are getting closer and closer to being fully operational, and that's what the president wanted to avoid, to find a resolution before those missiles are ready to be launched.
Kennedy turned to his group of advisers known as the EXCOMM to help find that resolution.
It's the kind of conduct one might expect from the Soviet Union, not the United States.
And we'll hear in some of the tapes how his military advisers, particularly Curtis LeMay, was almost baiting him, accused almost just falling short of calling him a coward for not taking direct quick military action.
Four days after learning about the missile sites and meeting daily with the EXCOMM, Kennedy made a decision.
On the 22nd, he met with leaders of Congress, and they urged him to take military action.
Senator Richard Russell, majority leader from Georgia, tells Kennedy that responsibilities to our people demand stronger steps.
That same day, President Kennedy came clean to the nation about what was happening.
October 22nd, 1962 marked the first time the president spoke publicly about the missile crisis.
On October 27th, Air Force pilot Major Rudolf Anderson was shot down during a reconnaissance mission over Cuba.
Back at the National Archives exhibit, Stacey Bredhoff says we can be grateful for President Kennedy's clear, disciplined thinking that pulled us back from the precipice.
Half a century later, it's just a great time to look back with this perspective and with the wealth of historical resources that have become available in recent years and take another look at this moment in history, which was really one of the most dangerous moments in the world.
