In the November/December issue of Cigar Aficionado, Peter Kornbluh, an expert on history's closest brush with a Third World War, describes the events through recently declassified documents.
See the entire article in Cigar Aficionado, available soon on newsstands.
If needed, U Thant was to undertake his own UN initiative to end the crisis, calling on the Soviets to withdraw the missiles in Cuba, and the United States to withdraw the missiles in Turkey.
A UN proposal, the message inferred, would provide Kennedy with the needed political cover to agree publicly to such a deal.
But in addition to his negotiations with Khrushchev and secret channel to the UN, the most enduring secret of the missile crisis diplomacy was that Kennedy actually made an approach to Castro, reaching out to the fiery Cuban leader through a third-country intermediary in a concerted effort to bring the crisis to an end.
But after his dramatic October 22 presidential address to the nation, the President ordered the ExComm to look again at ""alternative courses of action"" to the use of force.
The idea was to coax Castro to eject the missiles along with the Soviets by opening the door to Cuba's return to the West.
Such an approach ""would be made to Castro through a Latin American representative in Cuba, probably the Brazilian ambassador,"" the State Department recommended.
Headed by the populist president João Goulart, Brazil had maintained strong ties to Cuba after the revolution, and a longstanding interest in being a mediator to improve U.S.--Cuban relations.
At the ExComm meeting on October 26, President Kennedy approved the clandestine back-channel communication.
He overruled the objections of CIA director John McCone who insisted on safeguarding the agency's right to covertly continue its efforts to overthrow Castro.
In a top secret/eyes only cable from the Secretary of State to United States Ambassador Lincoln Gordon in Rio, Rusk stated that it was time to ""discuss with Castro alone RPT alone"" a way out of the missile crisis.
Of course this now means giving up the offensive nuclear capability being established in Cuba and sending home Soviet military personnel, on which help can certainly be given if needed.
From such actions many changes in the relations between Cuba and the OAS countries, including the U.S., could flow.
To disguise the origins of this message, according to Hershberg's research, United States embassy officers translated it into Portuguese and typed it onto plain paper; Ambassador Gordon then passed it to Brazil's foreign minister at a midnight meeting on October 27.
By the time Brazil's emissary General Albino Silva arrived in Havana on October 29, however, the Soviets had already announced they were withdrawing the missiles; Castro had heard the news on the radio and was furious at Nikita Khrushchev for negotiating a deal to end the crisis without even consulting him.
The urgency and relevance of Kennedy's Brazilian back-channel message had been eclipsed by events.
For McNamara, the main lesson of the Cuba conflict was that there could be no such thing as successful crisis management in the nuclear age-therefore a global project was needed to eliminate weapons of mass destruction.
To be sure, 50 years ago the world came closer than ever before to atomic annihilation.
But more commitment than luck was involved in the extensive efforts to search for, and find, a diplomatic solution in which both sides got something their leaders needed to save face and evade the horror of nuclear war.
As the historical record has expanded, the image of the resolute president has given way to the resolution president, committed to extricating the U.S., the USSR, and Cuba from the danger of war in the dark shadow of the bomb.
Of all the international crises in modern times, the Cuban missile crisis deserves a full understanding, by policy makers and citizens alike.
But only when all archives have been opened, and every last page of documentation declassified, in the United States and in Moscow and Havana, will the historical record be complete and that appreciation possible.
Maintaining secrecy around the missile crisis is, quite simply, a threat to global security.
For the complete story, see the December Cigar Aficionado, on newsstands November 6.
The Cuban Cigar Powerhouse The Magazine Subscribe The Magazine Subscribe More in See all Special Report: 2021 Year in Review An analysis of all of the cigars rated by Cigar Insider this year.
Dec 20, 2021 Cuban Double-Nine Dominoes Nov 16, 2021 Freedom of Speech July in Cuba is predictably hot, but this summer something quite unusual arrived with the rising … Sep 21, 2021 Southern Draw Releasing Jacob’s Ladder The Ascension Family-owned cigar brand Southern Draw Cigars is releasing a new size to their Jacob’s Ladder line.
Sep 20, 2021 My Father Garcia & Garcia Robusto Shipping Today A new, limited-edition from My Father Cigars is on its way to tobacconists across the country.
