The analysis includes correspondence from October 16 th to October 28 th , 1962, in a total of fifteen letters.
The paper engages with Kennedy's perceptions of reality and the use of language as socially constructed pattern.
First, the article identifies dominant narra tives in American political discourse, then examines how these dominant discourses were manifested in diplomatic correspondence, and finally, attempts to examine how American domestic narratives influenced interpretation and understanding of the events during the crisis.
The paper focuses on semantic aspects of the conversation between the two leaders, power dynamics, use of language and the narrative performed in order to transmit the message.
Using Critical Discourse Analyses, the author aims to identify power relations instituted in the correspondence at the discursive level.
In August 1962, American U-2 aircraft spotted air defence missiles in Cuba, causing escalation of the situation between United States and the Soviet Union.
Cuban missile crisis was the period characterised by intense communications and miscommunications between the Kremlin and the White House.
From October 16 to October 28 of 1962 , Kennedy and Khrushchev exchanged approximately 15 letters; the content of those letters varies from attempts of de-escalation of the situation to assertive demands and confrontations.
However, positivist approaches have been dominating most of the scholarly work on the Cuban missile crisis.
The dominance of empiricism has limite d the space for epistemological debates about the construction of knowledge about the Cuban missile crisis itself.
Most of the works on the topic focus on the general pattern of correspondence, facts and historical details.
Dominant methodological approaches in the 43 Modebadze / Journal of Young Researchers/ №8, September, 2019 study of international relations mostly fail to focus on how social constructio n of knowledge and understanding of ""reality"" shaped and influenced JFK Kennedy's or Nikita Khrushchev's perceptions and actions during the Cuban missile crisis.
Letters also include personal correspondence, congratulations about various occasions and even anecdotes shared between the two leaders.
Using a postcolonial approach, they claim that efforts to produce a critical oral history enabled to see events of October 1962 from the Cuban perspective, long excluded from interpretative debates involving only superpowers.
More recently Karlsson and Acosta also tried to emphasize on the crisis from a Cuban perspective.
By adding local and human dimensions they focus on historical, archaeological and anthropological reflections.
Jervis offers analytical points about the political psychology of leaders and suggests that Kennedy’s and Khrushchev’s decisions are fundamentally speculative.
Considering such different interpretations of first-hand sources by academics and practitioners, presented paper takes historiographical standpoint with caution and instead takes primary sources – fifteen letters exchanged during the crisis – as the main data for analyses.
In the following paper, the author utilises the Critical Discourse Analysis of diplomatic correspondence between Kennedy and Khrushchev to underline the importance of American discourse, values and ideologies manifested in the language – influencing the interpretation of the letters.
The following paper, through a post-structural approach, seeks to analyse how American value-centric discourse on the Cuban missile crisis influenced diplomatic negotiations between Kennedy's and Khrushchev.
The paper engages with Kennedy's perceptions of reality and the use of language as a socially constructed pattern.
In order to do so, first, the author identifies the dominant narratives in American political discourse, then examines how these 44 Modebadze / Journal of Young Researchers/ №8, September, 2019 they were manifested in diplomatic correspondence.
The final part of the paper attempts to examine how did the American narratives prevalent during Cuban missile crisis influence interpretation and understanding of the events during the crisis.
The popularity of alternative approaches and post-modern theorizing continue to influence contemporary international relations theory.
Current epistemological positions involving the notion of communicative acts hence open an unexplored dimension of the Cuban missile crisis.
Behind simple telegraph texts, one can focus on meanings beyond the sentences and broader discourses manifested in them.
In the following paper, the author uses theory as a critique through postmodern paradigms.
The theory is used in a dialectical manner, to make sense of the construction of reality and knowledge, and how an understanding of this ""reality"" by engaged actors influenced the Cuban missile crisis.
Kennedy and Khrushchev, their power dynamics, use of language and narrative performed in order to transmit the message to each other.
The main objective of the paper is to examine how American discourse, values and ideologies manifested in language use in the diplomatic correspondence influenced negotiations bet ween Kennedy and Khrushchev.
In the backdrop of the emergence of alternative approaches t o IR methodology, discourse analysis is becoming increasingly popular, especially between young scholars opting for more critical post -modern approaches against mainstream methodologies.
In total, fifteen letters were exchanged during thirteen days timeframe.
This multidiscip linary approach focuses not only on semantic aspects but on production and reproduction of knowledge and power via utterances.
The following paper is an attempt to incorporate this threefold analysis.
CDA is particularly useful when dealing with primary sources such as letters.
Codes were defined during the analysis, but data analysis was conducted deductively as the themes under which codes were categorized were derived from theory and other research findings.
The presented paper includes, although is not limited to examining main themes in conversations and speeches, but also puts emphasis on actor's perspectives and language use.
Re-constructing U.S narratives ""The United States, empowered by the binding energy of the universe, was to become the universal container"" Before proceeding to the analysis, the term ""discourse"" has to be briefly defined.
The term discourse has been widely used expanding disciplinary boundaries of academic to non-academic studies.
However, works of Michel Foucault are one of the most important in the field.
He argues that decision-makers attempt to minimize differences between a message sender and an addressee, accepting credulity of meta -narratives for both sides.
Rethinking epistemological and ontological frameworks of the events of October 1962 implies a reconstruction of the dominant U.S narrative.
American Narratives, Po stmodernism, and the Atomic Age"" gives a deep insight into American's perception of the world order in a nuclear age.
Nadel also emphasizes the narrative of capitalism vs socialism and American's thrive on capit alist competition.
Three main narratives are discussed below identified from the letters and the literature review.
Hegelian concepts of ""the other"" and ""othering"" have become popular in critical discourses that construct the self in opposition to the other.
One of the most canonical works on Othering is Edward Said's ""Orientalism"" first published in 1978, where he exposes how Eurocentric tradition of dualisms created the notion of Oriental – the discourse of exclusiveness and domination vis-a-vis less civilized East.
Even though the relations between the United States and the Soviet Union exposed different power dynamics, position of superiority was still in a play.
If the United States was the ""community per excellence"", the Soviet Union was the Other and the enemy because it did not share capitalist western ideology and values.
Moreover, it was a powerful state with nuclear weapons that could challenge the U.S dominance in the world politics.
Answering this question goes beyond the scope of this paper, but one can argue that the United States used these differences to justify and legitimize their hostility towards the Soviet Union.
This delineation between Us and You can be seen as one the indicator of Othering.
Another pattern, that is also a characteristic of the ‘othering’ is the process of attributing unwanted features to the Other.
Widespread anti-communist discourse in American society, his strong stance against Castro during presidential campaign and failure in Bay of Pigs invasion influenced Kennedy's high sensitivity towards the Cuban missile crisis.
Projecting unwanted features such as unpredictable, moody and impulsive behaviour to the ""other"" can be seen a s a common strategy in the enemy construction, and historians are indeed mirrors of meta -narratives and discourses that influence the interpretation of reality.
Therefore, Othering is a complex process that involves historical heritage, culture, ideology and political discourse.
Soviets could never be equal to Americans 49 Modebadze / Journal of Young Researchers/ №8, September, 2019 because they could not adopt the American way of life , this discourse of power and knowledge from the position of superiority has a lot in common with Orientalism.
Possession of the atomic weaponry established a new f orm of power relationships.
Nuclear power became an integral part of the American narrative that it was a nation justified to be the watchdog of global security.
This position also implied the depiction of the United States as God's chosen nation by possessing nuclea r weapons.
Under this discursive field of ""containment"" the United States acquired the title of the ultimate guarantor of the global peace, thus, qualifying itself to talk on behalf of the other nations.
This extra ct from Kennedy's letter is a manifestation of the American narrative declaring itself as the protector of its allies, and ultimately of all the nations adhering to capitalist ideology and the whole world.
The United States has openly taken the path of grossly violating the United Nations Charter, path of violating international norms of freedom of navigation on the high seas, the path of aggressive actions both against Cuba and against the Soviet Union.
None of the leaders interpret the Cuban missile crisis as a confrontation between solely two superpowers but seeks to legitimise their actions by talking on behalf of the ""other states"" or nation However, if one thoroughly examines the very articulation of the words, they can observe that Khrushchev does not ""globalize"" the threat on the whole hemisphere but mostly refers to the Soviet Union and Cuba or the ""other states"", by which he most likely means the socialist block.
Although in the following paper the author complies with Foucaultian notion of ideology, as in Kennedy's and Khrushchev's letters it refers to the distinction between capitalist and socialist market, and more broadly the way of life, the analysis of the correspondence will be conducted using the actors’ definition of ideology.
In order to avoid an ontological error in defining the ideology, the author will briefly examine it in Foucaultian sense and then move to the ""traditional"" understanding of “communism vs capitalism” ideological positions.
The main focus of the notions “discourse” and “ideology” is on power relations.
He argued that power is dispersed in society, possessing both productive and repressive characteristics.
Therefore, in Foucaultian sense, one can assume that a political leader's system of thought is as much affected by ideology as the one of an ordinary citizen.
Therefore, Kennedy and Khrushchev were both influenced by the narratives accepted and widespread in their societies.
The correspondence between Kennedy and Khrushchev is abundant with direct references to their ideological standpoints.
The letter from General Secretary Khrushchev to President Kennedy sent on October 26, 1962, articulates the essence of the communist vs capitalist debate.
Both leaders depict ideological differences as the main justification of their objectives as they both interpret Cuban missile crisis from their ideological standpoints.
The relationship between ideology has never been simple during the Cold war.
Both sides ’ rhetorical commitment to the ideology was used to legitimize their objectives seeking world domination.
This rivalry depicts the power relations between the United States with the capitalist dominant ideology and the Soviet Union, with marginalized communist ideology still looked down.
Khrushchev sees t he balance between the two ideologies as a guarantee of peace, while the American discursive field on communism is inevitably negative.
Misinterpretation Different discourses lead to different interpretations.
The American discourse on the place of the United States in world politics largely determined what could have been considered a threat to its security.
Containment policy shaped and influenced the US's stance towards the Soviet expansion, thus, any attempt of the Soviet Union to strengthen its position on the international arena vis-á-vis its dealing with other states, any fluctuation of the ""overall balance"" was interpreted as a threat to the US’s position and its national security.
First, reason probably was differences in backgrounds including social, cultural and ideological.
Both leaders interpreted the crisis through their own ""truths"", delegitimizing the opinion of the other.
This discourse on the USSR significantly shaped Kennedy's actions during the Cuban missile crisis.
All the means located there, and I assure you of this, have a defensive character, are on Cuba solely for the purposes of defence and we have sent them to Cuba at the request of the Cuban Government.
The ""truth"" that actors tell is constrained by discursive frameworks imposed upon them.
These frameworks circulating at the time, and all knowledge, as Foucault would argue, is determined by institutional, political and social pressures.
The failure in Bay of Pigs invasion, upcoming elections, opinions coming from the Executive Committee of the National Security Council both shaped and influenced his interpretation and understanding of the Cuban missile crisis.
The American discourse portrayed communism in self-evident negative terms; accepting capitalism as a superior ideology happened in the backdrop of excluding the communist discursive positions.
Conclusion The presented paper on a discursive level examined the correspondence between John F Kennedy and Nikita Khrushchev as an articulation of dominant American narratives.
The paper dealt with the analysis of how values, culture, ideology comprisin g the American narratives manifested in the language use influenced the interpreta tion and understanding of the Cuban missile crisis.
Following Foucault's work on discourse, it aimed to show the importance of political framing, claiming that discourse s shape the interpretation of the texts.
Different discourses employed by the United States and the USSR voicing cultural narratives and ideologies were examined under broader framing, as those they shape the understanding of reality and identity.
The paper drew on the importance of language, selective or unconscious use of vocabulary as a manifestatio n of the discourse.
The second narrative dealt with the discursive field of ""containment"" under which the United States acquired the title of an ultimate guarantor of global peace.
This paper argues that the perception of the United States as a ""community per excellence"" influenced American political elites' understanding of the Soviet actions on Cuba.
The third narrative examines the discursive field of the ideological rivalry of between capitalism and socialism under the broader framing, which includes but is not limited to the political and economic theory of social organization.
The paper focuses on the Foucaultian tradition of understanding an ideology emphasizing power relations within which dominant narratives are produced and reproduced.
F Kennedy reveals how can ideologies and cultural narratives be manifested in the language use, shaping and influencing communication.
Therefore, the systems of thoughts manifested in the discourse played an important role in the diplomatic correspondence during the Cuban missile crisis.
The main focus of this paper was the American narratives and Kennedy's position.
However, the USSR's narratives were also briefly examined to give deeper insight into the perceptions of both sides.
This paper implemented postmodern critique to examine how the dominant American narratives were articulated and manifested in the language of the diplomatic correspondence and how did the American discourse on the Cuban missile crisis and ideological meta -narratives shape diplomatic negotiations between Kennedy and Khrushchev.
Instead of emphasizing historical facts and empirical accounts gained through the positivist epistemology, a reflectivist approach provided deeper analysis.
Arguing that any form of diplomatic negotiation or outcome can be subjectively understoo d and interpreted through different lenses can open up new opportunities for further discussions about construction of the knowledge about the Cuban missile crisis.
Translated by J B Baillie, 2d ed., rev. and cor. throughout. ed., G Allen & Unwin.
