He is also a political commentator with Russia's “Kommersant” Publishing House.
He is the author of three poetry collections, a winner of the Maximilian Voloshin International Literary Award and a member of Union of Russian Writers.Sergey Strokan is a journalist, essayist and a poet.
He is the author of three poetry collections, a winner of the Maximilian Voloshin International Literary Award and a member of Union of Russian Writers.A Cuban soldier paints a SAM-2 missile deployed during the missile crisis of 1962 at Morro Cabana complex, on October 11, 2012 in Havana.
Moscow and Washington are quietly marking the 50th anniversary of the event – a rare moment of truth in US-Russian relations, which have known their ups and downs in recent decades, and are currently facing new and critical tests.As the drums of war today get louder and louder, and Republican Presidential hopeful Mitt Romney labels Russia as America’s number-one foe, it is instructive to recall the stormy events of October 1962, which have been mostly left to the archives and 20th-century history textbooks.
Well, at some point Khrushchev was obsessed competing with the United States superpower – taking them on in all spheres, from weaponry and space exploration to muddy fields of agriculture.
It is not America, but the Soviet Union which had to reinstate itself as the world leader, Khrushchev believed.
This is how Soviet nukes were moved to the other part of the world, closer to United States shores, forcing President Kennedy to respond.
They are the heritage of the Cold War, and have no place in today’s world.
Some will say that, 50 years after Cuban crisis, it is sheer idealism and wishful thinking to believe that leaders of today would ever follow this principle, considering the wars in Afghanistan, Iraq, Libya, Syria and warmongering rhetoric over Iran.
It is reported that when the United States blockade of Cuba went into effect and Soviet submarines approached, Kennedy ordered United States ships to fire small depth charges at the ships to force them to surface.
Historians say that what Kennedy didn’t know was that the subs were carrying nuclear missiles, and were close to using them.The fourth lesson for US-Russian relations is that labeling each other the number-one foe, as Mr Romney does today, is a shabby and odd practice, to say the least – this is an outdated, obsolete mentality.
However, disasters can easily be avoided when national egos and paranoia give way to new pragmatism, usually discovered with enormous difficulty after crises and mistakes.
