Cuba's struggle with the Russians after the Missile Crisis /* * 3rd-party JavaScript libraries jqueryeasing and Dynamic Drive Terms of Use require the notices below within the script tag that refers to the .js file.
Cuba's struggle with the Russians after the Missile Crisis ผู้แต่ง: James G Blight; Philip Brenner สำนักพิมพ์: Lanham, Md.
Sad and Luminous Days will provide an important counterpoint to the stream of simplistic books about the missile crisis that are sure to appear.
Achieve some major breakthroughs that aid in our understanding of contemporary Cuba.
I have known for some time that we in the Kennedy administration misunderstood the Cubans and Russians.
But in Sad and Luminous Days, we learn the many ways the Cubans and Russians misunderstood each other, and how those misunderstandings made the crisis as dangerous as it was.
Its principal lesson-the necessity of achieving realistic empathy with one's adversary-is especially salient at a moment when the remaining superpower, the United States, has declared a 'war on terrorism' involving potential confrontations between the United States and many other smaller countries.
An Inside Account of the Man and His Era, by His Son, Sergei Khrushchev This splendid book shows starkly the deep differences between Cuba and the Soviet Union during the half-dozen years that followed the 1962 missile crisis.
Those differences arose from the way the Soviets negotiated with the United States in 1962, without prior consultation with the Cubans.
This wonderful book amply demonstrates, however, that this view of empathy is false and derives from a fundamental misunderstanding of what empathy actually entails.
The events of September 11, 2001 demonstrate how profoundly tragic may be the result of our failure to reach a deep and comprehensive understanding of how the world looks through the eyes of our adversaries.
After Sad and Luminous Days, no one will be able to write the same way about Castro's relationship with the Kremlin. -Arthur Schlesinger Jr.
Every so often a work of history comes along that turns conventional wisdom on its head and brings to light previously mysterious, indeed hidden nuggets of truth, opening a new dimension to what we long held as the only conceivable plot line.
