The American government were hopeful that this invasion would lead to an uprising against Castro.
It was impossible to hide the fact that the United States government was involved and was forced to pay $53 million in food and medical supplied to have the captured invaders returned to the United States.
From Castro’s view point this invasion was evidence that the USA was working actively to overthrow his government.
Background For many people the twelve days of the Cuban missile crisis were the most frightening of their lives.
Kennedy had been elected as United States president by promising to get tough with the communists.
In 1959, Fidel Castro had taken power in Cuba, he soon took actions to nationalise American companies.
In response to this the U.S stopped buying Cuban sugar and refused to supply Cuba with oil.
The U.S government became increasingly concerned about the new Cuban government, this led to a fear that the U.S might intervene against the Cuban government.
This fear materialised when in 1961, Cuban exiles trained by the U.S staged an invasion of Cuban territory at the Bay of Pigs, although the invasion was quickly repulsed.
Castro soon became convinced that the U.S was serious about invading Cuba.
Shortly after the failed Bay of Pigs invasion, Castro declared Cuba as a socialist republic, entering into close ties with the Soviet Union.
Few in Washington, DC seriously believed that the Soviet ballistic missiles in Cuba could seriously change the strategic balance of power.
The United States had around 10 times as many nuclear weapons as the Soviets.
In 1961, the United States started deploying 15 Jupiter intermediate-range ballistic missiles in Turkey.
These directly threatened cities in the western parts of the Soviet Union.
Soviet premier Khrushchev publicly expressed his anger at this missile deployment.
Therefore the deployment of Soviet missiles in Cuba; the first time they moved missiles out of the USSR, can be seen as Khrushchev’s direct response to the United States missiles in Turkey.
Having medium range ballistic missiles on Cuban land meant that the Soviet Union had the capacity to threaten Washington DC with a flight time of less than twenty minutes.
Deployment of Missiles Khrushchev planned the deployment in May 1962 and by late July over sixty Soviet ships were en route to Cuba, some already carrying military material.
Director of the CIA John McCone, was told by French intelligence that the Soviets were planning to place missiles in Cuba, therefore he warned President Kennedy.
Kennedy’s administration team had received repeated claims from Soviet diplomats that there were no missiles in Cuba and that no plans had been made to deploy any and that they were not interested in starting an international crisis.
It was a U-2 flight in late august 1962 that photographed surface to air missile sites being constructed.
On September 4 1962 Kennedy told congress that there were no offensive missiles in Cuba.
Found on Wikipedia September 8 1962 saw the first consignment of SS-4 MRBMs unloaded in Havana, with a second shipload arriving on September 16.
The Cuban population noticed what was happening and hundreds of reports reached Miami, all of which were considered false by United States intelligence.
The missiles were not discovered by the United States until a U-2 flight photographed images showing the construction of an SS-4 site near San Cristobal.
Initially the United States government kept the information secret, only telling a small number of key officials.
President Kennedy announced the discovery of the installations in a televised address on October 22.
He proclaimed that any nuclear attack from Cuba would be regarded as an attack by the Soviet Union, and America would respond accordingly.
Kennedy placed a naval quarantine on Cuba to prevent further Soviet shipments arriving there.
International law dictated that the word quarantine was used rather than blockade.
Establishing a blockade would have been classed as an act of war and war had not been declared between the United States and Cuba.
Response by US After the photographic evidence showing Soviet missiles deployed in Cuba had been confirmed, President Kennedy organised a secret meeting of senior advisors at the White House.
The group met frequently from 16 October to decide how to respond to the threat.
An immediate bombing strike was disregarded straight away as was an appeal to the United Nationsthis was felt to be to time consuming.
This narrowed the choice to a naval blockade and ultimatum of a full scale invasion.
Finally the blockade was chosen although some members of the group were requesting tougher action.
The Americans had concerns that the soviet’s reaction to the blockade may turn into escalating retaliation.
Kennedy spoke to the American public and to the Soviet government in a televised address on October 22.
He confirmed the presence of missiles in Cuba and announced the decision for a naval blockade as a quarantine zone of five hundred nautical miles around the Cuban coast.
He also warned that the military were prepared for any eventualities, and accused the Soviet union of secrecy and deception.
The United States received solid support from its European allies although the British Prime Minister Harold Macmillan, could not understand why a diplomatic solution could not be considered.
Khrushchev sent letters to Kennedy on October 23 and 24. in these he claimed the deterrent nature of the missiles in Cuba and the Soviet Union had peaceful intentions.
The Soviets had two different deals delivered to the American government.
On October 26, they offered to withdraw the missiles if the United States could guarantee they would not invade Cuba or support any invasion.
Following this, the next day October 27, the Soviets broadcast on public radio for the withdrawal of the United States missiles in Turkey in addition in addition to the demands of the day before.
The crisis peaked on the 27 October when a U-2 aircraft was shot down over Cuba.
At the same time Soviet merchant ships were nearing the quarantine zone.
Kennedy responded by publicly agreeing to the first Soviet deal and sending his brother Robert F Kennedy to the Soviet embassy to privately agree to the removal of the missiles in turkey.
The Soviet ships turned back and on October 28, Khrushchev announced that he had ordered the removal of Soviet missiles from Cuba.
Satisfied that these missiles had been removed, President Kennedy ended the quarantine on 20 November 1962.
After the Crisis The compromise reached satisfied no one, it was a particular embarrassment for Khrushchev and the Soviet Union who had not made public the withdrawal of the missiles in Turkey.
The Soviets were portrayed as retreating from circumstances they had started, although they could have made this look just the opposite and positioned themselves as the USSR saving the world from nuclear war by not insisting on restoring the nuclear balance.
Cuban people felt they had been betrayed by the Soviets in whom they had trusted, with all the decisions being made by Kennedy and Khrushchev.
The purpose was to create a way that the leaders of the two major Cold War countries could communicate directly to solve any future crisis.
