By Sheldon M Stern | October 6, 2002 Late in 1961, President John F Kennedy approved a covert plan to undermine or eliminate President Fidel Castro of Cuba.
Soviet Premier Nikita Khruschchev, angered by United States Jupiter missiles in Turkey, decided to protect Castro and alter the balance of power by shipping offensive nuclear missiles to Cuba.
The secret plan required deceiving American officials in Moscow and Washington.TUESDAY MORNING, OCTOBER 16, 1962National security adviser McGeorge Bundy had received the stunning news by telephone the previous evening while giving a dinner party U-2 spy-plane photographs had revealed irrefutable evidence of offensive missile sites under construction in Cuba.
The president reeled off the names of key members of the National Security Council and told Bundy to organize a meeting for later that morning.
He then summoned his brother, Attorney General Robert F Kennedy, to the White House.
Those Russians,"" RFK exclaimed upon seeing the U-2 pictures.As the president's advisers gathered in the Cabinet Room just before noon, they found JFK talking with his daughter, Caroline, only a month short of her fifth birthday.
Tensions were high, but JFK and his advisers knew that nothing was to be gained from emotion and panic and that any effort to humiliate the Soviets would only make the situation worse.
This was one case where a favorite Kennedy family maxim, ""Don't get mad, get even,"" did not apply.Kennedy pored over the aerial photos with a large magnifying glass supplied by Arthur Lundahl, director of the National Photographic Interpretation Center.
As his advisers took their seats, the president hit the switch under the conference table, activating a concealed tape recorder.Deputy CIA Director Marshall Carter began by explaining what thephotographs of a medium-range ballistic missile site in San Cristobal revealed to his trained eye.
For several minutes, Carter and Lundahl continued to focus on the technical specifics revealed by the photographs.
No, sir,"" Graybeal interjected before the president had finished his question.FRIDAY MORNING, OCTOBER 19""It's good to have men like Curt LeMay and Arleigh Burke commanding troops once you decide to go in,"" the president had once told journalist Hugh Sidey.
In short, he respected the military as soldiers but not as policy makers.
Kennedy pointedly ignored Taylor's request and began to speak in an obvious effort to control the agenda of the meeting and demonstrate that the commander-in-chief was in charge.
But he was initially hesitant and uncomfortable, repeatedly tripping over his words:""Let me just say a little a . . . first about a . . . what the problem is, a . . . from . . . at least from a . . . my point of view,"" he began.
He then became progressively more confident and lucid, telling the chiefs that if the United States did nothing in response to this ""rather dangerous but rather useful play of theirs,"" the Soviets would end up with a significant military base from which to pressure the United States and damage American prestige in the world.
Kennedy could not push aside his Cold War blinders, any more than the Joint Chiefs or the ExComm, to even consider the possibility that the weapons in Cuba were at least in part a genuine Soviet commitment todefend their Cuban allies against American subversion and attack.But, he warned, if the United States attacked the missiles or invaded Cuba, it would give the Soviets ""a clear line to take Berlin,"" and the United States would then be regarded by the North Atlantic Treaty Organization allies as ""the Americans who lost Berlin, we didn't have the guts to endure a situation in Cuba.
His use of the personal pronoun sent a clear message he would listen to the chiefs' advice, but the decision was his, and he said he had decided to respond with a limited naval blockade.General LeMay jumped aggressively into the discussion, giving no indication that he had understood the grim contingencies raised by the president.
This uh . . . uh . . . blockade and . . . and political action I see leading into war.
LeMay had gone well beyond merely giving advice or even disagreeing with the commander-in-chief.
He had taken their generation's ultimate metaphor for cowardice, the 1938 appeasement of Hitler at Munich, and flung it in the president's face.
Everyone at the table knew that JFK's father, Joseph P Kennedy, had been a supporter of appeasement as ambassador to England between 1938 and 1940.
President Kennedy, in a remarkable display of sang-froid, refused to take the bait; he said nothing.Moments later, LeMay renewed his attack.
In other words, you're in a pretty bad fix at the present time,"" LeMay said, almost taunting the president.Kennedy had not heard or perhaps thought he had heard wrong.
MONDAY NOON, OCTOBER 22A comprehensive effort was launched to inform foreign leaders and United States embassies and consulates around the world of the imminent blockade.
As JFK prepared to speak to the nation on television that evening, the Cubans and the Soviets received a clear signal that something was up when the evacuation of United States military family dependents began at the Guantanamo naval base in Cuba.
By 4m., some 2,500 family members, who had been given 15 minutes to pack one bag each, were on their way to Norfolk, Virginia.Paul Nitze, assistant secretary of defense for international security affairs, began the noon ExComm meeting with a briefing on the Berlin situation before being interrupted by the president.
JFK was determined to prevent the outbreak of nuclear war if the Soviets reacted to the blockade or possible air assaults in Cuba by attacking American missiles in Turkey.The president had first raised this issue on October 20, recommending that the Joint Chiefs of Staff issue new orders to American personnel on the Jupiter bases not to fire their missiles at the USSR, even if attacked, without specific presidential authorization.
Nitze reported that ""McNamara and I wrote out a suggested instruction from him to the chiefs, and we took it up with the chiefs.
And therefore they don't realize there is a chance there will be a spot reprisal, and what we gotta do is make sure these fellows do know, so that they don't fire 'em off and think the United States is under attack.
I've got your point, we'll do it again,"" Nitze answered, finally retreating.
Some strained laughter broke out at the resolution of this ""difference of opinion,"" and Bundy relieved the tension by telling Nitze, in a tongue-in-cheek tone, ""Send me the documents, and I will show them to a doubting master,"" likely glancing toward the president.
MONDAY EVENING, OCTOBER 22At 5 o'clock, the president and several key advisers met with nearly 20 leaders of Congress from both parties summoned to Washington from all across the country and flown to the capital in military aircraft.
Some of the leaders resented being informed of Kennedy's decision barely two hours before his speech to the nation.
As a member of Congress, JFK had never been an insider, and many of his colleagues had dismissed him as an indifferent legislator at best, a playboy at worst.
Now, whether they liked it or not, he was the president; but that did not mean they would passively accept his decisions.The meeting began with detailed briefings by CIA Director John McCone and Lundahl.
The president undoubtedly watched the faces of his congressional allies and adversaries, wondering what they were thinking.
JFK concluded the briefings with a review of the options discussed over the past seven days of secret meetings specifically appealing to the Republicans in the room by revealing that he had sent McCone to brief former president Dwight D Eisenhower.
We called for a meeting of the Rio Pact countries and hope to get a two-thirds vote for them to give the blockade legality.
If the situation deteriorated further, the blockade could be tightened.
You have warned these people time and again, in the most eloquent speeches I have read since Woodrow Wilson, as to what would happen if there was an offensive capability created in Cuba.
The Soviets, he declared, had challenged ""the announced foreign policy of the United States.
And I think that you . . . we should assemble as speedily as possible an adequate force and . . . and . . . and clean out that situation.
The time's gonna come, Mr President, when we're gonna have to take this gamble, in Berlin, in Korea and Washington, D.C., and Winder, Georgia, for the . . . for the . . . for the nuclear war.
I don't know whether Khrushchev will launch a nuclear war over Cuba or not.
But Senator,"" JFK explained, ""we can't invade Cuba,"" because it would take several days to assemble and deploy the men required for an invasion.
So that's what we're doing now,"" Kennedy replied impatiently.Russell would not relent.
When JFK bluntly replied, ""No,"" Russell declared brusquely that Berlin would remain a hostage in any case.
Oh, my God, I know that,"" Russell exclaimed, not even letting the president finish.
Suddenly, another influential Southern Democrat, Senator J William Fulbright, weighed in against the president's chosen course of action.
Russell remained silent, but he must have been gratified.The president again reminded Fulbright, chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee and a former Rhodes Scholar, that an invasion would require a direct attack on 8,000 Russians.
And I think that it would be foolish,"" JFK said, ""to expect that the Russians would not regard that as a far more direct thrust.
And I think that the inevitable result will be immediately the seizure of Berlin.
I'll say this to Senator Fulbright,"" Kennedy continued, ""we don't know where we're gonna end up on this matter.
We just tried to make good judgments on a matter on which everyone's uncertain.
I guess that's it,"" Halleck concluded.John F Kennedy switched off the tape recorder and headed for the Oval Office.
He certainly noticed that all of the congressional flak had come from Democrats.TUESDAY EVENING, OCTOBER 23At 7:06, President Kennedy signed the quarantine proclamation in the Oval Office and returned to the Cabinet Room.
JFK, RFK, Taylor, and Bundy remained behind after the meeting and talked informally.
JFK's secretary, Evelyn Lincoln, interrupted with a message that Jacqueline Kennedy was on the telephone, and the president left to take the call.
When JFK returned, the Kennedy brothers were alone in the Cabinet Room.
Robert Kennedy, eager to bolster his brother's self-assurance, contended that ""you got all the South American countries and Central American countries to vote unanimously when they kicked us in the ass for two years, they vote unanimously for this, and then you get the reaction from the rest of the allies and everybody else, say that you had to do it.
SATURDAY, OCTOBER 27In Cuba, Castro received reliable new intelligence that American airstrikes and an invasion could be only a few days away.
In Moscow, Khrushchev approved a plan to defend Soviet installations in Cuba against an American assault.President Kennedy became increasingly irritable at the morning ExComm meeting in response to nearly unanimous opposition to Khrushchev's latest letter, which just arrived in Washington, proposing a trade of United States missiles in Turkey for Soviet missiles in Cuba.
Well,"" JFK retorted sharply, ""this is unsettling now, George, because he's got us in a pretty good spot here.
Ball suggested pulling the rug out from under Khrushchev by releasing his October 26 letter.
Later that evening, a small group of ExComm members joined President Kennedy in the Oval Office.
JFK revealed that his brother was about to hand-deliver a new letter for Khrushchev to Soviet Ambassador Anatoly Dobrynin and requested advice on what the attorney general should say.
Once the president announces there will be an invasion, he won't be able to reverse himself.
He instructed Gromyko to direct Dobrynin to contact Robert Kennedy at once and tell him that a reply to the president's message would arrive shortly.
The Kremlin had apparently received a report that President Kennedy had scheduled a television address on Sunday afternoon presumably to announce an invasion of Cuba.
Khrushchev decided not to risk sending his message through the slow and unreliable diplomatic channels but instead to broadcast it immediately over Moscow radio.
CIA Director John McCone had gone to Mass an hour earlier after hearing on his car radio that the Kremlin would shortly make a significant announcement.
The president reacted to Khrushchev's message with surprise, relief, and some skepticism.
The Soviets, after all, had systematically deceived the United States about putting the missiles in Cuba, and Gromyko had lied to the president in the Oval Office.
They also urged JFK to order sweeping airstrikes in Cuba in 24 hours, followed by an invasion, unless irrefutable evidence proved that the missile sites were being dismantled.
General Taylor dissented but agreed to transmit the message to McNamara.
Stephen's, however, a groundswell of elation had overwhelmed the White House.
The United States missiles in Turkey were withdrawn, a Moscow-Washington hot line was established, and the Nuclear Test Ban Treaty was negotiated.
But the Kennedy administration never abandoned its commitment to bring down Castro.Sheldon M Stern served as historian at the John F Kennedy Library from 1977 through 1999.
