I began some basic research to explore the topic further, and then immersed myself in the next few days.
I got a closer perspective on the life of the President and his brother, the Attorney General, during the event, and learned about the topic in depth and substantially more than from any other source.
There were also many great quotes that I was able to implement into my writing.
I wanted to make sure I included as much of both the American and Russian perspectives as I could get my hands on despite the commonly seen American-biased details of the event, so these sources were also helpful in my writing.
I’d done an exhibit the previous year, and wanted to try something new.
Since the word count for papers is higher, I also felt that I could express my ideas better, rather than using more artistic measures in an exhibit.
Cutting down words was a problem for me last year as well as this year, but with some effort, I was able to get my word count down to the limit.
I tried to get an earlier start in my project this year and found it quite beneficial to managing my time.
Careful deliberations and debates took place during the argument to ensure the best possible outcome for the safety of the countries directly involved, and the world.
Because of this essential communication, President Kennedy and Soviet Chairman Nikita Khruschev were able to make good judgments and form peaceful solutions to their opposition and impact further generations of world leaders by setting an example and resolving their conflict without firing nuclear weapons.
During the crisis, the constant communication between United States President John F Kennedy and Soviet Chairman Nikita Khrushchev is often credited as what saved the opposing superpowers from the risk of nuclear war and endangering millions of civilian lives.
Letters exchanged between the conflicting leaders, debates between their advisors, and diplomatic negotiations of ambassadors prevented a Third World War provoked by the long-lasting dispute over nuclear weapons.
Additionally, the successful resolution of the event paved the way in terms of communication for future generations of leaders, and demonstrated the importance of global correspondence.
Although the nations were allies in World War II, the United States was skeptical of the Russians’ communist government.
The fear of communism skyrocketed when McCarthyism, a campaign led by United States Senator Joseph McCarthy, caused thousands of people to be wrongly accused of supporting communism and lose their jobs, or suffer other severe consequences throughout the 1950s.
In 1959, Fidel Castro, the leader of Cuba, allied with the Soviet Union.
When President Kennedy decided to launch an attack on Cuba in 1961 with the goal to overthrow Castro, the United States and the Soviet Union’s Caneira 4 tensions escalated further.
The assault, called the Bay of Pigs Invasion, failed, and within a day the forces supporting the United States had surrendered.
In response to the Bay of Pigs Invasion and to provide a defense system for their ally, the Soviet Union secretly placed missiles in Cuba.
The news reached the United States in October of 1962, when a man named Richard Heyser passed over San Cristobal, Cuba in a reconnaissance U2 plane flight and photographed a Russian missile being assembled on the island, just ninety miles south of the state of Florida.
Soon he learned the SS-4 missiles were capable of reaching the United States.
The President considered his options -one being a full-scale invasion on Cuba or another, a bombing of the country -but instead he settled on establishing a naval blockade to prevent the delivery of additional weapons to Cuba.
On October 22nd, President Kennedy made an announcement broadcasted across America, warning about the missiles being assembled in Cuba.
In order to prevent panic when Americans were informed of what was going on in Cuba, the President tried to communicate honestly and assure their safety.
The United States held its breath, Caneira 5 but thankfully no firearms were raised, and the Soviet ships stopped short of the line of naval vessels.
That changed when, between October 22nd and October 28th, many letters were sent between President Kennedy and Nikita Khrushchev, the leader of Russia.
Through these communications, the two negotiated peace terms while the tension rose.
In their letters, Kennedy and Khrushchev both wrote that they wanted to come to terms and avoid nuclear war at all costs.
Shortly thereafter, Khrushchev further proposed he would disassemble the missiles that had been shipped to Cuba in exchange for the removal of the “Jupiter” missiles from Turkey, which had been stationed there earlier by the United States.
The Kennedy Administration initially decided to ignore Khrushchev’s second letter and agree to his original terms, but afterward, American officials accepted Khrushchev’s secondary terms and agreed to withdraw Caneira 6 their missiles from Turkey.
Both leaders knew that if they were, their families and citizens could die.
Both recognized that if the nations erupted into full-scale war, their countries and even the world could be annihilated.
By making decisions in their best national interests, writing letters back and forth, and sending ambassadors to further confirm peace terms, the two leaders worked to better understand each other and the obligations they had to their countries and people.
Some members favored a blockade as a first step whereas some strongly opposed it, instead arguing that a full-scale invasion was the better choice.
In his memoir of the crisis, Robert Kennedy describes the President as acknowledging the pressure on him and believing that Chairman Khrushchev is simultaneously undergoing similar pressures.
After the crisis, Khrushchev’s son was interviewed about the Russian perspective on the event.
Caneira 7 Without this communication and the realization that each political leader wanted to avoid nuclear war that ultimately was the key to understanding, one country may have fired weapons on the other, resulting in full-scale nuclear combat and millions of deaths.
Because of this communication, the two countries avoided the imminent danger of starting a third World War.
There was a constant fear among the Americans that a “miscalculation a mistake in judgement” would be made when the ExComm debated over taking next steps in the crisis.
Despite the split decision among Kennedy’s advisors between an invasion or a blockade , the group was aware that a unified decision was necessary.
If not, Soviet ships could deliver more weapons to Cuba, further posing a threat to the United States.
This idea of multiple perspectives and checks and balances continues to be used in American presidencies in the form of the presidential cabinet.
Throughout the predicament, Attorney General Kennedy assisted his brother, the president, in his decision-making process.
More importantly, however, was his role in the last days of the conflict.
The meetings were arguably one of the most beneficial methods of communication during the event because the deliberations were immediately received and negotiated, whereas the letters took time to reach the disagreeing leaders.
After the crisis, communication further improved between the United States and Russia.
The construction of the phone line was intended to prevent the leaders of the two nations from struggling to understand each other’s intentions again.
This crisis is a good example of the increase of diplomacy in government leaders’ circles of advisors.
Now, in January of 2021, the Treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons is on the political table.
Kennedy and Khrushchev’s communication also set a precedent for future leaders, one prominent example being the incredible relationship between Ronald Reagan and Soviet Chairman Gorbachev several decades later in the Cold War era.
The idea of communicating between nations is one that we can apply to conflicts in the twenty-first century.
Communication and peaceful collaboration between political parties could make a difference in the division of the United States and result in a more united country.
In Caneira 10 this case, we can communicate studies, vaccine recipes, and information between countries to understand mutations of the virus and how they differently affect people.
Making accords or passing laws which help improve the circumstances of the climate crisis, for another example, can be agreed upon across countries too.
It is easier to solve issues if we are willing to band together and negotiate with countries than if nations stand alone.
If we can be open to the views of others as we work with foreign countries, we can accomplish more to resolve issues that impact everyone.
The first step into solving any issue, whether on a smaller or larger scale, is trying to understand the aspects and goals of the other perspective involved.
Although it can be difficult to allow ourselves to hear the other angles of the situation, it can help us to resolve problems.
The only way they successfully did so was through letter communication and ambassador negotiations.
This source is a transcript of John F Kennedy’s address to the United States saying that missiles were being assembled in Cuba.
I found this transcript more helpful to me than a video of the 35th president’s statement because it was easier to find quotes that supported my thesis.
By reading this document, I learned that the television was one of the ways communication was spread to the entire country and was essential to help citizens prepare for potential threats from Cuba.
In Ambassador Dobrynin’s cable to the Russian Ministry he explained his view on the crisis.
I think it is important to support both of a conflict’s perspectives as much as possible; this source helped me to see what the Russian perspective the less often told one was like.
I can tell this is primary, because it was a cable directly from Dobrynin during the last few days of the crisis.
This book was one of my most helpful sources since it gave me a focused and specific view of the crisis from Robert Kennedy, the president’s brother, who, during the crisis, assisted President Kennedy and advised him.
It gave me a sense of the immense pressure and responsibility on the part of the President because it was written by a person who was closely involved in the event as well as being close to him.
I know this is reliable as it is a primary source written by Robert Kennedy--since he was directly involved during the entire crisis, I can confirm that it is indeed primary.
This is another letter Kennedy wrote to Khrushchev during the crisis, except it was shorter and only outlined and confirmed information I already obtained from other sources.
However, the letter displayed the diplomats the two national leaders attempted to remain during this time.
I can tell this is reliable since the document was transcripted from the original letter President Kennedy sent to Khrushchev.
This source confirmed facts I’d already learned about and gave me a specific quote to help support a specific point in my project about historical impact.
I can tell this is reliable because it is a transcript of the letter Kennedy sent to Khrushchev on October 28th, and it is primary because it was directly written by John F Kennedy during the crisis.
This document helped me gain insight into the position of the Russian/Cuban alliance in contrast to the typical United States’ story.
I think it is important to see both sides of an argument, and this document certainly helped me do so since most other articles I found were written from the perspective of the United States.
This is a primary source and is a transcript of an actual document written so I can tell it is reliable.
Kennedy, this letter helped me to prove the ideas I claimed to be true, and continued to give me insight on the Russians’ perspective.
From Nikita Khrushchev’s son’s words I was able to compare the reactions to the crisis from two different sides of the argument.
This was an interview conducted about the crisis from someone who experienced the event, thus it is a primary source.
This site is maintained by historians and comes from a long-trusted administration, so I can tell it is reliable for my research purposes.
History.com, A&E Television Networks, 27 Oct.09, www.history.com/topics/cold-war/cold-war-history.
History.com, A&E Television Networks, 4 Jan. 2010, www.history.com/topics/cold-war/cuban-missile-crisis.
It detailed the most prominent events during the crisis and helped me to get a general understanding of the topic and major events.
I can tell this source is reliable because History.com is a well-trusted site, and the information I gathered here paralleled the facts and statistics of other sources I found.
The author of this article is credible, as he teaches at the UCLA International Institute's Center for Middle East Development, and the source is secondary since the majority of events discussed are based in 1962 during the Missile Crisis.
This article gave me a bit more information on the communicative impact of my topic, and the aftermath of the Cuban Crisis.
I could tell that this source is credible because it is based in a reliable institution and the information I already acquired from other sources paralleled the contents of the article.
I know this source is secondary, because it was published after the crisis and the article was not a first-hand account of the event.
National Archives, 20 Dec.17, www.archives.gov/publications/prologue/2012/fall/cuban-missiles.html.
I found several quotes and paraphrased ideas that I was looking to use as support for my argument, which made this resource particularly beneficial.
I know this source is reliable because it is government-based, and since it was not written by a person with a first-hand account, I know that the source is secondary.
This source helped me to connect my research project and the historical significance to the greater importance and influence on today’s world in 2021.
This source is secondary due to the fact that is not a first-hand account, and it is reliable because it is organization-based.
Caneira 20 United States Department of State, United States Department of State, history.state.gov/milestones/1961-1968/cuban-missile-crisis.
It proved to be well thought-out and held some important information about the positive consequences relating to communication during the Cold War as the crisis was resolved.
I know this one is a secondary source because it was not directly from a person who experienced/was involved in the crisis.
