Identify methods that the CIA used in gathering intelligence. been approved for release through the Historical Review Pro 2.
Analyze documents to identify factual information and points gram of the Central Intelligence Agency.
Explain to the students that they will be investi the United States and the Soviet Union.
In time, the hostility gating methods that the CIA used to gather intelligence which became so severe that both nations feared the other might launch revealed that a military buildup was taking place.
Project a a military offensive. transparency of the U-2 over flights and explain that this is one Both nations thus embarked upon a military buildup to deter way intelligence was gathered . the other from attacking.
The buildup included strengthening alliances as well as military might.
In 1960, scarcely a year after assuming power in Cuba, Fidel In 1959, Fidel Castro seized power in Cuba and later estab Castro declared his support for the Soviet Union.
The United States soon severed States now had a Soviet satellite approximately ninety miles from diplomatic relations with Cuba.
In the spring of 1961, it responded to this situation by including the invasion at the Bay of Pigs in 1961, failed and Castro attempting to invade Cuba at the Bay of Pigs, in hopes of toppling continued to advocate revolutionary communism in Central the Castro regime.
Following this failure, the Agency , John McCone, was informed that Soviet ships Kennedy administration actively pursued other measures toward were delivering missiles to Cuba.
These measures, collectively known as Operation revealed that the Soviet missile installations were already in place MONGOOSE, were clandestine and interagency in nature, di in Cuba.
In addition to sabotage operations under MON of the CIA is to gather intelligence for the President.
McCone, who in 1962 was Director of Central Intelligence, was a very successful west coast engineer and businessman who had served as Secretary of the Air Force under Truman and chairman of the Atomic Energy Commission under Eisenhower.
McCone took great interest in the Soviet a publication of the buildup in Cuba and did what every good intelligence analyst is Joint Committee supposed to do; he imagined himself in the other fellow's shoes. on Historians and Archivists In this case, the other fellow was Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev, of THE and McCone asked himself what Khrushchev might be planning.
Khrushchev had few intercon The Joint Committee on Historians and Archivists was es tinental ballistic missiles with which to directly threaten tablished in the late 1960s by the American Historical Asso the United States from the Soviet Union.
None of these could reach the United States from to identify mutual interests and responsibilities among those who study society's records and those who preserve and Soviet soil.
With financial assistance from the Cuba, McCone correctly guessed, was that piece of real Andrew W Mellon Foundation, two investigative teams estate.
The results of their efforts have been compiled choice, including Berlin. into this new 59-page publication.
Bloomington IN 47408-4199 McCone's own top analysts on CIA's Board of National Esti mates had similar reservations about his theory.
In four meetings with top Administration officials, including two with the president, McCone attempted to warn about what he Address feared the Soviets were planning.
Then, believing he had made his point, he left for France on honeymoon with his second wife.
McCone, who learned of the news in France, Army Intelligence had earlier passed to the West. believed this discovery corroborated his theory.
His top analysts, As a result, the intelligence community could tell the Presi however, did not agree.
Pointing out that these were defensive dent that he had sufficient time to make a thoughtful decision. rather than offensive missiles, they argued that the Soviets were This was an extremely important factor, since it allowed the putting in SAMs to defend Cuba from United States attack.
More likely, leader of the free world to evaluate his options and, ultimately, McCone replied, was that the Soviets planned to use their SAMs step back from the brink.
Still, without John McCone's insight to discourage the United States from flying its U-2s over Cuba, and persistence, the intelligence community might not have thus effectively blinding the United States to the presence of Soviet discovered the missiles in time to provide the president with the offensive missiles when they arrived.
His analysts did not find timely warning he needed to make a peaceful solution to the crisis this reasoning persuasive. possible.
During the month while McCone was away, not only were SAMs discovered in Cuba, but refugee and agent reports flooded Procedures the CIA warning yet again of the suspected presence of offensive After analyzing the background information, the students missiles there.
But there had been so many of these reports and will have an opportunity to investigate how intelligence was for so long, with none proven correct, that CIA headquarters gathered and how President Kennedy was informed.
A delay of almost five days followed McCone's ultimatum, Closing the Lesson during which the oversight group in charge of such requests Using the information from all the documents, have the considered all alternative means of conducting aerial reconnais students write their own intelligence estimate on the crisis to the sance.
But on 14 October 1962, a lone U-2 under Air Force com mand photographed the stunning evidence that the Soviets were For Further Reading indeed placing medium-range ballistic missiles in Cuba.
Much of this intelligence came from aerial photography, which increased dramatically after the missiles' dis Linda Miller is an American government teacher in Fairfax, covery.
Other intelligence, especially identification of the missiles Virginia.
She has received many teaching awards, including and evaluation of their operational readiness, came from material Virginia Council for the Social Studies Teacher of the Year. codenamed IRONBARK, which Col.
Oleg Penkovsky of Soviet Mary McAuliffe is the Deputy Chief CIA History Staff.
We do not believe the measures to achieve a I higher degree of action readiness for Soviet and bloc forces are being taken on a crash basis.
Communist re | action to the United States quarantine action against Cuba has not j gone beyond the highly critical but uncoramitting state ment issued yesterday by the Soviet government.
Surveillance of Cuba indicates continued rapid progress in completion of IRBM and MRBM missile sites.
Buildings believed to afford nuclear storage are being assembled with great rapidity.
Cuban naval units have been ordered to block ing positions at Banes and Santiago Bays.
Survey of Soviet shipping shows 16 dry cargo and 6 tanker ships en route to Cuba.
Of these 22, nine j are in positions which would permit arrival by the end of October.
Official world reaction shows a generally favor able response to the United States action, particularly in Latin America.
The OAS representatives approved a resolution endorsing the quarantine without opposition, one absten tion was due to lack of instructions.
Sep 62 ^ PJ^ lace & ^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^ cCte3r&^y t sd OURCEi Cuban national, A 12 C53 97^ ^7 years old. -* years of schooling, average intelligence.
On 17 Sep 62, about 2100 hourcjMl^jravcling by automobile from Havana toward toy heme in B__HHHH Pinar del Rio, I observed a convoy of 10 motorcycles, l6 trucks, ond eieht trailers proceeding southwest on the Central Highway toward Pinar del Rio.
Since I was traveling in the cwae direction ao the convoy, I passed what were the last units of the con voy at the entrance to Guanajoy, Havana /Grid coord 2703^0, Sheet T$$\ I, Scries E72_27f and then passed the leading element of the convoy immediately ' after Artcmisa, Pinar del Rio /Grid coord 190235, Sheet 36QUIII, 8criea E72_27# Although the vehicles were scattered over, a distance, I am of the opinion they were all part of the same convoy.
The leading element of the convoy was five motorcycles driven by unarmed Rebel Army soldiers whose function appeared to be clearing the civilian traffic ahead.
The trucks were followed by eight Soviet-built flatbed-type trailers j approximately 32 feet long, seven of wtech were carrying what looked liko I huge tubes extending over the entire length of the flatbed and completely'\ covered with canvas.
However, I did notice what looked like large metal prongs sticking out from under the \ canvas at the rear of the trailer.
Although I don't know too much about . .. it, it looked like a piece of radar equipment.
The trucks were in turn follo^d by five motorcycles driven by unarmed Rebol 5 Army soldiers.
Because of darkness and rain I could not distinguish who 4 the drivers of any of the vehicles in the convoy were.
On 17 Sep 62, about 2100 houro^wMl I Havana toward my homo in pHLHLHHB Pln I I of 10 motorcyclca, 16 trucks, and eight t I the Central Highway toward Plnar del Rio.
Since I I came direction as the convoy, I passed I voy at the entrance to Guanajay, Havana /p I Scries C72^7, and then passed the leading ele I j after Artcmisa, Finer del Rio /Grid coord 19 I i ET2^7.
Although the vehicles were scatte I opinion they were all part of the some convoy* I I 2.
Tile leading element of the convoy was five I Rebel Army soldiers whose function appeared to b I traffic ahead.
The motorcycles were followed by I carrying about 30 Rebel Army soldiers armed I and rifles.
I could not distinguish what the ciehth trailer wno \ i I I carrying since it was completely covered with canvas.
However, I did ' I I notice what looked like large metal prongs sticking out from under the \ | I I canvas at tho rear of the trailer.
I I I -The trucks were in turn followed by five motorcycles driven by unarmed Rebel 5' J I I A Army soldiers.
Because of darkness and rain I could not distinguish who 4 I I I i the drivers of any of the vehicles in the convoy were.
Acting Director of Central Intelligence SUBJECT : Recent Soviet Military Activities in Cuba 1.
U-2 photography of 29 August confirms extensive Soviet military deliveries to Cuba In recent weeks.
Surface-to-air missile sites, guided missile boats, and additional land axmaments were observed* 2.
One probable assembly area has been identified and SAM equipment has been located at one additional site* A* The small amount of permanent construction at these sites and the speed ocf the work Indicate the program is pro ceeding on a crash basis.
C A TirfrrtTTTrm _vP 1O* +_?,Ovrv_ fall y +xm* n*A jm^nnrmml .--111 be required to operate each site.
Soviet personnel doubtless will man the sites for at least the 9 to 12 months while Cubans are being trained.
Eae one area of SAM activity in Oriente province probably will be followed by several others in the vicinity.
The pattern now emerging suggests as many as 2k sites may eventually be set up ~ enougft to blanket the entire island. km At least 8 Kbnsar-class missile boats have been delivered to Cuba in recent weeks.
A Obese PF-llke boats carry two missile launchers each, with the radar guided missile effective against surface targets to ranges of between 15 and 17 miles.
B Some Cuban naval personnel have received training in the USSR, but it is not known If this Included Kbmar training.
C These boats are in addition to 13 or more torpedo boats and 6 submarine chasers delivered by the USSR earlier this year.
Tbe pfcotograpfay shows that current deliveries to Cuba also contain land armaments, including tanks and possibly self-propelled guns.
A Reports indicate other shipments have contained artillery, tanks, and possibly combat aircraft, but these are not confirmed.
B The photography of 29 August tinned up the highest number of MIG aircraft yet noted, some Jf.
We believe Cuba's aircraft Inventory includes approximately 6C MIG Jet fighters, including at least a dozen MIG-19s.
Soviet shipments of military equipment and personnel to Cuba show no sign of letting up.
A About 16 Soviet dry-cargo ships are now en route to Cuba, of which at least 10 probably are carrying military equipment.
Routine Soviet deliveries of economic aid and trade goods are being made largely on Western ships* Bo At least 1,700 Soviet military technicians arrived in Cuba in late July and early August in connection with these military activities, 1* MDst of these Soviets appear to be involved in setting up SAM facilities but thus far ve cannot conclude that this is their only objective.
Co At least 1*300 more Soviets are arriving unannounced this week; no reports an their activities so far* 1.
Construction of the remaining SAM sites, which apparently were it considered less vital than those listed above to the protection of ]lloffensive missile bases in Cuba, began in late September or early October.
Work probably began on the SAM site at Siguanea on the Isle of Pines in the last week of September and on the sites at Esmeralda, Chambas, Maldonado, Santiago de Cuba, Ciego de Avila, and Deleite during the first half of October.
