The series of conflicts that caused the crisis started in November, 1954, when Fulgencio Batista1 gained power and ignored problems within Cuba.
Batista’s authoritarianism created great unrest in the Cuban people because the​ ​tyrannical leader didn’t care for his citizens.
Batista’s autocratic regime gave Socialist ideals to a Cuban Revolutionary named Fidel Castro.
The Cubans became tired of excessive corruption and exploitation of their people’s land by their government and the United States government; there is no better incentive for rebellion than a repressive government.
A rallying leader, Fidel Castro arose with the outraged Cubans and ignited flames of revolution creating violent conflict within Cuba.
Once Castro won the revolution, he seized power in 1959, and ironically created another dictatorship.
Castro then imposed a “socialist program,” displayed by taking private Cuban land 1 Cuban President from 1940-1944, later became dictator of Cuba.
The rapid development of a socialist country so close to the United States mainland must have been an alarming situation to the United States Castro decided to expropriate over three million acres owned by United States companies.
In fact, the Central Intelligence Agency decided to create a plan of aggression toward Cuba which would spark conflict between the two nations.
The Cuban Air Force was supposed to be bombed, but United States bombers were shot down before reaching the airstrip.
The United States lost the only skirmish against what was seen as a weak nation with no chance against the CIA-trained Cubans.
The United States failed to invade Cuba and didn’t even destroy one Cuban plane.
The invasion was a dramatic failure that would severely damage the U.S.’s ego and their global prestige.
When the United States government figured this out, they knew that with one wrong step, the United States could potentially be​ ​obliterated, so tensions in the United States government were at an all time high.
With the discovery of Soviet missiles in Cuba, the United States had to react efficiently.
United States officials opposed this plan due to fear of Soviet retaliation.
This plan was not wise because​ ​it​ ​would be seen as an act of aggression.
The United States would not have wanted to​ ​be the cause of WWIII, a tremendous fear during the Cold War.
The second option was to blockade Cuba from any imports of offensive weapons.
Overall, the blockade, or quarantine, was the better option because there was no military strike.
Instead, the quarantine just flexed United States military might, but this was still a conflict which only worsened the crisis.
In this situation, United States President John F Kennedy had to think efficiently; one mistake could turn the conflict into nuclear war.
Kennedy informed the American people of his decision during his “Address on Cuba” on October 22, 1962.
The naval quarantine was the best decision, but it was a smaller conflict which didn’t help the overall crisis whatsoever.
A final statement President Kennedy said was, “To halt this offensive build up, a strict quarantine on all offensive military equipment under shipment to Cuba is being initiated”.14 This was the first time the naval quarantine was ever publicly mentioned.
The United States government didn’t provide the necessary funding to create enough public fallout shelters for the people.
This created a feeling of betrayal within the minds of Americans because they trusted the government to keep them secure.
Instead, it was seen as neglect caused the insecurity of thousands and the feeling that no one was safe inside their homes during the crisis.
People started to realize that “the government wasn’t going to save them,” and that Americans had to adapt.
Despite the approaching climax of the crisis, citizens were shocked to realize that nuclear missiles could rain upon them without warning, taking away everything they worked for and even their lives.
People started taking things into their own hands, “ 13 ​John F Kennedy, ​Back Radio and Television Report to the American People on the Soviet Arms Buildup in Cuba, Oct., 1962​ , www.jfklibrary.org, , 0:7:13 0:7:29.
The conflict between the United States government and the people was at an all time high, but the crisis with Cuba wasn’t over​,​ the United States government had to focus on averting that crisis first.
Castro kept the severity of the crisis a secret from the Cuban people while rallying them at the same time.
Cubans were heard chanting, “Patria o muerte” .19 Castro made a smart decision because through this conflict, he sparked nationalistic ideals in his citizens minds.
Pro-Castro Cubans felt extreme passion for their country during the crisis which in turn blinded them to the possibility of nuclear annihilation, but they were not completely oblivious to the crisis.
Cubans stocked up on food but did not create fallout shelters, unlike many Americans.
Batista’s regime, Castro’s revolution, and expropriation of businesses.
The Soviet leader, Nikita Khrushchev, wrote a letter to Kennedy, pointing out that a “quarantine” was against international law.
Khrushchev attempted to frighten the United States into submission, but this letter’s intentions were ineffective and would only escalate the “quarantine” conflict further.
In a letter from Kennedy to Khrushchev, Kennedy stated, “I hope that you will issue… instructions to your ships to observe the terms of the quarantine”.22 This letter is of utmost importance because it brought the crisis closer to it’s climax by cementing the legitimacy of the quarantine in Khrushchev’s mind.
The most prominent phrase was, “the violation of the freedom to use international waters... is an act of aggression which pushes mankind toward the abyss of a world nuclear-missile war”.23 In this sentence Khrushchev used the U.S.’s own principles against them by saying that they were violating the Soviet Union and Cuba’s freedom.
While meant to intimidate Kennedy into discontinuing the conflict of quarantining Cuba, Khrushchev’s intimidation did not work, and the quarantine conflict remained in effect.
With nuclear war looming ever so closely, Khrushchev wrote yet another letter to Kennedy proposing a compromise involving the United States missiles in Turkey.
He stated that under United Nations inspection, missiles would be removed from Cuba and Turkey.
He also demanded that the 22 ​John Kennedy, letter to Nikita Khrushchev, Oct., 1962.
This was the first time that compromise was ever suggested, and the letter would prove to be effective, diplomatically.
Once Kennedy received this letter, he wrote back on the same day accepting the terms of the compromise.
He also stated that in order for the compromise to proceed, all construction of missiles in Cuba would have to be halted.
Cuba, the U.S., and the Soviets On the last day of the crisis, Khrushchev sent a letter to Kennedy saying he agreed to the terms of the compromise and had ordered his men to dismantle the missiles in Cuba.
This compromise showed that diplomacy could prevent a potential nuclear crisis even if the two countries had extreme differences in their prefered ideologies.
In 1966, the Soviet Union began to mass produce Intercontinental Ballistic Missiles .28 This renewed tension between the two countries.
In order to secure the relationship between them, it became essential for the two countries to compromise on a treaty limiting the creation of nuclear weapons.
This was the first time that the United States and the Soviet Union agreed on slowing down production of nuclear vessels.
SALT also displayed that the United States and Soviet Union could civilly agree upon something.
This agreement showed the people of both nations that even if they had ideological differences and past disputes, 25 ​Nikita Khrushchev, letter to John Kennedy, Oct., 1962.
This also led to the possibility of more compromises between the two countries.
Over the next fifty years, the Soviet Union fell, and the West “won” the Cold War, and the Cuban economy was going into recession.
Once the Soviet Union fell, Cuba lost it’s most important trade partner.
The Cuban economy relied solely on a world superpower to keep it stable, and suffered without one.
During the recession Cubans wanted to emigrate to the United States The mass emigration only hurt the United States and Cuban relations.
The influx was due to Castro allowing any Cuban that wanted to leave, leave the island through Mariel Harbor.
Once in America, the immigrants were sent to refugee camps, sometimes for months.
A United States naval base’s Cuban refugee camp cost the United States $35 million.
Castro’s decision to unleash a flood of immigrants at great cost to the United States enforced the idea in the United States that the countries relations weren’t going to improve.
Raúl began an “economic reorientation”.33 During this process, the United States noticed the socialist government slowly becoming more capitalist which in turn sparked interest and incentive for the United States to mend relations between the two countries because the U.S. could influence Cuban decisions as it became more capitalist.
President Barack Obama stated in his Cuban Policy Changes Speech, “American businesses should not be put at... disadvantage, and... increased commerce is good… we will facilitate authorized transactions between the United States and Cuba”.36 With fewer restrictions on American business in Cuba, the American economy would have another income.
This could effectively open American businesses to the Cuban sugar industry creating more income for the United States economy from import taxes, and Cuba’s economy would benefit by taxing exports.
A good relationship is beneficial for the two countries because Cuba will have a more stable economy, and the U.S. would have another trade partner.
Also having a secure relationship helps prevent the chances of another crisis between the two nations.
Robert Kennedy’s words stayed true to many as the relationship between the United States and the Soviet Union healed during the Cold War.
They also stay true today as United States and Cuban relations continue to use compromise to heal from past conflicts.
There were multiple “missile trailers”, suggesting that missiles were already at the site.
This photograph showed the United States government that the rate of construction of the missile sites was increased.
I found this source very important because of it’s interviewees that were involved in the crisis when they were children.
The source also explained some key details of what it was like in Cuba at the time.
John F Kennedy Presidential Library and Museum​, www.jfklibrary.org/Asset-Viewer/sUVmCh-sB0moLfrBcaHaSg.aspx.
This primary source is an audio clip of John Kennedy’s Address on Cuba.
I will use this in my main event because this is when the people of the United States learned about what was going on, and this would cause my short term impact.
Office of the Historian​, United States Department of State, history.state.gov/historicaldocuments/frus1961-63v06/d67.
I used this letter because it was Kennedy’s response to Khrushchev’s offer of a compromise.
The letter explained that the missiles were to be removed from Cuba and Turkey under United Nations inspection.
But Kennedy explicitly said that any work being done in Cuba to create missiles must stop before any deal is made.
This is going to be used in my main event because it was another step into creating the Compromise to the situation.
This letter is quite important to my main event because this is the first time that Kennedy acknowledged that there was going to be a quarantine around Cuba.
In fact Kennedy informed Khrushchev to tell Soviet ships all of the terms of the Quarantine.
I used this memoir because it was a good primary source for my main event.
The memoir helped with the understanding of how it was inside of the white house during those thirteen days, due to Robert Kennedy being part of the Kennedy 14 administration.
This letter has significant importance to my main event and will be used in it because in this letter Khrushchev is accepting the idea of the compromise.
This letter was sent from Nikita Khrushchev to John Kennedy as a response after Kennedy’s letter about his address on Cuba.
Khrushchev talked about how in this case the United States were disturbing peace, and Khrushchev explained how the United States was the aggressor in this incident.
This was also used in my main event because this is one of the many letters that will be sent throughout the Crisis between President Kennedy and Chairman Khrushchev.
Plus Khrushchev explained that those missiles have been there way longer than the missiles in Cuba.
I used this in my main event because it was when a compromise was first brought up.
I used this letter from Nikita Khrushchev to John Kennedy because it gave information about my main event and, the letter showed the perspective of Nikita Khrushchev.
In this letter Khrushchev talked about how the U.S.’s idea of a quarantine is horrible and against international law.
Khrushchev also explained that the United States is bringing the world closer to nuclear war.
I used this letter in my main event because of how Khrushchev talked about the United States bringing the world closer to Nuclear war.
Low-level photograph of San Cristobal no. showing extensive tracking from surging construction and possible missile readiness drills.
The White House President Barack Obama​, United States Goverment, obamawhitehouse.archives.gov/the-press-office/2014/12/17/statement-president-cuba-pol icy-changes.
I used this transcript of Obama’s Cuban Policy Change speech because it is important to my long term effect.
I used it because in this speech Obama explained how the relationship between Cuba and the United States He also explained how the relationship would change for the better.
National Public Radio​, 22 Oct.12, www.npr.org/2012/10/22/163395079/childhood-memories-of-the-cuban-missile-crisis.
I used this interview because the interviewee was with her family in Cuba during the crisis.
Maria Salgado was the interviewee and she included mainly how she personally felt because of the crisis.
I used this source in my short term impact of how the Cubans felt during the crisis.
U-2 photograph of MRBM site two nautical miles away from the Los Palacios deployment – the second set of MRBMs found in Cuba.
This is a great secondary source that gave a lot of information about the background of the Bay of Pigs and the Bay of Pigs itself.
I used this to help explain where the Bay of Pigs happened and how it got its name.
I used this book because it gave information about what type of Soviet missiles were placed in Cuba.
Questia​, www.questia.com/newspaper/1P2-38617354/the-secret-trail-to-u-s-cuba-relations-diplom atic.
This source gave me information about the relations between the United States and Cuba.
It also explained about how Obama increased relations between the United States and Cuba.
I used this in my long term effect to help explain the compromise that occurred during my long term effect.
I made this a secondary source because it was not made by anyone who experienced the negotiations between Cuba and the United States in 2014 and 2015.
This is in my Historical context because it helped me explain why my main event was caused.
The part I used in this resourceful book explained how Cuba started “Nationalizing” their country.
Encyclopedia of World Biography​, 2nd ed., Detroit, Gale Research, 1998.
It tells the reader a summary of Fulgencio Batista’s life, but most importantly it tells the reader about Batista’s relation to the Cuban Government and 19 what role he played.
I ended up using this in my historical context because Batista was the cause for Castro’s Revolution which would later cause the United States to intervene.
I used this Newspaper because it gives information about Castro’s overall life.
But the information that i decided to emphasize on was when he staged his Rebellion.
This event was at the end of Fulgencio Batista’s reign over Cuba therefore I used it in my historical context.
This is a short passage that summarizes about the Bay of Pigs Invasion attempt.
It explains about when and why the plan was made up, who it was approved by, and the 20 specifics of the invasion.
This source did go extensively into the details about the response plans to Soviet missiles in Cuba, so I used this source mainly for the details about the response plans in my paper.
Chatham House the Royal Institute of International Affairs​, www.chathamhouse.org/publication/ia/normalizing-us-cuba-relations-escaping-shacklespast.
I used this research report because it gave me incite about my long term effect.
My long term effect is the relationship between the United States and Cuba today, and this report gave me information on how the Obama administration dealt with the United States and Cuban relationship.
It was very helpful in the sense that it gave me information mostly about how people felt at the time.
This newspaper had important information about the American made refugee camps for Cubans.
Office of the Historian​, United Stated Department of State, history.state.gov/milestones/1969-1976/salt.
This was an amazing source because it gave information about the SALT pacts.
I found this research report rich with information about the Cuban economy.
It helped explain to me the Cuban dependency on the Soviets for a stable economy.
I used this source because it gave me a lot of information about the Cuban refugees.
The information that I used from this source is found in my long term effect when I talked about Cuban refugees.
