January ■ February ■ March ■ April ■ May ■ June ■ July ■ August ■ September ■ October ■ November ■ December 1960 was a leap year starting on Friday of the Gregorian calendar, the 1960th year of the Common Era and Anno Domini designations, the 960th year of the 2nd m illennium, the 60th year of the 20th century, and the 1st year of the 1960s decade.
It is also known as the ""Year of Africa"" because of major events— particularly the independence of seventeen African nations—that focused global attention on the continent and intensified feelings of Pan-Africanism.
Contents Events Births Deaths Nobel Prizes References Events January ■ January 1 Cameroon gains its independence from French-administered United Nations trusteeship.
Although they are refused service, they are allowed to stay at the counter.
The event triggers many similar non-violent protests throughout the Southern United States, and six months later, the original four protesters are served lunch at the same counter.
Coors is later found murdered, and Joseph Corbett, Jr. is indicted for the crime.
The United States announces that 3,500 American soldiers will be sent to Vietnam.
April ■ April 1 ■ Abdul Rahman of Negeri Sembilan, 1st Yang di-Pertuan Agong of Malaysia, dies in office.
He is replaced by Hisamuddin Alam Shah ibni Almarhum Sultan Alaeddin Sulaiman Shah, Sultan of Selangor.
There are 179,323,175 United States residents on this dayJ 2 ^ All people from Latin America are listed as white, including blacks from the Dominican Republic, European whites from Argentina and Mexicans who resemble Native Americans.
South Korean students hold a nationwide pro-democracy protest against President Syngman Rhee, eventually leading him to resign from that office.
Tiros I prototype on display at the Smithsonian National Air and Space Museum May ■ May 1 ■ Several Soviet surface-to-air missiles shoot down an American Lockheed U-2 spy plane.
Its pilot, Francis Gary Powers of the Central In telligence Agency, is captured.
May 6 United States President Dwight D Eisenhower signs the Civil Rights Act of 1960 into law.
May 9 The United States Food and Drug Administration announces that it will approve birth control as an additional indication for Searle's Enovid, making it the world's first approved oral contraceptive pill.
Francis Gary Powers wearing special pressure suit for stratospheric flying ■ May 13 A joint Swiss and Austrian expedition makes the first ascent of the Asian mountain Dhaulagiri, the world's 7th highest mountain.
The Diet next approves a mutual security treaty with the United States.
This megat hrust earthquake ruptures from Arauco to Chiloe Archipelago, causing the most powerful earthquake on record and a destructive basin-wide tsunami.
June ■ June 1 New Zealand's first television station begins broadcasting, in the city of Auckland.
Five days later, it unites as scheduled with the Trust Territory of Somalia , to form the Somali Republic.
July ■ July 1 ■ Ghana becomes a republic, and Kwame Nkrumah becomes its first President.
A Soviet Air Force MiG-19 fighter plane flying north of Murmansk, Russia, over the Barents Sea, shoots down a six-man RB-47 Stratojet reconnaissance plane of the United States Air Force.
Four of the United States Air Force officers are killed, and the two survivors are held prisoner in the Soviet Union.
Concurrently, it unites as scheduled with the five-day-old State of Somaliland to form the Somali Republic.
In response to a United States embargo against Cuba, Fidel Castro nationalizes all American and foreign-owned property in Cuba.
He is also the first man to make a solo crossing of the Atlantic Ocean in a gas balloon, and the first man fully to witness the spherical curvature of the Earth.
In Moscow, American U-2 pilot Francis Gary Powers is sentenced to 10 years in prison for espionage.
The Soviet Union launches the satellite Sputnik 5, with the dogs Belka and Strelka , 40 mice, two rats and a variety of plants.
This satellite returns to earth the next day and all animals are recovered safely.
September ■ September 1 ■ Sultan Hisamuddin Alam Shah, Sultan of Selangor and 2nd Yang di-Pertuan Agong of Malaysia , dies in office.
Abebe Bikila of Ethiopia wins the gold medal in the marathon, running barefoot in a world time, and becoming the first person from SubSaharan Africa to win Olympic gold.
October ■ October 1 ■ Nigeria becomes independent from the United Kingdom, and Nnamdi Azikiwe becomes its first native-born Governor General.
Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev pounds his shoe on a table at a meeting of the United Nations General Assembly, his way of protesting the discussion of the Soviet Union's policies toward Eastern Europe.
A large rocket explodes on the launch pad at the Baikonur Cosmodrome, killing at least 92 people of the Soviet space program.
Martin Luther King Jr., and secures King's release from jail for a traffic violation in Atlanta.
Michael Woodruff carries out the first successful kidney transplant in the United Kingdom, at the Edinburgh Royal Infirmary.
Vice President Richard Nixon, to become the second youngest man to serve as President of the United States, and the youngest man elected to this position.
Polaris missile test December ■ December The African and Malagasy Organisation for Economic Cooperation is established.
Geoffrey Francis Fisher, talks with Pope John XXIII for about one hour in Vatican City.
This is the first time that a chief of the Anglican Church had ever visited the Pope.
December 5 ■ Pierre Lagaillarde, who led the insurrections in 1958 and 1960 in Algeria, fails to appear in court in Paris, France.
He has reportedly fled with his four fellow defendants to Spain, en route to Algeria.
The Supreme Court of the United States declares that segregation in public transportation is illegal in the United States.
December 7 The United Nations Security Council is called into session by the Soviet Union, in order to consider Soviet demands for the Security Council to seek the immediate release of former Congolese Premier Patrice Lumumba.
December 8 For the first time, Mary Martin's Peter Pan is presented as a stand-alone 2-hour special on NBC, instead of as part of an anthology series.
This version, rather than being presented live, is shown on videotape, enabling NBC to repeat it as often as they wish without having to restage it.
Although nearly all of the adult actors repeat their original Broadway roles, all of the original children have, ironically, outgrown their roles and are replaced by new actors.
December 9 ■ French President Charles de Gaulle's visit to Algeria is bloodied by European and Muslim rioters, in Algeria's largest cities.
Planned as a 13-part drama, it becomes such a success among viewers it will continue past its 10,000th episode in its 60th anniversary year, being shown six times a week.
December 11 MGM's The Wizard ofOz is rerun on CBS only a year after its previous telecast, thus beginning the tradition of annual telecasts of the film.
December 12 The Supreme Court of the United States upholds a lower Federal Court ruling that the State of Louisiana's racial segregation laws are unconstitutional, and overturns them.
While Emperor Haile Selassie of Ethiopia visits Brazil, his Kebur Zabagna leads a military coup against his rule, proclaiming that the emperor's son, Crown Prince Asfaw Wossen Taffari, is the new emperor.
December 14 ■ Antoine Gizenga proclaims in the Democratic Republic of the Congo that he has taken over as the country's premier.
December 15 ■ King Mahendra of Nepal deposes the democratic government in his country, and takes direct control himself.
December 16 ■ Secretary of State Christian Herter announces that the United States will commit five nuclear submarines and eighty Polaris missiles to the defense of the NATO countries,1 OlOby the end of 1963.
March 12 ■ Minoru Niihara, Japanese singer ■ Courtney B Vance, American actor March 13 ■ Adam Clayton, Irish rock bassist ■ Joe Ranft, American animator and voice actor March 14 Kirby Puckett, American baseball player March 15 — Rosa Beltran, Mexican writer, lecturer, and academic.
Austin, British philosopher ■ Giles Gilbert Scott, British architect ■ February 9 Adolph Coors III ■ February 10 Aloysius Stepinac, Yugoslav Roman Catholic prelate (b.
