Some Russian nationalists said Yeltsin should threaten the West with nuclear missiles as Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev did during the missile crisis in 1962.
Yeltsin, under tough criticism from nationalist and communist opponents at home, has been trying to limit the NATO expansion.
The Cuban crisis was triggered by the deployment of Soviet nuclear weapons in Cuba.
Vladimir Zhirinovsky, a Russian ultranationalist who is given to extreme statements, said Thursday that Russia should use the same tactic against NATO now.
NATO wants an agreement with Russia before NATO's July 8-9 summit meeting in Madrid, Spain, where it plans to name its first new members fr om Central and Eastern Europe.
They also must not deploy weapons and military hardware, especially nuclear, in newly accepted NATO members,"" Yeltsin said Thursday.
Negotiators have agreed to form a new Russia-NATO council that will allow Moscow to have a direct voice but not a vote in decisions.
Lo uis P o s t-Dis patch Cit at ion Compiled From News Services, 'YELTSIN LIKENS NATO SPREAD TO CUBAN CRISIS', St.
Sergei Mikoyan, a magazine editor and son of Nikita Khrushchev's top deputy, said Tuesday he doubted a Washington Post report that a key Soviet missile base in Cuba was apparently attacked by Cuban troops at the height of the crisis.
Three Soviet soldiers may have died in the attack, which occurred just hours before an American U2 spy plane crashed near the base, the Post said.
Mikoyan confirmed the spy plane was shot down, but said it was 'a very grave mistake' by a low-level commander acting without authorization.
He said it is still unclear whether the commander was Cuban or Russian.
But Soviet leaders at the time were never informed of a conflict with the Cubans, said Mikoyan, who traveled to Cuba at the end of the 1962 crisis with his father, Anastas Mikoyan, first deputy premier to Khrushchev, then the Soviet leader.
Neither my father nor his colleagues ... knew anything about fighting,' said Mikoyan, now editor of the Magazine America Latina.
The Boston Globe reported today that in closed session at the conference a Soviet adviser said Soviet military officials installing the weapons in Cuba did not follow orders to camouflage the site from U.S. reconnaisance flights.
Clear photographs of the installations taken by United States reconnaisance planes led to President Kennedy's demand that the Soviets remove their missiles and their deployment and launch facilities.
The Globe also said it was learned in the closed meetings that Khrushchev agreed to withdraw the missiles from Cuba at the conclusion of the crisis without telling Cuban leader Fidel Castro, who was extremely upset when finally informed of the Soviet leader's decision.
Hersh's report said the National Security Agency did not break the Soviet code until 10 months after the crisis.
In decoding messages, Hersh said, the NSA learned of an attack the night of Oct., 1962, on a Soviet surface-to-air missile site near a naval station at Banes, on the island's northeastern coast.
Although the intercepts did not specifically name the attacking force as Cuban, the NSA analysts concluded the fighting was between Soviets and Cubans, Hersh reported.
The intercepts indicated at least three Soviet soldiers were killed and 15 others were wounded in the fighting, the report said.
On the morning of Oct., 1962, a top secret American spy plane crashed near the missile site, and President Kennedy and his advisers assumed the Soviets had shot down the U2 with a missile from the site, Hersh said.
But Mikoyan said it was a low-level, unauthorized commander -who Mikoyan said he could not identify as either Cuban or Soviet -who ordered the shooting of the plane.
We came to the conclusion that it was human error by some small commander.
He wouldn't confess because it was a very grave mistake,' Mikoyan said.
The U2 crash, which the United States declined to officially confirm at the time, influenced Kennedy to send his brother, Robert, to meet Soviet Ambassador Anatoly Dobrynin, the report said, citing an RFK memoir.
The crisis was resolved when Khrushchev agreed to withdraw Soviet nuclear missiles from Cuba and the United States agreed to remove Jupiter missiles within five months from Turkey and Italy and pledge not to invade Cuba.
I'm not a history enthusiast, nor do I recall much of anything about 1962, but when I talked at length with George about ""Awaiting Armageddon,"" I was fascinated.
She has written a book for ordinary Americans about the reaction of ordinary Americans to an extraordinary possibility that the world might come to an end at any moment.
The memory of that terror accompanied George to Hickory High, from which she graduated in 1970, and then while she triple-majored in American studies, history and Latin at Dickinson College in Carlisle, Pa.
For the next 20 years, the recollection simmered as George worked for a variety of newspapers, including the Detroit Free Press from 1983 to 1990 and the Philadelphia Daily News, where she was the deputy managing editor when she made the decision in 1994 to get out of the newspaper business.
It was when George was working on her doctorate that the memory of her fifth-grade fright became a vehicle that drove her down the road of authorship.
October 24, Memphis police spotted a man holding a pick and standing over a manhole as he tried to determine whether his family could take refuge under the city's streets,"" is one anecdote George included in her book.
She also uncovered a story about neighbors warning neighbors with fallout shelters that they'd kill the fallout shelter owners in order to have a safe place to put their own families.
Ten-year-old Alice George was clearly afraid, and the Civil Defense drills performed at her elementary school served only to fuel her fear.
The driver, Karen Gros, of Waterloo, surveyed a desolate scene of abandoned, cinder-block buildings, ventilation shafts sprouting like mushrooms from the cracked asphalt and three small mounds topped with steel doors that yawned open in the midday sun.
The visitors had traveled to this incongruous setting in farm country for a rare glimpse of a facility that once served as one of the spear tips in this nation’s protracted Cold War standoff with “the Rooskies,” as “Dr.
From 1960 to 1968, this site four miles south of the little town of Hecker contained dozens of Nike Hercules missiles armed with nuclear warheads.
With identical defense compounds at Pacific, Marine and Grafton, the Hecker base — officially designated Nike Missile Site SL-40 — formed the St.
Louis area’s defensive ring against long-feared waves of bombers from the Soviet Union.
But the 14-acre launch site, in remarkably solid shape for its age, is set to go at private auction on July 12 to the highest bidder — operational elevator pads and bay roofs, generator buildings and pump house included.
Proceeds from the sale will benefit the property’s owner, the Career Center of Southern Illinois.
The vocational school took ownership of the property in the early 1970s after the army shut it down.
The career center still has classrooms and offices in buildings that were once the base barracks and radar center.
Buy-A-Farm, the company running the auction, opened the site to the public on Thursday and Friday.
Some visitors, such as 10-year-old Tyson Johnson, a budding history buff from Germantown, had only a vague notion of the tense national mood during the period the base was in operation.
Another visitor brought a front-line perspective to one of the country’s darkest periods.
John Dreas, 74, of Casevyille, was stationed at Hecker as a missile crewmen from 1962 to 1964.
Auction manager Wayne Keller has fielded inquiries from across the country about the site.
He has heard from a Monsanto scientist interested in using it as testing facility for plants.
A beverage distributor said the three magazines would be ideal as warehouses.
And a military buff would turn it into a museum for his collection of restored military vehicles.
Chuck Nitsch, 59, of Hillsboro, inspected the property as a possible renewable energy home site.
Keller noted that similar sites around the country have been re-purposed by doomsday preppers as residences, some with swimming pools in the pits that once housed hydraulic equipment for the missile elevators.
A Peoria, Ill., man who co-authored a book on Nike missile sites nationwide said that the Hecker base is one of the best-preserved.
Louis area,” said Mark Berhow, co-author of “Rings of Supersonic Steel,” a history of air defenses operated by the army from 1950 to 1974.
Compared to the rust, disintegrating asphalt and peeling paint that mark the surface equipment and support buildings, the magazine interiors are in fine shape at the Hecker site.
Berhow said the army’s strategy was based on waves of Soviet bombers sweeping over the Arctic Circle to bomb America with conventional and nuclear weapons.
But much of the time was just sitting around; there were some real issues with morale and discipline amongst the missile men,” he said.
She recalled as a child that some soldiers would help out at her family’s farm.
With the emergence of intercontinental ballistic missiles and the diminishing threat of attacks from manned bombers, the Nike sites began shutting down nationwide.
The last active sites, located in Florida, closed around 1980, Berhow said.
William Ecker, who died in 2009, pulled the nondescript khaki flight suit from a family closet to make it a museum piece on the anniversary of his flight.
Photographs taken on Ecker's low-level flight over Cuba on Oct., 1962, were used two days later by the United States ambassador to the United Nations to help prove Soviet missiles were being stockpiled in Cuba.
After nearly two weeks of extreme tension, the Cuban missile crisis was peacefully defused.
The suit has no military patches or labels with Ecker's name because he was flying a secret mission.
If his RF8 Crusader jet had been shot down, the Navy wanted to be discreet.
So Ecker carried only a prisoner-of-war card in case he was captured, the pilot's son, David Ecker, said.
While the museum has spy planes from the era in its collection, this is its first personal artifact from the missile crisis, said curator Alex Spencer.
Ecker's flight was featured in the movie ""13 Days,"" recounting the Cold War standoff 50 years ago involving then-President John F Kennedy and the Soviet premier, Nikita Khrushchev.
The letters show that, despite verbal assurances to Khrushchev, Kennedy ultimately refused to agree to any pact prohibiting the United States from attacking Cuba.
Since the end of the missile crisis, exiles have perceived the KennedyKhrushchev exchanges as the principal obstacle to ousting Castro by military means.
After Moscow withdrew its missiles from Cuba, the FBI began cracking down on exile paramilitary groups to prevent them from launching raids against the island.
Tuesday, several hundred exiles signed the letter to Bush at WAQI-AM Radio Mambi, seeking Bush's blessing for renewed raids.
Valdes-Dapena and her husband, Carlos, fled Cuba in 1988 after state security agents raided their home in Havana.
Radio Mambi commentator and general manager Armando PerezRoura, the chief promoter of the letter, said he wants at least 100,000 exiles to sign it by Feb., when he plans to deliver it to the White House.
The date is the anniversary of the beginning of the Cuban war of independence in 1895.
The White House made no comment Tuesday, but a State Department official familiar with Cuban affairs rejected the notion that Bush would sanction military action.
Ariel Ricardo, a Cuban government spokesman in Washington, said the United States will not attack Cuba because it knows Cubans will defend their homeland fiercely.
In Miami, Perez-Roura said the release of the KennedyKhrushchev letters is not enough to satisfy the aspirations of certain exiles to renew military operations.
The commentator launched the letter campaign last week in anticipation of the release of the KennedyKhrushchev letters.
He credited the idea to former political prisoner Andres Vargas Gomez, who said White House sanction is needed to prevent official interference with possible future raids.
Other exile leaders welcomed the release of the KennedyKrushchev correspondence.
Andres Nazario Sargen, secretary general of the paramilitary organization Alpha 66, said the letters show exiles again can take up arms against Castro.
Ramon Cernuda and Ricardo Bofill, who represent prominent dissidents in Cuba, said the exile military option was unrealistic in light of the end of the Cold War.
Fifty years ago during the Cold War, the world came the closest it ever has to an exchange of nuclear weapons between the Soviet Union and the United States.
President John F Kennedy was briefed on Oct., 1962, about a Soviet SS-4 medium-range ballistic missile being assembled for installation in Cuba, just 90 miles from United States shores.
For more than 10 days, President Kennedy and his team wrestled with a diplomatic crisis of epic proportions.
Pitt Professor of History Peter Karsten also wrestled with the crisis, but from a cryptography room on the USS Canberra.
Then a legal officer with the Navy, Karsten was responsible for decoding orders for the admiral aboard his ship who commanded the destroyer screen during the crisis.
Although the lectures are free and open to the public, those wishing to attend must register in advance by e-mailing Beverly Brizzi at beb38@pitt.edu.
Additional presentations by Pitt faculty will follow the keynote address. * 11m.
For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at htsyndication@hindustantimes.com Co pyrig ht HT Me dia Ltd.
David OrmsbyGore, who as Lord Harlech later founded television channel HTV, was a personal confidant of President John F Kennedy after being appointed to Washington in 1960.
So close was the relationship that when the world teetered on the brink of nuclear war in November 1962, Ormsby-Gore told JFK to ignore Prime Minister Harold Macmillans suggestions of a high-level international conference to ease the crisis.
The revelation is one of a series found in recently-unearthed material on Ormsby-Gores career, including BBC interviews found in an attic and papers from the Kennedy Library in Boston.
Macmillan said nothing publicly but instructed Ormsby-Gore to make his concerns known and this time his ambassador did do as he was told.
The Cuban missile crisis at the height of the Cold War, saw the United States and the Soviet Union locked in a standoff for more than a month over the issue of Soviet missile deployment in Cuba just 90 miles off the Florida coast.
The crisis culminated in the naval blockade of Cuba and fears the two superpowers would begin a nuclear war.
Macmillan and Kennedy spoke four times on a hotline during the crisis, with Ormsby-Gore told in advance what the Prime Minister would say.
When the message came through that Macmillan was planning a conference to draw the superpowers away from war, Ormsby-Gore went privately to Kennedy and told him to ignore the Prime Minster.
The debate over whether the blockade of Cuba was legal or not the White House called it a quarantine for that reason also has echoes of the 2003 invasion of Iraq, which raised similar questions.
BBC Wales has also gained access to a number of interviews with Lord Harlech, which were recorded by a researcher in the late 1960s.
The tapes had lain in an attic for more than 30 years, and have only now been released, following a request by BBC Wales journalist Guto Thomas to the Kennedy Library.
He played a critical role in the relationship between Macmillan and Kennedy.
After retiring from the post in 1965 he took up his seat in the House of Lords, and founded Harlech Television later HTV in 1968.
Heyser, who lived in Apalachicola, died Monday at a nursing home in nearby Port St.
The retired Air Force lieutenant colonel said in a 2005 interview with The Associated Press that no one was more relieved than he that the crisis ended peacefully.
President John F Kennedy announced to the world that the photos proved the Soviet Union was building secret sites for nuclear-tipped missiles 90 miles south of Key West.
Kennedy summoned Heyser to the White House after the pilot made five flights over Cuba in nine days.
A third pilot was killed in a crash while training for the Cuban mission.
CIA pilots earlier had taken photos of anti-aircraft missile launchers in Cuba.
The Air Force pilots then were assigned to search for suspected sites of offensive missiles that could strike the United States.
He retired in 1974 after 30 years of service and returned to Apalachicola, where he was born and raised.
And from that derived many of the worst events of the last two decades.
President Kennedy defused a situation that might have led to nuclear war, they say.
Nikita Khrushchev was forced to withdraw Soviet missiles and bombers from Cuba, at little cost to America.
Kennedy promised never to help Cuban freedom fighters liberate their island from Castro's Communist tyranny.
He thus consigned the Cuban people to a loss of self-determination -for which fate the Cuban community in Miami remains bitter -and took from United States citizens the right to keep our hemisphere free of control by distant tyrannies.
Until Kennedy capitulated 25 years ago, Monroe's words long stood as a pillar of security for American freedom.
In 1962 the Soviets did, as promised, withdraw their missiles from Cuba.
But they have since installed bases for nuclear submarines and for fighter planes, such as the MiG-25, that carry nuclear bombs or cruise missiles.
In other words, the Soviets broke their word not to use Cuba as a base for nuclear bombs.
Moreover, the Kremlin has used Cuba as a springboard for spreading Communist tyranny throughout the Western Hemisphere and the world.
The Sandinista junta in Nicaragua was steered by Castro in its 1979 seizure of power from the legitimate forces that had overthrown dictator Somoza.
The Sandinistas make regular trips to Havana for advice on keeping their Leninist regime in power.
And unless the Nicaraguan freedom fighters -the contras -restore freedom there, the Kremlin will turn Nicaragua into the firstRed Army base on the North American mainland.
The Soviets have also used Castro's military as proxies to conquer Angola and Ethiopia.
The cost, an indirect but real result of Kennedy's timidity, has been at least a million deaths from war and forced famine.
Another indirect consequence of Kennedy's diffidence was a quick worsening of the Vietnam war.
Seeing how weakly America reacted just 90 miles from its own shores, the Soviets gave Hanoi the green light to open a full-scale assault on South Vietnam.
The cost, in American lives and domestic strife, was incalculable; it still burdens us.
After 25 years of appeasement and detente, the Soviets have gone from enjoying but a fraction of America's nuclear force to superiority in almost every area.
Perhaps Oct. should become a national day of mourning for the passing of America's control over her own destiny.
The film recreates the tension surrounding the Cuban missile crisis and JFK's White House.
All you have to do is look at a window and note that the landscape isn't scorched and barren to ascertain that the John Kennedy administration's confrontation with Nikita Khrushchev's Soviet Union didn't end in a nuclear cataclysm.
So it's quite remarkable that ``Thirteen Days,'' a cinematic account of the crisis set mostly within the White House, is so taut and exciting.
Those who remember those anxious hours of October 1962 will surely feel extra goose bumps crawling down their necks at shots of military forces being amassed on both sides of the conflict.
But even younger viewers should be entranced by the way the movie watches John F Kennedy and his administration desperately try to keep abreast of events.
Some White House veterans, though, have criticized it for, as they put it, misleadingly elevating the status of Kenneth O'Donnell, Kennedy's chief political adviser.
This line of argument runs that O'Donnell, played by Kevin Costner -one of the movie's producers -was only on the periphery of the missile crisis.
This may be so, but it ignores how dependent the movie, as a movie, is on O'Donnell's character.
O'Donnell who, by happy accident, was a middle-class family man, becomes a crucial identification figure for the audience, as well as an explicator of events.
O'Donnell was a friend of Kennedy (Bruce Greenwood) and of his brother, Attorney General Robert Kennedy and so, as far as the movie is concerned, is able to interact with the brothers, who operate in near-tandem, intimately.
O'Donnell is also a convenient dramatic figure, in that he can verbally explain certain twists to the audience that would go unsaid by more directly involved participants in the response.
Beyond that, O'Donnell plays a kind of Doc Holliday to the Kennedys' Earp brothers.
The Western comparison is apt because director Roger Donaldson, working from an intricate and engrossing script by David Self, has structured the film like a genre film.
From the onset of the crisis, the Kennedys are faced with a cadre of advisers recommending a strong military response to the Soviet gambit.
Maxwell Taylor , national security adviser McGeorge Bundy and éminence grise Dean Acheson (Len Cariou), these men wanted to respond with air strikes against the missiles followed by an invasion of the island.
JFK was instinctively opposed to this tactic, figuring that it would lead to a Soviet move in Berlin and from there to all-out nuclear war.
He had trouble coming up with a counter-plan, though, and when he did he still faced active opposition from his military staff.
According to the movie, the generals and admirals not only disapproved of the relative restraint of the blockade option but actively sought to undermine it.
Curtis LeMay is depicted as a particularly flagrant offender, using his prerogatives as head of the Strategic Air Command to order provocative military actions.
The movie manages to bounce an awful lot of balls off this creative tension.
There are constant political trap doors springing open and journalists poking around the hubbub of activity.
Despite the obvious fact that there were no outright battles, the movie does include several exciting scenes of other kinds of military confrontations, including one of reconnaissance flights over Cuba and of American and Soviet ships playing chicken at sea.
There's a strange dread, tinged with excitement, hanging over the whole story.
Maybe it's similar to the emotional fallout endured by people who have just escaped a life-threatening situation.
Once the adrenalin subsides, you begin to realize just how close you came to expiring, and then the fear, and a thrill, upsets your emotional equilibrium.
You can point out all the movie's qualities , but it's the visceral response that makes the movie.
The look back into the past when we walked on a tight rope and didn't even realize how taut and slippery it really was.
Dino Brugioni was the Chief Information Officer of the National Photographic Interpretation Center at the time, and worked with a team to analyze images taken by U-2 spy planes flying over Cuba.
Brugioni briefed President Kennedy, explaining which structures could indicate the presence of Soviet missile sites.
Chronology of a near-catastrophe October 11, 1987 | UPI Author: BUD NEWMAN Section: News 2349 Words OpenURL Link In a terrifyingly tense two-week superpower showdown called the Cuban missile crisis that began 25 years ago this week, the United States and the Soviets tiptoed to the brink of nuclear war and peeked over the edge.
Neither side liked what it saw and at the last moment both backed away.
And in the quarter century that has passed since that showdown in the fall of 1962, neither side has again allowed tensions or events to escalate to the frightening level they reached during those two weeks.
At the height of the crisis, which lasted from Oct. to Oct., 1962, Secretary of State Dean Rusk said the United States and the Soviet Union were 'eyeball to eyeball' over the long-range nuclear rockets Russia had secretly placed in Cuba and what the United States would do to get those missiles out.
According to crisis participants and books written on the subject, Kennedy and his top advisers decided on Saturday, Oct., that if the Soviets did not agree to remove the missiles by Sunday, the United States would plan to launch an air strike no later than Tuesday, Oct., to destroy them.
That was to be followed by a massive invasion of Cuba involving perhaps 100,000 United States combat troops.
How many Soviets and Americans might have been killed and whether such United States military actions might have escalated into all-out nuclear war will never be known because on Sunday, Oct., the Soviets agreed to dismantle the missiles in exchange for a United States pledge not to invade Cuba.
During the crisis, however, top government officials and the handful of reporters who would have been evacuated with the president in the event of a nuclear war were told never to be more than 15 minutes from the White House.
Military forces of both nations were placed on maximum alert and United States nuclear bombers were ordered into the air.
The missiles in Cuba, when operational, were capable of hitting cities as far north as Boston, as far west as Denver and as far south as Lima, Peru.
What follows is a day-by-day account, based on books and interviews, of how the irresistible force of the United States was locked in a potentially deadly duel with the immovable objects of the Soviet Union.
Two American U-2 spy planes, flying over Cuba to check reports of an arms buildup there, unknowingly captured on film from 13 miles over San Cristobal, southwest of Havana, the first evidence that Russia was building offensive missile sites.
They had never placed a similar offensive capability in Eastern Europe.
The U-2 photos taken Sunday are studied by intelligence analysts, who find evidence that launching sites for offensive missiles are being built.
Bundy is told of the discovery at 8:30 p.m. but chooses not to tell Kennedy that night.
Kennedy learns of the missile sites from Bundy and orders more U-2 flights.
He quickly forms a secret group of top trusted aides, dubbed EXCOM, for Executive Committee of the National Security Council.
EXCOM members, including military, diplomatic and political advisers, are told not to tell their wives or secretaries about the missiles.
Some Cabinet members type their own letters and memos to ensure secrecy, fearing that if word of the United States discovery leaked before a decision was made how to respond, Kennedy would lose the initiative to Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev.
Some EXCOM members push immediately for an air strike to wipe out the missiles, which are not yet operational.
Kennedy, aware that new U-2 photos show missiles at the launch sites for the first time, keeps a normal schedule by campaigning in Connecticut for Senate candidate Abraham Ribicoff.
EXCOM meets without Kennedy, as it often did so his presence would not inhibit frank talk about options.
Six options are discussed, ranging from doing nothing to a naval quarantine to a surprise attack.
The president's brother, Attorney General Robert Kennedy, becomes discussion leader and argues that a Pearl Harbor-style surprise strike runs counter to United States tradition.
The president keeps his longstanding appointment with Soviet Foreign Minister Andrei Gromyko but does not confront him with United States photos of the missiles.
Rusk observes that if the Cuban missiles are not removed 'we go down with a whimper.
Kennedy campaigns in Illinois and Ohio, where he develops a phony cold so he can return to Washington and deal with the crisis.
Officials make plans to broadcast a Kennedy speech on the crisis directly to Cuba via commercial radio stations.
Lines are run to station doors without telling station managers, who are asked one hour before Monday's speech to carry it.
The president, during a long, bitter EXCOM meeting, expresses a preference for more limited initial action instead of an air strike.
More than 1,000 Marines go to the United States Naval base at Guantanamo in Cuba; ships head for the Caribbean.
Bundy urges James Reston of the Times not to print it for national security reasons.
To decoy reporters, United States diplomats from other areas come to the White House and are told to be visible.
The Pentagon lies about the Caribbean troop buildup; Guantanamo dependents are evacuated.
He announces a United States quarantine of all offensive weapons to Cuba as a first step and warns that any ship from any port found to carry such weapons will be turned back or sunk.
He calls for emergency meetings of the Organization of American States and the United Nations Security Council.
The military goes on worldwide alert, missile launch crews are put on 70-hour weeks and B-52s with nuclear bombs in their bellies are sent aloft, where they remain for 30 days.
The Soviets criticize United States 'piracy' but make no military response to the quarantine.
At the United Nations, Soviet diplomat Mikhail Polonik tells United States diplomat Ernest Weiner, 'This could well be our last conversation.
Two African nations honor a United States request and refuse landing and refueling rights to Soviet planes, preventing the Soviets from bypassing the naval blockade and shipping weapons to Cuba by air.
Kennedy rejects Khrushchev's call for a summit meeting until after the Cuban missiles are withdrawn.
In Moscow, Westinghouse executive William Knox is called to a meeting with Khrushchev, who admits the missiles are in Cuba and threatens to use them if necessary.
He also warns that Soviet submarines will sink United States ships if any Soviet ships are stopped by the United States quarantine.
In a dramatic United Nations Security Council confrontation, United States Ambassador Adlai Stevenson questions Soviet Ambassador Valerian Zorin about the missiles.
Zorin responds that Stevenson will get his answer 'in due course' and that he does not want to be questioned like a prosecutor interrogates a witness.
In the Caribbean, the first Soviet ship is intercepted -a tanker carrying no weapons that is allowed to pass without being boarded to give the Soviets more time to consider their position.
A Panamanian ship under Soviet charter, the Marucla, becomes the first Russian ship stopped at sea.
The United States readies 5 million leaflets in Spanish to be dropped over Cuba before a possible United States air strike.
Alexander Fomin, a Soviet diplomat in the United States, calls ABC News State Department correspondent John Scali.
When they meet privately at a restaurant, Fomin proposes three terms for settling the crisis and asks Scali to relay them to top United States officials.
Those terms essentially call for removal of Soviet missiles from Cuba in exchange for a United States pledge not to invade Cuba -the terms on which the crisis eventually is resolved.
That night, Kennedy gets a long, rambling personal letter from Khrushchev outlining essentially the same terms for ending the crisis as set by Fomin.
A U-2 spy plane is shot down over Cuba and another operating near Alaska accidently strays over Russian airspace.
In Washington, before the United States can reply to Khrushchev's personal letter of the night before, another more formal, more harshly worded letter arrives from Moscow demanding that removal of United States missiles from Turkey also be part of the deal.
EXCOM members wonder if the new hard-line letter means Khrushchev is no longer in control in the Kremlin and wonder which of the three Soviet overtures to respond to.
Robert Kennedy proposes that the United States respond to the most favorable terms of all three and ignore the unfavorable terms.
With the Cuban missile sites nearly operational, the president decides that if the crisis is not over by the next day, plans for an air strike the following week will proceed.
Suddenly, the crisis is over and both sides back away from the brink of war.
In a response to Kennedy received that morning, the Soviets agree to dismantle the missiles in Cuba and return them to Russia.
United States missiles in Turkey are removed later but are not part of the deal.
