Plus Search Join Plus Plus Login Plus Topics Blog Slideshows Columnists Contributors Subscribe About Topics Blog Slideshows Columnists Contributors Subscribe About Plus Search Join Plus Plus Login Hot Topics #Roe Wade #Supreme Court #liberty #entertainment #politics Search Death by Fidel Dr.
I’ve been lecturing on the man every fall semester for 20 years, spending two or three weeks on him, his ideology, and the beautiful country he destroyed.
It’s ironic that the day he died I finished two long chapters on him for a book manuscript, and a family friend visiting for Thanksgiving just happened to ask how much longer I thought the 90-year-old despot might continue to live.
First, there’s the death he was responsible for since seizing Cuba in January 1959, and then, second, there are the incalculable millions more who would have died—not just in Cuba but in America and worldwide—had he gotten his way in October 1962.
Unfortunately, no one truly knows, akin to how no one knows how many poor souls he tossed into his jails, from political dissidents to priests to homosexuals.
Fidel’s prison-state has never permitted human-rights observers, reminiscent of how he never permitted the elections he repeatedly promised in the 1950s.
From the late 1950s to the late 1990s, it’s estimated that Castro killed between 15,000 to 18,000 people, whether victims of long-term imprisonment or outright execution by bullets.
Cuba is a surreal island of no boats, where boats are banned—because people with boats flee.
As they bob for breath, the Castro government sends military helicopters to drop large bags of sand on them from high above.
But here, too, these numbers do not capture the level of Fidel’s brutal madness.
Consider the actual millions he badly wanted to kill, especially here in America.
If Fidel Castro had his way in October 1962, the United States would have been leveled by atomic bombs and so would little Cuba, which would’ve ceased to exist.
The fact is that Fidel recommended to Nikita Khrushchev that Cuba and the USSR together launch an all-out nuclear attack upon the United States, literally igniting Armageddon.
The firing of those missiles alone would have led to at least 80 million dead Americans, which would have been half the population, plus added tens of millions of casualties.
In response, of course, the Soviets would have automatically launched on America from Soviet soil.
Under the terms of their NATO and Warsaw Pact charters, the territories of Western and Eastern Europe would also erupt.
Once the smoke cleared, hundreds of millions to possibly over a billion people could have perished, with Western civilization in its death throes.
If Fidel Castro had gotten his way, he would have precipitated the greatest slaughter in human history.
Their ambassador to Cuba, Alexander Alekseyev, was so stunned at what Castro told him that he stood frozen, speechless, crushed.
As McNamara learned, this was Fidel’s big chance to die as a “martyr” for Marxism-Leninism.
Thankfully, the world averted nuclear war, through the leadership of Khrushchev and Kennedy, and no thanks to bloodthirsty lunatics like Fidel Castro and Che Guevara, who were ready to blow up the world in the name of their Marxist-Leninist nightmare.
Paul Kengor is professor of political science and executive director of The Center for Vision & Values at Grove City College.
Frank Marshall Davis, The Untold Story of Barack Obama’s Mentor and Dupes: How America’s Adversaries Have Manipulated Progressives for a Century.
