Tensions are high between the two super-powers over the building of the Berlin Wall in 1961 and the siting of missiles by the USA in Turkey.
Fidel Castro led a communist revolution in Cuba in 1959 which ousted the USA-backed President Fulgencio Batista.
Castro repelled the 1961 USA sponsored Bay of Pigs invasion by 1,500 Cuban freedom fighters most of whom, within 3 days, had either been killed or captured.
The Hawks The Hawks wanted to undertake immediate airstrikes on the missile installations on Cuba, followed by an invasion to topple Castro’s regime.
JFK receives photographic proof undertake a naval blockade that the Soviet Union is deploying nuclear missiles to prevent Soviet vessels ‘right under his nose’ on Cuban soil.
JFK was in a bind but fortunately he had read ‘The Arthur Schlesinger, who was on ExCom at the time of Guns of August’ by Barbara Tuchman which chronicled the Bay of Pigs deliberations, later wrote; ‘our the staggering chain of events that led to the outbreak meetings were taking place in a curious atmosphere of of World War One.
JFK didn’t want to go down in history, along with Soviet Union leader Nikita Khrushchev, as one of the men that started a nuclear war – but he needed to demonstrate a forceful & decisive response.
People – being open to 2) To stimulate free-wheeling discussions, meetings were held in informal other people’s views this is settings, with no formal agendas and protocols.
ExCom would be broken into two groups themself in the shoes of that would work up the detail of their others, seeing things from preferred option and then reconvene. their perspective.
Each sub-group exchanged their worked-up preferred option paper with the other sub-group who then Decision-making in a crisis is stressful.
Create the time and space for high-quality thinking; if possible, try not to be rushed.
Some of the ‘hawks’ became ‘doves’ – initial opinions shifted as the detail was worked-up.
Final options Need to get everyone to focus on the big picture and presented to JFK for him to make the ultimate decision to transcend narrow agendas. collaborative leaders must also be decisive.
Be inclusive; set the framework; engage staff, create JFK opted for a naval blockade.
Be open to differing viewpoints. told the Soviet Ambassador that the USA would be blockading Cuba; he then went on television and Bring in knowledgeable experts who can bring in new addressed the American people on the threat posed by intelligence and different perspectives – irrespective the nuclear missiles on Cuban soil and of the blockade. of their position, status or employer.
