In fact, the Missile Crisis was never fully resolved, because of Fidel Castro’s refusal to allow UN inspections for nuclear weapons, to ensure that all the Soviet missiles had been removed.
However, decades of misinformation about JFK’s supposed pledge not to invade Cuba to end the Crisis is so pervasive that it is important to finally put it to rest.
This chapter not only documents that JFK made no such pledge, but shows how the failure to fully resolve the crisis led to the creation of the C-Day coup plan the following year.
JFK’s Secretary of State, Dean Rusk, explained to us in 1990 that JFK never agreed not to invade Cuba, the reason being that Castro refused to allow UN weapons inspectors into Cuba in the fall of 1962.
A transcript of President Kennedy’s November 20, 1962 prime-time TV news conference provided the first confirmation.
Making use of the new documents about the Missile Crisis that were being declassified, Bechloss was one of the first major historians to question the existence of the pledge.
He said JFK “may have deliberately avoided such an unambiguous commitment,” and that JFK “watered down the pledge” by adding conditions that “had the effect of neutralizing” it.
The actions of George W Bush, Saddam Hussein, and UN Secretary General Kofi Anan in the fall of 2002 regarding weapons of mass destruction parallel very closely the actions—and even the words—of JFK, Fidel Castro, and UN Secretary General U Thant in the fall of 1962.
The documents show that Dean Rusk was one of the United States officials who encouraged JFK not to make a firm no-invasion pledge in 1962, in order to allow the United States more flexibility in getting rid of Castro.
A strategy paper from Rusk’s State Department dated November 7, 1962 called for “maximal United States strategy . . . directed at the elimination . . . of the Castro regime,” even as the Missile Crisis was winding down.
A leading Cuban journalist at the time, Carlos Franqui, said that Castro “could never accept the idea of an inspection of any kind by any agency . . . because that would have finished him off” by making him look weak.
So, on November 21, 1962, JFK notified Khrushchev that the Missile Crisis was over—but with the issues of UN inspections and a no-invasion pledge still unresolved.
JFK and members of his administration felt that they had to do something to make sure all the missiles were gone and wouldn’t be reintroduced, since their efforts at the UN had proven fruitless.
By the spring of 1963, JFK and his key advisers were looking at new ways to topple Castro.
However, Rusk agreed that the American public—and possibly the Soviets—had assumed that there was such a pledge, which made the Kennedys’ efforts in 1963 all the more risky.
That’s why they needed a legitimate—or seemingly legitimate—”coup,” not just an assassination or a full-out United States invasion while Castro was still in power.
They didn’t want to risk a nuclear confrontation with the Soviets, so any United States military action against Cuba would have to take place under very special circumstances.
It would have to appear to be a peace-keeping mission, in response to a “palace coup” against Castro, to quote a recently declassified memo.
As Dean Rusk explained to us, Castro’s refusal to allow the UN inspections led directly to what became the Kennedys’ plan for a coup in Cuba.
The problem of Cuba remained a growing thorn in the side of JFK into the spring and summer of 1963.
Worse, the report said that concealed missile sites were “quite possible,” a charge that JFK couldn’t completely refute without the UN inspections that Castro wouldn’t allow.
Hawkish sub-committee chairman John Stennis was demanding that JFK take “positive” steps to make getting the Communists out of Cuba his highest priority.
Moreover, the United States might not be able to find the missiles if they were reintroduced, since the report said it would be “possible” for the Soviets “to adopt improved measures of concealment and deception . . . to avoid providing many of the indicators that United States intelligence would be relying on” to detect any new missiles.
We could not always depend on U-2 spy planes to do the job, since they were now sometimes being approached by Soviet MiG jets.
However, JFK had already been planning to take some type of action to prevent the reintroduction of Soviet missiles into Cuba and to resolve the problems with Castro once and for all.
White House memos declassified just a few years ago show that in late April 1963, the Kennedy administration was beginning a major push to eliminate Castro, setting the stage for C-Day.
It was just one of several such groups, all under the control of Bobby Kennedy.
The notes from a different Cuba subcommittee two days later develop the plans further.
Investigative journalist Gus Russo, who has numerous CIA sources, documented that “although Robert Kennedy assumed the task of dealing with the nuts and bolts of policy implementation, this by no means implies that the younger brother was operating without JFK’s implicit agreement.
Though addressed to President Kennedy, the memo also had a section where the Defense Department, the CIA, and Bobby Kennedy’s Justice Department could all check their “concurrences” with the policy.
These April 1963 meetings were not the first time the Kennedys had targeted Castro with a broad plan of covert action.
Robert Kennedy was actively involved, though he did not dominate it to the extent he would dominate C-Day the following year.
For decades, OPERATION MONGOOSE has been described as primarily a relentless and escalating campaign of sabotage and small Cuban exile raids that would somehow cause the overthrow of Castro.
Only in recent years have newly released documents and accounts shown that MONGOOSE also included plans for an invasion of Cuba in the fall of 1962.
The military was heavily involved with MONGOOSE, and suggested a variety of often outrageous plans to justify the military invasion, such as blaming the sinking of a ship or the crash of an airliner—or a United States space capsule—on the Cubans, or staging a phony attack on Guantanamo.
MONGOOSE was quietly terminated in early 1963 after a demonstrable lack of results.
Some of those programs were known to the Kennedys and their Cuban subcommittees.
It was an attempt to find disgruntled military officials in Cuba who might be willing to recruit higher military officials in a plot to overthrow Castro.
In addition, the CIA had been supporting dozens of Cuban exile groups for years, but most were ineffective, and the Kennedys were starting to scale back their support and shut down the groups’ raids on Cuba.
The CIA had two other major operations against Cuba that were being hidden from the Kennedys in April 1963.
One was CIA backing for the violent Cuban exile group Alpha 66, which even attacked Soviet ships in Cuban waters, a dangerous act during the Cold War.
Even as JFK denounced Alpha 66 and tried to clamp down on its leadership, he didn’t realize that the CIA was actually directing the group’s activities.
The other major operation was the CIA’s ongoing plots with Mafia boss Johnny Rosselli to assassinate Castro.
The CIA-Mafia plots began in 1959, had been ramped up in the summer of 1960 prior to JFK’s election, and continued even after the CIA had assured Bobby Kennedy in May 1962 that they had been stopped.
These plots were still active in the spring of 1963, with two well-documented attempts.
This program was first uncovered by the Senate Church Committee in the mid-1970s.
CIA Director John McCone, a recent JFK appointee, was kept in the dark about the unsanctioned CIA operations as much as JFK was.
CIA officials who were aware of them, the highest of whom appears to have been Deputy Director for Plans Richard Helms, had far different ideas on overthrowing Castro by 1963 than did the Kennedys.
Historian Arthur Schlesinger, Jr., a JFK aide at the time, wrote that “the CIA wished to organize Castro’s overthrow from outside Cuba, as against the White House, the Attorney General’s office and State who wished to support an anti-Castro movement inside Cuba.
Although our sources and documents indicate that Schlesinger did not know about the plan for a coup in Cuba, he worked closely enough with the Kennedys to accurately describe their feelings about Cuba.
The Kennedys wanted a change in Cuba to be part of a political solution, whether by a genuine coup or a negotiated agreement with Castro, whereas Helms and other CIA officials acted as if assassination of Castro by any means at any time was justified.
Since none of the CIA’s sanctioned or unsanctioned actions were having much effect by April 1963, the Kennedys were very receptive just a few weeks later when one of the highest officials in Cuba contacted a Kennedy ally and offered to stage a coup against Castro, if the Kennedys would back him.
Please follow us across to hartmannreport.com this will be the only place going forward to read Thom's blog posts and articles.
Sign Up Now Footer Navigation CommunityBlogs Contact Congress ThomAbout Blog Articles Events Videos The Program RadioListen Live Find a Station Sue's daily stacks © 2022 Mythical Intelligence, inc.
