So we met at lunch to make the final touch ups to our essay, printed out our editorial cartoon and coloured it in.
Fea and Amberly wrote their reflections, while asha coloured in the cartoon.
And if you won't even say you're sorry, you're no sort of King at all,” said Bartholomew in Dr.
The book Bartholomew and the Oobleck, is about the greedy and proud King Derwin who hires royal magicians to create a new weather element.
The result, oobleck, falls from the sky causing a sticky mess which wrecks havoc on the Kingdom of Didd.
The problem is finally resolved when the king takes responsibility for the disaster and apologizes.
He had grew tired of the four common weather elements of rain, sun, fog and snow, and desperately wants something new to prove his might as King.
His resentment of the status quo was much like Fidel Castro’s outlook on Cuba’s dictatorship government.
King Derwin is not capable of creating a new weather element by himself, therefore summons a higher power in the form of his Royal Magicians to carry out the task.
However, unlike the other harmless elements, the oobleck would cause devastation.
Castro and King Derwin both brought in higher powers to fulfill their aspirations, but both higher powers later cause a destructive change.
In the book Bartholomew and The Oobleck, when the Oobleck arrives, it wrecks havoc on the citizens of Didd.
The oobleck causes people and animals to get stuck in the sludge, without any hope of escaping.
When the Oobleck falls on the Kingdom of Didd, the citizens are frightened by the menacing green blobs falling from the sky and rendered powerless, just like the citizens of America.
The United States tried many times to resolve their problems with Cuba and many of their attempts were futile.
Bartholomew tries to warn the citizens of Didd by sounding the horn and asking the general for assistance, but the horn is covered in Oobleck and the general is too arrogant to realise that the Oobleck was a problem.
The American public feared the worst, and knows that the missiles could potentially reach American soil with devastating consequences.
In Bartholomew and the Oobleck the citizens are worried because they do not know when the Oobleck will go away and can do nothing to help the situation.
Similarly, the American people could do nothing but have faith in Kennedy's decisions.
The countries involved could reach a peaceful agreement or the crisis could result in war.
Possibly a third world war and, most likely, with the help of the nuclear missiles that caused the crisis in the first place, complete destruction of cities, countries, or even the entire earth.
It's at this point of the story where Bartholomew abandons his fruitless efforts to warn the people about the sticky oobleck and returns to King Derwin.
Bartholomew gets angry with the king and demands an apology for the mess he's created.
Then, Bartholomew tells King Derwin that the least thing he can do is apologize and if he does not, he's no sort of king at all.
Luckily, for the kingdom of Didd and the entire world, a deadly end is avoided.
The stories both start with a character, King Derwin and Fidel Castro, becoming frustrated with some aspect of their lives.
These characters take action to remove this frustrating aspect and enlist a higher power for help.
In both situations, this help they enlist causes much trouble, and causes people to get ""stuck"" in a sticky situation that has potential to end fatally.
The fact that the book and the crisis follow a similar pattern demonstrates how well Dr.
He understood that greed and pride can be detrimental and that sometimes apologizing is the best thing to do.
Its length allows this book to include detailed facts about the Crisis.
His only bias is that, as he is American, he does seem to believe that the United States authorities were right and the Soviets wrong, but this is only seen by the way he presents his facts and doesn't interfere with the truthfulness of them.
This can be seen by the pages of source notes and bibliography included in the book.
This historical documentary, hosted by internationally acclaimed writer Tom Clancy, was produced by the Discovery Channel commemorating the 40th anniversary of the crisis.
It goes into detail about the Soviets' plan to secretly transport and set-up missiles in Cuba, the American's discovery of the missiles, and the agreement that marked the end of the crisis.
This is a very reliable source because some of it's information is from first-hand interviews of people in the American and Soviet military, as well as real video and photos that were taken during the crisis.
The facts shown are not twisted to fit personal opinion, but rather documented as they occurred from dependable, unfiltered primary resources.
Defcon2 gave a very clear and informative time line which was especially useful to plan out the essay event by event.
It was also very useful when looking into more specific information about the Soviet’s plan and the Americans’ discovery of the weapons.
This article states that U Thant actively mediated and helped resolve the crisis.
He successfully appealed to Kennedy and Khrushchev to allow time to resolve the naval blockade peacefully.
This source is a reliable source as it comes from the Ottawa Citizen, a well respected newspaper.
In addition the authors are well qualified to discuss military matters as Walter Dorn is a professor at the Royal Military College of Canada and Chair of the Canadian Pugwash Group and Robert Pauk is a research associate and UN peacekeeper.
Some bias might be that the article is overtly enthusiastic about the role of U Thant during the crisis.
In addition, all of our other sources merely mentioned U Thant and did not go into detail about his contribution to resolving the crisis.
This gave us a new perspective on the crisis, that the crisis was not only resolved just by Kennedy, but also by U Thant in his tireless quest for peace.
We used this source in our essay to explain the contributions of U Thant and Kennedy that helped resolve the conflict.
This book has a section entitled ""Notes"" which provides a list of references used to write this book to assure readers of its truthfulness.
As this book is the longest it also has more space to go into a bit more detail than some of the other books.
This book explains the beginnings of the cold war and the beginnings of the friendly relationship between Cuba and the Soviet Union, so that the reader gets a sense of the mounting tensions and panic associated with the threat of nuclear war.
In addition, this book explains in detail about the Communist relationship of Cuba with the Soviet Union and the tensions felt in America during the crisis.
The information in Catherine's book is reliable as there are many sources that Catherine used to write her book and many suggestions for further reading.
Catherine seems like a well-learned lady, with a masters in English language.
This source had more information of the Bay of Pigs Blunder and the ascension into power of Fidel Castro than our other sources, but it did not have as much about the difficult decisions President Kennedy had to make in order to get the Soviets to remove the missiles from Cuba.
In addition, U Thant is not mentioned much in this book, though he is important to the resolution of the crisis.
In particular, the information on the Bay of Pigs invasion was useful, as some of the other books barely had any information on the invasion.
Also, Catherine’s book provided good detail on all the events that happened during the Crisis, especially the beginnings of the crisis, Cuba’s ascension into power and how the missiles are discovered by the Americans.
Fea finished her annotated bibliography, made the new changes to her part of the essay, and finalized the outline for the editorial cartoon.
Tonight Fea will write her reflection and color in the editorial cartoon.
Amberly organized all of the drafts, edited a version of the essay, complied everybody's changes together but mostly kept the sanity of the group.
Amberly also helped Asha by editing her two sources for the annotated bibliography, and helped her with the format.
Asha made the changes to her part of the annotated bibliography, made changes to her part of the essay and helped Fea decide what to do with the editorial cartoon.
In addition, Asha asked Mr Blauer what he thought of our editorial cartoon.
Mr Blauer thought that we should show Khrushchev in a more concrete way and also use a different picture to depict Kennedy.
He also thought that we should name the lawn Cuba, so as to make our picture clear.
Amberly’s work for tonight is to write compile the annotated bibliography together and to have a family member look over the essay for her.
Asha’s work is to edit the essay very thoroughly and to write this blog post.
We still have a lot of work to do, but since we have the full class tomorrow, I am sure we can get the project done with great success.
January, 11, 2010 Today in class, we went over possible ideas for the editorial cartoon.
Outline of U.S, with Kennedy face in center, Outline of Cuba with Castro+Krushchev faces in center, both countries covered in oobleck2.
Missiles dripping with oobleck, based on Cuban flag, pointed at American flagIn the end, we decided to go with the third idea.
The Essay Came Together Over the weekend, we Asha took home one book, while Amberly took two.
Also, got the timelines from all of the books as Amberly has so graciously scanned them for Fea and Asha.
In addition, Asha got some pages about operation mongoose and President Kennedy’s reaction to the Cuban missile Crisis from Amberly, that Asha had asked for on Friday.
These scans were important, because they enabled us to use more than one source to write our paragraphs, and had additional information than the other source.
During the weekend, Fea and Asha sent their parts to Amberly, who put each of the parts together to make the first draft.
Fea still hadn't written in her in-text citations, so she spent most of the class doing that.
Asha also spent time doing the citations, as on the pages Amberly sent, there were no page numbers or bibliographical information.
Amberly spent time improving the introduction so that it gave a good summary of the Cuban missile crisis, the book Bartholomew and the Oobleck, and how the things that happened during the book and during the crisis were related.
This would prove to be a difficult thing to do, since most of the information is necessary.
Thursday January 6th, 2011 On Thursday January 6th, Fea came back, which was lovely, since now we could start working on the essay.
We divided the essay up into three parts, which is equal to the number of people in the group, as you might have guessed.
FEAKing Derwin orders his Royal Magicians to make a new weather: FEARoyal Magicians make the Oobleck: FEAThe Oobleck arrives: ASHABartholomew tries, unsuccessfully to warn people: ASHACitizens of Didd get stuck in Oobleck : ASHAKing apologizes : AMBERLYOobleck goes away : AMBERLYAmberly was also given the job of writing the introduction and the conclusion.
The Soviet Union was looking to find other nations to spread Socialistic ideal to the Western World.
The Soviet Union feared that they would lose Cuba, a fellow communist nation, to a U.S invasion.
That prompted them to place missiles in Cuba to keep the country in the state that they wanted.
Denial At first, King Derwin refused to admit the disaster he’d caused.
The Soviets tried to deny that they had any offensive weapons stationed in Cuba.
Admittance In the end, King Derwin admits that he was wrong, and summons the Royal Magicians to get rid of all the Oobleck.
The Soviet Union admits to having missiles in Cuba, and later on removes them.
This was the table that resulted:King becomes angry for the weather:Fidel Castro takes power in Cuba, removing the dictator Fulgencio Batista, who had been supported by the United States Fidel Castro nationalizes more than 1 billion dollars worth of American property.
