Conspiracy Suspects 1963 Gallery Shop Nikita Khrushchev Action adventure novel Saving Jackie K explores escalating tensions between the United States and Russia, in the 'Cold War' timeframe preceding JFK's tragic assassination.
Soviet Premier, Nikita Khrushchev, is shown with increasing hostility toward the United States and our president.
During the power struggle following the 1953 death of Soviet Premier Joseph Stalin, Khrushchev eventually emerged victorious.
By late 1956, the new leader taunted the United States and its western allies with the threat, ""Whether you like it or not, history is on our side.
In Kennedy's first year in office, 1961, Khrushchev showcased his hothead temper in an exchange at a United Nations Plenary Meeting.
The Soviet premier put forth a resolution decrying colonialism by Western Europe, and the Philippine Ambassador challenged him on his hypocrisy, countering that Russia was equally guilty of colonialism in Eastern Europe.
Khrushchev responded in a rage, taking off his right shoe and pounding it repeatedly on the desk.
He then creatively called the Filipino a jerk, a stooge, and a lackey of imperialism.
In October 1962, Khrushchev conspired with Cuban dictator Fidel Castro, and began secretly planting intermediate-range ballistic missiles in Cuba, with trajectories capable of striking the United States.
Acting quickly, JFK ordered a Naval blockade of supplies and weapons from being shipped to Cuba from Russia.
Several weeks later, Khrushchev agreed to withdraw the bombs, and Kennedy subsequently lifted the quarantine.
By August of 1963, world leaders seemed to making overtures toward peace, at least symbolically.
Along with Great Britain, both the United States and USSR signed a joint Nuclear Test Ban Treaty.
The accord was enacted to prohibit experimental detonations of atomic weapons in the atmosphere, outer space, and under water, effectively allowing only underground explosions.
The purported rationale was to slow the arms race and prevent excessive fallout.
The two super powers then began making plans for a second historic summit.
Kennedy and Khrushchev had previously met in Vienna, 1961, with harsh words being exchanged on both sides.
But hopes for improved relations between the two men and their countries were dashed on November 22, 1963, when JFK was assassinated.
