Great Nuclear War, ASB Wars Great Nuclear War View source History Talk Welcome to the portal page for ""Great Nuclear War"" This timeline explores the broken world left by the Great Nuclear War October 28, 1962.
On October 27th, a B-52 bomber crashes shortly after take off causing its nuclear payload to detonate eviscerating a small United States Air Force Base in the rural town of Damascus, Arkansas.
The United States are swift to respond launching a “Retaliatory Strike” against the USSR in response to what they believe to be a Soviet First Strike.
Less than ten minutes later Soviet and American missiles are making landfall severely crippling both nations.
France, in light of this sudden, and terrifying American aggression, refuses to launch their missiles against the USSR, and after a short but intense series of reprisals, lasting approximately six hours, the world is razed to the ground by nuclear arm fire, and human civilization along with it.
While the war is never officially declared over, the early morning hours of October 28th mark the end a chapter of human history.
This is also a collaborative timeline, produced by a team of contributors.
If you want to join us in developing this world, we welcome your additions.
Before making major edits to the articles within this ATL, please take some time to read the Editorial Guidelines Contents 1 Introduction 1.
This invasion didn't lead to the Nuclear War everyone feared, until a takeoff accident on a B-52 Bomber caused a Nuclear Detonation.
But it was not an end; but rather the preface to a new volume of human history.
Timeline of Crisis It should be noted that in this timeline the Soviet strategic nuclear forces are on par with the United States strategic missile forces due to a nuclear incident in 1958 which sent the Soviets into a frenzy when it came to the expansion of their nuclear forces.
So in this timeline 10 IRBM sites are built in Cuba instead of six and the number of Soviet ICBMs is larger than the United States ICBM force than by about 20 missiles and in this timeline both the United States and the USSR would be obliterated.
Saturday, October 27, 1962 9:00 AM CIA memorandum indicates all of the 10 IRBM sites in Cuba appear to be operational.
Cuban mobilization continues at a high rate, but Cuban forces have strict orders not to fire unless fired upon.
After realizing the error, the pilot radios for backup as he flies back to Alaska.
Two nuclear-armed F-102s respond, and although the flight is shadowed by Soviet aircraft, no shots are fired.
Upon receiving the news, the ExComm believes the order to fire on the U-2 was given by the Kremlin and is intended to escalate the conflict.
When in reality, the order was given by a Soviet Colonel named Antipov Svyatoslav who was in command of the SAMM Battery in Cuba which shot down the U-2, and the Kremlin was unaware of the situation.
They take heavy fire, and one aircraft is hit by a 37mm anti-aircraft shell but is able to return to base.
He decides not to order a reprisal raid on the SAM sites that shot down the aircraft, angering many in the Pentagon, but indicates that if another aircraft is shot down, he will authorize retaliation.
In an attempt to ""communicate,"" the Beale begins pinging with active sonar and drops practice depth charges on the submarine.
Sevastopol is severly damaged 4:28 PM In Washington, Kennedy and ExComm agree to a response to Khrushchev's trade letter, and agree to the deal as long as the American missile withdrawal will be kept secret.
In exchange for that concession, the United States will agree to a guarantee of non-invasion of Cuba.
Though aware that American tactics involved the use of practice depth charges, the Soviet submariners believe they are under attack.
In response it launches two out of its three 15 kiloton nuclear torpedoes at the USS Cony and Beale, along with another one launched at the American aircraft carrier the USS Randolph.
At 40 knots, it closes the distance between the submarine and the USS Cony and USS Randolph quickly.
The nearby aircraft carrier USS Randolph is destroyed, and several of its accompanying destroyers are wrecked as well.
The B-59, meanwhile, managed to surface just in time to avoid getting hit by a massive underwater shock wave which would have buckled its hull.
Water floods various compartments of the submarine, sending it on a mad dash for land.
No nuclear weapons are authorized to be used, but Soviet submarines west of 60W are to be killed on sight, but no action is to be taken outside of the western Atlantic Ocean.
The Soviet Ambassador, Anatoly Dobrynin is to be notified of this fact immediately.
The USS Essex, which is heading a task force hunting a submarine at the time of the message, launches alert aircraft, and all ships arm weapons.
The report comes from the freighter Pella, which had seen 3 large mushroom clouds to the north as it approached the quarantine line.
Khrushchev demands an immediate verification and orders that a message be sent to the embassy in Washington.
As a precaution, he orders a heightened state of alert for Soviet strategic forces.
A heated exchange follows, and Dobrynin leaves the White House 15 minutes later, almost at a run.
This fact is observed by reporters who have been watching the comings-and-goings at the building since the beginning of the crisis.
The attack proves successful, and the submarine is driven to the surface where it is sunk by gunfire from the depth-charging destroyers.
Before being destroyed, it manages to transmit a distress call indicating that it is under attack by American ships and is sinking.
The garbled call is picked up by nearby Soviet ships and is relayed across the Atlantic to the Soviet Union.
Upon receipt of the news, Khrushchev orders immediate counter action, ordering the Soviet military to full readiness and also ordering that Soviet ships and submarines may attack American Military ships at sea.
Its captain, Nikolai Annenkov, has the submarine first target an American Cruiser along the Quarantine Line.
The cruiser is hit by two torpedoes and sinks, sending out a distress call as it goes to the bottom.
As with the Soviet submarine's distress call an hour before, the message is passed on by other ships.
It is only one of six to go across the radio within 15 minutes as other Soviet submarines begin to get to work.
Khrushchev questions the message, as the Americans now seem to be attacking Soviet submarines.
He demands Dobrynin ask Kennedy if a state of war exists between their two countries.
He orders that American ships prosecute any Soviet vessels in the Atlantic Ocean.
After extensive negotiations with the Joint Chiefs and ExComm, he orders that a strike be readied for the missile sites in Cuba.
If war is at hand, Kennedy thinks, those missiles must not leave the ground.
The conversation is short and to the point, as Kennedy is furious over the nuclear attacks and the perceived Soviet sneak attack.
But the Soviets are equally outraged about the attack on their submarines and the use of a nuclear depth charge against one of their submarines before the submarine in question, the B-59 even used it nuclear torpedos.
The first real stages of fear setting in, Dobrynin relays the message to Moscow via radio, and requests that Khrushchev come to the radio in person so that a direct channel can be set up between him and Kennedy.
Over the next twenty minutes, 9 Soviet vessels will be sunk around the world and 11 American ships will join them at the bottom of the sea.
As a result of the Defense Emergency, Civil Defense measures begin to be put into place, and in several cities, air raid sirens are accidentally switched on, causing panic.
A Soviet soldier, patrolling with a loaded rifle, trips, firing a single shot harmlessly into the air.
On the other side of the border, American soldiers, tense with the news from the other side of the Atlantic, fire on the Soviet soldiers that they believe are attacking.
After ten minutes of firing, the Soviets throw a grenade over the wall kill 4 out of the 6 American Soldiers.
But, then each side retreats deeper into its sector of Berlin, having received pullback orders from their respective commanders, who want to avoid conflict as long as possible.
Over the next few hours, the situation at sea continues to deteriorate as diplomats on both sides of the world work to arrange a voice-to-voice meeting between the two leaders.
Meanwhile, ships and submarines are fighting a war while most of the western world sleeps.
In Washington, Kennedy is increasingly bombarded by questions from political leaders across the country as news of the nuclear attack and subsequent sinkings trickles out.
Not many people in the United States have gone to sleep, and stay glued to their televisions and radios for the latest news bulletins.
Premature air raid sirens have awoken many from bed, and in some cities there are riots and bouts of looting, which are suppressed by local police.
Sunday, October 28, 1962 12:04 AM – In Washington and Moscow, Kennedy and Khrushchev hang up their phones with a sense of finality, concluding a nearly 90 minute discussion – if such a disorganized, shout-filled conversation deserves that label – that leaves both leaders believing the other has fired the first shots.
Pressured by many members of the ExComm, and by his military advisors, Kennedy believes that the best way to bring the crisis to an end is to destroy the missiles that are causing it.
Kennedy, in a deep malaise, and seeing no other option, authorizes the invasion.
He repeatedly reminds himself that the risk is worth it, that it could save millions of Americans.
Even if the Soviets launch… 1:37 AM – After nearly an hour of discussion, Khrushchev comes to an undeniable conclusion – the Soviet Union and the United States are both in a position it cannot win.
A strike against the NATO or Warsaw Pact countries, even if successful, would invite a massive nuclear attack against both sides, something that would utterly destroy both countries.
He is aware, even if the United States is not, is aware that his nuclear capabilities are more numerous than the United States nuclear capabilities.
But he realizes if he were to stand down he risked the possibility of a Military Coup by the KGB which would launch against the United States and at least this way he could control the situation.
Thus with the support of his military advisors and the majority of the Cabinet, he orders that if the Americans invade Cuba that the Soviets will declare war.
Kennedy refuses to discuss the topic, and instead veers conversation toward the upcoming attack on Cuba.
As mid morning sunlight streams through the windows of his office, the door bursts open to admit 4 KGB officers, who bring news of the Americans begging an invasion of Cuba.
Khrushchev almost dies of a heart attack but is saved by onsite soldiers with medical training.
The entire Cuban naval defense network and military is put at full alert along with half of the soviet troops on the island.
MiG fighters launch from Cuba, but they are vastly outnumbered by the approaching American aircraft, which number nearly 120.
Due to the odds stacked against them, the 60 MiGs are shot down in short order, with the loss of 50 American aircraft.
Though the American bombers take a few losses from SAM fire, Cuban anti aircraft gunnery is fairly good due to Soviet training, and downs 10 aircraft.
Only one SAM site is destroyed, and a few additional bombers tasked with hitting the Cuban airfields are chased off by a remming MiGs.
However MiG-17 fighters from bases further away arrive and chase off the now undefended American Bombers.
Which makes the bombing ineffective and they only destroy 50% of the known IRBM and MRBM sites.
Which left about 75% of the Soviet IRBM and MRBM Force on the island of Cuba left.
But the attack is aborted because Cuban air defenses and aircraft were now swarming the area and sending more aircraft in would be a suicide mission.
It will be a great challenge, but all agree to a plan of action – an invasion of Western Europe, with the aim of eliminating western nuclear arms that might threaten the Soviet Union.
Khrushchev, knowing the real numbers on the ground – the United States with 27,000+ nuclear warheads, versus the Soviet Union’s 30,000+, and most of those on long-range launchers – knew the strategy would work.
Contacting the various commanders of armies along the frontier, Khrushchev and his advisors set their plan into motion.
H-hour will be at dawn the next day, in order to achieve the greatest amount of surprise possible.
The Red Army may not be fully ready, but neither will NATO… or so the thought goes.
President Kennedy has called for a special meeting of the combined Congress in order to take a vote on a declaration of war.
The question on everyone’s mind is whether it will be only against Cuba, or also against the Soviet Union.
In Cuba itself, Kennedy has authorized the use of everything short of nuclear weapons in order to ensure the safety of Guantanamo Bay.
Doubts about moving ahead with an invasion are quickly are squashed by the need to destroy the west’s nuclear capabilities.
Over a third of the assembled chamber casts votes via telephone, due to the fear of a surprise Soviet attack.
This bending of the rules is allowed due to the extraordinary circumstances of the vote.
Immense public pressure is being placed on Kennedy to retaliate in nuclear form, given the public knowledge that the Soviets and the United States have already used nuclear weapons, but Kennedy feels as in control of the situation as he’s been in the last 24 hours, and resists the pressure.
The Essex task force has been chasing the submarine for the last 12 hours, and several close depth charges have caused minor damage throughout the boat.
Because of the long range, and thanks to the five destroyers screening the Essex, Captain Nikolai Shumkov orders the submarine’s single nuclear torpedo readied.
The 15kt nuclear warhead will kill the carrier even if it detonates a ways off after running out the 4,000m programmed distance.
After launch, the B-130 executes an emergency turn, and slips away undetected.
It, along with three of its escorts, is vaporized in less than a second.
Only one destroyer, which had detected the noise of the B-130’s emergency turn and had gone to investigate, evades destruction.
Unlike the first nuclear attack, reports are immediately picked up outside the White House, and the President is bombarded by calls for retaliation against Cuba.
The city of Guantanamo, Cuba, will be targeted by a 50kt nuclear device, to be delivered by the United States Air Force.
This will have the effect of responding to the Soviet move, as well as relieving pressure on the embattled defenders of Guantanamo Naval Base.
Rioters storm the gates of the embassy, burning buildings, and lynching the few people still present in the building.
Police, unwilling to stop the violence, stand by while the building burns before eventually breaking up the protest.
Ambassador Dobrynin, having been evacuated several hours earlier, watches the events unfold on television.
He will leave for Mexico in less than an hour, en route to Moscow, having been quietly recalled by Khrushchev.
The assistant ambassador will remain in Mexico to coordinate the American withdrawal from Europe the Soviets hope will take place following their predicted victory.
Only one is scheduled to drop its weapon, but the other one is a backup in the event that the primary bomber is shot down.
Their mission will be to clear the airspace around Guantanamo and ensure the safe arrival of the B-52s.
MiG-17s scramble from Cuban airfields, but are shot down in rapid succession by the F-4 Phantoms that maintain a constant presence over Cuban airfields.
Many sites uncovered during the first wave’s attack are destroyed in this wave of bombing.
Only one makes an approach over the target, as the other aircraft stands off in reserve.
A few American bombers make one final run through the remaining defenses to draw off whatever missiles or antiaircraft fire remains.
As a result, only one SAM is launched at a B-52, and that at one of the reserves, which is damaged in the attack.
The resulting explosion incinerates the town, killing an estimated 20,000 people instantly.
Along the perimeter of the Naval Base, firing comes almost to a complete halt as defender and attacker alike turn to stare at the enormous fireball rising into the sky a dozen miles to the north.
He quickly launches into a tirade, demanding an immediate nuclear response from General Issa Pliyev, commander of Soviet forces in Cuba.
Though Pliyev isn’t allowed to launch the IRBMs or SRBMs, Castro knows that the general still has several short-ranged tactical nuclear missiles which he has permission to use, small-warhead missiles intended for battlefield use.
He demands that the general use these against Guantanamo Naval Base in retaliation for the American nuclear strike.
But, first he withdraws the 20,500 Warsaw Pact he sent to aid in the attack on Guantanamo.
For most, this only hardens his resolve that NATO’s nuclear assets in Western Europe must be destroyed quickly, and at as low a price as possible.
Air support of ground forces will be sacrificed to missions targeted at NATO missiles and air power.
One missile overshoots the base entirely, landing in the Caribbean Sea.
Another one impacts at the far eastern end of Guantanamo’s runway, blasting chunks of concrete into the air in an enormous fireball.
Two fall amidst the American buildings on the eastern side of the bay, killing hundreds of Americans in an instant.
The final two missiles impacts amid aircraft hangars and a control tower on the western side of the bay, destroying Guantanamo’s ability to launch aircraft and killing several hundred more Americans.
Among those killed are the commanders of the Marine brigade currently battling along the perimeter of the isolated base.
Though the marines fight on, they have largely lost contact with higher command.
Kennedy and the rest of the ExComm, who had previously believed Khrushchev's claim of tactical nuclear rockets to be a bluff, are stunned to the core.
The CIA and aerial reconnaissance had not revealed the presence of any FROG launchers on the island.
Kennedy feels a brief instant of guilt, but quickly moves to what should be done.
Reluctantly, Kennedy agrees that the Enterprise and Independence carrier groups to the west and south of Jamaica, respectively, should prepare to assist the invasion rather than begin an evacuation.
After an additional consultation with ExComm and others, Kennedy agrees to the Joint Chiefs’ request for a nuclear strike on Havana both to retaliate for the destruction of Havana and to soften Cuban defenses for the invasion, which has an H-hour set for noon, 14 hours hence.
Kennedy is under enormous pressure from Congress to “level Cuba” and end the threat once and for all.
Ironically, this would probably have been the right move, as it would have irrevocably eliminated the nuclear threat from the island – at the cost of every human being living on it.
In his heart, he knows that the invasion of Cuba will cost many lives, but those lives will mean a cost far less than that of the devastation of Cuba.
Due to the large number of SAMs and antiaircraft fire expected around Havana, the bomber is armed with a single AGM-28 Hound Dog standoff missile.
As more and more SAC bombers are called into service, armed, and sent to standoff positions near the Soviet Union, every bomber is valuable, and this one will not be risked.
It falls to an altitude of 5,000 feet before igniting its engine and rocketing toward Cuba.
However, Cuban radar detects its launch and the city along with Castro is evacuated.
Although it explodes over the south side of the city, rather than the downtown section of the city, the large size of the warhead renders any inaccuracy moot.
Among the nearly 500,000 people who die in the first five minutes after the detonation is Fidel Castro’s close advisor and older brother Ramón Castro, who has been directing the ongoing fight from a bunker beneath the city.
General Pliyev, driving west in a chauffeured car, is rocked by the explosion, despite being 30 miles from the city.
The Cubans will be utterly enraged, he realizes – he has to get to the remaining nukes in order to prevent the Cubans from seizing them.
He has no desire to see a Cuban-launched nuclear missile start a war between his country and the United States, not out of any love for the United States, but rather a love for the Soviet Union.
Monday, October 29, 1962 12:35 AM – An exhausted President Kennedy emerges from a conference with the Joint Chiefs of Staff and other American military advisers.
Virtually every topic in relation to the growing war is discussed, ranging from the ongoing invasion of Cuba, the growing Soviet activity in Europe, and the growing number of flashpoints around the world, from the Korean border to the Persian/Soviet border, to Europe, Berlin, and the situation at sea, which is finally settling as the Soviets have taken firm control of the North Atlantic, Baltic, and North Pacific, while the Americans had control over the East Pacific, South Atlantic, and South Pacific.
Before adjourning to bed for a short rest Kennedy has been awake for more than 40 consecutive hours – he remarks that it’s a dark day and that he hopes the world will still be there when he wakes up.
Events in Cuba have made it abundantly clear to the Soviets that if things are not handled quickly, they will not be handled at all.
Khrushchev believed he could handle Kennedy – events in Cuba showed otherwise.
So the Soviets responded to the destruction of Havana, Santiago, and Guantanamo with the support of Castro give the order for 3 nuclear launches against the American ally South Korea in response for the attacks on Cuba.
Five Million people die between the attacks on all three cities and then if to make matters worse North Korean, Chinese, and Soviet Troops surged across the border and into South Korea.
Facing little to no resistance as the disorganized and scattered South Korean defenders that were more focused with setting up refugee camps for survivors of the attacks than stopping the North Koreans.
Meanwhile, In the Soviet Union and many other Warsaw Pact countries bombers are already in the air, streaming from bases all over the Eastern Bloc Nations to targets in Western Europe, the Middle East, and Asia.
Only the bare reserves – nuclear-armed retaliatory bombers stand in reserve to finish things if the strikes do not succeed.
He orders word of Havana’s destruction be spread among the soldiers, in order to spur them to fight harder.
Electrons know no borders, and the Soviet and Warsaw Pact buildup is noticed with alarm by NATO aerial commanders.
With General Norstad out of communications, NATO sector commanders are left to order their horrifically outnumbered aircraft into the air.
Air defenses along the line are put into operation with varying degrees of quickness.
Warsaw Pact forces quickly burst through NATO lines and a Soviet nuclear armed IRBM makes it through NATO lines and drops a one Megaton nuclear warhead on Brussels which destroys the city and kills the majority of NATO high command including General Norstad, Supreme Commander of NATO Forces in Europe.
Bleary-eyed, he is ushered into the Situation Room and informed of events in Europe.
Exhausted, and having gotten less than an hour of sleep, he orders American air defenses to full readiness, and orders an Air Defense Emergency for NORAD and Civil Defense.
Across the United States and Canada, air raid sirens begin to howl, startling the few Americans and Canadians who have gone to sleep into wakefulness.
The instant a bomb falls on North America, he’ll order a strike on the Soviet Union.
Several of Kennedy’s military advisors are extremely agitated at this statement.
By ignoring strikes against American forces outside North America, he is endangering the United States’ ability to strike back, they declare, and by limiting America’s response to targets outside the Soviet Union, he would be inviting a counterstrike.
Eventually, the aircraft turn back, but not before leaving Airfields across Europe and Nuclear launch silos in Turkey and Italy in Flames.
Which effectively rendered NATO’s air superiority a moot point as over 75% of NATO’s Air Forces had been destroyed or rendered combat ineffective.
Detoured several times due to American airstrikes, site holding the final remaining 5 SS-4 launchers and 20 SS-4 missiles, that were not destroyed in American Airstrikes.
Immediately upon arriving, Pliyev is confronted by an agitated Cuban officer, who says he has orders from Castro to secure the launch of the remaining nuclear weapons against American targets.
Pliyev, having seen the destruction of Havana in the rear-view mirror of his car, rebuffs the furious officer, and orders him to return to his post.
The sentiment festering among the Cubans guarding the missiles, however, is a hostile one – having heard of the destruction of Havana, they want revenge, particularly the soldiers who had families in the city.
The nuclear weapons at hand are the perfect way for them to get that revenge, and they cannot understand why “that damned Soviet general” will not let them be fired off.
The Americans, after all, have already used nuclear weapons on Cuba – it is only right that they should have revenge.
Pliyev warns the Red Army troops to be on high alert and orders a Soviet infantry battalion to come reinforce the missile base’s Garrison.
He doesn’t like being out of contact with higher authority, the broadcasts he’s picking up from the United States are making him nervous, and worst of all, the Cubans look mutinous.
If things are as bad as American radio is making them sound, he wants to launch the missiles on his authority, not those of some ragged militiaman.
But that won’t matter a damn if the Cubans don’t go along, he thinks darkly.
French, British, and American forces resist where possible, but retreat to pre-planned fortress lines.
House-by-house fighting, point-blank armor fights, and brutal combat will be the hallmarks of the fight for the city, the first operation of the Soviet invasion of western Europe.
The first targets hit are secondary airfields, SAM sites, and suspected nuclear storage sites.
The aircraft are met by a hail of ground fire as well as a few of the NATO air forces which weren't destroyed already.
F-105s clash with MiG 21s over Germany as the largest aerial battle in history unfolds as dawn breaks over Europe.
The sky is streaked with missile and aircraft contrails and the dots of ejected pilots’ parachutes.
They are then met by a storm of anti-tank missiles, counter-artillery, and every rifle in Western Europe.
Warsaw Pact forces advance extraordinarily fast, despite chemical bombardment by NATO Forces.
Precision air strikes on NATO Hardpoints and Defensive Strongholds breaks any significant resistance.
Soviet air planners are at a loss with how successful the operation is going.
Their mission orders were specific – to target NATO special weapons depots wherever found – to which they had fulfilled to the letter.
So now they could focus on smashing what remained of NATO’s Air Forces and Air Defense Network.
However, adding to their troubles is the standing order to keep 20 percent of nuclear-capable aircraft in reserve – just in case.
However this fact was made moot by the fact that NATO forces were in a even worse position.
The battle plan is called Plan Foxtrot Alpha India Lima or Plan Fail which details a United States and NATO Forces to withdrawal to the Rhine River and then use tactical nuclear weapons against Soviet Forces as they tried to cross the river.
Despite the chaos surrounding the destruction of Havana, most Cubans return fire on the American destroyers shelling the town and surrounding coast.
They are quickly silenced, but sporadic artillery fire continues to fall around the ships.
In less than a half hour, La Boca, at the entrance to the harbor, is in flames, as is the airfield on the shores of the harbor.
American aircraft are everywhere, strafing and launching rockets against anything that even looks like it might be hostile.
Guantanamo and the three nuclear torpedoes used against American ships and the six Tactical Nukes used against Guantanamo ensure that no one is in the mood to take prisoners.
Pliyev is again approached by the same Cuban officer, who demands that he use the Soviet nuclear weapons.
The Americans are attacking Mariel, he declares, and begs Pliyev to use his weapons to drive the Americans back.
Pilaev orders the company guarding the missiles to be ready for anything, and orders the radiomen feverishly working to establish contact with anyone in Moscow – or barring that, the Soviet combat group in San Antonio de los banos -to work faster.
The information is quickly helicoptered back to East Germany and passed up the chain of command.
Assigned to the far eastern and western flanks of the invasion, respectively, the 101st lands near the town of Abajo and its adjacent airfield, while the 82nd lands in and around Cabanas.
Unfortunately, the weather is bad, and with it raining and thundering & lightning.
Even the Cubans seem quiet as the Screaming Eagles fall from the sky, as most of the militiamen who otherwise might have been defending have been rushed to fight fires in Havana, 15 miles to the east.
The 82nd is greeted by heavy small arms and antiaircraft fire, and the Cubans there have no burning Havana to distract them.
The men of the “All-American” division dig in under increasing fire, and await support.
The First Armored, better known as “Old Ironsides” lands to the west of the harbor, and scout elements strike quickly inland to capture the Mariel airfield, two miles from the beach.
Resistance is light, as the Cuban militia in the area have been largely been pulled back anticipating the incoming Tactical Nuclear Missiles.
The same can’t be said on the harbor’s eastern side, where the towns of Mariel and La Boca are scenes of burning, hellish urban warfare as the Marine regiment assigned their capture becomes drawn into close combat with a regular Cuban Army company.
Refugees from the fighting began streaming south, only to be strafed by American aircraft under orders from higher authority to ensure that no guerrilla fighters manage to close with American lines.
The fact that the columns are moving away, not toward the battlefront, is ignored.
Pliyev gives orders to launch to launch the nuclear tipped FROG missiles which makes impact with the make impact two minutes later.
But before they could do so they were hit by 2 Tactical Nuclear missiles and the fleet was also hit by another Tactical Nuclear missile which sunk one carrier and damaged another.
The few Cuban regulars in the area have the new Soviet RPG-7s, and knock out many American tanks conveniently.
Many in the military, having lost faith in the plan to eliminate NATO’s nuclear capability through conventional means, call for the employment of several tactical nuclear weapons in order to ensure the destruction of known enemy weapons.
Though the Soviet Union can far better suffer nuclear attack than the NATO forces, Shelepin has no desire to see nuclear fire rain down on Europe.
Forced by events to reveal the Nurnberg discovery, he declares that even now, Soviet aircraft are en route to destroy the NATO bunkers described in the documents, and that soon, all the talk of nuclear action will become moot.
On that note, the military commanders disperse, but there is the unspoken feeling that if this attack is not successful, a new approach may be needed.
As the men of the unit celebrate their minor victory, word comes in that large numbers of Soviet troops and a small amount of armor is assaulting the Marine beachhead east of Mariel.
Air support is plentiful, but the Marines are hard-pressed, and orders go out for the First Armored to make every effort to relieve the pressure on the Marines.
Pliyev watches through his binoculars as a stream of Cuban trucks and soldiers marches out of the Cuban camp.
Pilaev orders one of the Cubans to get as close to the camp as possible in order to find out what happened.
His suspicions are verified when the man returns with news that the column is leaving is to reinforce the Cuban forces starting to mop up the remaining United States Forces.
American aircraft have been flying overhead for nearly two days now, and although his missiles are hidden in caves blasted from the mountainside – an abandoned coal mining operation – he still fears discovery from the ever-present eyes in the sky.
One of the patrols of Soviet soldiers guarding the missiles confronts a group of Cubans intent on seizing the missiles.
No one knows who fires first, but the situation devolves into a firefight that draws more and more men from both sides into the fighting.
They launch bombs and cruise missiles that hit nuclear weapon stockpiles in fields and bunkers.
Small amounts of American reserves – all that’s left after reinforcing embattled units all day can only slow the Soviet breakthrough.
The Soviet missiles are wheeled from their caves and into position for launch.
Tens of Thousands of American soldiers are killed or injured in the first minute.
The thick-skinned armor of the tanks and APCs of the First Armored division fare well – those that were further away and buttoned up, at least – but the trucks and men supporting those tanks take heavy losses.
The 82nd Infantry division, having been engaged in heavy fighting south of its Cabanas drop zone, takes gruesome losses.
Cuban forces close to the detonation points also take a few losses, but most injuries are from flash blindness as many more Cuban soldiers are facing north, into the American beachhead.
But the American attack is destroyed in a brutal and utterly destructive way.
He immediately orders a full civil defense alert and orders that Washington be evacuated.
Washington is still grappling with the launch from Cuba, and no orders are coming from above.
The chaos of battle is such that his orders are not questioned as every available man rushes to try to beat back the approaching Soviet armor.
No further missiles have been detected as incoming, but Kennedy is advised that it does take some time to reload the missile launchers, particularly if they are being crewed by inexperienced Cubans.
The situation on the ground is bleak, as the eight nuclear blasts have grievously injured the invasion, and the First Armored is in a fight for its life as the Cubans exploit the gaps in the line.
Hesitantly, the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff recommends a full nuclear response to cover an evacuation of the island.
Clearly, the situation is untenable, and the threat of further attacks demands a nuclear response.
He can see no other alternative, and he doesn’t want to see all of the American troops in Cuba die in nuclear fire.
He okays nuclear attacks in order to shield the evacuation and on suspected missile sites.
Curtis LeMay and the other military advisers, they have just been given a blank check for anything involving nuclear weapons in Cuba.
Stunned by the news, he is tempted to call off the upcoming nuclear bombardment of Cuba for fear of escalating the conflict, but decides that there is no alternative – the United States cannot afford more missiles launched from Cuba.
The temporary no-man’s land created by the five nuclear detonations would have bought time for American forces time to contain the Soviet breakthrough but brave and enraged Soviet forces charge through the radiation determined to make sure their comrades did not die in vain.
Between 10:30 and 11:30 PM, 10 nuclear devices ranging from 50kt to 2Mt will be deployed in Cuba.
Most are dropped or launched to cover the evacuation of the invasion force.
But, two are deployed around Guantanamo as the survivors of the naval base are evacuated.
West of Havana, the evacuation proceeds at a strange quick but calm pace.
Repeated nuclear strikes have brought the fighting almost to a halt, and American soldiers embark on the beaches at night in a surreal scene lit by the enormous fires that surround the beachhead.
Those who have chemical and nuclear gear wear it, adding to the strangeness of the scene.
Many evacuees describe the scene as something beyond hell, as badly burned men are loaded onto evacuation ships.
The armor of the Marines and First Armored holds back what little hostile action there is.
Great Britain is directly in the Soviet line of fire, and barring the sudden outbreak of common sense, the only way for Britain to survive is to strike first.
Nuclear fighting has clearly broken out in Germany, and McMillan informs Kennedy that he has authorized his forces on the ground to respond to nuclear attack with missiles of their own – even to strike first if it appears that the Soviets are going to employ nuclear weapons.
Britain is already undertaking full Civil Defense measures, Kennedy is informed.
Soviet bombers, already at the ready, begin to take to the air, while Soviet Submarines prepare their Nuclear Torpedos for launch and begin stalking United States Battle or Carrier Groups, while ICBMs, IRBMs, and SRBMs begin spinning up their gyroscopes and begin receiving location and targeting information.
British forces respond with their own nuclear weapons to stem the resulting Soviet breakthrough.
Losses on both sides are massive, and at least one detonation takes place in the city itself, causing enormous civilian casualties.
The message calls for an immediate cease-fire and says that the government of West Germany will surrender unconditionally to the Soviet Union in exchange for a suspension of nuclear and chemical attacks in West German territory.
No official contact with the West German government has been made since the early hours of the Soviet attack, when Chancellor Konrad Adenauer was presumed killed in a Red Army Faction assault on his armored limousine.
The broadcast is not taken seriously by NATO and they continue to fight against Warsaw Pact forces.
But Warsaw Pact forces take it seriously and all front commanders order that nuclear and chemical weapons are not to be used unless NATO Forces use them first against Warsaw Pact Forces and they broadcast this order across open channels and then confirm them via secure channels.
This causes their to be many gaps in NATO which the Soviets exploit by rushing through with mechanized and tank brigades.
They soon afterward encircle the NATO northern flank and rush toward the Rhine in a mad dash to make it their before NATO Forces contain their Breakthrough.
Also West German Forces turn over the locations of over Half NATO’s nuclear weapons stockpiles.
Soviet commanders on the scene respond with 2 20 Kiloton FROG missiles launched at the position from which the rounds were originally launched.
For the time being, the Soviet strategy will consist of reducing the southern, largely American half of West Berlin, while lighter forces hold the British and French brigades in place.
Multiple armored columns attempt to move from the Zossen area into the central portion of the city in an effort to quarter West Berlin, but are stopped near the Papester U-Bahn station by hastily-placed mines and ferocious anti tank fire.
However after mine sweepers are brought up and chemical weapons are deployed in the area after NATO used Chemical weapons Soviet forces manage to drive a wedge between British and French forces.
Kennedy attempts to talk McMillan out of the approach, calling it “insanely dangerous,” but is interrupted by a string of messages about the nuclear fighting in Germany.
No sooner has he uttered the words when another officer enters, bringing word that a large number of Soviet bombers have been detected by radar at Thule Air Force Base in Greenland and by radar stations in Alaska.
Though the aircraft have not yet crossed into Canadian or American airspace, they have continued on their headings for several minutes, and given the large number of aircraft, the Joint Chiefs of Staff believe this to be a major Soviet attack.
After several moments, Kennedy orders fighters to intercept any bombers that cross the border.
LeMay, Commander in Chief of the Strategic Air Command, if this means he is free to execute SIOP-63, the nuclear plan for action against the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe, Kennedy hesitates.
LeMay responds heatedly, demanding that they not wait until the bombs are falling on the United States, and Kennedy fires back with harsh words of his own, saying that he will not risk nuclear war.
Quietly, he agrees to LeMay’s suggestion that should a nuclear attack take place anywhere in North America, he will be free to release the bombers to their missions.
With the issue settled, Kennedy hangs up the phone, and begins to address the next crisis in a long list of them.
In Omaha, LeMay is handed an extensive list of bomber dispositions and fuel states, and with a sinking feeling, realizes that if he does not issue a go order in the next 15 minutes, nearly 20% of his bomber force will need to turn back for refueling.
Many bombers have been holding at Fail-Safe for far longer than was planned, and many are now on the edge of being able to perform their missions and return to North America, let alone their staging airfields.
While one-way missions are only to be expected, 20 percent is a large proportion of the force in the air, and that will be on top of a large number of bombers that have already cycled back from Fail-Safe or are only now returning to it.
Those bombers will be needed for follow-up strikes, and they cannot be thrown away, LeMay believes.
Six Soviet nuclear weapons devastate the area, destroying a stockpile of Corporal missile reloads.
British, Belgian, and Dutch commanders, with Prime Minister McMillan chiming in from an underground bunker in Wales, demand immediate action against Soviet airfields and known fixed missile positions in Eastern Europe.
The threat is clear, they declare to what's left of NATO High Command – the Soviet Union is clearly on course to escalate the conflict, and the more nuclear weapons NATO destroys, the fewer that can be launched against Western Europe.
When NATO Command counters that he does not have the freedom to launch nuclear weapons without the authorization of the President, McMillan replies that Kennedy’s orders of “forward defense” cover this situation, and that by not attacking, Norstad is violating Kennedy’s orders, not following them.
NATO High Command attempts to find a compromise solution, but there is none.
McMillan announces his intention to use Britain’s nuclear capability, with or without America's assistance – but without America’s help, the effectiveness of the attack will be greatly lessened.
The American high command is torn – on one hand, Kennedy’s instructions to them were to avoid widening the war whenever possible, but on the other, nuclear war has clearly broken out.
Reluctantly, he agrees to McMillan’s plan, but requests some time to coordinate his forces.
Communications are growing more and more difficult, thanks to Soviet attacks, telephone lines being cut, and the increased radio interference caused by the nuclear detonations.
If he does not issue the go order immediately, his bomber force will lose a substantial portion of its strength for at least three hours.
On the other hand, if he does issue the go-order, it might trigger a full-scale nuclear war, not just the little one in Cuba and Germany.
After a conference call to NORAD headquarters at Cheyenne Mountain, he issues the order.
The Soviet aircraft approaching Canada and Alaska have not turned back, so his decision is the obvious one.
Unless a full recall is issued, his aircraft are to continue on to Russia and destroy their targets.
Though they’ve used up all their loiter time, the bombers on the edge should still have enough fuel in their tanks to hit their targets and crash-land somewhere in North America – barring battle damage.
And of course, if the Soviet bombers turn back, they can always be recalled.
But as LeMay looks at the situation board, deep underground, that doesn’t seem likely.
Across Britain, air-raid sirens blare and telephones ring as the four-minute warning is put into effect.
The name will be somewhat of a misnomer – it won’t take four minutes for the Soviet missiles to reach their targets.
The precise coordination of the Strategic Rocket Force is fully executed among Red Army-controlled launch facilities in Eastern Europe.
All of the Red Army’s IRBM and MRBM facilities acknowledge the initial order and targets all across NATO Controlled Europe.
All the MRBMs and IRBMs make it of the ground and hit their targets in Western Europe.
Similarly, sixty concrete missile silos blow their rocket-propelled hatches clear and fire their missiles.
Ten of the missiles will be SS-6 Sapwood missiles launched from Baikonur and Plesetsk.
Another forty missiles launched will be SS-7 Saddler missiles, launched from soft positions.
As they launch, curving northward from their launchers in Central Asia, they will proceed undetected, below the horizon, for nearly a third of their flight.
At T+11 minutes, they will be picked up by the Ballistic Missile Early Warning radar station at Clear, Alaska.
That station will likely also be dealing with several IRBMs inbound to points in Alaska, possibly even at the station itself.
A full 80 IRBMs will launch from bases near Anadyr, in the Soviet Far East, with the goal of knocking out Alaskan and Canadian air defenses and opening a hole through which Soviet bombers can pass.
Despite that distraction, standing orders dictate that missiles higher above the horizon have priority.
At T+12 minutes, they will be picked up by the third and final BMEWS at Thule, Greenland, which should detect the missiles as they cross the horizon and arc over the North Pole.
Further warnings will be issued, but NORAD will already be well aware of the situation.
That station, monitoring several hundred IRBMs in flight over Europe, may easily miss the ICBM tracks inbound to the United States and Canada.
President Kennedy, upon hearing the news, will want to issue a full-scale civil defense alert, but the highest level of alert – that of a Civil Defense Air Emergency – has already been issued 24 hours earlier.
The attacks from Cuba have already put Americans at a higher state of alert than any government warning could provide, but the last-minute alert, issued at T+17 minutes, causes many in urban centers to begin fleeing in their automobiles at high speed toward the countryside.
Kennedy and his brother will evacuate to Mount Weather and the Pentagon is rushed into Raven Rock while most of congress is already safe inside the Congressional Fallout Shelter.
At T+22, the missiles will disappear from the radar screens at the BMEWS facilities.
Their radars only point in one direction, and cannot track the missiles to their ultimate targets, nor do they have the processing power to analyze where the missiles might hit.
They only serve to warn, and with their jobs done, they wait to be annihilated themselves.
At T+29, the missiles may begin to become visible to Canadians and Americans looking skyward.
The night sky will provide a brilliant backdrop to the fiery streaks of the reentry vehicles, which should shoot across the stars like meteors.
It is unlikely that any will be targeted on sites in Western Europe, as these are well within the range of IRBM and MRBM launched from Eastern Europe and western Russia.
Nor is it likely that the missiles will be fired at American missile silos, since these early Soviet missiles lack the accuracy to reliably knock out hardened targets.
Exceptions will likely be made in the cases of Cheyenne Mountain and Offut AFB in Omaha, the headquarters of SAC, but these will likely be the only exceptions.
The missiles will also not be targeted at early-warning radars or interceptor bases – no one in the world had the capability to shoot down an ICBM at the time, and the most the United States can do is watch as the missiles streak in.
Theoretically, a nuclear-tipped BOMARC or Nike Zeus missile could destroy an incoming ICBM, but that would require a level of coordination with radar and computer-aided guidance not available in 1962.
Though he will likely survive from his bunker deep in the Welsh mountains, the vast majority of Britain – hell, Europe – will not.
Many pilots anxiously turn their eyes skyward, half expecting to see the contrails of incoming missiles.
In peacetime, the pilots took pride in their ability to reach the Soviet Union before even the bombers of the Strategic Air Command.
Now, in the face of an unknown number of Soviet fighters and SAMs, that pride turns to a growing fear.
In Lincolnshire, at five RAF bases, missile launchers are thrown upright by giant hydraulic rams, and toxic rocket fuel is pumped into 15 separate American-built Thor missiles.
At the launch site, crewmen work in frenzied panic, one eye on their work, and another on the sky.
By the book, it takes 15 minutes to fire the Thor from its horizontal storage position.
Driven by fear for Britain and more importantly, themselves – it will only take six.
Many units have dispersed, particularly the nuclear and chemical units, but those in close contact have not.
Moreover, the sheer number of incoming warheads will negate much of both sides’ dispersal strategy.
In Italy, two squadrons of nuclear-armed Jupiter IRBMs are readied on the launchpad.
From their locations north of Taranto, they can reach deep into Eastern Europe.
He immediately sends authorization for NATO command to use any means necessary to ensure the security of Europe – an order more redundant than anything a President had ever given.
In addition, he authorizes the execution of SIOP-63, Option B, – the targeting of Soviet and Warsaw Pact military and communications installations.
As with the Soviet strike, the fact that many of these targets are in or near major population centers is conveniently overlooked.
Thomas S Power is far too involved with the immediate actions of his SAC bombers to be worried about the targeting restrictions placed on him by Kennedy.
With scarcely a word, he acknowledges Kennedy’s operations order, gives several targeting orders of his own, and orders SAC’s nuclear missiles to launch against population centers, military bases, and economic centers.
With the order given, Power’s main concern shifts to ensuring that none of his bombers will be shot down by NORAD’s fighters over the Arctic Ocean.
In the air, every SAC bomber not previously en route to the Soviet Union begins to wing its way toward that country.
Fuel to return to America is a luxury some of Power’s bombers cannot afford.
Over 1,300 American bombers are now winging their way north, across Canada and the Arctic Ocean.
Launched from far eastern Siberia, they are clearly inbound to targets in Alaska.
Word is passed to NORAD and Washington, which can only stand by and wait.
The dispersal of fighters has already taken place, and those not already in the air probably never will.
The only variable is how many missiles and bombers will reach their targets.
News of the incomings adds to the air of fatalism among the few people who remain in the White House which are only a few members of the secret service.
In Lincolnshire, the first Thor missiles begin to take flight, soaring upward on a pillar of fire.
Before the last of them leave the launch rails, an enormous roar in the air signifies the arrival of several Soviet missiles.
RAF Helmswell, Feltwell, and dozens of other airfields in Britain are annihilated.
The scene is repeated in Western Europe and North Africa, from SAC bases in Morocco to Italy and Turkey and northward, to the unoccupied portions of Norway, as Soviet ICBMs, IRBMs, and MRBMs reach their targets.
The attacks devastate NATO airfields and naval bases, communications, command, and military centers.
Though the Soviet missiles have a failure rate approaching 23 percent, the sheer number of missiles ensures that every major target, including every SAC base, is hit at least once.
BMEWS Fylingdales is hit by no fewer than five nuclear weapons, completely vaporizing the facility, and eliminating any chance to observe future attacks.
In West Germany, tactical nuclear weapons and chemical warheads fly with across the front lines , devastating both sides equally.
While NATO and Warsaw Pact forces fight on as they die at the hands of each other's gunfire and chemical and nuclear weapons.
In Berlin, fighting stops as the night sky is lit with dozens of mushroom-cloud explosions at all points of the compass.
No weapons fall in Berlin itself – it appears no one was willing to risk hitting their own side.
North of Taranto, Soviet IRBMs destroy virtually all of the American and Italian Jupiter IRBMs on the launch rails.
Only two of the 30 missiles manage to escape the first strike, and one will be driven off course by a detonation, landing harmlessly in Hungary.
In Turkey, the third squadron of American Jupiters, the centerpiece of Kennedy’s missiles-for-missiles proposal that would have brought an end to the Cuban crisis, has long since been destroyed by conventional Soviet bombing.
Elmendorf, Eielson, and Clear Air Force Bases are among the first targets hit, but over a dozen other targets are hit as well, victims of the 24 IRBM launched from Siberia.
In the air, fighting rages as Soviet fighters and bombers clash with American fighters of the 343rd Fighter Wing.
In the end, the simple realities of fuel, ammunition, and the lack of SAGE Facilites to direct their efforts is what brings down the Delta Darts defending Alaska.
For every bomber they bring down, there are two more, launched from bases in nearby Siberia and with their bases destroyed by Soviet IRBMs, there is no way to refuel and rearm.
The vast majority of the fighters launched from Elmendorf and other airfields eventually run out of fuel and have their pilots bail out.
A handful manage to reach Juneau or a Canadian airfield, but almost none are refueled in time to defend again before Juneau and the Canadian airfields are eviscerated by 50 kiloton nuclear bombs dropped on the airfields by the very bombers they were trying to defend against.
Across the Bering Strait, a mirror of the Alaskan battle is being played out over Siberia as Soviet fighters clash with Alaska-based bombers.
Thanks to the virtue of being based a thousand miles closer to their targets, the Alaskan bombers find themselves engaging an alerted and able Soviet defense.
With no American IRBMs to soften the Soviet defenses, they go down in gruesome numbers, but not without landing a few hits of their own.
Few even make it to their targets and even fewer make it back to friendly bases.
But the reserve silos are destroyed by Soviet ICBMs and Bombers before the order ever comes to launch the reserve.
It will take only 25 minutes for the first missiles to reach their targets, long before SAC bombers – which passed the fail-safe line over nearly 40 minutes previously – reach their targets.
Those that fall in East Germany are lost in the frenzy of tactical and short-range nuclear destruction.
Outside of East Germany, the capitals of 2 Eastern European nations join the nuclear bonfire.
In Berlin, scattered fighting continues, but with fewer and fewer orders coming from higher authorities on either side, and the obviousness of what has happened, no one seems willing to press home the attack.
In the space of five minutes, more Americans die than in every American war combined.
In Washington, Kennedy watches the meteor-like trails of the incoming warheads from the roof of the White House.
A few streaks rise to meet them – Nike-Zeus antiaircraft missiles – before the sky brightens with one final sunrise.
Five hundred feet below the mountains of western Virginia President Kennedy and his Cabinet begin planning what comes next.
A half a squadron of specially-equipped Tu-95K bombers is tasked with the destruction of the base and the adjoining BMEWS radar station, roughly 18 miles northwest.
The bombers are engaged several hundred miles north of the target, and two are shot down.
Unfortunately for the defenders, this leaves four bombers, which continue onward, juking and weaving.
A score of BOMARC missiles roar into the air from the darkened base, lancing forward at a closing speed well in excess of Mach 6.
Small multi-kiloton warheads explode in front of the cruise missiles, knocking them from the air or destroying them outright.
The 3 Megaton warhead explodes a bare 1,000 feet over the base’s runways, destroying the base instantly.
The radar operators at the BMEWS radar station 18 miles away are spared immediate death from the nuclear detonation, only to suffer a prolonged death from starvation and freezing, as the site is completely isolated from a United States with far greater problems on its hands.
They will be joined by a few homeless pilots who bail out of their fuel-starved aircraft.
For the Soviet Union it’s a costly, if successful operation and it’s one that can be repeated.
The six specially-modified bombers represent almost half of the entire AS-2 capable force, barring two aircraft down for maintenance, the two that survived the attack, and the 6 left in reserve.
However, the extraordinarily unwieldy missiles require over 20 hours to be attached, armed, fueled, and readied for launch.
Thus the next strike will be one consisting of 10 Su-59s armed with the Kangaroo Cruise missiles.
Hardest hit were airfields, communications systems, command and control systems, and military bases.
As with the Soviet attack, where possible, cities were avoided – where possible.
Cities like Moscow, Vladivostok, Murmansk, Archangel, that housed large military bases or command facilities, were hit regardless of their civilian population.
However the hardened Soviet anti-aircraft network is still very much intact and most SAC bombers will be shot down.
Kennedy also sends orders, via radio, to the American ballistic missile submarine fleet, instructing it to engage the Soviet Union where possible.
The submarines’ Polaris missiles lack the accuracy to hit military targets.
As the bombers come in at low level, the radars of the Distant Early Warning Line have difficulty locating many of the Soviet aircraft.
This is further compounded by the loss of the SAGE combat centers to Soviet ICBMs.
Due to that loss, fighters can't be guided to their targets and thus are grossly ineffective against Soviet Bombers.
For every Tu-95 that is intercepted, another breaks through to hit the DEW radars and continue south.
For every radar that is destroyed, more bombers remain undiscovered, hitting the line and winging their way south.
As the radars go down, one by one, enormous gaps are torn in the DEW line, allowing more and more bombers through.
Several bombers continue onward to strike targets in the Kola Peninsula, but many find that their targets are already burning, victims of American ICBMs.
All eventually find some target worthy of an atomic bomb, or are shot down.
The survivors turn westward, with many bomber crews bailing out over Britain, unable to find a usable airstrip on which to land.
Several others land in neutral Sweden, which has not been hit in the fighting, and are interned.
Dark clouds of ash blot out the sky over Germany, and dark rain begins to fall as water vapor coalesces around ash from hundreds of nuclear detonations.
Survivors remember it as heavy, heavier than anything they can remember.
Throughout the growing storms, NATO and Warsaw Pact bombers and fighters continue to clash.
With an enormous gash ripped in the front line, the aircraft can engage in combat without a fear of ground fire, and can penetrate deep into the opposition’s territory before facing enemy fire.
The gap in defenses allows NATO bombers to hit Poland, Hungary, and Czechoslovakia with ease, just as Warsaw Pact bombers can hit targets in the Netherlands, Belgium, France, and Britain.
In many cases, communications have broken down between what remains of higher authority and the bases launching attacks.
As more and more weapons fall, the situation continues to grow worse, with greater and greater civilian casualties.
Only the accelerating rate of attrition and the destruction of the remaining stockpiles of weapons and operational aircraft might provide an end to the fighting.
American bombers based in Guam will avenge the hits by completely leveling the area around Vladivostok, which has itself already been hit by two ICBMs.
After firing from a depth of 10m, the submarine slips away undetected as scattered Soviet aircraft respond to the radar contacts.
The scene will be repeated twenty more times over the next 48 hours, as various Polaris missile submarines contribute their missiles to the firestorm engulfing the Soviet Union and various soviet submarines launch their payloads against the united states.
Of the 80 American missiles fired, 67 will successfully hit their targets.
Two additional submarines will remain silent, destroyed by soviet submarines to complement the destroyed missiles sitting in SAC silos which were supposed to be a reserve but in the end were missiles waiting to be taken out and they were.
Two more commissioned ballistic missile submarines lack missiles, and one – the USS Thomas A Edison is destroyed in the destruction of Charleston.
Two uncommissioned submarines at sea survive the war, but three others still fitting out or under construction are destroyed.
The USS Abraham Lincoln is lost with all hands in an encounter with a Soviet hunter-killer submarine before firing its missiles.
Additionally, the Regulus Missile-carrying submarines fail to mirror the success of their Polaris counterparts.
All are sunk before launching their targets, killing several hundred American sailors in the process.
Also because their bases have been destroyed by Soviet IRBM and bomber attacks, the crewmen of the bombers that turned back before they were destroyed are forced to divert to remote airfields in Turkey, Greece, and Cyprus.
Coming in low over the empty forests, the scattered bombers manage to evade most contact.
However, once in range of the radars of the two southernmost lines – which happen to overlap – interceptors can be efficiently vectored to the incoming bombers.
Most of the survivors manage to avoid the radars, either by using the Rocky Mountains to shield themselves, or by flying low across Baffin Bay to avoid contact via the immense spaces involved and the confusion caused by Soviet ICBMs hamper interception efforts.
Only the sheer number of American bombers, ironically, prevent the Soviet defenses from having greater effect.
Without a central system to coordinate interception, Soviet fighters must be guided by their onboard radar or the facilities from their basing airfields.
However, Strikes on air bases further reduce the effectiveness of the Soviet defenses.
The brand-new USS Arizona memorial, dedicated five months previously, is completely destroyed, as is the airfield on Ford Island.
The Hotel-class submarine that fired the missile would escape in the confusion.
It should also be noted that over half of the American Pacific fleet and all of its supply and logistics structure is destroyed.
In total, almost 1000 American bombers have been shot down by Soviet fighters.
What little opposition remains is limited to SA-2 sites near primary targets, most of which have already been destroyed by ICBM warheads.
The attack is somewhat of an accident – Seattle was the primary target for the bomber, but due to repeated momentary contacts with Canadian and American fighters, the crew spends more time evading than navigating toward its target.
Two separate attempts by Soviet bombers to penetrate Chicago’s defenses are defeated by nuclear-tipped BOMARC anti-bomber missiles, which knock the low-flying aircraft into Lake Michigan with their shock waves.
However one bomber finally makes it through and nukes Chicago less than a minute after another bomber dropped a nuke on Seattle.
By 4:00 PM, the last Soviet bomber and American bomber has been destroyed or has turned back to their respective bases or where they use to be.
By the end of the day, the bomber threat to United States and the Soviet Union is over.
The war is now over with over a Billion Dead and 20,000 nuclear devices detonated world wide.
The Northern Hemisphere lies in ruins and the Soviet Union and United States are obliterated.
What remains of the two nations militaries now turn their attention to rebuilding what they destroyed in less than 48 hours… The world.
The number of estimated nuclear detonations is 5,000 in the United States, 1,000 in Canada, 5,000 in the Soviet Union, 1,000 in China, and 8,000 within the territory of both nations allies in Europe and Asia.
The Great Nuclear War, World War III, the Final War, but no matter what you call it, targets worldwide were destroyed, and the results of this total nuclear exchange are close to the frantic forecasts of the General Public.
This results in more than a billion people killed initially, and another billion in the Winter of 1962 and the following famines and fallout.
With the world largely devastated, and most of the Northern and parts of the Southern Hemisphere in ruins, the estimated survivors in these areas desperately try to keep together what is left of their societies.
They are facing challenges that we would consider third-world today; clean water, food, disease.
After an horrifying first few years Post-War, a few regions, territories, and countries stabilize and master basic problems such as food, water, and defense.
The fragile new world order emerges and it soon become obvious that initial hopes of some survivors for a united mankind are indeed naive.
Famine, disease, and lack of resources provoke conflicts and wars in large parts of the world, potentially threatening all recovery.
