He was seen as Stalin's 'best pupil' as he imprisoned 387,000 people and killed 2,000 people to whoever opposed the soviet rule.
Stalin died so Khrushchev took over De-stalinisation: Relax the soviet system.Students and workers demonstrated in protests and even burnt the statues of Stalin and fought against the police.
He wanted to leave the Warsaw pact, no more communist government, free elections and UN protection from the USSR and to be a neutral country.
He refused to grant Nagy's reforms and feared that if one country left the Warsaw Pact; other countries would follow.
Sent in 200,000 soviet troops in Nov 1956 to remove Nagy's government Nagy seeked refuge in the Yugoslav embassy but was found and trialled for treason then executed in 1958.
America sent $20 million worth of food and medical aid and they praised Hungary's bravey.
Kadar to re-establish communist control in Hungary. 11 of 26 A divided Berlin Some Eastern Germans didn't like the communist rule There were better jobs with higher wages in the West Easy access to West Germany 2,500 people crossed over from the East to West per day Many skilled workers left for the west East had a skills shortage 12 of 26 The Berlin Wall November 1958 Khruschev declares that Berlin belongs to the USSR and the USA have a 6 month ultimatum to withdraw from the city.
Geneva Summit 1959 No solution Camp David 1959 Withdraws 6 month ultimatum Paris 1960 United States Spy plane shot down USA refuse to apologise and Khruschev reimposes the 6 month ultimatum Vienna 1961 Re-states 6 month ultimatum Kennedy spends $3. billion on additional defence to prepare for potential war.
Thus, the wall was built in August 1961 to divide soviet zone from western zone.
Brezhnev Doctrine was imposed and it was the idea that if one Eastern European country threatens the stability of the rest then the USSR had the right to invade.
Dubček was forced to sign the 'Moscow Protocol' meaning that he betrayed socialism.
Technology wasn't developed enough, thus, couldn't compete in the Arms Race 22 of 26 Gorbachev, Perestroika and Glasnost USA have a booming economy, excellent computer technology, lots of NATO allies and were seen as the 'leaders of the free world' USSR had a large amount of nuclear weapons but the Chernobyl Power plant explosion in 1986 in Ukraine made it look like the USSR were facing a crisis.
They had a failing economy, old fashioned technology, expensive Afghanistan war, shortages and low living standards.
People started leaving East Germany through Hungary so the Government accounced the greater freedom of travel for East Germany.
Furthermore, on the 9th November, they were allowed to cross the border from East to West.
The Warsaw Pact ended in 1991 where Poland left first, followed by Hungary and then finally East Germany. 25 of 26 The End of the Cold War Gorbachev's glasnost policies meant people could say what they thought and perestroika made the economy even worse.
The August Coup 1991 A group tried to take control and rescue the USSR by removing him from power.
The coup was defeated in a few days whilst Gorbachev returned to power but he looked weak whilst Yeltsin looked strong as he defended the coup.
History 1. / 5 based on 3 ratings History surgery timeline 1845-1918 0.
