It’s about the hammer of Justice, the bell of freedom, and a song about love between the brothers and the sisters.
President John F Kennedy has a big hammer and he believes that it is the hammer of justice, he also has a bell of freedom that today he will ring loud and clear, and he will sing a song, but it’s not a song about love between brothers and sisters.
So on this Monday morning, October 22, 1962, the White House is buzzing with activity.
In fact, the entire United States administration and defense apparatus are working at high speed and with great intensity.
The military preparations have been extended beyond the Atlantic and East Coast.
Troops and supplies are being moved towards the Caribbean from all over the world, and bu now, it is not only the Soviets that have noticed.
This morning, the Washington Post runs a headline on the front page speculating that there is an international crisis pending, based on observations of these activities.
Before that, Kennedy will talk to the Congressional Leadership and key allies.
To prepare for all of that he will convene cabinet members, and meet with military and civilian advisors throughout the day.
First, the White House press secretary contacts all major United States news outlets and asks them to hold back on any reports until the end of the day.
But there is also concern that the Soviets will make an announcement themselves, preempting the Americans.
For a minute, the White House considers issuing an immediate written statement, but finally they decide to stick to the plan.
One of the first things to do is prepare the speech to be delivered to the United Nations by United States Ambassador to the UN Adlai Stevenson.
Remember that he was the only one to openly voice strong opposition to the chosen path of action, so Kennedy is taking steps to make sure that Stevenson is up for the job.
It’s John J McCloy, Chairman of the private think tank, the Council on Foreign Relations.
These two men will stay connected beyond Kennedy’s death, as McCloy will serve as Chairman of the Warren Commission that will investigate Kennedy’s assassination a little more than year from now.
Uh, well I wanted… I think we need someone there to sort of… of sustain Adlai and stiffen him and support him and… McCloy cancels everything and will take the first flight tomorrow.
No I’ll, I’ll check with my military, I’ll get my air aid on the thing.
And then we’ll be back… …and I'll just wait to hear a further call from you, or some representative.
During a meeting of the National Security Council in the morning, Secretary of State Rusk makes a last ditch attempt to persuade Kennedy to call off the blockade and offer up the United States missiles in Turkey and Italy as a trade for the Soviet missiles on Cuba.
The President reportedly flat out rejects the proposal and berates Rusk for restarting the discussion.
Kennedy also calls his predecessor, President Eisenhower and leaves no doubt as to the true intentions of the United States regarding an invasion of Cuba. we have to assume as, as this surveillance continues… with the U-2s, that the SAM sites will shoot one down, At that point we were just discussing what actions we would take in uh, attacking the SAM Sites.
I would assume that this would uh, only be first in an increasing number of steps.
We’re not going to be in any position to carry out an invasion for some days, because we have to move those troops around form uh, from San Diego, but we’re going to do all those things.
And I’ll stay in touch with you this week as like I said, anticipate that it will get more intense.
Well I uh, I uh thank you for telling me and well I uh, I will uh, and personally I uh, I think you’re making the only move you can.
Yeah I uh, this… it’s tough to, uh as I say we will uh, I don’t know… we may get into the invasion business before many days are out, but eh, but… Of course from a military standpoint that’s the clean cut thing to do now.
That’s right… Because you’ve made up you mind, you’ve got to get rid of these things.
General, what about if the Soviet Union… Khrushchev announces tomorrow, which I think he will, that if we attack Cuba that it’s going to be nuclear war.
In other words, you would take that risk in the situation same as ours.
They have now concluded their discussions regarding how much freedom they will give their commanders in the field to use their tactical nukes.
An order now goes out to NOT use any nuclear weapons without prior consent from Moscow.
There's only two issues with that first of all, to launch the MRBMs and IRBMs Moscow has to provide the launch codes anyhow, but there is no way of stopping the use of the tactical nuclear arms remotely.
Second of all, the commanders have already been given the order that if they should lose contact with the state, they can deploy tactical nukes as they see fit.
As we will see in days, this is not a hypothetical situation, but a real, direct threat.
Meanwhile, the United States armed forces are taken to the third highest defense readiness, DEFCON 3 “Increase in force readiness above that required for normal readiness” in practice this means that the Air Force is now ready to mobilize within 15 minutes, and that all other service branches are ready to act.
The mother of a school friend of mine contacted me on Facebook when we started this series.
She told me that at this time she and her US army husband were stationed in Wiesbaden, Germany, and she was in hospital about to give birth to her first child in a matter of days.
She then got a message that in case of a nuclear exchange, she should make her way to Spain to be repatriated.
Anyhow, it might seem odd that President Kennedy has moved from considering doing nothing at all only three days ago, to heading to war with determination today, but if you think about it, it’s not really.
While Kennedy has personal doubts and fears that he might be starting World War III, once he has committed himself to a course of action, he really has no choice but to follow through.
For others in the administration, it’s different, like Attorney General Robert Kennedy.
Now, RFK will later claim that he was the first one to oppose the hawks and that his line was always diplomacy.
On the first day of the crisis he was a strong advocate for an immediate invasion, but six days later he’s changed his mind.
We also know that it was Undersecretary of State George Ball that convinced RFK to reconsider during several discussions between the 17th and 19th of October.
To what extent the Kennedy brothers discussed and planned this as a coordinated ‘good cop bad cop” effort we will never know as they will both fall victims to assassin’s bullets before they can reveal the full story.
In order to understand what is about to happen, we have to consider for a moment the world of 1962.
Television is a relatively new phenomenon, and there’s not even landline telephones in many homes in the western world.
Outside of the West, the vast majority of the world’s population still doesn’t have electricity.
Nonetheless, President Kennedy is the first President to make extensive use of TV to communicate.
Still, a great many of his viewers will catch him on TV in neighbors' homes, or standing in front of a television shop window.
Over the next 24 hours, it will be replayed again and again on TV and radio all over the world.
Moreover, the Cold War is on everybody’s minds even those of us who experienced only the end parts of The Cold War can assure you that we lived in constant fear of nuclear war.
See you tomorrow on day 8, when the diplomatic dance makes new twists and turns.
