Jerry McIlmoyle, a U-2 pilot, was near the end ing U-2 overflights of Cuba, and the unwelcome news of his 25 October 1962 reconnaissance mission over Cuba that the Soviets had installed medium-range ballistic and was turning for home—McCoy Air Force Base, near missiles on the island.
On 16 October 1962, National SeOrlando, Florida—when two nearby explosions rocked curity Advisor “Mac” Bundy showed President Kennedy his aircraft.
An experienced flier, McIlmoyle realized he photos of the missiles in Cuba, a secret he initially shared had experienced a near-miss from Soviet surface-to-air only with members of the ExComm.
All were agreed that missiles recently installed in Fidel Castro’s Cuba. the missiles had to go and all options were on the table for As expected, he reported being fired on as soon as he their removal. landed, only to be informed by a gruff Air Force lieutenant general freshly flown in from Washington, DC, that As many readers will already know, an intense dayshe most assuredly had not been fired on and that was to be long debate followed about how the United States should his story, period.
The nation’s military forces were at Thus begins the recent book by prolific authors Casey DEFCON 3 and by 24 October would be at DEFCON 2, Sherman and Michael Tougias that intertwines the U-2 only one level short of war. program, the Cuban missile crisis and, especially, the president and man John F Kennedy.
Early on, the authors After chronicling the high-stakes tension of that introduce readers to McIlmoyle and two other U-2 pilots critical period in October 1962, including the blockade who play key roles in the story, Chuck Maultsby and and encounters both actual and anticipated, the authors Rudy Anderson.
But two disparate events revived the spectre of on Lockheed Martin engineer Kelley Johnson—not often nuclear war, both involving U-2 flights, one piloted by a part of the Cuban missile crisis story.
Chuck Maultsby, who became disoriented and was barely able to land in Alaska before being shot down and, more After discussing the well-known shootdown of the tragically, Rudy Anderson, whose U-2 was downed by a U-2 piloted by Francis Gary Powers, the authors shift SAM, killing him instantly.
As the authors point out, it their focus to President Eisenhower’s $13M plan to oust was just such “miscalculations, incorrect interpretations, Castro, approved in August 1960, which CIA Deputy and breakdowns in command and control that could lead Director for Plans Richard Bissell was to accomplish by to war.” planning a “low-key” invasion.
They chronicle the “immediate and spectacular failure” that was the 17 August They discuss the two letters Khrushchev sent to 1961 Bay of Pigs invasion, the dangerous and nerve-rackKennedy to stave off nuclear war and the latter’s strateAll statements of fact, opinion, or analysis expressed in this article are those of the author.
Nothing in the article should be construed as asserting or implying United States government endorsement of its factual statements and interpretations.
It was not until to the USSR in return for a promise of no United States invasion.02 that Secretary of Defense McNamara learned about If the blockade failed and there was no or a negative this near-nuclear exchange of 40 years before.
The short response to Kennedy’s counteroffer, the invasion would chapters in the book make for easily-digested chunks of proceed.
They also excel at capturing and relaying 10:00 Sunday morning, Secretary of State Dean Rusk told to readers the inherent tension of the ExComm meetings, Bobby Kennedy that the Soviets had “blinked” first and the intense debates that occurred there, and the colorful had agreed to remove all the nuclear missiles from Cuba. and conflicting personalities and interests of those in the room.
The authors thankfully provide readers with “the rest of the story,” at least concerning some of the primary In at least two instances, the authors reveal their lack actors.
On 5 Nov 1962, the Cubans released the body of familiarity with DoD jargon, which has the potential of Rudy Anderson, who was thereafter buried in his to either confuse or irritate readers.
His wife Jane never forgave refer to “intercontinental-range ballistic missiles” Kennedy for getting her husband killed, as she expressed , when the context makes clear that what the authors it, and died in 1981, at the young age of 46.
Chuck are referring to is “intercontinental ballistic missiles,” for Maultsby retired from the Air Force in 1977 and died of which the standard acronym is “ICBM”—“IRBM” is genlung cancer in 1998, at age 72.
In terms of “how do we erally understood as “intermediate-range” vice “interconavoid this situation in the future,” the authors note that tinental-range” ballistic missiles, which differ markedly the crisis prompted the immediate installation, on the United States in range and lethality.
Although a minor criticism, it is an side, of a Moscow-Washington “hot line,” both in the error that would not be made by the most junior intelliWhite House and at the Kennedy family compound on gence analyst.
A similar order-of-battle gaffe is a referCape Cod. ence to imagery shot by Navy F8U Crusader low-level recon flights over Cuba, which the authors state revealed In Above and Beyond, Sherman and Tougias provide “nuclear-tipped SAMs, or FROGs” ; again, an OB a number of interesting tidbits, likely unknown to many analyst worth his or her salt knows that the two are very readers, in what is otherwise a familiar tale.
David A Foy is the Intelligence Community historian on the History Staff of the Center for the Study of Intelligence.
