Cuba, the United States, and the Legacy of the Mexican Revolution In October 1962, when the Soviet Union deployed nuclear missiles in Cuba, the most dangerous confrontation of the Cold War ensued, bringing the world close to the brink of nuclear war.
Selections from twenty primary sources provide firsthand accounts of the frantic deliberations and realpolitik diplomacy between the U.S., the U.S.S.R., and Fidel Castro's Cuban regime; thirteen illustrations are also included.
Ebook examination copies are also available to qualified course instructors.
In October 1962, when the Soviet Union deployed nuclear missiles in Cuba, the most dangerous confrontation of the Cold War ensued, bringing the world close to the brink of nuclear war.
Getchell begins with the origins of the Cold War, then progressively narrows the focus onto Latin America, the Cuban Revolution, and the events immediately preceding the crisis, allowing her to place the crisis within the context of the Cold War in the region.
Her descriptions of the Cold War in Latin American and Cuban-Soviet relations are particularly useful and fill a gap in the literature for readable summaries on these topics.
The author takes a fair-minded but critical view of United States policies toward Latin America, with a valuable exploration of the attitudes of the region’s governments and people and of the backlash to American intervention.
Soviet-Cuban relations emerge as one of the major themes of the book and the area in which it contributes original research.
Getchell uncovers records from the Soviet embassies in the United States and Mexico that highlight Cuba’s eagerness for relations with the Soviet Union early in the revolution and Soviet beliefs about American intentions toward Cuba.
Her description of Fidel Castro’s substantial efforts to court the Soviet government and gain economic and military support is illuminating, and the discussion of Nikita Khrushchev’s reasons for moving Soviet missiles to Cuba is comprehensive.
Many of the documents in the appendix also focus on Soviet-Cuban relations.
She returns to these topics in discussing the aftermath of the crisis, again filling a gap in the literature for readable summaries on how the crisis influenced the subsequent course of the Cold War in the Western Hemisphere.
