The Democratic People’s Republic is backed by the newly created People’s Republic of China.
June 1956 Christmas Island United Kingdom begins construction , British of airstrip, military encampment and Gilbert and Ellice scientific bunkers to prepare for Islands Colony Operation Grapple hydrogen bomb tests.
October–December Egypt and Hungary Cold War political tensions rise following 1956 United Kingdom, French and Israeli attack on Egypt during Suez crisis, and crushing of Hungarian uprising by Soviet troops.
July 1957 London, England After failure to reach megaton range at Malden Island tests, UK Cabinet agrees to proceed with further hydrogen bomb tests, but relocated to Christmas Island.
Further atomic trigger tests to continue in Australia to support H-bomb program.
Islands Colony 23 September 1958 Christmas Island United Kingdom conducts Grapple Z , British atomic test codenamed ‘Burgee’ Gilbert and Ellice , with the bomb on a Islands Colony tethered balloon.
October–December Geneva, Switzerland United States, United Kingdom and 1958 USSR hold talks in Geneva to establish a moratorium for nuclear testing.
The world’s largest hydrogen bomb (RDS-220 code name ‘Vanya’ or ‘Tsar Bomba’) is the most powerful man-made explosion in human history.
January 1962 Washington DC, USA United States announces resumption of nuclear testing in the Pacific, to begin on Christmas Island in April.
Five nuclear weapons are also dropped from aircraft for air bursts in the vicinity of Johnston Island.
Kennedy and Nikita Khrushchev face off over nuclear missile deployments in Cuba and Turkey.
Over 50 years, the Western powers used the Pacific region as a laboratory for nuclear testing.
Between 1946 and 1958, the United States conducted 67 atomic and hydrogen bomb tests at Bikini and Enewetak atolls in the Marshall Islands.
In 1962, there were 24 further United States atmospheric nuclear tests at Christmas Island, as well as five atmospheric airbursts and nine high-altitude nuclear tests, with warheads launched on missiles from Johnston Atoll and submarines.
These were followed by nine hydrogen and atomic bomb tests in 1957–58 at Malden Island and Christmas Island in the British Gilbert and Ellice Islands Colony —today the Republic of Kiribati.
France conducted four atmospheric nuclear tests at Reggane and 13 underground tests at In Eker in the Sahara desert in Algeria between 1960 and 1966.
There are quite a few mistakes in the files, from the days before electric typewriters and correcting fluid.
There are also many examples where Europeans have used different names for atolls than those used by indigenous communities, such as Penrhyn/Tongareva, Fanning/ Tabuaeran or Johnston/Kalama.
For consistency throughout the book, I have retained the name ‘Christmas Island’, in spite of local usage.
This book will not go into detailed analysis of the different prototypes for British atomic and hydrogen bombs, nor provide complete data on the types of radiation generated during the Grapple nuclear detonations— the footnotes provide a number of sources for readers interested in greater technical detail.
Atomic weapons rely on nuclear fission, where the nucleus of uranium or plutonium splits into lighter elements, instantly releasing massive amounts of energy.
A nuclear detonation differs from conventional explosives due to the generated heat, blast and especially radiation. xix Grappling with the Bomb In contrast to atom bombs, thermonuclear or hydrogen weapons rely instead on nuclear fusion.
Some early hydrogen bombs in the 1950s, using a mixture of tritium and deuterium, relied on atomic triggers to generate the massive heat and pressure required start the fusion process.
The bomb that destroyed Hiroshima was only 12 kt, whereas larger thermonuclear or hydrogen bombs have an explosive power greater than 1 megaton.
Fallout is tiny particles of dirt, weapon debris, fission products or other substances contaminated with radioactivity.
These particles are spread into the atmosphere following a nuclear explosion, then return to earth, especially through rainfall.
Fallout can be blown for some distance by atmospheric or stratospheric winds.
Some nuclear detonations are fired from a tower or low-level balloon and are defined as a ground burst, generating extensive radioactive fallout.
Other tests are air bursts, detonated at higher altitudes in an attempt to limit the amount of irradiated soil and debris.
In order to reach a stable state, they release that extra energy or mass in the form of radiation.
Ionising radiation describes the particles and electromagnetic radiations that have sufficient energy to cause ionisation as they interact with matter.
Alpha particles have little penetrating power, and can be blocked by a barrier as thin as a sheet of paper.
However, they can cause significant cell damage and potential health risks if ingested or inhaled, because of the large amounts of energy deposited in short distances in tissues.
Beta particles have slightly more penetrating power, but can be stopped by shielding from metal such as aluminium.
First, the activity of radioactive material is the rate at which radioactive decay takes place.
Third, other units measure the relative biological damage in the human body.
In the 1950s, many countries used the measurement rem , but today, the sievert is the standard unit to measure the health effect of low levels of ionising radiation on the human body.
There is no accepted threshold below which there is no risk of cancer induction.
Regulatory dose limits reflect upper permitted thresholds of exposures by workers and members of the public.
Half-life is the time in which radioactivity will decline to half its initial value through decay.
Some radioactive isotopes are long-lasting, such as plutonium-239 with a half-life of 24,400 years.
Ionisation in the human body may cause cellular damage that leads to the death of a cell, or the cell may be damaged in such a way that it cannot reproduce or fulfil its original function.
Where there is DNA damage in the nucleus of the cell, damaged cells may continue to reproduce and develop into cancer, after an interval (latent period) from a few years to many decades.
