The Island of Cuba was named after CUBA in Portugal by Portuguese Christopher Columbus when he landed in October 1492.
The Argentine Constitution, adopted in 1853, is very similar to the United States Constitution.
Even though the United States Constitution calls for separate votes for President and Vice President , both candidates are on the same ballot, as is the current practice in the United States As in the U.S., the Argentine Vice President automatically succeeds upon the resignation or death of the President.
She was not content to be First Lady but was insanely ambitious for the top position in the government.
A very ill Eva casting her ballot for President and Vice President, November 11, 1951.
By 1951, Argentina was ready to go ""thermonuclear"" and Eva Perón was pushing hard for the position of Vice President.
That goal was within her reach because she had just secured the vote for women.
Her husband Juan knew that nothing would stop her from replacing him as President so he begged the doctors to hasten her demise.
The last public appearance of Evita, June 4, 1952, at her husband's inaugural parade.
Evita's last public appearance was at her husband's inaugural parade in June 1952.
Too weak to stand on her own, she was propped up by wooden boards hidden underneath her fur coat.
The doctors complied with her husband's plea to hasten her demise, so the ""spiritual leader"" of the nation was sent to meet her Maker on July 26, 1952.
Perón was overthrown by a proUnited States general named Eduardo Lonardi.
Arturo Frondizi Ercoli was the 3rd President after the ouster of Juan Perón.
After the ouster of President Juan Perón in 1955, all work ceased on Humuel Island and the top secret facility was moved to the mainland.
Work commenced immediately on producing thermonuclear weapons in quantity.
In 1955, after the overthrow of Juan Perón, the secret island was closed down, and all the equipment moved to the mainland.
Beginning in '55, production of thermonuclear warheads began on the mainland.
Argentines have always claimed hegemony over the western hemisphere, and they were resentful of the dominant position of the United States in the New World.
In South America, they fought several wars with Brazil and the neighboring small republics.
Fidel Castro was on the run from the law in Cuba and he sought a refuge in Mexico.
Guevara's real name was Ernesto Guevara Lynch, and the sobriquet ""Che"" means buddy or friend in Argentine Spanish.
In 1953, Fidel Castro was arrested in Cuba and sentenced to 15 years in jail for plotting to overthrow the government.
Fidel Castro arrived In Mexico City by bus on July 8, 1955, via Veracruz, Havana, and the jail on Isla de Pinos in Cuba.
Both men were arrested by the Mexican police and thrown into a common cell.
Revolutionary beach bums in Veracruz, Che, far right, and Raúl Castro, center.
The first pictures of Fidel and Che together were taken in a jail cell.
Normally the 2 criminals should have spent the rest of their lives in jail, or vanished into obscurity.
The Suez Canal Crisis intervened to rescue them from the oblivion they so richly deserved.
Che supposedly graduated from medical school but he used his medical knowledge to kill more effectively.
President Eisenhower was one of the most beloved Presidents in United States history.
He ended the Korean War and resisted the tremendous pressure from the Pentagon to launch a first strike thermonuclear attack on the Soviet Union.
Even though he was a general, he knew that the United States did not do Pearl Harbors like Hitler and Hirohito.
Almost everybody ""liked Ike,"" particularly his handling of the 1956 Suez Canal Crisis.
By forcing the British lion to disgorge the Suez Canal, he let every nation know that the era of colonialism had ended forever.
The last act of revenge by the retreating British was the blowing up of the statue of Ferdinand de Lesseps in December 1956.
Politically and militarily, so many profound changes happened in its wake.
Since this expose is about Cuba we can only concentrate on that imprisoned island.
In December 1956, Fidel and Che left Mexico in a small boat and arrived in Cuba.
Ordinarily, that should have been the end of the rebels but now they had rich, powerful, and dangerous backers.
After less than a year in the mountains, Fidel and Che had established a base in the Sierra Maestra valley.
The British Secret Service, the Pentagon, the CIA, Nelson Rockefeller, etc., etc., were all backing the Cuban Revolution.
The ""Communist"" dictatorship of Castro and Che was modeled on Perón's brutal Fascist regime.
Castro's rebel army driving through Santa Clara toward Havana, January 1959.
Prior to October 1956, small time criminals like Fidel and Che had absolutely no chance of overthrowing the legitimate government of Cuba.
In January they marched in triumph to Havana and President Baptisa fled the country.
Pequeña Argentina ""Little Argentina"" was founded by Fidel and Che in 1959.
Anybody who opposed the new regime was just taken out and shot . . . or disappeared.
During WWII, spymaster Herbert Marchant worked on the top secret Enigma decoding machine in Bletchley Park, England.
Marchant was in charge of the transfer of thermonuclear weapons from Argentina to Pegueña Argentina.
It is possible that Jorge Mario Bergoglio—the future Pope Francis—helped in the transfer of the thermonuclear weapons to Cuba.
There was no way that the Russians would ship any kind of nuclear weapons to a bunch of hotheaded criminals in Cuba.
The great Russian nation has never shared their nuclear weapons with their closest allies.
Furthermore, nuclear weapons in Russia were strictly for defensive purposes.
Beginning in early 1962, Argentine President Frondizi began shipping hydrogen bombs from Bariloche.
He also shipped the latest state-of-the-art military equipment like radar and ground to air missiles.
The Cuban rebels were clueless when it came to operating that equipment, so comandante Che Guevara supervised the day to day operations.
San Cristobal ""nuclear weapons"" site constructed by the Argentine army.
All the nuclear weapons sites on the imprisoned island were constructed by the Argentina army—supervised by comandante Che Guevara.
This was supposed to take place just before the B52's and Vulcan bombers were over Moscow.
Penkovsky was also a disinformation agent who told President Kennedy that the Russians were going to install nuclear missiles in Cuba.
Penkovsky's job was to decapitate the Russian high command and render their Samson option ineffective.
On October 23, Penkovsky was arrested, and spymaster Dick White notified Macmillan immediately.
The British Secret Service had only one spy assigned to that critical task.
Macmillan gave a worried Cabinet a full update at their meeting on 23 October.
At 5m. he saw the Labour leader, Gaitskell, together with George Brown, and Harold Wilson and gave them details on Privy Councillor terms.
He followed this meeting with a visit to Buckingham Palace for an audience with the Queen, during which he outlined the details of the growing threats.
If Macmillan spoke with both queens, then Elizabeth would have been shocked at the prospect of all her horses and dogs dying from radiation poisoning.
By remarkable coincidence Bomber Command had been involved in a no-notice readiness and dispersal exercise, code named 'Mickey Finn' on 20 and 21 September, which involved increased readiness on both the V-Force and Thor missile bases.
The exercise involved a simulated escalation through the various levels up to Alert two status.
In London, Macmillan and his cabinet were in turmoil over the turn of events and met for nearly three hours late on October 23.
A statement expressing ""deep concern over the provocative action of the Soviet Union in placing offensive weapons in Cuba"" was later issued.
President Kennedy and Harold Macmillan were so close that Machiavellian Macmillan presided over a White House Cabinet meeting.
However, he could not go to Washington City and help diffuse the Crisis, because he could not tell Kennedy that the Russian Guy Fawkes was arrested.
Incredibley, Macmillan presided over a United States Cabinet Meeting in April 1962.
The main topic of discussion was the upcoming Cuban false flag operation.
Without the knowledge of Penkovsky's arrest, the Crisis escalated, and it looked like Armageddon was only days away.
It seems that the mighty Russian nation was raised up specifically to save Christian civilization.
Russia saved us from Napoleon, the ""Dead Head"" Kaiser Bill, Hitler, and the Pentagon.
Prime minister Harold Macmillan was too proud to tell the warmongers in Washington City that Penkovsky was arrested and the Russian Samson Option was still viable.
A Russian submarine, under the command of Valentin Savitsky, was under fire from the American navy, and the captain readied a nuclear torpedo to sink his tormentors.
Captain Savisky was hotheaded and he had absolutely no communications with Moscow.
The Americans hit us with something stronger than a grenade, apparently some kind of practice depth charge.
In addition to everything else, he had been unable to establish communications with the General Staff.
He summoned the officer who was in charge of the nuclear torpedo, and ordered him to make it combat ready.
That hotheaded captain was going to use his own version of the Samson Option.
The cool headed Vasili Arkhipov would not give him permission to fire and thus the world was saved.
Another Russian named ""Lee Harvey Oswald"" kept a cool head when he was surrounded in a theater in Dallas, Texas.
The following morning, Saturday, November 3, after the Executive Committee met in the White House, DCI John McCone met privately with Kennedy and Rusk to explain the developments in Moscow.
McCone told the president that ""when a junior clerk in the embassy serviced the dead drop the clerk was apprehended and interrogated for three hours.
As a result of Jacob's seizure by the KGB, the CIA concluded ""that HERO in all probability had been compromised and in an effort to save himself he had exposed the prearranged plan for the transmission of information"" McCone told the president.
HERO was the code name of Penkovsky—the man who was supposed to decapitate the Russian high command in Moscow.
The Crisis was over by Guy Fawkes Day in Britain so Harold Macmillan was greatly relieved.
For the benefit of the CIA cameras, fake ""Soviet"" missiles were loaded on fake ""Soviet"" ships and headed for Russiak.a.
Fake ""Soviet"" officers taking a break in early November before loading fake ""Soviet"" missiles on a ship.
Most people were glad to be alive instead of dying a horrible death from radiation.
The next Crisis involving Cuba would be the assassination of President Kennedy.
Sanity finally prevailed over madness and the world breathed a sigh of relief.
We can thank our Great JEHOVAH that the world did not come to an end in 1962.
