The United States uses atomic weapons to win the war, is the world superpower The Cold War was a battle of ideas/ideologies Soviet Union & United States & the Eastern Western European Bloc European Nations Democracies GOAL → “Containment” GOAL → spread or limiting the spread world-wide Communism of Communism Former allies against Hitler’s Nazi Germany in WW2, the democratic United States and the Communist USSR had different forms of government, economy,and world views.
Both sides wanted to win over the hearts and minds of the rest of the world, especially the former colonies / new countries in Africa and Asia.
The “Iron Curtain” – a line separating the democratic Western European countries from the Communist Eastern European countries.
From Stettin in the Balkans, to Trieste in the Adriatic, an iron curtain has descended across the Continent.
Behind that line lies the ancient capitals of Central and Eastern Europe. -Sir Winston Churchill, 1946 Truman Doctrine The U S. should support free peoples throughout the world who were resisting takeovers by armed minorities or outside pressures…We must assist free peoples to work out their own destinies in their own way.
Truman The United States gave Greece & Turkey $400 million in aid to defeat communist groups.
This move is not against any country or doctrine, but against hunger, poverty, desperation, and chaos.
America leads the Berlin airlift for over a year, flying in all the supplies needed to keep the city going.
Berlin Blockade & Airlift The Cold War The Cold War was an era of competition and conflict between the superpowers the United States and the USSR, along with their allies, when the threat of nuclear war created constant world tension.
Greece & Turkey ❖ France ❖ Iceland ❖ 1955: West Germany ❖ Italy ❖ 1983: Spain Germany The United States and NATO decided to make Germany a powerful ally in the defense of Western Europe and not treat them as formers Nazis to be punished.
West Germany became a country in 1949 and joined NATO just six years later.
Communist China The Nationalists in China were United States allies against Japan in WW2.
The Nationalists were corrupt and had treated the people they ruled poorly.
In comparison, the Communists under Mao Zedong won peasant support and then victory.
A “Police Action” Kim Il-Sung Syngman Rhee “Domino Theory” The Korean War After WW2, the United States and USSR split the Korean peninsula into two regions.
The United Nations supported South Korea and many countries helped the United States defend South Korea.
The Korean War The United States commander General MacArthur launched a surprise invasion of North Korea and quickly drove North Korean forces up to the border with China.
Mao’s China warned the United States not to approach the Chinese border and launched its own surprise attack in December, 1950.
It was called a “Police Action” because fear of WW3 and nuclear weapons kept the United States from using all its might to win the war.
The United States Army and Air Force made up the greatest part of the United Nations forces The Korean War The Chinese invasion appeared to be winning and General MacArthur called for the use of Atomic Bombs.
He also criticized Truman for not trying to win the win war aggressively enough.
In the US, the President is the Commander in Chief of the Armed Forces.
Although MacArthur was tremendously popular, Truman “fired” him for attempting to determine how the war would be fought and what its goal would be.
In appointing a new United States commander in Korea, Truman emphasized the fact that the President makes the decisions about waging war and not the military.
In 1953, President Eisenhower compromised with North Korea and the fighting stopped.
The war has never ended but the 38th parallel now divides the two countries.
The freedoms guaranteed under the Bill of Rights were considered less important than the threat of Communism.
Sputnik – The Space Race In 1957 the USSR successfully launched the world’s first satellite, which orbited the globe.
Americans feared that the satellite could direct nuclear missiles and that the USSR was significantly ahead of the US in scientific research.
Overnight, the United States added great emphasis to scientific education and the development of satellites and missiles.
Khrushchev Embraces Communist Cuba’s leader Fidel Castro, 1961 Bay of Pigs Disaster The United States secretly helps Cubans try to overthrow Fidel Castro and end Communism.
Castro will turn to the USSR for protection afterwards and Krushchev will secretly have nuclear missiles installed in Cuba.
