U2 OpenURL Link Leo Smith II was a young Air Force officer working in a new Minuteman missile silo when the United States faced down the Soviet Union during the 1962 Cuban missile crisis.
On Monday, after three decades spent around the nuclear trigger at the Strategic Air Command, Smith is retiring a lieutenant general and SAC vice commander.
That's also the day SAC ends, and without ever firing a missile or other nuclear arms.
Close to the geographic center of the continental United States, SAC is the big nuclear shield the nation's defenders have held up to the world for 46 years.
Once consuming nearly half the Pentagon budget, SAC is going the way of the Cold War and the Soviet Union.
Defense spending cuts and Air Force restructuring are paring down the huge and costly sentry at Offutt Air Force Base.
Under the new arrangement, the Strategic Command will coordinate nuclear plans for the Air Force and Navy while other parts of the Air Force take care of the missiles and bombers.
The Air Mobility Command and Air Combat Command will train the pilots and maintain the planes for strategic or tactical wars.
The SAC flag, with its shield bearing an armor-covered fist clenching lightning bolts and an olive branch, will be taken down and packed away.
Jim Exon, D-Neb., chairman of the Senate Armed Services Subcommittee on Strategic Forces and Nuclear Deterrence, said in an interview last week.
From Feb., 1961, to July 24, 1990, SAC kept at least one ""Looking Glass"" plane in the air every minute of every day watching for possible nuclear attacks.
It could also assume command if the earthbound SAC center was destroyed.
Then on Sept., 1991, President Bush ordered the nation's bombers, tankers and missiles off alert for the first time since 1957.
In the 1950s, SAC took 47 percent of the United States defense budget, said David Sorenson, professor of national security at the Air War College at Maxwell Air Force Base, Ala.
At SAC headquarters lately, more Navy uniforms are turning up and many former staff have already gone to new jobs at other air bases.
Monitoring continues, however, in the reinforced-concrete command center 40 feet underground.
Eight big video screens can still display satellite images, weather forecasts, battle video and other information military top brass need to direct a war.
The line to the National Military Command Center in Washington still provides prompt contact with the president.
SAC was created to contend with nuclear weapons, preventing any accidental firing as well as planning their use.
The intention was a command so threatening that no enemy would dare attack the United States or its allies with nuclear arms.
It was more than enough to inspire Hollywood, in 1955 with ""The Strategic Air Command"" starring James Stewart and again in 1963 with ""A Gathering of Eagles,"" featuring Rock Hudson.
Ironically, the only nuclear weapons the United States ever used were the bombs dropped in World War II, before SAC was born on March 21, 1946.
SAC headquarters move from Andrews Air Force Base near Washington, D.C., to Offutt Air Force Base near Omaha.
SAC begins operating continuous airborne command-post in ''Looking Glass"" flights.
A SAC U-2 reconnaissance plane spots Soviet missiles unloaded in Cuba, setting off the Cuban missile crisis.
SAC creates Strategic Projection Force for fast deployment and support of conventional operations worldwide.
Continuous airborne command post ceases, though flight crews remain on ground alert.
Bombers, tankers and Minutemen II missiles come off constant alert begun in 1957.
It was a great American intelligence success because the missiles were discovered before they were operational,"" said Allison.
Kennedy Discusses Options President John F Kennedy then convened a small group of experts to decide what course of action to take.
Initially, the experts favored air strikes followed by an invasion, but they felt that would inevitably lead to nuclear war.
Allison said they knew that Soviet-leader Nikita Khrushchev would respond in some forceful way.
And then when they attacked the missiles in Turkey, which were nuclear-warhead armed missiles designed to fire against the Soviet Union, we would obviously have to respond against the Soviet Union,"" he said.
Kennedy Opts for Naval Blockade President Kennedy made the announcement during a televised speech to the nation on October 22nd, 1962.
Two days later, Soviet ships approached the quarantine line and stopped.
He thought that one of the most important things was not allow to make the first shot,"" Khrushchev said.
Khrushchev said his father and President Kennedy were adversaries, but they negotiated with each other.
While the naval quarantine of Cuba worked, tensions rose as Moscow continued to make operational the missiles already in Cuba.
Differing Messages from Khrushchev On October 26th, 1962, `Kennedy received a message from Khrushchev, offering to withdraw the missiles from Cuba, in exchange for assurances that Washington would neither invade that country nor overthrow Fidel Castro.
Before replying, President Kennedy received the next day another letter from Khrushchev.
Graham Allison said Kennedy and his staff decided to ignore the second letter and agreed to incorporate the contents of the first letter in a new proposal.
One is a public deal and the public deal is basically what the first letter proposed, which is you withdraw the missiles and I will guarantee that we will not invade Cuba or attack Cuba.
There is a private ultimatum, and it says we need a response within the next 24 hours or else we are going to act,"" said Allison.
On October 28th, Nikita Khrushchev announced on Radio Moscow the Soviet Union had accepted the American offer and would withdraw its missiles from Cuba.
Sergei Khrushchev said some people saw this as a blow to Moscow's prestige.
Especially on our side, there were the Chinese who just hated this feeling, they told us you are scared, you surrendered to the Americans, you have to start the war.
And by next April as per their secret deal all United States missiles in Turkey were removed.
It existed in the United States in October 1962 during the Cuban missile crisis.
In particular, they cover interactions between President Kennedy and Premier Nikita Khrushchev.
One grew up wealthy and privileged, and the other was raised in near-poverty in the Soviet Union.
A big part of their differences was a result of a summit meeting in 1961 in Vienna when Khrushchev ""roughed up"" the new American president.
He got a rude awakening when the two were perilously close to nuclear war in 1962.
In a decisive moment, Kennedy called his bluff, and Khrushchev blinked.
During the critical 13 days of the crisis, armed nuclear missiles were pointed at each country from land, air and the sea.
The United States had several hundred manned bombers ready to launch, and 60 Strategic Air Command bombers were airborne and on station at all times.
The Soviets had long-range bombers loaded with nuclear bombs prepared to fly toward American cities.
Both nations had nuclear submarines prowling the seas, ready to strike.
Kennedy ordered a blockade of ships bound for Cuba containing cargoes of offensive weapons.
People in the United States reacted to this nuclear confrontation with fear, including panic buying at supermarkets.
For continuity of government, federal agencies had bunker complexes in the mountains of Virginia, West Virginia, Pennsylvania and Maryland.
To Khrushchev's credit, he proposed a compromise that would end the crisis.
He offered to remove the Soviet missiles from Cuba if the United States would remove its missiles from Turkey.
He realized if there was direct conflict with the United States, the Soviet homeland would be destroyed by the superior United States forces.
In the Soviet Union, Khrushchev's withdrawal of the missiles from Cuba was seen as a humiliating defeat.
This decision, along with domestic problems, cost him his political career.
Ousted in a bloodless coup, he was allowed to retire without being incarcerated or killed.
During the 40-plus years of the Cold War between the two superpowers, no crisis brought them as near to nuclear war as that in October 1962.
It is worth noting that a force of several thousand Soviet troops remained in Cuba until the end of the Cold War.
Vice President Jose Ramon Fernandez, who organized a similar conference last year dealing with the Bay of Pigs invasion, provided no details about the documents in announcing the conference on Thursday.
Most Russians associated with the 1962 crisis have died, but several of the late President Kennedy's advisers are living.
Fernandez said conference organizers are studying the possibility of taking participants to sites related to the crisis in the Havana area.
He said the conference's aim is to shed light on events leading up to the crisis, which peaked when the United States learned there were Soviet nuclear missiles on Cuba -just 90 miles from the United States.
CHRISTOPHER MARQUIS AND MARTIN MERZER Herald Staff Writers Section: FRONT 1664 Words Page: 1A OpenURL Link Confronted by the most provocative action by Cuba since the missile crisis of 1962, American officials Sunday vowed a vigorous response to the destruction over international waters of two unarmed aircraft from South Florida -companions of a plane that United States radar observed entering Cuban airspace.
But a day of high-level meetings ended without apparent consensus on how to punish Cuban President Fidel Castro.
The options ranged from a military blockade to punitive sanctions like the severing of U.S. phone service and charter flights to Cuba.
After some initial saber rattling, officials said military action seemed unlikely.
The Clinton administration convened an emergency meeting late Sunday of the United Nations Security Council.
At the same time, Secretary of State Warren Christopher emphasized that the United States would mount its own response.
Many leaders of the Cuban-American community -and some Republican presidential candidates -called for harsh action.
Candidate Pat Buchanan said United States fighters should patrol skies near Cuban airspace.
As the deliberations continued through the night in Washington, the Coast Guard pressed its search for the four missing members of Brothers to the Rescue -three United States citizens and one recent Cuban rafter, all passionately opposed to Castro.
Their apparent deaths over or in the Straits of Florida ignited an international crisis, carved another deep notch in the long standoff between Cuba and the United States, aroused widespread revulsion.
The shootdown clearly ended a period of relative calm during which the United States and Cuba cooperated on refugee and other matters.
More than 1,500 people flocked Sunday to the Brothers' hangar at Opa-locka Airport.
Later, 3,000 people gathered at La Ermita de la Caridad Catholic Church in Coconut Grove to hear Auxiliary Bishop Agustin Roman's words of consolation.
In a symbolic but dramatic gesture of mourning, organizers canceled next weekend's Carnaval Miami -the two-week celebration of Latin culture that climaxes with the Calle Ocho festival.
On front after front, developments unfolded Sunday in ways solemn and tragic and ominous.
Armando Alejandre Jr., Carlos Costa, Pablo Morales and Mario de la Pena.
In Washington, the administration said the two doomed planes were flying over international waters Saturday when they were destroyed by Cuban MiGs but that a third plane -carrying Brothers founder Jose Basulto -was three miles inside Cuban airspace during the attack.
Basulto, whose plane landed safely in South Florida, angrily denied the report.
In any event, a senior United States official said, the apparent incursion ""in no way excuses"" Cuba's response.
Legal experts said international law forbids a government from shooting down a civilian plane unless it represents a military threat.
American officials and many others said Brothers to the Rescue, at most, posed a political threat to Castro, not a military one.
Brothers pilots dropped leaflets over Havana last July and again in January, urging peaceful protest to Castro's communist regime.
After the July 13 flyover, Castro warned that he would employ force to defend Cuban airspace.
The encounter was captured on a dramatic tape of radio communications between Brothers pilots and flight controllers.
The unarmed, single-engine Cessnas were easy prey for Castro's jet-powered MiGs, bristling with firepower.
A videotape made by a passenger aboard a cruise ship passing nearby showed a plume of black smoke rising from the sea.
Never once in the 1,000-word account did Cuba assert that its warplanes attempted any deterrent -as required by international law -other than blasting the planes out of the sky.
The Cuban government claimed that the two downed planes reached points five and eight miles respectively off the Cuban coast, well inside the 12-mile limit.
But no one could explain why Cuba spared the only plane that apparently veered into its airspace -the plane flown by Basulto.
Basulto conceded that his plane ""was the closest to Cuba,"" but he said cockpit instruments showed that he never entered Cuba's airspace.
He said he doubted the plane could have crossed the limit unintentionally.
On previous flights, he said, Cuban air traffic controllers have made mistakes, telling Brothers pilots they were inside Cuban airspace when they were not.
In Washington, administration officials were tight-lipped over which options would be presented to Clinton.
For more than a year, the administration has authorized U.S. long-distance carriers to serve the island.
An end to that would isolate Cubans in exile and on the island but would deprive Cuba of a cash bonanza.
A halt would also isolate exiles from island Cubans and halt a steady illegal flow of U.S. goods and cash to family members.
Such a move would amount to a rollback of recent liberalizing measures but would also deprive Havana of hard currency.
While United States officials all but ruled out a military blockade, several interim steps could demonstrate United States resolve and authority.
In Miami, once again, the relatives and friends and brethren of men lost in the fight for freedom in Cuba lit candles and murmured prayers and asked God to ease their grief and grant peace to the victims.
Herald staff writers Ana Acle, Henri Cauvin, Alfonso Chardy, Elaine de Valle, Jennifer Gonzalez, John Lantigua, David Lyons, Jack Rejtman, Frances Robles, Michael E Ruane, Fabiola Santiago and Peter Slevin contributed to this report.
He says the planes came to within 15 miles of the coast off Havana, but never entered Cuban airspace during what he called the ""completely routine"" search-and-rescue mission.
A United States official says radar records show that the plane carrying Basulto was three miles inside Cuban airspace when the other two planes were shot down.
The official says the other two planes did not enter Cuba's 12-mile limit.
The foreign ministry contends that three planes entered Cuban airspace Saturday morning, although Basulto says the planes didn't leave Opa-locka until 1:10m.
Cuba says two planes entered Cuban airspace again Saturday afternoon, but Basulto's plane remained outside the limit.
JEFFERY A SALTER / Herald Staff LOST A FRIEND: Humberto Sanchez brushes a tear Sunday in memory of fellow Brothers to the Rescue pilot Armando Alejandre Jr.
Juana Perez sits reflectively as others demonstrate Sunday morning at the Brothers to the Rescue hangar at Opa-locka airport.
Brothers to the Rescue founder Jose Basulto, who denies a report that he flew inside Cuban air space, gathers his thoughts at a press conference Sunday.
That observation about the dangers of potentially fatal diplomatic misinterpretations and blunders was manifested at a remarkable conference in Moscow on the 1962 Cuban missile crisis, which took the world to the brink of nuclear war.
At the conference were former top American, Soviet and Cuban officials who were directly involved in the event, including Defense Secretary Robert McNamara and Soviet Foreign Minister Andrei Gromyko.
For President John Kennedy's aides, the question was why Nikita Khrushchev would brazenly risk nuclear war by deploying missiles in Cuba.
Some Soviets noted that Mr Khrushchev was desperate to redress Soviet nuclear inferiority.
Deploying 40 short-range missiles to Cuba would serve as a stopgap measure.
But the primary cause appears to be Soviet and Cuban concerns in April 1962 that America was set to invade the island in October; the missiles were meant to deter the attack.
United States officials strongly denied any invasion plans, but Mr McNamara conceded that extensive United States covert operations against Cuba that year could well have been misinterpreted as pre-invasion activity.
Both governments seriously misinterpreted the motives and the likely responses of the other side.
Each feared the worst from the other side, while downplaying the provocative nature of its own actions.
Unlike the crisis leading to World War I, fear and ignorance were overcome during the Cuban crisis by common sense but just barely.
This meeting clearly shows just how close to nuclear war the world was.
E-4 OpenURL Link Carlsbad writer Susan Carol McCarthy was 11 years old and living in Florida in 1962 when the Cuban missile crisis happened.
Her memories helped form the backdrop for her new novel, ""A Place We Knew Well,"" about a family struggling with a few crises of its own.
The idea of this book came to me because I started having nightmares after 9/11.
I was a mother with children, but in my nightmares, I was 10 or 11 years old, back in my parents' home in Florida.
It took me a while to put together that my subconscious had connected the Cuban missile crisis and 9/11.
I really resented the loss of innocence, that the world was neither as safe nor as sane as I had led them to believe it was.
I Googled Cuban missile crisis and Floridians, and I couldn't find another book that was written from the perspective of average Floridians being in the cross hairs.
When you have a story to tell and no one else has told it, this is worth exploring.
It just feels correct to me to look at an event and then see how it affected ordinary people.
The challenge is to make it intriguing reading and add surprises that perhaps the readers didn't know.
One of the things you are writing about again with the new book is moral courage, the struggle to do the right thing even in terrifying circumstances.
We all have these points in our lives where there's a fork in the road, and you have a choice.
I'm curious, I'm inspired by people who, when they're backed into a moral corner, they make the right choice.
I was also struck by the portrait of Sarah, a wife and a mom, who is unraveling as the world around her appears to be unraveling, too.
When I started thinking about her, I started thinking about the women in our community.
It wasn't an easy time, and so I thought it would be interesting to explore that.
I have a good friend whose aunt was one of five sisters, but she was the only one who was unable to conceive and have a child.
It was very difficult, because this was the '50s and '60s and people were having kids left and right, and if you weren't, there was always that question as to why.
I myself had miscarriages, and I think it's an aspect of the female experience that's more common than most people realize.
Travis, our older son, went off to Long Beach State, and he was one semester from graduating.
He and his roommate had purchased a barbecue grill at a garage sale and put it on their deck, and there was a terrible fire.
Everything was going wonderfully, and then I come back and there's a phone message from the sheriff's department, and when I called the number I learned soon enough I was talking to the coroner's office.
It was always my worst nightmare and it came true, and it was one of the reasons this book took so long.
There was quite a while there where I was just emotionally flat-lined and couldn't do anything.
What I realized over time is that when you lose a child, you not only lose that amazing person in your life, you also lose their college graduation and their wedding and their children and on and on.
Those lessons that Avery learns came straight out of my education as the mother of a lost child.
The crazy thing was one year to the day after we lost him, I got the results from a mammogram saying, oh, by the way, you have breast cancer.
No editor in the world would allow in a book such a coincidence to happen.
It was maybe halfway done, and then life intervened for a couple of years, and I was able to get back in and finish.
CUBAN MISSILE CRISIS -THREE MEN GO TO WAR brings to life the three central figures in the crisis -President John F Kennedy, Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev and Cuban leader Fidel Castro -while SECRETS OF THE DEAD ""The Man Who Saved the World"" reveals the dramatic and shocking story of the events that took place beneath the waves when a lone Russian submariner refused to fire a nuclear missile.
On October 22, 1962, President John F Kennedy informed the world that the Soviet Union was building secret missile bases on the island of Cuba, 90 miles off the shores of Florida.
CUBAN MISSILE CRISIS -THREE MEN GO TO WAR, premiering Tuesday, October 23, 8:00-9:00m.
ET , explores the roles the three iconic leaders played during some of the most dangerous moments in history, set against the human stories of ordinary men in the field such as the Soviet man who shot down the U2 piloted by United States Air Force Major Rudolf Anderson on the worst day of the crisis.
The film features revealing interviews with key witnesses and experts, including Sergei Khrushchev, son of the former Soviet premier; Ted Sorensen, former member of the renowned Executive Committee of the United States National Security Council; former KGB and CIA operatives; and Captain Jerry Coffee, the reconnaissance pilot who made a split second decision to veer off course in Cuba and revealed a new type of nuclear weapon that could have annihilated invading American forces.
An edge-of-your seat tale of espionage and intrigue at the highest level, CUBAN MISSILE CRISIS -THREE MEN GO TO WAR offers a fascinating perspective on one of the most harrowing times in modern history.
From Crossing the Line Productions, the film is produced by John Murray, and co-directed by Murray and Emer Reynolds.
SECRETS OF THE DEAD ""The Man Who Saved the World,"" which premieres Tuesday, October 23, 9:00-10:00m.
ET , is an intimate and intense film exploring the dramatic and little-known events that unfolded inside a Soviet B-59 submarine in the waters off the coast of Florida.
While politicians desperately sought a solution to the standoff between Russia, the United States and Cuba, no one was aware of what was happening beneath the waves.
The story of Vasili Arkhipov, the man who refused to fire the nuclear missile, was hidden for decades, only emerging in Russia in recent years.
With most of the action set in a claustrophobic submarine running out of air, ""The Man Who Saved the World"" combines tense drama with eyewitness accounts and expert testimony about some of the most critical events in the Cold War.
A Bedlam Production for THIRTEEN in association with WNET; executive producer for Thirteen is Steve Burns; executive producer for Bedlam Productions is Simon Breen; and executive in charge is Stephen Segaller.
About Bedlam Productions Based in London, BAFTA and Academy Award-winning Bedlam Productions' key areas of activity are feature film and documentary production.
Both founder members have worked extensively for major national and international broadcast networks and film production companies, gaining critical and commercial acclaim.
About Crossing the Line Productions Crossing the Line is a multi-award winning production company that has made films for many of the world's leading broadcasters.
Their film Broken Tail, co-produced with PBS' NATURE series, recently won the top awards at the world's leading wildlife film festivals in the United States and has just received two Emmy Nominations.
Christian Toto; THE WASHINGTON TIMES Section: CMETROPOLITANLIFE 1117 Words Page: C5 OpenURL Link LOS ANGELES The Cuban missile crisis cries out for a Hollywood-size retelling.
The crisis had it all great characters, a compelling narrative, nail-biting suspense and a happy ending.
To hear star Kevin Costner tell it, the production of ""Thirteen Days,"" the new film chronicling that tense chapter in American history, was anything but a slam dunk.
Sometimes a film in which the world is spared nuclear Armageddon isn't enough to pry financing from a studio's parsimonious power brokers.
Mr Costner, an actor whose career has endured more peaks and valleys than a plastic surgeon's waiting room, understands.
That doesn't read very well for people,"" Mr Costner says during a recent round-table interview to promote the film.
Indeed, the $80 million movie languished for more than four years and cycled through several directors before financing could be cemented.
Graced with relative unknowns in the Kennedy roles Bruce Greenwood as John F Kennedy, Steven Culp as Bobby Kennedy the film fleshes out the bitter, behind-the-scene skirmishes in a talky, yet straightforward narrative.
Mr Costner has the less flashy role of Kenneth O'Donnell, the presidential aide and confidant who had both men's ear during the crisis.
Looking astute in oval-shaped glasses, his hair the kind of brown that has seen its share of sunshine, Mr Costner recalls his visceral reaction to the project.
Screenwriter David Self, relying on memoirs, White House tapes and CIA documents for inspiration, describes how U-2 spy photos revealed a missile buildup in Cuba.
In the tremulous 13 days that followed, the president's decisions were based on conscience, not on getting re-elected or on poll figures, Mr Costner says.
The plainspoken actor plays his part with a jarring Massachusetts accent that promises to roust even the sleepiest moviegoer's complacency.
Prince of Thieves,"" he gave a halfhearted British lilt to his performance, earning universal rebuke.
The Kennedys and the late Mr O'Donnell sounded different from anyone else in Washington, he says.
That made their presence all the more grating inside the Beltway, something the film had to depict to be true.
I want you to hear the inflections,"" Mr Costner says, his own intonations still flavored by the accent.
Besides, he adds, Mr O'Donnell's blue-collar speech patterns mirrored his hardscrabble bearing.
CBS anchorman Dan Rather once described Mr O'Donnell as ""prison tough,"" Mr Costner recalls.
Viewers will latch onto the story through Mr Costner's character, Mr Donaldson says.
He kept a diary at the time and went back to read those passages for inspiration.
His journals recall how unimportant homework seemed given the gravity of the situation.
Like Mr Donaldson, the film's key players all talk with passion of the period and spliced their own research into their performances.
Mr Greenwood pored through stacks of material to make sure his Kennedy would measure up to the task at hand.
The research gave the Canadian-born actor fresh insight into the period that has been called Camelot.
Mr Greenwood defends the often besmirched president as intensely as he rips away the leader's charismatic veneer.
Mr Costner sounds equally defiant defending the film and the source material.
CIA documents also being released half a century after the Cold War drama shine a light on the tense two weeks in which the two superpowers came close to nuclear war.
In late 1962, Soviet premier Nikita Khrushchev ordered a secret deployment of nuclear missiles in Cuba that were soon detected by United States spy planes.
On October 16 that year, United States president John F Kennedy was briefed on photographic proof of the missile sites being developed.
US officials determined that the medium-range missiles would be able to reach key sites within 1600km of Cuba in minutes.
But Mikoyan was so concerned at Castro's erratic behaviour during a diplomatic visit that he wrote back to Moscow that they must urgently take back the remaining bombs.
Mikoyan was driven to cite a non-existent Soviet law banning the transfer of tactical nuclear weapons to other countries.
Commenting on the material in the United States exhibition, Dobbs said yesterday that both Kennedy and Khrushchev had made mistakes leading up to the crisis.
Khrushchev had gambled by deploying nuclear weapons so far from the Soviet Union on the United States doorstep.
And Kennedy fumbled his first major foreign policy crisis at the Bay of Pigs with the failed effort to topple Castro.
Furthermore, the Kennedy administration's campaign to overthrow Castro, called Operation Mongoose, triggered a dramatic Soviet reaction.
A CIA document outlines plans to assassinate Castro, including a 1964 plot with mafia connections.
The mob and ``patriotic Cuban exiles'' settled on a payment of $US100,000 for assassinating Castro, $US20,000 for his brother Raul and $US20,000 for Che Guevara, plus $US2500 for expenses.
Addressing himself to these reports, Mark Leibovit, a veteran analyst and Internet commentator on events that could affect the financial markets, took note of the missile speculation, warning clients on Friday that such an action would surely represent an additional threat to a market already saddled with a slew of worries.
Indeed, the Washington Post reported last month that Russian bombers capable of carrying nuclear bombs could be deployed in Cuba in response to American plans to install a missile defense system in Europe.
Russian missiles last appeared in Cuba in 1962, during the Cuban missile crisis, in what was the closest the world ever came to nuclear war.
Mr Leibovit, the head of VRTrader.com, an online investment service for traders, told me during the weekend that he thought the installation of such missiles in Cuba if indeed such an event were to come to pass could lead to a significant market shellacking.
He estimated that the Dow Jones Industrial Average could be vulnerable to falling back to 10,800, and possibly even to the low reached in 2003 of around 7,000.
Mr Leibovit was negative on the market a few months ago, but recently switched to a more positive view in the wake of the falling price of oil.
Now, though, given Russia's invasion of Georgia and speculation about the return of Russian missiles in Cuba, he's getting a lot more concerned.
Mr Leibovit is referencing a declaration Friday by a top Russian general that the Kremlin was prepared to launch a nuclear attack against Poland if it persisted in participating in a deal with America, under which we would provide Poland with Patriot missiles in exchange for locating a missile interceptor base there.
The Cuban missile crisis arose in April 1962, when the Soviet leader, Nikita Khrushchev, conceived the idea of placing intermediate-range missiles in Cuba.
He theorized that deployment in Cuba would double the Soviets' strategic arsenal and provide a real deterrent to a potential American attack against the Soviet Union.
At the time, the Cuban leader, Fidel Castro, was looking for a way to defend his island from an American attack following the failed Bay of Pigs invasion in 1961, an effort by American-trained Cuban exiles to overthrow the Cuban government.
Consequently, he approved Khrushchev's plan, which secretly went into effect in the summer of 1962.
In mid-October, reconnaissance photographs disclosed the Soviet missiles.
On October 22, President Kennedy announced the discovery of the missile installations to the public and his decision to quarantine the island.
At the same time, he proclaimed that any missile attack launched from Cuba would be regarded as an attack on America by the Soviet Union and demanded that the Soviets remove all their offensive weapons from Cuba.
Negotiations ensued and on October 28 an agreement was reached whereby the Soviets removed their missiles and light bombers in return for assurances America would not invade Cuba.
Presumably, this agreement, which in theory is still in effect, would be scrapped if Russia were to place missiles there again, a former Merrill Lynch strategist, Bill Rhodes, says.
The chief investment strategist of Standard & Poor's, Sam Stovall, figures the market would react negatively to a reinstallation of the missiles, but he thinks, unlike Mr Leibovit, that the decline would be minimal, no more than a couple of percentage points.
Because he believes cooler heads would prevail and such an action would be reversed quickly.
An obvious question is why investors are taking the prospect of missile installations so close to America so lightly.
All it takes is a lot of social media buzz; ""balloting"" on Facebook, Twitter and such begins Friday right after he builds a ""missile"" for Kelly Ripa and Michael Strahan in their ""Live's Search for America's New Grill Star"" contest.
Each contestant gets a segment on a Friday show to whip up his or her creation for the TV hosts.
For ""Live,"" he said, he ""wanted something unique rather than your basic ribs.
But the assembly is ""no small process,"" said his wife, Kelly, who's been through it countless times in recent weeks.
The sandwich contains smoked mojo pork, ground rib-eye, picnic ham, Swiss cheese, grilled pickles and his special 4-5-5 sauce.
That's just the ingredients; then there's the smoker, grill, oven, countless bowls and measuring spoons, and a piston — which he uses as a sandwich press at the end of the build.
When he says he's not a weekend warrior, he's right; every night he cooks … if he comes home at 10 he cooks, he's got a grill in his office and cooks for his staff.
It's not unusual for Juarez to call a neighbor late at night to say, ""Hey, I've got a sockeye salmon or something.
Juarez has five grills and smokers — four at home and one in the kitchen he built into his office at Victory Solutions, where he routinely cooks for staff birthdays and other special events.
Born in 1963 in Havana, Juarez came to the United States with his parents in 1968.
That scene is revisited in the new film 13 Days, which opens today in Central Florida.
The world never came closer to nuclear war than during those 13 days of mounting tensions, escalating threats and military posturing.
Nowhere was that tension felt more keenly than Florida, which might either have become a staging area for an invasion of Cuba or the first American soil to be hit by Soviet missiles.
That long-ago October is remembered as a month when the United States government learned that the Soviet Union was installing intermediate-range ballistic missiles in Cuba, and the world held its breath.
Anti-aircraft missile batteries were rushed in from across the country.
Strategic Air Command bases in Orlando, Satellite Beach and Tampa went on high alert.
U-2s flew out of McCoy Air Force Base in Orlando -now the site of Orlando International Airport -and RF-101 low-level reconnaissance aircraft zipped in and out of MacDill AFB in Tampa.
The film's primary focus is on Washington intrigue, but Air Force and Navy bases in Florida play a secondary role in scenes that accurately re-create the massive buildup of force that occurred during the Cuban missile crisis.
It took capitalism to bring the danger at hand home to a lot of people.
The state's newspapers and TV stations were days behind the story because of military secrecy.
A Sentinel reporter was arrested for trying to find out what was going on at McCoy.
KEY WEST AT GROUND ZERO Key West was ground zero during the crisis, an island village turned into an armed camp.
And other batteries of high-altitude Nikes were taken to other locations, including the outskirts of Everglades National Park.
PERMANENT AIR DEFENSE The Cuban missile crisis led to a permanent air-defense missile presence in Florida.
Hawk, whose stepfather was a missile specialist with SAC at the time, has worked as a military historian and history teacher in the years since 1962.
And though much of the world was relieved that war was averted, at least one segment of the Florida population was let down.
Cubans who had only recently fled their homeland were bitterly disappointed.
I think Cuban-Americans still look at the missile crisis as `Kennedy won in the short term, but Castro won in the long run.
The tapes, released for the first time, cover nearly three hours of meetings by President John Kennedy and his advisers, including his brother Robert, then United States attorney general, National Security Adviser McGeorge Bundy and Defense Secretary Robert McNamara.
Alerted to the rapid buildup of Soviet missile sites on Cuba, Kennedy and his team considered several possible United States responses -including a direct air strike against Cuba.
But Kennedy was also concerned that inaction might cause the collapse of the NATO alliance.
Their quality is mostly poor, depending on background noise and the proximity of the speakers to hidden microphones in the Oval Office.
In the first recording, many of Kennedy's advisers appear to lean toward military action.
They view aerial photographs of the missile installations and review possible actions, including a response to any attack by Cuban President Fidel Castro on the United States naval base at Guantanomo Bay in Cuba.
The photographs apparently showed a rapid buildup of bases for medium-range ballistic missiles.
At one point, Kennedy and his advisers debate launching a surprise attack on Cuba.
But several advisers warned the president that Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev had to be ""given some way out"" of the impasse and that a surprise attack would block this option.
Kennedy can be heard asking Defense Secretary McNamara what the casualties would be in an airstrike against the bases in Cuba.
We must assume it will kill several hundred Soviet citizens,"" McNamara replies.
Some of those at the meeting warn that any military action against the missile sites in Cuba could spark a Soviet reaction in other parts of the world, including a direct strike against the United States.
The tapes, released for the first time, cover nearly three hours of meetings by President Kennedy and his advisers, including his brother Robert, who was attorney general, national security adviser McGeorge Bundy and Defense Secretary Robert McNamara.
They view aerial photographs of the missile installations and review possible actions, including a response to any attack by Cuban leader Fidel Castro on the United States naval base at Guantanamo Bay.
It is not conduct that one would expect from the United States,"" says George Ball, an undersecretary of state.
Kennedy can be heard asking McNamara what the casualties would be in an air strike against the bases in Cuba.
