Ralph Crane/Life Magazine/The LIFE Picture Collection/Getty Images 2 of 33A spy photo of a medium range ballistic missile base in San Cristobal, Cuba, with labels detailing various parts of the base.
Getty Images 4 of 33President Kennedy signs the proclamation formally putting the blockade around Cuba into effect.
October 1962Bettmann/Getty Images 7 of 33 United States United Nations Ambassador Adlai Stevenson challenges Soviet Ambassador Valerian Zorin to deny that his country placed nuclear weapons in Cuba.
October 1962Bettmann/Getty Images 8 of 33Cuban soldiers stand by an anti-aircraft artillery at the Havana waterfront, ready for an American invasion.
Bettmann/Getty Images 9 of 33One of six United States Army anti-aircraft missile launchers set up on George Smathers Beach, prepared for the threat of a missile launch from Cuba.
Keystone/Getty Images 12 of 33President Kennedy meets with Air Force pilots who have been flying reconnaissance missions over Cuba.
Bettmann/Getty Images 13 of 33An American destroyer steams alongside a Soviet one, demanding to inspects its cargo as part of the United States blockade of Cuba.
Underwood Archives/Getty Images 16 of 33Protesters and police break out into a brawl.
CORBIS/Corbis via Getty Images 18 of 33A placard calling for peace falls to the floor as protester outside the United States embassy is knocked over.
Cecil Stoughton/The LIFE Images Collection/Getty Images 20 of 33Citizens of the Soviet Union demonstrate outside the United States Embassy in Moscow in protest of the United States blockade of Cuba.
VCG Wilson/Bettmann Archive 21 of 33A Soviet freighter, refusing demands from the American blockade to let them inspect their cargo, is photographed from above with what appears to be nuclear missiles on board.
Bettmann/Getty Images 22 of 33Bar patrons watch President Kennedy's address to the nation on the television.
Robert W Kelley/The LIFE Picture Collection/Getty Images 25 of 33Protesters and police officers clash outside the United States Embassy in London.
PA Images via Getty Images 26 of 33A Soviet freighter believed to be carrying nuclear missiles is escorted away by a Navy plane and destroyer.
Y Owen/The LIFE Images Collection/Getty Images 29 of 33A United States Navy Picket Ship intercepts a Soviet freighter, believed to be carrying missiles, as it leaves Cuba.
Carl Mydans/The LIFE Picture Collection/Getty Images 30 of 33The debris of the American U-2 airplane piloted by Rudolph Anderson that was shot down by the Cubans during the 1962 missile crisis.
Today, those 13 days are a part of history that the world has never forgotten – but they're not a necessarily a part of history that the world has ever fully understood.
Here in the West, we've learned the story through the American perspective.
But inside the Soviet Union and inside of Cuba, a wildly different version of the story was being told, with details that would be kept out of the official version of the story in America.
Inside The Kremlin Wikimedia CommonsJupiter Nuclear Missiles deployed in Turkey by the United States military.62.
When President John F Kennedy announced to the world that the Soviet Union was building nuclear missile sites in Cuba, he painted Soviet Chairman Nikita Khrushchev as nothing short of a cartoon supervillain.
But if, by moving nuclear bombs into firing range of the United States, Khrushchev was recklessly threatening world peace, Kennedy was guilty of that very same crime.
In 1961, the United States had installed a series of intermediate-range ""Jupiter"" nuclear missiles in Italy and Turkey, where they'd be in range to strike virtually all of the western U.S.S.R. – including Moscow.
Plus, the United States already had ballistic missiles in Britain aimed at the Soviets.
This, from the Soviet perspective, was the real beginning of the crisis.
So in order to keep the United States in check, and in order to protect his socialist ally in the Caribbean, Khrushchev moved nuclear missiles into Cuba.
He believed, in part, that the missiles would help balance the power between the United States and the Soviet Union, which was becoming dangerously one-sided.
By some estimates, the United States had more than 5,000 nuclear missiles capable of hitting Soviet targets, while the Soviets only had 300.
He was also convinced that an American invasion of Cuba was inevitable – despite its failed attempt at one in the April 1961 Bay of Pigs debacle — and the only way to stop it was with nuclear missiles.
With that logic, Khrushchev convinced Cuban President Fidel Castro to let him move missiles into his country.
Kennedy left every one of those details out of his address to the nation; an omission that frustrated Khrushchev to no end.
Inside The Kennedy White House Cuban naval blockade resumes, a news report announces.
For the first time, they had proof that the Soviets were transporting nuclear weapons into Cuba.
Over the next few days, the news would only get worse; evidence would come through showing that four Cuban missile sites that were already fully operational.
Americans and civilians in nations around the world would be convinced that this was a sign that nuclear war was inevitable.
But in the War Room, few believed that America was really under any type of nuclear threat.
Preparing For The Missile Crisis The United States strengthen their missile power Kennedy, likewise, didn't believe that the Soviets had any intention of firing the missiles.
The news, he believed, would make people think the balance of power had changed, even if it really hadn't.
America couldn't be seen allowing the Soviets to send nuclear weapons to own the U.S.'s greatest sworn enemies.
After all, Kennedy had recently campaigned against Richard Nixon on the basis that the Eisenhower administration's policies had sprung a communist regime in the Caribbean.
The Soviets, they believed, wouldn't do anything to stop it; they would fear retaliation from America's more powerful arsenal too much to raise a finger in Castro's defense.
But Kennedy ultimately refused, fearing that the Soviets would retaliate in Berlin.
Instead, he took McNamara's suggestion to set up a blockade around the country to keep Soviet materials out.
The blockade was technically an act of war; Cuba was accepting the Soviets' missiles, and so what the Soviets were doing completely abided by international law.
In Havana Keystone-France/Gamma-Keystone via Getty ImagesCuban Prime Minister Fidel Castro gives a speech, criticizing the United States during the naval blockade of Cuba.
Everything, Khrushchev believed, was going more or less according to plan.
He had fully bought into Khrushchev's claims that the United States was getting ready to invade, and he was ready to take the whole world down with him.
Castro wrote up a letter to Khrushchev, begging him to launch a full-scale nuclear assault on the United States the second an American soldier set foot on Cuban soil.
Castro's second-in-command, Che Guevara, shared every bit of his president's fervor.
He didn't care if the ensuing nuclear war would have wiped Cuba off the map.
As Khrushchev was quickly learning, hotter blood ran through the Cubans' veins than his own.
Desperate to keep things from getting out of control, he urged Castro to stay calm, and even Khrushchev's own men were every bit as willing to fire if provoked.
A Hemisphere In Terror American, Soviet, and Cuban leaders may have talked a big game, but that didn't comfort their people.
Existential dread swept over the United States and Cuba, as people outside of the annals of government prepared for potential nuclear annihilation.
My sisters remember him praying on his knees at his bedside that we would not have a nuclear war.
The situation was similarly frightening in Cuba, which was still fairly fresh off of its 1959 socialist revolution.
Maria Salgado later recalled her ""family members from out of town coming in and everyone being in our same hometown because...you know, the world was going to end.
Up In Flames The United States Military prepares for the possibility of an invasion of Cuba.
For more than hour now, he and his men had been watching an American U-2 spy plane fly over Cuban land.
In the White House, news of Anderson's death brought the crisis to a whole new pitch.
The Soviets had drawn first blood; by the plan Kennedy had laid out, it was time for a full-on war.
Kennedy alone, however, stopped the American Army from storming Cuban soil.
Against the advice of almost every member of ExComm, he ordered his men to stand by and wait until they'd spoken to the Soviets.
Castro was intent on firing every nuclear missile he had if an American soldier invaded.
And in Havana, Castro was ready to keep shooting down any planes he saw — no matter what the consequences.
The day before the U-2 plane shot down, Kennedy had caved to his ExComm team and admitted that their advice was right.
The U-2 pilot's death cemented this decision in his advisors' eyes, but Kennedy changed course.
Under The Water Wikimedia CommonsVasili Arkhipov, the man some say saved the world from the brink of nuclear war.
On the very same day, ships in the naval blockade around Cuba detected a Soviet submarine moving beneath them.
They dropped ""signaling depth charges"" on it, beckoning it to come to the surface.
What they didn't know was that the submarine was carrying a tactical nuclear torpedo on board – and that the commander of the vessel, Valentin Savitsky, wasn't afraid to use it.
When the depth charges exploded, the crew of the submarine became convinced that their lives were in jeopardy.
Savitsky ordered his men to retaliate by firing the nuclear torpedo up to destroy the Navy ships attacking them.
Had the crew launched the missile, it is very likely that the United States Army would have retaliated in kind and a nuclear war would have begun.
By Soviet rule, Savitsky wasn't allowed to fire at the missile unless he got consent from the two other senior officers on board.
One agreed – but the other, Arkhipov, stood his ground and refused to approve the nuclear launch.
Arkhipov argued that the depth charges weren't proof that a war had begun; the Americans might just be trying to get them to surface.
He stayed firm in his refusal, and convinced the crew to head back to Russia peacefully.
The Kennedys, Robert said, were doing everything they could to keep a war from happening; but in a democracy, he warned, the President's power was limited.
The Soviets would take their missiles out of Cuba and, in exchange, the Americans would take their missiles out of Turkey.
No one was allowed to know that the missiles in Turkey were part of the bargain.
Publicly, Kennedy was allowed to tell the world that all he'd given the Soviets was a promise not to invade Cuba – but privately, the Soviets had gotten what they'd wanted.
In the public view, he'd been humiliated, and the blow was so horrible that it ended his career.
Today, he's remembered by many as one of the greatest American presidents; a title experts credit, in a large part, to his handling of the crisis.
Then, see how life was behind the iron curtain with these incredible photos of East Germany.
