Dear Dave , u/2/9 7 Day before yesterday you asked !:ie about tlie book ""One Hell of a Gamble, that Jerry had loaned me and 1 told you it is a fine and an important work, as Jerry had said and as reading it makes obvious.
Then yesterday 1 came to where the USSR records to which the authors had access quote Hhruschev as saying exactly i£ what was ^bsic t& my contemporaneous analysis and seeming had never suggested itself to any of those of the ExCom w or icing on that crisis.
The onl1|. iaq.Wr i've added to the age on whicli Jerry has a few is the highlighting of what Kh. said.
The Untold Story 01 the uba Missile Crisis (not Cubquj I add that it had reached this ^Laysis and had expressed it twice the Wednesday before the solution was formulated and announced.
Those to whom I had expressed it where the VfxPost's foreign editor whose name x recall was T'hornbury (l had customers in the host newsroom and delivered there on Wednesdays ) and Dob Jogers , then manager of tho//ational Symphony and who had been editor of CLICK when I was its Washington correspondent.
I'd loned tliadrt^ft^efi and the records of tliat and other analyses to Howard Hoflfman for a college thesis that he changed and later made into a book, hany of those pages did not come back but many also exist.
From what has since come out 1 Was notcorrect on all details but in essence I was on target, quite correct, and wliat 1 have marked, was whjkt kh believed and as it turns out said and was basic in my t ranking/ analysis/ understanding of wliat was going on wliile it was going on and the people who ran the governments were strtygftling.
I thought it was obvious but I suppose what is obvious is too simple for bigshots with big reputations to maintain and jobs to justify for which there can be nothing sxmple. l\4e reached this point in the book.
H i 8 2 ""ONE HELL OF A GAMBLE"" cussed Biryuzov and Rashidov's important trip.
Kennedy is intelligent and would not set off a thermonuclear war if there were our warheads there, just as they put their warheads on missiles in Turkey.
After the election period, he intended to visit the United Stales to inform Kennedy himself.
In Agatha Christie’s popular mystery Murder on the Orient Express, the detective Hercule Poirot encounters a train full of individuals who had motive and opportunity to kill the wealthy American found dead in his luxury compaitment.
