Acclaimed as one of the most important spies of the century, his role in the Cuban missile crisis has been portrayed as of pre-eminent importance to the outcome.
Other historians have challenged this interpretation, while some believe that far from working for the West, Penkovsky was an instrument of Soviet strategic deception.
These were critical years of the Cold War, culminating in the Cuban missile crisis of October 1962, almost certainly the most dangerous confrontation of the Cold War.
The story of Oleg Penkovsky is an extraordinary story of Cold War espionage.
It is also of great value in exploring various issues in the history and historiography of intelligence, and in assessing problems in evaluating the broader significance of intelligence in policy-making.
Perhaps most importantly, Penkovsky is a case study for evaluating the role and significance of intelligence, and specifically espionage, in Cold War policymaking, and in specific Cold War crises.
Authoritative studies of United States and British intelligence in the Cold War have emphasised the importance of Penkovsky's espionage and the achievements of Western intelligence services in facilitating his role.
Other, more critical, works drawing on disaffected insiders, have questioned whether Penkovsky was working for the west or against it.
Various claims and counter-claims about the value of Penkovsky's espionage have been made, particularly in relation to the Cuban missile crisis.
This article examines key claims made about Colonel Penkovsky's espionage concerning the Cuban missile crisis, and explains where much of the literature presents a distorted impression of his role and value to the West.
In addition it attempts to indicate where future research might profitably focus.
A key element in reviewing the history and historiography of Penkovsky's role is the material released by the CIA both as a result of the United States Freedom of Information Act and through its own declassification programme.
The credit for the former rests with Jerrold Schecter, an American writer, and Peter Deriabin, a KGB defector, whose 1992 book, The Spy Who Saved the World, draws upon this material and presents an absorbing, though contested, interpretation of Penkovsky's significance.
These detail various stages and various aspects of the Penkovsky case, from his initial efforts to contact the CIA, to his activities as a 'defector PENKOVSKY AND THE CUBAN MISSILE CRISIS 25 in place', to attempts by CIA officials to contrive a deal to save his life after his arrest.
They include transcripts of his meetings in Britain and France with his SIS and CIA case handlers,6 reports from the CIA station chief in Moscow to CIA headquarters, and diagrams of where dead letter drops were to be arranged.
As such they provide unprecedented documentary insights into CIA tradecraft.
More importantly, from a broader perspective, the documents cover how Penkovsky's material was assessed, evaluated and integrated into the US intelligence analytical and policy processes.
In the early 1990s the government did, however, co-operate and assist in the process of declassifying CIA records, discussed above, that enabled Schecter and Deriabin to construct their account.
Thus, CIA records contain various details involving senior SIS officers, including Maurice Oldfield, senior liaison officer in Washington; Harry Shergold, the senior SIS case officer; and Sir Dick White, head of the service.
CIA and SIS officers, and other officials, including the former British Ambassador to the USSR, Sir Frank Roberts, have also written or spoken on the record about the operation.
It has been claimed that SIS's role meant that Britain made an important contribution in the Cuban missile crisis.
According to Alistair Home, Harold Macmillan's official biographer, the espionage of Oleg Penkovsky was one of two important British contributions during the crisis.
Much of the testimony reflects on the success involved in a joint operation run for some 17 months from the heart of the Soviet defence and security establishment.
Joseph Bulik, one of Penkovsky's two CIA case officers, later reflected that the 'big lesson on the Penkovsky case is never to enter into a joint operation with another service'.12 The circumstances of how Penkovsky was uncovered remain unclear, though the former KGB Chairman, Vladimir Semichastny, has suggested that it followed contact between SIS and Penkovsky that was not disclosed to the CIA.13 Schecter and Deriabin argue that such disclosures are attempts by the KGB to foment 26 INTELLIGENCE AND NATIONAL SECURITY British-American discord over the eventual failure of the operation.
Soviet penetration of United States security in the USSR is a further possible explanation for what went wrong.
BACKGROUND Oleg Penkovsky first attempted to contact Western intelligence and offer his services in August 1960.
Various motives for his espionage can be identified but concern that his own career was blighted by the KGB's growing awareness of his father's Russian Civil War role in the White Army, fuelled his animus against the Soviet system.
Between August 1960 and August 1962, Penkovsky supplied the West with some 8,000-10,000 pages of testimony and classified material from General Staff files.
In addition, Penkovsky was a confidant and protege of the Chief Marshal of Soviet Artillery, Marshal Sergei Varentsov, responsible for Soviet tactical missile forces, and had cultivated a relationship with the head of the GRU, General Ivan Serov.
The possibility was indeed raised by the Head of the CIA's Soviet Division, Jack Maury, with the Deputy Director for Plans, Richard Helms.
Helms however, was clear 'that at this point in the Agency's history, we cannot afford but to follow up such a lead'.21 Schecter and Deriabin demonstrate how the CIA unsuccessfully attempted to contact Penkovsky in Moscow between October 1960 and February 1961.
Meanwhile Penkovsky made several other attempts to establish contact with the West through Canadian visitors and officials, and then through the British businessman, Greville Wynne.
Through Wynne, Penkovsky finally made contact with Western intelligence.
Back in Moscow Penkovsky communicated via Wynne and then through SIS channels using Ann Chisholm, the wife of the SIS Head of Station, Rauri Chisholm.
The espionage of Oleg Penkovsky occurred during a critical period in the Cold War.
Recent and more considered analysis of Khrushchev's foreign policies has emphasised his desire for a detente that could transfer resources from military to productive expenditure.
Yet at the time, the lack of effective Western intelligence concerning Soviet military capabilities and intentions exacerbated Western fears and increased the risk of inadvertent confrontation.
In 1958 Khruschev had first threatened to sign a separate peace treaty with the East Germans, and by 1961 the Soviet leader was determined to force the issue of West Berlin.
At the Vienna summit between Khrushchev and Kennedy in June 1961 the two leaders spoke of war that winter.
Christopher Andrew argues that Penkovsky's intelligence subsequently exerted a direct influence on Kennedy's attitude and rhetoric and reinforced his determination to stand up to the Soviets over Berlin.
On the one hand Penkovsky's information indicated that Khruschev's threats were founded on nuclear bluff ; on the other Penkovsky told his handlers that Khrushchev was strengthening his armies in East Germany and could use force if he sensed his objectives could be attained.
Penkovsky's representations of Khrushchev's views, while reflecting what senior military officers believed and debated, almost certainly seriously misrepresented Khrushchev's intentions.
The extent and significance of Penkovsky's influence on Kennedy is potentially important, though adjudication awaits systematic study of American decision-making during the crisis.
The view that Penkovsky's espionage was of crucial importance in the missile crisis has received wide circulation.
Penkovsky... for the first, and so far, the only recorded time in post-war history, human intelligence, supplied directly to the enemy, helped to tilt the course of world events'.27 As noted, Schecter and Deriabin's study has endorsed this view of his importance.
Some historians dispute the significance of Penkovsky's espionage for Western policy-making.
McGeorge Bundy, then JFK's special assistant for national security, argues 28 INTELLIGENCE AND NATIONAL SECURITY that, 'Penkovsky had no discernible relation to the real assessments and actions of the United States government in the missile crisis',28 and his own account of October 1962 makes no reference to Penkovsky.
Similarly, Raymond Garthoff, then a CIA analyst responsible for appraising Penkovsky's material, describes the 'tremendous amount of important military information', but argues that this was merely 'useful background information during the crisis'.30 Most recently, the special issue of Intelligence and National Security devoted to the role of intelligence in the Cuban missile crisis relegates Penkovsky to passing references.
Various accounts, including two by Greville Wynne, describe aspects of SIS's involvement,32 and senior British officials have commented on the importance of the case.
Sir Frank Roberts believed that Penkovsky's information 'was almost more important than any other intelligence either way', while Sir Nicholas Henderson, erstwhile secretary of the JIC, has stated 'that the intelligence he provided was of crucial importance to us in assessing the state of Soviet preparedness and intentions'.33 According to Alistair Home, Maurice Oldfield, then senior SIS liaison officer in Washington, believed in the 'supreme importance' of Penkovsky's espionage, a view apparently shared by Harold Macmillan.
Yet, although some senior British and Soviet officials have spoken publicly of Penkovsky's role, evidence of how material was used in British assessments and policy-making is negligible.
Whatever the actual importance of Penkovsky's material, British officials clearly believed that Britain made a significant contribution through the joint operation.
Similar statements about the importance of Penkovsky's espionage have been made by senior American intelligence officials.
It is clear, both from United States officials and recently declassified US documents, that Penkovsky's intelligence was accepted and used by the West.
The CIA has, for example, published various documents containing information provided by Penkovsky.
The significance of such material for western policy-making is a more contentious issue.
However accurate the material Penkovsky supplied, its importance depended, first, on how it was integrated into the intelligence analytical process, and then how such assessments were used by decision-makers.
It is now possible to trace what Penkovsky passed to the West through this analytical and political process in the US, and scrutinise various claims about the importance of his intelligence to the missile crisis.
There is no doubt that Penkovsky's information not only provided President John F Kennedy with advance information about the Cuban missiles but gave him confidence in taking a tough stand with the Kremlin...37 The suggestion that Penkovsky warned the West about the missiles in Cuba is repeated in Peter Wright's Spycatcher,™ and is wholly misleading.
He will rant and rave and even send arms here and there just as he did to Cuba and possibly even send small-caliber rockets there.
In fact there was talk about this with Castro and possibly a few rockets are already there.
In July 1960, Khrushchev had publicly warned that Soviet intercontinental missiles would protect the Cuban people,40 and in November there is evidence that Che Guevara 'probed' Khrushchev on the idea of deploying nuclear missiles on the island.
Penkovsky did warn his CIA and SIS case officers about Soviet tactical nuclear missiles in East Germany.
At his first debriefing in London in April 1961, he explained that with the exception of Albania, all 'People's Democracies were being provided with ballistic missiles, including the R11 missile'.46 Moreover, he stated that, 'in the DDR we now have four 30 INTELLIGENCE AND NATIONAL SECURITY brigades, and of these two brigades already are equipped with nuclear warheads'.47 Further details were provided at this and subsequent meetings.
Aside from the military significance to NATO, this challenged the existing belief that the Soviets had never deployed nuclear warheads outside Soviet territory.
The American intelligence community believed that, because the Soviets had never deployed 'offensive' nuclear weapons outside their own territory, they would not do so in Cuba.
It is therefore clear that Penkovsky's information on Soviet nuclear deployments outside the USSR did not materially affect either CIA or British estimates of the likelihood of Soviet 'strategic' deployments in Cuba.
During the 1950s the American intelligence community exaggerated and distorted the potential threat posed by Soviet strategic nuclear forces.
The 'bomber gap' and then the 'missile gap' arose because of the paucity of Western intelligence, and the analytical failures of the American intelligence community.
The advent of aerial photography afforded by the U-2 high altitude aircraft played a critical role in dispelling the bomber gap.
By 1960, when Eisenhower PENKOVSKY AND THE CUBAN MISSILE CRISIS 31 suspended U-2 overflights of the USSR, there were also growing divisions among the various intelligence bureaucracies over the scale of Soviet ICBM deployment and production.
Satellite photography portended a transformation in assessing Soviet strategic forces.
There were, however, problems with the United States satellite programme and the first successful photoreconnaissance mission did not take place until August I960.52 This meant that the differences within Washington had not been resolved when Penkovsky appeared.
Although it was not until autumn 1961 that the issue was resolved within the American government, McNamara's public remarks indicate that growing scepticism about the missile gap at the highest levels in Washington preceded Penkovsky's espionage.
Various writers contend that Penkovsky's intelligence was critical in dispelling 'the missile gap', and in guiding Kennedy's handling of the crisis from a position of strength.
Recently declassified American documents show how and when Penkovsky's information was used in the American National Intelligence Estimating process.
Of greatest potential interest was Penkovsky's information about Soviet ICBM capabilities, and in particular what NATO termed the SS-6 the missile at the heart of the missile gap.
The information he supplied indicated that the SS-6 was in considerable difficulty, and that Soviet ICBM capabilities were well below American estimates.
Penkovsky recounted remarks by Marshal Varentsov indicating that Soviet ICBMs were numbered in tens, and were still at the testing rather than operational stage.
These remarks do not appear to have been corroborated by documentary material.
As noted below, Penkovsky supplied extremely valuable copies of a top-secret General Staff journal but he did not have access to articles on strategic missiles, which were retained in an exclusive bulletin.
Although Penkovsky's information did not affect the June NIE, it was nevertheless clear that disagreements, in particular between USAF intelligence and the other organisations, including CIA, were intensifying.
There is no indication that Penkovsky supplied relevant documentary materials during this period.
The CIA has now published details of the Corona programme including the NIE of September 1961 that finally buried the missile gap.
Although NIE 11-8/1-61 shows that by September 1961 Penkovsky's information was accepted, it was satellite photography that enabled a more realistic assessment of the Soviet strategic arsenal.
By the autumn of 1961, the debate within the United States intelligence community was effectively resolved, and after careful consideration President Kennedy decided to make publicly known that his government was now aware of America's nuclear superiority.
Christopher Andrew contends that Penkovsky's advice to stand up to Khrushchev played a part in the President's decision to go public on United States superiority.
This raises fundamental questions about the nature of nuclear deterrence and the role of nuclear weapons in the missile crisis, which are beyond the scope of this article.
The argument that Kennedy's recognition of American nuclear superiority was crucial is certainly challenged by those studies that contend that nuclear superiority was of secondary importance to fear of nuclear war in Kennedy's management of the crisis.
Whatever Kennedy's perceptions, those of Nikita Khrushchev are also potentially significant.
There were those, including within SIS, who believed that the KGB's discovery of Penkovsky's espionage alerted Khrushchev to the fact that Kennedy now knew he was bluffing, and that this influenced his climb down.
Penkovsky's information ensured that Khrushchev could not indulge in diplomatic nuclear blackmail...'.68 Khrushchev himself, according to a CIA source, made this point, with presumably unintended irony, when he had told an audience in Kiev in December 1962 that Penkovsky had 'done some good simply on the grounds that now the United States knows the strength and technological advancement of the Soviet Union'.69 When, and how, Khrushchev was told of Penkovsky's arrest is not known.
What is nevertheless clear is that, long before the missile crisis, the United States government made clear its recognition of American nuclear superiority.
In October 1961, Roswell Gilpatric, McNamara's deputy, delivered a speech declaring that 'we have a second strike capability which is at least as extensive as what the Soviets can deliver by striking first', demonstrating that the United States was ahead in the 'arms race', and that, thus, the West knew Khrushchev was bluffing.
To strengthen the message, the United States government provided classified briefings on the military balance to allies believed to have been penetrated by Soviet intelligence.
If the Soviet leadership understood and believed Gilpatrick's message, the discovery of Penkovsky's treachery ought not to have made any difference.
MISSILES IN CUBA A third claim about Penkovsky's intelligence focuses on United States assessments of the missiles in Cuba.
Although Penkovsky did not alert the West to the deployment of missiles, he did supply technical information, including the manual for the SS-4.
This information was helpful to analysts at the National Photographic Intelligence Centre in identifying the missiles, as the Deputy Director of Central Intelligence, General Marshall Carter, told the President and his advisers, on 16 October.
Other sources of information were also important, in particular photographs taken by military attaches at Red Army parades.
As the head of the NPIC, Arthur Lundahl, told the President, the CIA knew that the missiles were MRBMs because of their length.
Initially, there was some doubt over whether the MRBMs were SS-3s or SS-4s.
More significant was that Penkovsky's data enabled accurate assessments of the readiness state of the missiles.
This became a critical issue for Amercian decision-makers, some of whom believed that the operational status of the missiles would determine when a decision to destroy them had to be taken.
Some United States officials behaved (and communicated with their allies) as though the operational condition of the missiles was an indicator of Soviet intent, and therefore of importance to the decision whether or not to attack them.
Within the White House on 16 October, there was disagreement over the implications of the operational condition of the missiles.
McNamara argued that if an air strike was to be launched it had to take place 'prior to the time these missile sites become operational'.79 This assumption was challenged by Secretary of State Dean Rusk who questioned whether the Soviets would automatically retaliate with their surviving missiles in Cuba against the United States.
McNamara remained concerned whether the decision to launch would be taken in Moscow or Cuba.
Soviet command and control arrangements, and associated technical aspects of launch procedure, were therefore of great importance to senior US officials.
McCone told McNamara on 17 October that Penkovsky's oral reports 'indicated considerable autonomy in hands of field commanders',81 which may well have contributed to the Defense Secretary's fears of unauthorised use and inadvertent nuclear escalation.
Schecter and Deriabin argue that Penkovsky's information on the technical details of the SS-4 missile system was his vital contribution.
Richard Helms believed that Penkovsky's material on the SS-4 enabled American decision-makers to know exactly when the missiles would become operational, which in Helms' view gave Kennedy three extra days.
I don't know of any single instance where intelligence was more immediately valuable than at this time.
Penkovsky's material had a direct application because it came right into the middle of the decision-making.
Helms' claim raises interesting and still controversial issues, including whether, and under what circumstances, Kennedy would have attacked PENKOVSKY AND THE CUBAN MISSILE CRISIS 35 Cuba.
The President's initial reaction to the discovery of the missiles was certainly belligerent, though this quickly gave way to a more sober and pragmatic disposition.
The CIA's technical intelligence on the SS-4 may have informed his understanding of when a decision was necessary.
Whether he would have opted to destroy the missiles in the absence of such material is a separate matter.
The CIA told the President on 19 October that two MRBM sites were operational, though they could not confirm whether the warheads were present .87 By 27 October, all six MRBM sites were reported to be operational.
Whether Helms' claim that Penkovsky's information was vital in dissuading Kennedy from taking precipitous military action is far from demonstrated, and based on a contested and unsubstantiated reading of Kennedy's attitude.
On balance, it seems that while certainly helpful, Penkovsky's material was unlikely to have been decisive.
PENKOVSKY'S FINAL WARNING For the CIA and SIS, Penkovsky's espionage provided unprecedented insights into Soviet capabilities, and the prospect of warning about an imminent Soviet nuclear attack.
He was nevertheless able to learn of secret highlevel decisions most notably Khrushchev's decision to close the frontier in Berlin in August 1961.
The construction of the Berlin Wall took Western intelligence and Western leaders by surprise, though Penkovsky had managed to learn of plans to build the wall four days before open construction began.
Various proposals had previously been canvassed by SIS and the CIA to provide secure methods of communication with Penkovsky90 but in August 1961 he was unable to forewarn his handlers because he was unable to contact them.
After this experience procedures were established to enable contact to be made with Western intelligence in an emergency.
In October 1961 Penkovsky, visiting Paris under his official Soviet cover, was briefed on the procedure, conceived by British intelligence, to enable him to provide emergency warning of a Soviet attack.
Penkovsky was given two phone numbers of American Embassy personnel, either of which he could ring.
When a man answered the phone, Penkovsky was to blow into the mouthpiece three times.
The Americans would then go to a telephone pole 35 on Kutuzovsky Prospekt and look for a freshly marked letter X on the pole.
This signal meant that Penkovsky would leave a detailed message in the dead drop.
If it was not possible for him to promptly service the dead drop, the phone signal would be sufficient for an immediate early warning.
It was explained to Penkovsky that the signalling system, code-named DISTANT, was to be used 'only if he had learned for a fact that the Soviet Union had decided to attack, or that the Soviets had decided to attack should the West take specific action, or that the Soviet Union had decided to attack should the West fail to undertake specific action'.93 The British were to be informed of this warning through the CIA Station in London.
The warning was to be passed to the JIC whose discussion would be attended by the CIA Station Chief.
It was made clear to Penkovsky that the telephonic warning alone, whether or not the dead letter drop had been serviced, would be sufficient to 'result in prompt action at a high level in the United States and Great Britain'.95 Reliance on such a procedure raised considerable difficulties.
British officials in particular were concerned that such a system could lead to miscalculation and war.
In Britain any such warning would be evaluated by the JIC before military or political commands were informed.
Maurice Oldfield explained to Jack Maury that 'a DISTANT report will not be treated by the UK as an indicator unless the JIC accept it as such'.96 This approach differed from that of the United States, where the CIA would pass the raw 'data' on to its 'consumers', including presumably the President, for their evaluation.
Such an attitude reflected differences in the structure and function of the respective intelligence communities, though the CIA was not unaware of the potential hazards of relying on a source that could potentially be used for the purpose of deception.
PENKOVSKY AND THE CUBAN MISSILE CRISIS 37 According to the KGB, Oleg Penkovsky was arrested on 22 October 1962.
Raymond Garthoff suggests that Penkovsky could have deliberately tried to provoke a nuclear attack on the Soviet Union.
Among the most intriguing claims made of Penkovsky was that far being the West's prize Cold War spy, he was in fact a Soviet-controlled agent of disinformation.
The initial source of this claim was the KGB defector, Anatoly Golitsyn, who persuaded some senior Western intelligence officials that Penkovsky was working for the Soviets.
These included James Angleton, the CIA's Head of Counter-intelligence, who after initially endorsing Penkovsky's bona fides,106 came to believe that Penkovsky may have been a double agent.
These doubts were shared by some British officials, whose views became public.
A variation on this theme was the suggestion that Penkovsky could have been an 'unwitting medium in a Soviet intelligence operation', designed by 'Soviet doves', to communicate that Khrushchev was bluffing.
In the United States, Edward Jay Epstein publicly expounded Angleton's doubts and suspicions about Soviet success in penetrating and deceiving Western intelligence, asserting, inter alia, that Penkovsky was 'a Soviet postman at the time of the missile crisis'.109 The question of whether Penkovsky was genuine was a concern for the American and British intelligence communities.
In July 1962 there were fears within CIA that Penkovsky was 'under suspicion, 38 INTELLIGENCE AND NATIONAL SECURITY possible surveillance, and even might have been compromised to the point where he could be acting as a counter-agent'.110 As McCone told the PFIAB in 1963, the possibility that Penkovsky was a plant was something that we always feared.
We had checked his bona fides extremely carefully, and held up dissemination of reports in order to ensure their validity.
CIA records indicate that the British were convinced of Penkovsky's genuineness perhaps more wholeheartedly, and at an earlier stage than their US counterparts,""2 though fear that their agent might be turned was an inevitable concern.
It is however difficult to equate Penkovsky's warnings that his meetings were under KGB surveillance in 1962 with a disinformation operation.
It is even more difficult to explain why, if Penkovsky was a conduit of disinformation, he would have been discontinued at the precise moment in October 1962 when communication channels between the leaderships were so crucial.
The available evidence overwhelmingly suggests that Penkovsky was genuine.
Like most conspiracy theories it contains the means by which evidence that challenges the premises or conclusions can be dismissed.
Moreover, the history of deception and Soviet disinformation meant that such hypotheses could not simply be dismissed.
Without access to Soviet records the adjudication of historical evidence is inherently problematic.
PENKOVSKY AND THE CUBAN MISSILE CRISIS 39 The claims of Golitsyn that the Sino-Soviet split and the Prague spring of 1968 were KGB calibrated acts of disinformation, for example, fundamentally discredit his ideas of a global conspiracy in which Penkovsky played a part.
The claim that Kennedy's promise not to invade Cuba in return for the withdrawal of the missiles was a triumph for the Soviets was shared by Americans like USAF Chief of Staff General Curtis Le May who still wanted to invade Cuba.
Key to this are the various claims and fears about Soviet deep penetration agents or 'moles', and in particular, the allegation that MI5 was penetrated at a very senior level.
Several candidates emerged in both the internal 'molehunts' and the public accusations, most notably the Director-General, Sir Roger Hollis, and the Deputy Director, Graham Mitchell.
Penkovsky is important to these claims because if MI5 were penetrated at the highest levels, then the Soviet authorities would certainly have learned of his activities.
Penkovsky provided a very considerable amount of documentary material on Soviet thinking and capabilities, and at a time when Western sources were nugatory.
The advent of satellite photography may have been more important than Penkovsky's information about Soviet ICBM capabilities, but satellite photography could not shed light on the debates within the Soviet General Staff about the impact of the nuclear revolution on Soviet military doctrine.
The documents that he supplied, in particular the editions of the Top Secret Special Collection of the Journal of Military Thought could illuminate debates within the Soviet military on existing policy, strategy and procurement.
The Special Collection was a forum for 'sharp, controversial, and forcefully argued formulation of the most vital theoretical problems', created in 1960 to enable senior military officers to debate the revolution in military affairs occasioned by ballistic missiles and weapons of mass destruction.3 Key CIA and Defense Intelligence Agency assessments of Penkovsky's material have not been declassified.
The IRONBARK documents covered a period when the Soviets were preparing for a major revision in... three key areasSoviet military doctrine, organization, and weaponry.
These reassessments were at the heart of Kennedy's and McNamara's attempts to change NATO nuclear strategy in the 1960s attempts which culminated in the adoption of Flexible Response in 1967.
Hitherto, these have been attributed to analytical innovation within the Pentagon, and specifically in relation to deconstructing the Soviet order of battle.
Penkovsky's documentary material corroborated and may well have facilitated the reassessment of Soviet combat readiness, which underpinned this exercise.
There are also indicators that Penkovsky provided various materials and insights into Soviet chemical and bacteriological warfare capabilities.
Penkovsky's documentary material on the impact of weapons of mass destruction on the Soviet armed forces provided the West with a window on its adversary.
CONCLUSION The significance of Penkovsky's intelligence in the Cuban missile crisis has been sensationalised and distorted.
There are still aspects of Penkovsky's role in the missile crisis, most importantly the discovery of his treachery in Moscow, which may compel further reflection on his significance.
The exaggeration and distortion in much of the literature reflects upon some of the writers involved and in particular among those engaged in the popular and influential genre of espionage history.
While the motives of a Peter Wright may be transparent, other agendas, more opaque and more subtle, are at work.
Those who wish to present espionage as an important element of state activity have an interest in emphasising the importance of the case.
So too do British officials seeking to demonstrate the value of the 'special relationship' in this sphere.
Yet one clear lesson of the Penkovsky case is that writing on espionage is both difficult and problematic and requires a circumspect approach to the accumulation and 42 INTELLIGENCE AND NATIONAL SECURITY use of evidence.
This conclusion is not to 'debunk' Penkovsky or to denigrate his espionage.
It is to emphasise that the Cuban missile crisis is not a useful way of adjudicating on the importance of Penkovsky's espionage and that Penkovsky's espionage is not a fruitful way of examining the Cuban missile crisis.
NOTES I am grateful to Guto Thomas, Peter Jackson and Stephen Twigge for their comments on an earlier draft of this article, a summary of which was presented to the BISA International History Group conference at Leicester in September 1998.
Correspondence, John Grant, Principal Private Secretary to the Foreign Secretary, 11 Sept.
The other contribution was the British ambassador to Washington, Sir David Ormsby-Gore's suggestion to move the quarantine line.
The first materials Penkovsky passed to the West, in Aug.60, were to establish his bona fides.
The CNN Cold War programme dealing with espionage in the Cold War, scripted by Max Hastings, describes Penkovsky as 'perhaps the greatest spy of the Cold War' whose espionage was 'critical' to the United States during the missile crisis.
Verrier 193; the accuracy of the quotation is questioned by Andrew, Secret Service 786n.
Details of SIS and CIA operations are provided in Schecter and Deriabin passim.
Interviews with Peter Hennessy, 1994, quoted in Grant Smith, 'Britain and the Cuban missile crisis' 6.
Sir Nicholas Henderson, telephone conversation with author, 29 Nov.94; Sir Frank Roberts, interview with author, 6 Dec.94.
Material from Penkovsky's briefings was circulated through a 'special information handling channel', codenamed CHICKADEE; documentary material was circulated under IRONBARK, ibid. xiii, xiv.
SS-1) became known as the SCUD, David Holloway, Stalin and the Bomb: The Soviet Union and Atomic Energy 1939-56 324.
Soviet Estimate, Doc.288; Mtg 12, London, 1 May 1961, paras., 25, 62 Doc.
Peter Wright makes the highly erroneous assertion that when Gary Powers' U-2 was shot down in May 1960, the West lacked any photo-reconnaissance capabilities 'until the launch of the first satellite toward the end of 1962', Wright 210.
One indicator that the CIA did not obtain detailed technical data on the SS-6 from Penkovsky is that when the space booster version of the missile was subsequently shown at the Paris air show in 1967 the United States intelligence community were surprised by crucial technical features, which indicated their earlier calculations, including about weight and thrust, were in error.
Wonus, 'The Case of the SS-6', Studies in Intelligence , Vol. , National Archives.
Ed Proctor and Jack Smith Re Use of CHICKADEE Material in NIE 11-8-61, 7 June 1961, Doc.
NIE 11-8/1-61 Strength and Deployment of Soviet Long Range Ballistic Missile Forces, 21 Sept.61, in Ruffner 133.
In addition to satellite photography and human intelligence, NIE 11-8/1-61 drew upon electronic intelligence, ibid.3.
The CIA knew, presumably assisted by Penkovsky's material, that the SS-3 was a liquid-fuelled missile, requiring radar guidance, compared to the SS-4 which possessed inertial guidance and could be configured with a storable propellant; the absence of fuel tankers and radar equipment was an indicator that the SS-4 was being deployed, see May and Zelikow (note 73)78.
Strategic Considerations, CIA Memo, Probable MRBM Sites in Cuba, 16 Oct.
Memo of Meeting attended in Secretary Ball's Conference Room, 17 Oct.62, McAuliffe l60.
Conversation with Mr Helms Re Report on Large-Scale Soviet Military Preparations, 26 Sept.61, Doc.
For Golitsyn on Penkovsky, see Anatoliy Golitsyn, New Lies for Old The Communist Strategy of Deception and Disinformation 54.
Schecter's contacts were with anonymous officials; Bower conducted interviews with Nikolai Chistyakov, head of the KGB's investigation department, as well as KGB Chairman Semichastny.
West himself does not appear to subscribe to Wright's views on Penkovsky.
It is conceivable that Soviet intelligence might have learned of Penkovsky's activities from a mole but calculated that moving against him would risk their source.
Yale UP 1997); see also Joseph C Evans, 'Berlin Tunnel Intelligence: A Bumbling KGB', Int.
Richard Helms to Director, DIA: Establishment of Top Secret Special Collection of Articles of the Journal 'Military Thought', 8 Nov.61, Doc.
I am grateful to William Burr of the United States National Archive for this information.
