Though only in office for a relatively short period, JFK endured two harrowing nuclear showdowns with the USSR, increased the United States presence in Vietnam, and tried to establish a more innovative approach to America’s larger foreign policy.
He was president during some of the most intense moments of the Cold War.
This article explores the historiography of Kennedy’s foreign policies.
The modern historiography of United States foreign policy typically goes through three stages.
The second, ‘revisionist’ stage tends to occur once proper documentation begins to appear.
Almost always it involves a righteous debunking of the received orthodox wisdom; articles or entire books are crafted around new, if sometimes limited, evidence that undermines the conventional view.
Campbell Craig It certainly does with the history of John F Kennedy’s diplomacy.
The assassination of the young President in November 1963 all but guaranteed an uncritical, indeed hagiographic, early literature, one written, as it turned out, largely by people closely associated with the administration.
Waging war on two fronts, against military and political yahoos at home eager to wage World War Three, and a bullying Nikita Khrushchev risking thermonuclear holocaust in order to push America around in its own hemisphere, Kennedy and his assistants not only saw the crisis through to a peaceful resolution, they did so on American terms, forcing the USSR to dismantle its missiles in Cuba and send them home.
Eisenhower, and his successor, Lyndon Baines Johnson, just then getting bogged down in Vietnam, was not difficult to discern.
But it began to emerge in the 1980s and 1990s, from various perspectives.
Also, as early documents began to be declassified, a few historians began to question the myth of Kennedy as peacemaker.
One key line of attack was on his record in Latin America, a region of major initial interest to the new administration.
A companion to John F Kennedy, a major work on the historiography of the Kennedy administration edited by Marc Selverstone, will be published by Wiley in 2014.
Kennedy, as Rabe stresses, was as fervent an anti-communist when it came to western hemispheric relations as any president for the duration of the Cold War.
Of course, a far more resonant attack zeroed in on Kennedy’s expansion of America’s role in Vietnam.
Kennedy’s alleged culpability for a war that was not a formal military operation until after LBJ took office rests upon two pillars.
When Johnson took the oath of office in November, the United States had a substantially greater presence in Vietnam than it had had in 1960, and its long-time client in Saigon was gone.
Second, and perhaps more interesting, is the larger point that Kennedy brought into Washington a group of young foreign policy advisers, the ‘best and the brightest’, as David Halberstam called them, who were determined to solve difficult Cold War problems by means of modern social science.
Many of these advisers, above all Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara, stayed on with Johnson, and it was they who developed in 1965 and 1966 a modern counter-­ insurgency strategy that sold a losing war to Johnson and ended up transforming operations on the ground into a brutal catastrophe.
More recently, scholars have become interested in Kennedy’s indisputably fearmongering campaign of 1960, in which the presidential candidate grossly exaggerated Soviet military capabilities and made accusations, which he knew to be false, that Eisenhower (and by extension his vice-president Richard Nixon, Kennedy’s opponent that year) had let American defences slip.
Central to this strategy, as Christopher Preble has definitively shown, was the so-called ‘missile gap’ charge, whereby JFK echoed the absurd claims of defence intellectuals such as Henry Kissinger that the USSR was on the verge of achieving decisive nuclear superiority.
On top of this, as many popular biographers of JFK were at pains to point out, was the President’s wildly irresponsible personal behaviour.
He was involved in several extramarital affairs during his time in office, opening himself up to potentially devastating possibilities of blackmail, and he blithely associated with people close to organized crime.
What was more, he relied on bizarre and risky medical treatments to ease his chronically bad back, putting himself on several occasions in physically precarious situations in order not to appear infirm.
The revisionist response to the Camelot school unquestionably advanced our understanding of the history of United States foreign relations under John F Kennedy.
Over the past decade or so, however, a new appreciation of Kennedy’s foreign policies has emerged, and it is this that will be discussed in greater detail in the rest of this article.
We will focus here upon new arguments about JFK and Vietnam, his approach to the unique danger of nuclear war, and his apparent turn towards a policy of detente during the year 1963, a topic somewhat understudied in the extant literature.
Vietnam The United States policy to contend with the expansion of communism everywhere, codified in the famous strategy paper of 1950, NSC-68, had been fitfully pursued by the Eisenhower administration.
Because Eisenhower himself was determined to wage the Cold War cheaply, and his Secretary of State, John Foster Dulles, was primarily concerned with Europe, the United States had during the 1950s fought communism in the so-called Third World by means of political and economic warfare, much of it quite ruthless, rather than by sustained military intervention.
Eisenhower liked to point out that there was not a single American combat death during his entire term of office; while this was true, it meant that in many parts of the world United States anti-communist policies rested upon the political fates of pro-western leaders who had seized power by undemocratic means and enjoyed little popular support.
Kennedy’s international legacy, fifty years on This was surely the case in Vietnam.
Following the departure of the French in 1954, the country had been divided into a pro-socialist north, led by the legendary anti-colonial figure Ho Chi Minh, and a pro-western south, led by the devoutly Catholic Ngo Dinh Diem.
By the time Kennedy took office, the Diem regime, despite increasing levels of United States economic and military support, had become dangerously fragile.
The Kennedy administration regarded South-East Asia (in particular Laos, as well as Vietnam) as a key component in its larger policy of waging a more vigorous and effective Cold War in the Third World.
The President and his key advisers (including McNamara, National Security Advisor McGeorge Bundy, and Secretary of State Dean Rusk) believed that a systematic policy of building durable pro-western regimes, rather than just throwing some money and guns at any available rightist leader, represented a more durable and enlightened means of stemming the expansion of communism.
Such a policy made for a snug fit with the administration’s optimistic, scientific ethos.
So during the years 1961–3 JFK authorized an intensification of military, economic and social assistance to the Diem regime, and to South Vietnam more broadly, with the aim of constructing a modern society that could withstand communist interventions over the long term.
Not at all unlike the reasoning behind current United States ‘nation-building’ projects in the Middle East, the new policy combined a faith that all peoples desired a modern order with a determination that such an order could be imposed from the top down.
By the middle of 1963, it was clear that the South Vietnamese government was collapsing.
This was why Kennedy accepted the coup against Diem, which took place not long before the President was assassinated in Dallas.
At this point, of course, the history of Kennedy’s involvement in Vietnam ends and that of Johnson’s begins.
Preston’s chapter in the forthcoming Companion to John F Kennedy , ‘Whose war was it?’, provides a complete historiographical overview and advances a powerful interpretation in its own right; he sees Kennedy as more likely to have committed to war than most recent work, and the argument advanced here, suggest.
Campbell Craig order, and one that the United States clearly did not need to fight, it is perfectly reasonable to ask whether Kennedy, had he lived, might have decided to cut his losses there rather than commit to full-scale invasion as Johnson did.
As several historians have suggested, the question of whether JFK was committed to war remains open.
He did expand the effort in Vietnam, as we have seen, and did go along with Diem’s removal.
The easiest course was to continue the US policy of commitment to the preservation of South Vietnam, one that had been in place for a decade.
He rejected talk of negotiation, and reiterated frequently that South-East Asia remained an important theatre in America’s Cold War.
But there are hints that Kennedy was beginning to have doubts about the wisdom of banking on the South Vietnamese, and worried about getting dragged into a serious military operation.
He resisted demands that he send proper military forces there, and—as we shall see—was clearly rethinking the militarized nature of United States foreign policy in 1963.
We can fairly conclude that at least the President was not determined to wage major war in Vietnam—that the option of ‘declaring victory and leaving’ remained a possibility for him before November 1963.17 A second means of answering this question is to examine Johnson’s reasons for committing to a full-scale ground war in 1964 and 1965, and asking whether these reasons would have been as persuasive to Kennedy.
This is more of a counterfactual experiment—asking a ‘what if ’ question—than the foregoing discussion.
Nevertheless, it is, in my view, a more powerful challenge to the thesis that Kennedy was predetermined to commit to war in Vietnam.
This is because Johnson’s decision can be convincingly attributed to factors particular to him, factors which would have almost certainly been much less important to Kennedy.
It is generally agreed that LBJ made two overarching decisions which transformed United States involvement in Vietnam from a largely political nation-building exercise into a full-scale military operation to defeat Viet Cong forces in South Vietnam.
First, Johnson responded to reported attacks on United States warships in the Gulf of Tonkin in August 1964 (attacks which, we know now, were militarily insignificant and may have never even occurred) by demanding from Congress authorization to wage war against forces hostile to the United States in Vietnam.
For an effective critique of both their argument and their methodology, see Andrew Preston’s review of Virtual JFK in the Michigan War Studies Review, 24 May 2011.
With these two actions Johnson turned the American presence there into a massive and brutal war of counterinsurgency.
He and his advisers chose to exaggerate and perhaps invent the dangers of the Tonkin attacks in order to intensify the United States struggle in Vietnam, and to get Congress on side, because he recognized that these moves would deprive his Republican adversary in the November campaign of a major electoral issue.
Goldwater, like many on the Republican right, had long regarded Cold War hawkishness as the most effective weapon to use against Democrats.
Johnson’s moves in the late summer of 1964 were perfectly timed to pre-empt any such Republican strategy; they showed that he was tough on Vietnam, while at the same time allowing him to claim that he would not send any American boys there, as he did claim throughout the campaign.
The same reasoning, though at a deeper level, can explain Johnson’s decision to escalate United States involvement in Vietnam in 1965.
Once he had won the presidency the previous November, in one of the biggest landslides in United States electoral history, he had to decide whether to intensify the war or abandon it—the situation in South Vietnam by then was too desperate to make no decision.
Claims made by both orthodox and revisionist scholars that the White House simply did not foresee that intervention could turn into a quagmire are no longer sustainable.
But Johnson believed that United States credibility—and indeed, his own personal credibility—had long depended upon preventing a South Vietnamese collapse.
To abandon Saigon now would be to acknowledge failure, and the limits of US power, and this Johnson was incapable of doing.
It is quite plausible to argue that Kennedy, had he lived, would have been much less driven by such concerns.
In 1964 he would have been running for re-election, and with the great ‘victory’ over the Soviets in the missile crisis he would not have had to worry as much about being painted as a doveish Democrat.
Perhaps most important, Kennedy possessed a self-confidence that Johnson lacked.
The advent of megatonne thermonuclear bombs and intercontinental missiles in the 1950s meant that such a conflagration was, for the first time, conceivable.
Indeed, Kennedy campaigned in 1960 on the idea that there had to be a third alternative to, as he called it, ‘holocaust or humiliation’, and upon taking office he and his advisers sought to develop new military strategies that would permit the United States to wage a limited war against the Soviet Union, thereby keeping open the possibility of military victory in the thermonuclear age.
It was on this point that he sought to distinguish himself from his predecessor, Eisenhower; the notion that the United States had to accept a condition of mutual assured destruction flew in the face of the ‘Camelot’ mentality, according to which a new generation of the best and brightest could solve problems that their elders could not.
Yet it is one thing to talk about imaginative nuclear strategies and compelling the USSR to bend to America’s will in the abstract; quite another to follow through on such ideas when one’s finger is on the proverbial button.
Recent historical writing has demonstrated clearly that Kennedy realized this quite quickly.
In both cases, JFK and his advisers discarded their ideas about winnable nuclear war and came to recognize that it was necessary to play a very different game.
This game, as Eisenhower and Khrushchev had already discerned, necessitated taking a public stance of toughness and firmness while, behind the scenes, finding a way, any way, to avoid military conflict.
Kennedy’s international legacy, fifty years on symbolize an earlier era of overwhelming United States superiority, when the West stayed in Berlin simply because the USSR could do nothing about it; it was also becoming an acute problem on the ground, as East Germans and others from the Soviet bloc could defect simply by getting to Berlin and crossing over to the western sector.
At a conference in Vienna in the summer of 1961 he told Kennedy that the West had to leave.
It had been 16 years since the end of the war; there was no justification for keeping occupation forces in a city well within East Germany.
Almost immediately after taking office, therefore, Kennedy was faced with a classic nuclear dilemma.
The United States had long officially regarded the maintenance of the western presence in Berlin as a basic Cold War stake, one worth waging general war over.
If his administration was going to be tougher than its predecessor on such issues, and be willing to actually wage war over them, well, here was an opportunity.
He managed this by signalling to the Soviets that the West would now insist only upon a presence in its western sectors in Berlin, thus quietly abandoning the long-standing pretence that it ought to have access to the entirety of the old German capital.
This gave Khrushchev and East German leader Walter Ulbricht the green light to build the wall, which allowed them to solve the problem of massive defections to the West without having to try to physically expel the western powers from their parts of Berlin.
Publicly, of course, Kennedy voiced outrage over the wall; but it is crystal clear from newly available documentation that he and his aides were relieved by the move and that they shut down attempts by subordinate military advisers to challenge it.
Though he authorized a naval blockade around Cuba and publicly demanded that the missiles be removed, he also initiated secret negotiations with the Soviets whereby the United States promised to dismantle the Jupiter missiles in Turkey and never to invade Cuba.
Once it was apparent that Khrushchev was receptive to such a deal, the President and his advisers moved decisively to seal it with Moscow, even as others in the White House and Washington were demanding military action.
Indeed, since the Kennedy administration agreed to these two concessions in exchange only for a return to the status quo ante, it is hardly evident that the United States won the Cuban crisis at all.
If the Camelot historians were right to claim that it was JFK’s finest hour, it was not exactly for the reasons that they highlighted.
Knopf, 2008); and a special issue on the crisis, edited by Len Scott, in International Relations 26: 3, Sept.12.
Campbell Craig Now that the Cold War is over, historians and other scholars can seek to answer the question of how the two superpowers were able to avoid a Third World War, something that few careful observers of recent international history would ever have thought possible at its outset.
Had Kennedy decided to act upon his hawkish campaign ideas in 1961 or 1962, as many academics and generals were urging him to do, we might well not be here to wonder why.
Nineteen sixty-three Kennedy’s final year in office lacked the overt drama of his first two (until his trip to Dallas), and it is the subject of much less scholarly analysis.
There were no great superpower crises in 1963, and on the other most historically resonant question about his foreign policy—what to do in Vietnam—the President did not make any kind of smoking gun decision.
Yet students of United States foreign relations would do well to take a closer look at this period.
For it is clear that Kennedy’s experiences over Berlin and Cuba had shaken him deeply, and that he may have begun to question the foundations of American Cold War policy.
It is true, as historians largely critical of JFK (such as Stephen Rabe) argue, that while his views may have changed rhetorically, he did not act to alter United States foreign policy in any serious way.
But this assessment must be considered alongside the fact that his assassination in November 1963 meant that he had little opportunity to do so.
It was presented as a major presidential statement, as such addresses occasionally are, and its main points, if taken as serious indications of a policy change, represented a profound shift in his attitude towards the Cold War.
Underlying the speech was Kennedy’s recognition that nuclear weapons had changed everything.
Kennedy had argued so in the 1960 campaign; but the trials of 1961 and 1962 had changed his mind.
In other words, Great Powers would not surrender when each had invulnerable powerful forces that could destroy the other, making a winnable nuclear war short of general holocaust impossible.
Kennedy’s international legacy, fifty years on Because total nuclear war would destroy humanity, and because any war between the two sides would escalate to that, it was necessary to pursue a durable peace with the Soviet Union.
More immediately, and realistically, it would require seeking a ‘relaxation of tensions’ with the USSR, one based upon ‘mutual tolerance’ and a reduction of ideological sabre-rattling.
Americans needed to recognize that war was not inevitable, that the Soviets were not inhuman monsters, that it would be possible to wage the Cold War in a different manner.
JFK took two concrete steps during the last months of his life to reduce Cold War tensions, both in the arena of nuclear weaponry.
The treaty would ban all nuclear testing apart from that conducted underground, something which both obviated the need for intrusive inspections and would stop the emission of dangerous airborne radioactivity.
In a larger sense, the treaty could signify a small, but productive, form of cooperation among the major powers, and this was clearly the more important benefit to Kennedy as he expressed it in his commencement address.
The nuclear age demanded such cooperation, and here was a first step towards it.
A second step was to stop the proliferation of weapons to more countries.
By 1963 several nations were suspected of having programmes to build nuclear weaponry, and Kennedy feared that possession of the bomb by more and more nations would inevitably increase the risks of nuclear war.
Central to this policy in the first half of 1963, as Warren Bass and Avner Cohen show, was the case of Israel.
JFK focused upon this country because the proliferation of nuclear weaponry in the Middle East seemed particularly hazardous, but also, as both Bass and Cohen stress, because he believed that Israel was a nation he could coerce.
Kennedy developed a classic carrot-and-stick policy, promising the Jewish state thorough political and military support but at the same time warning that the support would disappear should Israel follow through on its nuclear project.
The test ban treaty did put a halt to atmospheric testing, but it did not lead to an easing of the arms race, as Kennedy had hoped it would.
During the 1960s and 1970s the two superpowers built thousands and thousands of new nuclear weapons.
Johnson maintained US political and military support for the Jewish state, but looked the other way when it developed a nuclear arsenal.
By the end of the 1960s, Israel had the bomb, and so did France and China.
In such a political climate, talk of relaxing tensions and stopping arms races was not just intellectually debatable; it was positively threatening.
In his June 1963 speech Kennedy, like Eisenhower, and also like the veteran Cold Warrior George Kennan, was suggesting that the ‘new face of war’ had made this kind of politics intolerably dangerous.
One gets from his address the idea that for JFK the main problem, or at least the main problem he could do anything about, was not abroad; it was at home.
Playing politics by constantly calling for belligerent foreign policies was one thing in the 1890s, or 1920s; in the 1960s, the stakes were too high.
It is speculation, but I believe that had Kennedy lived, his attempt to deal with this problem would have become a dominant feature of his presidency; and that had he succeeded in dealing with it, the Cold War might well have ended much sooner than it did.
