It looks like you’re using an outdated or unsupported browser that may not render correctly.
Log in Account iconAn icon in the shape of a person's head and shoulders.
Chevron iconIt indicates an expandable section or menu, or sometimes previous / next navigation options.HOMEPAGE 0 Newsletters Account iconAn icon in the shape of a person's head and shoulders.
Associated Press Castro made a covert agreement in July 1962 with Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev to host Soviet nuclear missiles in Cuba Cuban Prime Minister Fidel Castro, left, is embraced by Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev in the United Nations General Assembly on Sept., 1960.
Associated Press/Marty Lederhandler The move was partly an effort to deter the United States from attempting another Cuban invasion, and partly a way to maximize the Soviet Union’s nuclear strike capability.
United States intelligence soon picked up evidence of a Soviet arms build-up on Cuba, including anti-aircraft defense missiles President John F Kennedy opens at a Washington news conference on Sept., 1962, with a lengthy statement on the Cuban situation.
An American spy plane on Oct. took photos that clearly showed construction sites for nuclear-armed medium and intermediate-range ballistic missiles JFK Library The standoff officially began on Oct., when President John F Kennedy was briefed on the photos Map of the western hemisphere showing the full range of the nuclear missiles under construction in Cuba, used during the secret meetings on the Cuban crisis.
JFK Library Kennedy, anxious to maintain the appearance that the situation in the White House was business-as-usual, kept up his official schedule but met frequently with advisors to strategize.The Joint Chiefs of Staff urged Kennedy to launch an air strike followed by a full-on invasion of Cuba, but others called for a naval quarantine.
JFK Library Kennedy, meanwhile, kept up a normal schedule, attending a church service, eating lunch with the Crown Prince of Libya, and traveling to Connecticut to campaign for congressional candidates.
Soviet Foreign Minister Andrei Gromyko visited Kennedy in the White House on Oct., claiming that the Soviet aid to Cuba did not pose a threat to the United States and was merely defensive President John F Kennedy meets with Soviet Foreign Minister Andrei Gromyko, center, in the White House, Oct., 1962.
Associated Press/Harvey Georges Without revealing that he knew the extent of the nuclear arms build-up in Cuba, Kennedy repeated the warning he issued on Sept., when he said the ""gravest issues would arise"" should offensive nuclear weapons be found on Cuba.
Department of Defense via Associated Press The Kennedy administration used the term ""quarantine"" rather than ""blockade,"" as the latter would have legally implied a state of war.
A quarantine, however, allowed the United States to continue receiving the support of the Organization of American States, the 35-member continental organization.
Kennedy also sent a letter to Khrushchev urging his government not to take action that would ""widen or deepen this already grave crisis"" Page 2 of President Kennedy's letter to Premiere Khrushchev, October 22, 1962.
President Kennedy signs Proclamation 3504, authorizing the naval quarantine of Cuba.
JFK Library Kennedy then requested that Khrushchev halt any Soviet ships en route to Cuba, out of fear the United States would be forced to exchange fire and launch a war between the two nations.
On Oct., Khrushchev issued an angry rebuttal to Kennedy’s letter Dept. of State translation of Chairman Khrushchev's letter to President Kennedy of October 24.
Associated Press All but one of the Soviet vessels heading towards Cuba turned back.
One freighter containing only petroleum products was allowed through the quarantine.At the United Nations Security Council, United States Ambassador Adlai Stevenson lambasted the Soviet Ambassador Valerian Zorin over the evidence of the missiles.
New photographs emerged on Oct. showing further missile site construction, and Castro sent Khrushchev a private letter urging him to annihilate the United States with nuclear weapons ""However harsh and terrible the solution, there would be no other,"" Castro wrote to Khrushchev.
Tensions between the United States and the USSR reached their peak on Oct. — also known as 'Black Saturday' Wikimedia Commons Khrushchev sent Kennedy another letter demanding stronger terms, such as the removal of the US's Jupiter missiles from Turkey.An American U-2 plane was also shot down over Cuba by a Soviet-supplied missile.
Its pilot, Major Rudolf Anderson, was killed.Kennedy ultimately ignored the latest letter from Khrushchev, responding only to the warmer letter he had sent the previous day.
In turn, the United States would vow not to invade Cuba and remove its missiles from Turkey.
The Soviets announced they would remove their missiles from Cuba on Oct., ending the standoff In this Oct., 1962, President John F Kennedy leaves St.
Stephen's Roman Catholic Church after attending services in Washington D.C. shortly after the announcement from Moscow that Premier Khrushchev ordered Soviet rocket bases in Cuba dismantled and rockets returned to Russia.
Keep reading Newsletter Get a daily selection of our top stories based on your reading preferences.
