It was fought in the ﬁelds of ideology, military posturing, coalitions, political inﬂuIS ence, technological development, scientiﬁc development, space and military stockpiling.
The reason for this new and sublimated form of war was the advent TR of the nuclear age.
Any ﬁrst strike would lead to retaliation and mutually assured destruction.
IB You can regard us with distrust, but, in any case, you can be calm in this regard, that we are of sound mind and understand perfectly well that if we attack you, you will respond the same way.
D Although the nuclear stockpiling grew out of distrust, the outcome of mutually assured destruction was a degree of trust.
In an T attempt to halt the importation of nuclear warheads into Cuba, Kennedy instituted a naval blockade.
Knowing this fact with hindsight is chilling, because the USA was N on the verge of an invasion when a diplomatic solution was reached on 28th October.
Any substantial or systematic reproduction, re-distribution, re-selling, loan or sub-licensing, systematic supply or distribution in any form to anyone is expressly forbidden.
In the midst of this crisis the world found itself hostage to interpretations, communications, and miscommunications arising between these two groups, and to the communication channels which existed between these two groups, which, as we shall see, included a bicycle.
N While there are relatively few ﬁles pertaining to the interactions in Moscow, O there are full transcripts for many of the discussions that took place in the White House between President Kennedy and his advisors – the group known as TI ExComm.
President Kennedy had the system upgraded in 1962, only months before the Crisis, IS and was particularly keen on using the system during the Crisis.
IB The following analysis focuses upon the discussions of Kennedy and his advisors as they tried to deal with the puzzling and threatening actions being underU taken by the USSR in Cuba.
In the absence of direct verbal communication with Moscow, Kennedy and his advisors had to work hard to interpret the signiﬁcance of the Soviet actions they observed, the public statements Khrushchev made, and the letters he sent to Kennedy.
On this limited basis, and against a background of D distrust, Kennedy and his advisors had to decide how to respond, and they struggled to understand how their potential responses would be interpreted by Moscow and the world.
They were forced to reﬂect upon possible ulterior motives for each R of Khrushchev’s moves.
O Representing the mind of Khrushchev N One of the most striking features of the White House transcripts concerns the way in which Kennedy and his advisors represent the USSR in general and Khrushchev in particular.
Much of the social psychological research on intergroup Trust and Conflict.
The differentiation between ingroup and outgroup usually entails denigrating the outgroup and positively afﬁrming the ingroup.
Certainly during the Cold War, outgroup denigration was widespread in Allied propaganda.
However, no such denigration is evident in N the White House transcripts.
Indeed, he calls upon his “demonologists” not because he wants to denigrate the outgroup, but because he wants to understand the perspective of the outgroup.
The rupture needs elaboration and thematisation , and the effort to make meaning reveals an uncertain but nuanced IB understanding of Khrushchev’s motives and situation.
Several possibilities, Mr President possibly use it to try to trade D something in Berlin, saying he’ll disarm Cuba if we’ll yield some of our interests in Berlin and some arrangement for it.
I’m sure his generals have been telling him for a year and a half that he was missing a golden opportunity to add to his strategic capability.
A second consideration is that it is simply a trading ploy, that he wants this in so that he can – Trust and Conflict.
Each of the reasons put forward assumes that Khrushchev is a rational actor.
One possible reason, put forward by George Ball, is that Khrushchev aims to trade his N new-found advantage in Cuba for a development in Berlin.
O TI A second explanation, developed by Alexis Johnson, is that Khrushchev may be trying to do what the USA had done a number of years earlier.
Previously in the Cold War, the USA felt threatened by the Soviet long-range rockets.
But by the early sixties it had become clear that instead of the USA fearing a ‘missile gap’ it was in fact the USSR which was behind.
Thus the tables had turned and both the IB USA and the USSR were aware of this.
U According to social identity theory, social categorisation underlies intergroup conﬂict, because the mere act of categorising ingroup and outgroup leads to an exaggeration of the differences between the groups.
However, in the present case, D the evidence does not support such an account.
Johnson’s argument that Khrushchev R may be trying to gain a strategic advantage is based on identifying with the Soviet position.
T They, no more than we, can let these things go by without doing something.
They can’t, after all their statements, permit us O to take out their missiles, kill a lot of Russians, and then do nothing.
N Kennedy’s concern is that an invasion of Cuba might force the Soviets into a situation in which launching the missiles becomes necessary.
The USSR had made public its commitment to protect Cuba in the same way that the USA had made Trust and Conflict.
These public commitments are difﬁcult to renege upon, precisely because they are public.
Kennedy’s insight into Khrushchev’s situation comes through identiﬁcation not differentiation.
Simplistic denigration is a luxury born of distance N and non-engagement.
However, when one needs to engage and interact with a O distrustful other, either in negotiation or in battle, then it is advantageous to try and understand the mind of the other.
Given that Kennedy and his advisors could TI not take the word or actions of Khrushchev at face value, they were forced to elaborate an intricate representation of his motivation.
In such a context it would be naïve to simply categorise Khrushchev as an outgroup member, and dismiss IS him as mad or bad.
And positive self-differentiation would only lead to hubris and over-conﬁdence.
Distrust in this context implies that the other has an ulterior TR motive, and that in turn implies that in order to out-manoeuvre Khrushchev, Kennedy and his advisors had to understand him as accurately as possible.
In this particular context, identiﬁcation enabled perspective-taking because both the USA and the USSR were, despite their differences, in very similar positions in IB the Cold War, facing similar political, international, external and technological constraints.
This similarity became, through identiﬁcation, a useful resource in U understanding and thematising the untrustworthy mind of Khrushchev.
Then, once the missiles were discovered, the Soviet administration insisted R that the missiles were only for defensive purposes.
However, it would be overly simplistic to say that the relationship between T Kennedy and Khrushchev is characterised only by distrust.
Speciﬁcally, O there is the implicit assumption that Khrushchev is a rational actor.
If he were totally irrational, then he could not be negotiated with, and thus the only course of action would N have been violence.
The full extent of this communicative trust in Khrushchev as a reasonable and rational Trust and Conflict.
However, President Kennedy instead opted for a blockade because he was worried about a direct attack providing justiﬁcation for a Soviet incursion into Berlin.
Khrushchev drew an equivalence between the nuclear missiles which the USA had in Turkey and the missiles in Cuba.
If Soviet missiles should N not be in Cuba, he argued, then it followed that the American missiles should not be in Turkey.
Thus he offered to withdraw the missiles from Cuba if Kennedy withdrew the missiles from Turkey.
Kennedy is quick to recognise this as a deft O TI political move because it sounds reasonable.
Emotionally, people IB will think this is a rather even trade and we ought to take advantage of it.
Therefore, it makes it much more difﬁcult for us to move U with world support.
That being so, I think that the only thing we’ve got him on is the fact that, while they put forward varying proposals in short periods of time, all of which are complicated, under that shield this work goes on.
The USA could even argue that the messy negotiations are T merely a “shield” providing cover from an invasion while the missiles are made operational.
He suggests N responding to Khrushchev’s proposed deal by insisting that nothing can be discussed until work on the missile sites ceases.
Kennedy and his advisors suspect that such a statement will appear reasonable, and they also speculate that Khrushchev will be Trust and Conflict.
But I think that if we don’t say that, he’s going to say that we rejected his offer and, therefore, he’s going to have public N O opinion with him.
TI By making Khrushchev reject a reasonable deal, Kennedy hopes to position IS Khrushchev unfavourably in world opinion, and thus occupy the moral high ground.
However, even though this would help reposition the USA as a rational TR actor in the eyes of the world, it would not enable the USA to invade Cuba, because if they did invade then Khrushchev would still have a “blank check” for invading Turkey.
On the horns of this dilemma, Robert McNamara, the Secretary of Defence, IB proposes the following course of action.
He suggests secretly removing the nuclear missiles from Turkey and then, at the same time as invading Cuba, U announcing that the missiles have been removed from Turkey.
We D might be able to either shift the area in which they would apply their military force, or give them no excuse to apply military force, by taking out the Turkish Jupiters and the Italian Jupiters before we attack Cuba.
O A major constraint operating on both Kennedy and Khrushchev is the need to act rationally, to act with justiﬁcation and to appear reasonable.
Invading another country, whether Cuba or Turkey, is not simply a question of military ability, it is N also a question of justiﬁcation.
The White House transcripts reveal strenuous efforts to both guard the justiﬁcation for an invasion of Cuba and try to deny the justiﬁcation for a Soviet invasion of Turkey.
Hovering in the background of these discussions, as a superaddressee (Bakhtin, 1986; see also Marková, Introduction, and Psaltis, Chapter 5 in this volume), is world opinion as the guarantor of the rationality of Kennedy’s and of Khrushchev’s actions.
Often this superaddressee is objectiﬁed in the UN or a particular nation’s point of view.
No matter how tempting an invasion or an air strike on Cuba may be to Kennedy, N he cannot initiate these measures if they will appear unreasonable or unjustiﬁed according to world opinion.
But by the same token, Kennedy assumes that KhrushO chev too is subject to the gaze of world opinion, and Kennedy uses this knowledge TI to interpret and predict Khrushchev’s actions.
Thus, while Kennedy and his advisors are, at a reﬂective level, highly sceptical of Khrushchev’s moves and his motives, at a non-reﬂective level they assume, and trust in a predictive sense, that IS Khrushchev will act in a way which is deemed reasonable by the normative standards of rationality expected by world opinion.
In the same way that mutually TR assured destruction is the guarantor for not initiating a ﬁrst strike, so world opinion seems to be a guarantor for world leaders to trust each other to act rationally.
This new mode of U war was fought more in the political arena than in the battleﬁeld, yet the weapons of the battleﬁeld provided necessary weight to threats, guarantees and political posturing.
This new form of war, the Cold War, ﬁnds its peculiar dynamic in the fact that neither the USSR nor the USA wanted a nuclear war.
Fear of nuclear war D made each side cautious, but paradoxically the knowledge of that caution emboldened each side as they attempted to bully the other into backing down.
Bertrand Russell scathingly compared brinkmanship to playing a game of chicken, where opponents drive cars directly towards each other to see who will swerve away ﬁrst, with nuclear weapons.
In brinkmanship the aim is to push the other far enough so that they back down, O but not so far that a war results.
But I don’t think I can give a deﬁnitive view today as to what the real attitude of the Trust and Conflict.
In other words, I think that we can report that there is no conﬁrmed frozen Soviet reaction to the situation, as yet.
N Rusk is uncertain about how close Khrushchev is to the brink and draws into the O TI analysis a communication from Khrushchev to Bertrand Russell.
Russell at this time was very involved in nuclear disarmament and had written letters to both Kennedy and Khrushchev about the crisis.
Rusk points out that Khrushchev’s IS response to Russell suggests both that he is some distance from the brink and that if pushed to the brink he would back down.
On the night of the 26th Khrushchev sent a letter to Kennedy offering to remove the missiles in exchange for a guarantee from the USA not to invade or interfere with Cuba.
Then on the morning of the 27th a second letter arrived which was more assertive and which IB asked not only for a guarantee of Cuba’s sovereignty but also for the removal of the missiles in Turkey.
One is T that Khrushchev is engaging in brinkmanship, trying to get more out of the USA and conﬁdent that they will back down.
If this is the interpretation, then, as O Thompson suggests, taking some “forceful action” may make the Soviets change their minds.
The alternative interpretation is that, as Vice President Johnson suggests, maybe somebody is forcing Khrushchev to take this action.
If brinkmanship presupposes a rational opponent, then convincing one’s opponent that one’s actions are no longer rational should be an effective move within N this communicative activity type.
One way of doing this is to try and convince O one’s opponent that one is crazy and without concern for the future.
While such a strategy would doubtless have been effective for either Kennedy or Khrushchev TI to pursue, it would have the unintended consequence of a widespread loss of public support.
Neither political system could tolerate a leader who attempted to appear unstable and unpredictable – neither national nor international opinion IS would tolerate it.
Robert Kennedy, however, hit upon an alternative strategy for convincing Khrushchev that President Kennedy’s actions might cease being TR rational.
The implication was that Khrushchev should no longer assume that USA policy in Cuba would be rational and bound to world opinion.
IB The occasion of this self-presentation was at the height of the Crisis, on the night of the 27th October.
President Kennedy sent his brother to meet U Anatoly Dobrynin, the Soviet Ambassador in Washington.
First, there would be a public announcement in which President Kennedy would guarantee the sovereignty of Cuba in exchange for the D USSR withdrawing its missiles.
This second message was never written down, and was to R be considered void if it was leaked to the public.
That is to say, this third message was not meant to T appear as a communication.
Although an O implicit communication, the message certainly reached Khrushchev.
N ‘The President is in a grave situation,’ Robert Kennedy said, ‘and does not know how to get out of it.
That is why the President is appealing directly to Chairman Khrushchev for his help in liquidating this conﬂict.
N It is possible that Khrushchev’s account is unreliable, that it is a post-hoc rationalisation for the fact that he agreed to back down and remove the missiles O from Cuba.
What is important is that he succeeded in creating the impression for both Dobrynin and Khrushchev that President Kennedy brink.
TR might be losing control, and thus that the USA might actually be sliding over the Robert Kennedy’s third communication, which was ‘given off,’ was an unconventional, but nonetheless highly effective communicative move within the IB communicative activity type of brinkmanship.
Given that brinkmanship assumes a rational U opponent, convincing one’s opponent that one is no longer able to act rationally because one is trapped in a situation compels one’s opponent to back down.
The key R to this move is to shatter one’s opponent’s trust that one’s action is volitional and thus that one is able to conform to rational expectation.
The ﬁrst was concessionary while the second was T more demanding, seeking not only a guarantee for Cuba but also the removal of the missiles in Turkey.
Kennedy’s advisors wondered whether the ﬁrst letter had O been written by Khrushchev and the second one by some hardliners within the Politburo.
Then, in the midst of this uncertainty, produced in part through ineffective N and slow means of communication, there was news that a U-2 spy plane had been shot down by SAM missiles while ﬂying over Cuba and that other planes had been shot at with ﬂak guns.
I don’t know how to interpret it. (27th October 1962, Zelikow & May, 2001b, 446) N O President Kennedy and his advisors try to interpret the shooting as a rational act.
They assume that the act is communicative, and they try to reconcile it with the TI letters they had received from Khrushchev.
Both the second letter and the shooting are U interpreted in the light of each other, and both are interpreted in terms of brinkmanship.
OtherD wise, it is argued, the Soviets will take the advantage and become more strident in their demands.
This act gained such signiﬁcance in the minds of Kennedy and his advisors as a hard-line communication from Khrushchev that it was sufﬁcient basis for an invasion of Cuba.
T Fears and suspicions thus gain support from ambiguous communications.
O First, there was the formal channel, in the form of letters sent by telegram usually via embassies.
This channel was slow, with letters often taking 12 hours to get TI from one leader to the other, and in a number of instances the letter arrived disjointed with some hours delay between the parts.
These interactions IS occurred between proxies who reported back directly to the leaders.
In fact, Dobrynin’s memo on the crucial meeting was collected by bicycle courier who sent it by Western Union telegram.
Indeed, this means of communication was usually IB speedier than the formal and informal channels, and thus was used frequently.
However, public communications have the problem of reaching too wide an audiU ence.
Similarly Robert Kennedy’s communication that President Kennedy D might be losing control would not have been suited to the public channel.
None of these three channels is suited to resolving the kind of misunderstanding which arose out of the shooting down of the U-2 spy plane.
The formal and R informal channels were too slow and the public channel was too public.
Indeed, the ﬁrst implementation of the hot line did not have any voice component.
The architects of the system feared that direct voice communication, O with direct translation, might be too rapid, potentially leading to misunderstanding either through mistranslation or through misunderstood intonation.
Accordingly, the ﬁrst system was a teletype system that could transmit a page of text in three N minutes.
The message would then be veriﬁed by the President, before being encrypted and transmitted to the Kremlin in English.
The hot line was ﬁrst used in 1967 during the Arab–Israel war, when Israel launched a surprise attack on Egypt.
Fearing that the situation might escalate and that there would be a retaliatory attack on Israel, perhaps by the Syrians, the US military deployed an aircraft carrier to be ready to defend Israel.
The Soviet Premier Alexei Kosygin, who had links with Egypt and Syria, interpreted the move as offensive.
The message caused a stir, not least because it was the ﬁrst time that the hot line had been used.
Using the hot line, President Johnson was able to reasTI sure Premier Kosygin that the USA did not want a war.
It is manned on both sides 24 hours a day, and it is tested every TR hour.
IB Kennedy and his advisors were distrustful of Khrushchev, in part, because they did not know his mind or his motivations.
Moreover, the means of communication U between the leaders was limited and, because of the distrust, much emphasis was placed on military manoeuvres.
And in the context of limited D information, such actions can have dangerous interpretations, as was the case with the U-2 spy plane.
The hot line, on R the other hand, enables interrogating the mind of the other, and holding the actions of the other to communicative account.
T First, in a context of highly reﬂective distrust where there is a necessity to engage with the other and try to outsmart the other, the dynamics of social cateO gorisation which are assumed to underlie intergroup conﬂict do not hold.
Social categorisation assumes that intergroup conﬂict is based upon the positive differentiation of the ingroup from the outgroup.
However, Kennedy and his advisors N would be foolish to simply denigrate their opponent or to dismiss his perspective.
One particularly useful resource for this understanding, which recurs several Trust and Conflict.
Second, although at a reﬂective level Kennedy is deeply distrustful of Khrushchev and his motivations, at a more implicit and taken-for-granted level there is a remarkable degree of trust in Khrushchev as a rational actor.
Analysis of the actual negotiation process shows both Khrushchev and Kennedy trying to impale each other N fought out, like much of the Cold War, in the ﬁeld of public opinion.
Yet neither TI set of negotiators could risk actually assuming that the other was irrational.
Each side sought to justify their own actions while undermining any justiﬁcation for the actions of the other.
The guarantor of this rationality was the superaddressee of world opinion.
IS Third, brinkmanship presupposes that the other is a rational being – otherwise TR one would not be willing to risk pushing them to the brink.
The powerful effect that Robert Kennedy’s appeal had on Khrushchev can be explained in terms of breaking this taken for granted assumption.
Once Khrushchev believed that President Kennedy might be losing control, then he could not presuppose rational IB actions from the White House, and needed to quickly accept the terms offered to him.
U Finally, distrust and ambiguous communications are dangerous companions, especially in the context of brinkmanship.
Castro initiated shooting at United States military planes, but Kennedy and his advisors thought that this was a communication of escalation coming from Khrushchev.
It is this potentially catastrophic miscommunication that instigated the construction of the ‘hot line’ between the Kremlin R and the White House.
The hot line is, arguably, trust building because it makes each leader available for interrogation almost instantly.
The very immediacy of the medium is a counterbalance to misunderT standing and distrust.
The O blockade, the move to DEFCON 2 at the peak of the Crisis, and arguably even the attempt to install missiles in Cuba were all primarily acts of communication within a context of brinkmanship.
In such a context it would always remain N possible for the hot line to become another prop in brinkmanship.
Indeed, if the above analysis is correct, then the most important move in the game of brinkmanship occurred not on the international stage or with any new military mobilisation Trust and Conflict.
TI inter-subjectivity and the interplay of culturally shared and situation speciﬁc knowledge.
O lbjlib.utexas.edu/johnson/archives.hom/oralhistory.hom/McNamaraR/McNamara-sp1. pdf Retrieved 1st November 2007.
