Brazil, Bulgaria, Chile, nuclear proliferation through a Carnegie Corporation-funded China, Cuba, Czechoslovakia, Denmark, France, Germany Nuclear Proliferation International History Project . , Hungary, Italy, Israel, Mexico, Mongolia, As all CWIHP productions, this issue is a collaborative the Netherlands, Poland, Romania, Russia, Switzerland, enterprise.
Shorter introductions and editorial notes provide first Alex Barrow, Pierre Asselin, Jordan Baev, Csaba Bekes, Bastiaan analytic cracks at the sources.
We greatly appreagreements with the Foreign Ministry since 2005, CWIHP ciate the support of the Karl and Martha Mautner Fund. has been releasing and will continue to release major new At the Center, my work as CWIHP director has benefittranches of documentation on China’s Cold War era foreign ted from the support of The Hon.
All of them The documents in this issue will also be available through have played critical roles in assuring that this issue came out CWIHP’s new state-of-the-art Digital Archive database, in time and in good shape.
Kian Byrne, Daniel storage, description, and searchability of our online collecChardell, Chandler Grigg, Jordan Harms, Yuree Kim, David tions.
CWIHP is in the final year of a three-year development Najmi, Phan Ngoc, Emily Olsen, and Benjamin Venable.
Christian F Ostermann is the director of the Woodrow Wilson Center’s History and Public Policy Program and has headed CWIHP since 1997/98.
A vivid narrative information from the “other side” has yielded a narrative and emerged, centered on the deliberations and decision-making historiography far more balanced in its depiction of actions of John F Kennedy and his advisors around the table of the and decisions of both superpowers.
Two particularly impor“Excomm,” from the memoirs, recollections, and leaks of tant secondary works, Aleksandr Fursenko and Timothy former United States officials.
A few years after that, millions of TV Cubans into the drama as autonomous viewers experienced the brush with World War actors, not mere Soviet pawns.
Brazil, Bulgaria, Chile, China, Nikita Khrushchev mostly loomed off-stage, a mysterious, Cuba, Czechoslovakia, Denmark, France, East and West menacing presence in Moscow, although the emergence of his Germany, Hungary, Israel, Italy, Japan, Mexico, Mongolia, smuggled-out memoirs at least offered a tantalizing glimpse the Netherlands, Poland, Romania, Russia, Switzerland, and into the Soviet side of the story.
New sources help to discern the interrelaand his closest associate, Anastas Mikoyan, and a former tionship of the crisis and the concurrent strains in ties between Khrushchev speechwriter.
Yet, to date, the Havana authorities have perwith a cataclysm that could kill millions, devastate civilization, mitted only limited, selective access to state and communist and even deliver a lingering doom to party archives.
As a result, the next best thing to discern what those waiting “On the Beach” in Australia and other locales was happening in the Cuban leadership and in Cuban foreign spared from immediate incineration.
Even in farbut with those in his inner circle, including his brother Raúl off East Asia, the crisis had a manifest impact—communist , Ernesto “Che” Guevara, Carlos Rafael sources presented here detail how Khrushchev’s perceived surRodriguez, and others.
North Korea to question the value and credibility of Moscow’s although the Cuban records remain sealed, the Chinese security guarantees, turning them towards accelerated buildarchives have yielded extensive records of the conversations ups of their own military capabilities as well as toward the when these icons of 20th century revolution first encountered more bellicose Chinese.
But records from outsessions (which don’t tell us everything, as Martin J Sherwin side Russia, particularly in East-Central Europe in the realm usefully reminds us), but for the Soviets and other leaderships of the late, unlamented Warsaw Pact, also provide insight. as well.
Cables from Soviet-bloc embassies be seriously explored or comprehended. in Havana in the fall of 1962 (particularly the Czech, Polish, Finally, aside from learning more about countries that were and Hungarian) testify, also, to the intense emotions that were admittedly supporting actors or even bit players in the Cuban flowing, both during the preparations to fight the “imperialdrama, moving beyond the traditional sources also helps us ists” during the crisis, and the confusion and bitterness in the to understand the lead actors better.
Since 1992, aftermath of Khrushchev’s concession. the Cuban Government and Fidel Castro have personally Finally, the documents even raise new questions and offer hosted several useful conferences that, in addition to enabling new information about the frequently-reconstructed goingsconversations among US, Russian, and Cuban participations, on in Washington—not everything was written down in featured some releases of Cuban records.
This Bulletin contains United States documents, and telegrams from Swiss, Dutch, and other a selection of the most interesting Cuban documents that ambassadors record some reactions of senior officials and also emerged from conferences in Havana to mark the 40th anniverreveal hidden attempts to communicate between Washington saries of the Bay of Pigs and the Missile Crisis in 2001-2002, and Fidel Castro’s Havana.
At the Wilson Center, I thank Christian F Ostermann, CWIHP Director and Editor of the Bulletin, for allowing me to join him for this issue as Notes Guest Editor, for authorizing some fairly serious expenditures to pay for the translations of many documents from various 1 Influential early works by former United States officials included countries, and for supporting my work in many ways over Theodore C Sorensen, Kennedy ; the years.
John F Kennedy in the the issue, especially Allison Lyalikov and Laura Deal.
The Politics of Foreign Policy in the Administration gratitude also goes to the National Security Archive, whose of John F Kennedy ; cooperation was essential.
Blanton, in particular, has galvanized this effort and aided Missile Crisis . my own research in too many ways to name.
Thus, American fighter jets scrambling over Alaska narratives, while adding many new ones we never thought to defend an off-course U-2 spy plane over Siberia during the about before.
The old story revolved around The CWIHP Bulletin to the contrary notwithstanding, unprovoked aggressive behavior by the Soviets met with tough American-centricity dominates discussion of the Crisis even American brinksmanship.
President John F Kennedy’s biognow, but first the trickle and then the flood of new documenrapher Arthur M Schlesinger Jr. conveyed the conventional tation since the 1980s has provided multiple correctives to wisdom the Thirteen Days version, which centered in the Oval Office, when he described Kennedy’s “brilliantly controlled… matchbashed Moscow, and ignored Havana altogether.
Yet the slow lessly calibrated” crisis management that forced the Soviets to motion crisis in U.S.-Cuba relations that catalyzed events in back down.
Secretary of State Dean Rusk provided the most 1962 continues even today.
The primary sources were all too source to the very day and hour of decision. often not primary at all, obscured or concealed by secrecy Such documents led Blight to bring together all the classification systems, bureaucratic inertia and obfuscation, Kennedy aides in March 1987, at a congenial resort in the and not least of all the self-interest of many participants to Florida Keys.
Yet, without this basic research of opendocuments, and with each other, lips loosened.
In one of many ing the sources, the next levels of scholarly work are hardly highlights, former national security adviser McGeorge Bundy possible, or merely speculative.
Indeed, in the absence of read out a letter written by former Secretary of State Dean rigorous evidence, political science models rushed in where Rusk for the occasion, revealing for the first time anywhere angels feared to tread. an initiative known only to Rusk and President Kennedy, A few “docu-moments” stand out, however, as emblematic undertaken on the evening of the most dangerous day—just of the power of primary sources, and worth citing here.
Back in case direct communication with Khrushchev through the in 1986, for example, a psychologist with an historical bent Soviet ambassador failed.
Blight’s public proposal for a trade of the Turkey missiles for the Cuba dean, Graham Allison, had challenged the novice researcher missiles, as an alternative to war (thereby allowing Kennedy to make Essence of Decision irrelevant, clearly doubting the to, as it were, accept his own proposal, laundered through possibility.
The notes show the head foreign minister Andrei Gromyko and former ambassador to of the Air Force Tactical Air Command, General Walter the United States Anatoly Dobrynin.
By the end, the discussion Cuban and Soviet claims of United States aggression (and threatened turned to the President’s brother Bobby as the catalyst for the Soviet missile on behalf of JFK) who said he opposed the air strike for deployment, and the defense of Cuba as the leading Soviet two reasons, the similarity to what the Japanese did at Pearl motivation.
At the least, the evidence forced the American Harbor, and the “unpredictable” Soviet response that could delegation to put themselves in Soviet and Cuban shoes.
At one of the breaks in Havana 1992, Archive no small role in the subsequent invitation from the Cubans to staff presented Castro with more than 10,000 pages of declascome to Havana and hear from Fidel himself.) sified United States documents, neatly preserved on microfiche, and The other Moscow documentary highlight in 1989 feawith a two-volume index – testimony to the United States Freedom tured the interplay between documents and memory and of Information Act.
Former ambassador Dobrynin, citing fingers and hauled out his own archives, including a long and his own still-secret cables about his meetings with Bobby previously unknown letter from Khrushchev a few months Kennedy, challenged Theodore Sorensen about Bobby’s after the crisis, addressed to the young passionate revolutionfamous memoir, Thirteen Days, which skated over the details ary, describing snow falling on the birches, inviting the Cuban of what Dobrynin said was Bobby’s explicit offer on 27 to visit and make up and go hunting and fishing together.
October to trade the Jupiter missiles in Turkey for the Soviet At another point, while introducing the 23 October letter missiles in Cuba.
Publicly of course, the Kennedy adminhe received from Khrushchev, Castro started to read from it istration had denied any such deal; aides had blamed UN and said, “I’m declassifying here.
The ited, after Robert Kennedy’s June 1968 assassination but Americans were stunned.
McNamara even interrupted the before its posthumous appearance the following year.
Another year would pass before scholars could read inevitably responded in kind.
Massive controversy ensued Dobrynin’s follow-up cable, recording his 30 October meetfrom Gribkov’s disclosure, including multiple news headlines ing with RFK, where Bobby handed back to the Soviet envoy and journal articles, with scholars of Soviet command-anda formal letter from Khrushchev mentioning the deal, and control disbelieving.
But subsequent releases, some by explained, “Speaking in all candor, I myself, for example, do Gribkov’s initiative and others found in the collection of the not want to risk getting involved in the transmission of this late Soviet military historian Gen.
Dmitry Volkogonov at sort of letter, since who knows where and when such letters the Library of Congress, proved that the Operation Anadyr can surface or be somehow published – not now but in the deployment plans included even more tactical nuclear weapfuture – and any changes in the course of events are possible. ons than Gribkov had described, and that, just like on the The appearance of such a document could cause irreparable United States side, tacticals were in all the war plans as standard harm to my political career in the future.”16 operating procedure.
The danger factor in the Cuban Missile Testimony to the power of the primary source to alter Crisis had just gained an exponent. the present and the future as well as what we think of the After the 1992 conference, the declassification continued. past came again in Havana in January 1992.
Robert McNamara was ready to go Havana conference participants such as Khrushchev’s son back to Havana, seeing yet another opportunity for him to Sergei.
Fidel Castro was ready to receive the visitors, not least and microfiche supplement of documents on the Missile because Hollywood had left him out of the Crisis again, with Crisis.
The John F Kennedy Library finally achieved in the blockbuster movie Thirteen Days featuring Kevin Costner late 1996 the declassification of the October 1962 ExComm as Kennedy—a movie that Castro viewed with Costner in a tapes, 17 hours worth.
By October 2002, the Archive’s sleuths in Russia Virginia—and the new evidence forced scholars to look again and at the Navy Yard in Washington had matched some at JFK the dove.
On 27 October, for example, as the Joint extraordinary oral histories and contemporaneous diaries Chiefs are urging the invasion of Cuba, JFK remarks, “We from Soviet submariners, together with the extensive U.S. can’t very well invade Cuba, with all its toil and blood there’s Navy tracking charts for the four diesel “Foxtrot” submarines gonna be, when we could have gotten ‘em [the missiles in deployed from Murmansk to what they expected would be Cuba] out by making a deal on the same missiles in Turkey. their permanent base in Mariel.
Notably, the academician tipped torpedo and orders to use it if a war broke out.
On the Aleksandr Fursenko teamed up with the Harvard-trained ExComm tapes one hears Kennedy’s concern at the harassCanadian scholar Timothy Naftali and a major publisher’s ment of the Soviet subs, even without knowing about the book advance to take advantage of the usually-off-limits torpedoes, and McNamara’s reassurances that only “signaling Kremlin archive would be used.
At the Havana Federation), together with a wide range of other sources (even conference table, retired Navy Captain John Peterson (aboard some materials from the former KGB and GRU archives), a key destroyer chasing the subs in 1962) explained the sailto produce a whole new narrative centered in Moscow for ors’ frustration at dropping such firecrackers, so they encased a change.
Among many other highlights, at the core of the the grenades in toilet paper tubes and the cardboard would Fursenko/Naftali account were the remarkable short-hand keep the pin from popping and only disintegrate hundreds of notes taken by Khrushchev aide Vladimir Malin during meetmeters down, right next to the Soviet subs.
Also at the table ings of the Presidium of the Central Committee—the distilled was former Soviet submariner and signals intelligence officer Soviet equivalent to the ExComm tapes, or as close as we’re Vadim Orlov, who described the impact of the “signaling” likely to get—featured in this Bulletin in a new updated transdepth charges as the equivalent of being inside an oil drum lation by Mark Kramer and Naftali.
Thinking the war had already a Soviet law that purportedly prohibited the broken out upstairs, the Soviet captain ordered the arming transfer of such weapons beyond Soviet control—and then of the nuclear torpedo, and only calmed down under the cabled his colleagues in Moscow practically urging them to influence of a peer officer aboard named Vasily Arkhipov. hastily devise such a law.
But thus the Missile Crisis was For McNamara especially, and for the reporters present in finally settled.
The most important—and ful moment came when a historian got to play ambassador. continuing—barrier to historical understanding of the Missile The Kennedy ExComm had discussed at length at the height Crisis arises from excessive and anachronistic secrecy, mostlyof the Crisis sending a message to Fidel through the welloutdated national security classification on all sides of the respected Brazilian ambassador in Havana, Luis Bastian Pinto former Cold War.
Decades after the fact, United States securocrats still – a message censor references to the Jupiter missiles in Turkey and Italy, that would warn Castro that his Soviet allies were negotiating even though, as a contemporaneous document pointed out behind his back, that the presence of the missiles endangered in 1961, the presence of the Jupiters was no secret, evident Cuba, and more.
Only four decades later, at the 2002 Havana conference, order of the Republican-dominated United States Congress in 1998, did a scholar inform him that in fact the message had been which decreed in the Kyl-Lott amendments the re-review of scripted in Washington, not Rio, and approved personally documents declassified in the post-Cold War Clinton-era by JFK and the Excomm.
Though Castro told the professor reforms just in case they referred to nuclear weapons—in he would still have scoffed at the proposal, regardless of its effect the last gasp of a discredited Republican conspiracy source, the discovery of the hidden Brazilian effort (which in theory that President Clinton had divulged nuclear secrets to fact climaxed a nearly three-year attempt to mediate between the Chinese.
Washington and Havana) helped inspire this special issue and The intelligence bureaucrats have been just as retrograde its focus on the global history of the Missile Crisis. as the nuclear ones, only now, 50 years later, beginning to Substantively, the most significant new evidence on the declassify President Kennedy’s intelligence briefings, the Missile Crisis actually extends it well beyond the conventional President’s Intelligence Checklist . thirteen days.
At the 2002 Havana conference, and in the Reviewers of intelligence records have left whole sections of text of his posthumous book in 2012, Sergo Mikoyan detailed the Kennedy tapes deleted as somehow sensitive, even though the Soviets’ initial plan to leave the tactical nuclear weapons written records and notes of the same conversations—includin Cuba and even train the Cubans to use them—Cuba as a ing the deleted sections—have been declassified for years.
In effect, Cuban intransigence (their righGribkov announced the deployment at the 1992 Havana teous indignation at the Soviet pullout without consultation, conference, and the JFK Library’s own descriptive notes on and unilateral actions like Castro saying on 16 November the the meeting include the direct McCone remark quoted here.
Cubans will shoot at the low-flying United States planes) convinced Of course, researcher frustrations with Washington’s archithe Soviets that it was too risky to leave behind any nuclear val bottlenecks pale beside those encountered in Moscow. weapons in Cuba.
In the culminating 22 November conHuge swathes of the Soviet archives—those of the KGB, 15 Introduction military intelligence , and the General Staff, for Soviet Union well.
I know what they are required to do in the example—remain almost completely off-limits to researchlight of their history and their posture around the world.
Notes Over and above the security blockades are the actual assaults on the record.
More pernicious have been the actual Review, 28 July 1963. alteration and even destruction of the historical record by 2 For an earlier overview, see Thomas Blanton, “Annals of participants.
The most egregious offenders here were the Blinksmanship,” The Wilson Quarterly, Summer 1997.
For the most comprehensive review of that the documents did not capture verbatim, but which Allison, as well as of his second edition of Essence, co-authored in lodge themselves in memory.
For the conference, song, “Political Science” . the author was present.
The text of the notes indicates they Saved the World.” were handwritten in 1976 and typed in 1993.
Svetlana Savranskaya, The Soviet Cuban 35 See Jim Hershberg, “More on Bobby and the Cuban Missile Missile Crisis.
It was the Caribbean the world ready to offer up new insights and interpretations Crisis to the Soviets, and the October Crisis to the Cubans. of this seminal global event.
It The Excomm’s mostly hawkish advice was problemlegitimized and encouraged the efforts of governments, such atic.
Had it not existed, Kennedy would still have blockaded as Brazil, to promote independent peace plans.
The feeling of immediate Robert Kennedy’s responsibility to convince the more aggresdanger mobilized all circles in order to find the way out.
The Crisis was a global-war-in-the-making, as a sumIt involved not only Brazil, but all the Latin and Central mary of the conversation on October 22nd, between former American members of the Organization of American States.
Secretary of State Dean Acheson and French President Charles The energetic effort by the United States to gain OAS support De Gaulle suggests.
Or maybe all these locamaker was willing at the time to believe that it had an indetions at the same time.” pendent role.
Mothers with clear to push their public opinions to call on their governments to wartime memories, he reported on October 24, had rushed pressure the United States.” to nearby stores to buy large amounts of salt which quickly But somehow, the most devastating event in world hisdisappeared from shelves.
There were also Soviet skeptics. tory didn’t happen, and how a war was prevented remains an “It’s hard to understand why we had to build a military base 19 Introduction in Cuba in the first place,” a reporter confidentially told his to presumed advantage.
However once Massive Retaliation policy and Khrushchev’s nuclear threats he gets furious, he bites you hard and never leaves you even if during the Suez Crisis are relevant examples.
But the frightenhe loses all his teeth like an Irish bulldog.” ing realization that nuclear war could be only a stumble away, The Castro brothers’ rage at Khrushchev for agreeing introduced a more cautious approach to nuclear diplomacy.
It to remove the missiles without prior consultation with led to a re-evaluation of limited nuclear war.
The Crisis made Havana is reflected in another Japanese diplomatic report. it clear that it was too easy to slip into a global war while “At a dinner party on 18th hosted by climbing the rungs of an escalation ladder.
He then Khrushchev to finally accept the existence of a separate West went on to speculate that “Castro might need the possibilBerlin, with a Western military presence there. ity of the United States invasion because he wants to crack down on Technology was another important feature of the Crisis. anti-government movements by stirring an excessive crisis Not just nuclear weapons, but the vast array of related techmentality among the nation.
They were the basic components of the seventeen years of the Cold War was transformed by the Crisis that took the lead in both its creation and resolution.
During those “careless years,” both the United States and Soviet Technology made things possible, and because they were posgovernments had deployed its existential threat heedlessly sible, they were attempted; it was a metaphor for modernity.
Mao Zedong, too, was full of enthusiasm for what tions between Havana and Beijing during this period using Castro was able to accomplish.
Since at least 1956, Mao had Chinese-language sources, which in 2007 concluded flatly harbored private misgivings about the direction of Soviet forthat, “By all indications, the Chinese were simply forgotten eign policy.
He was not happy about its emphasis on peaceful by the Cubans during the crisis.”1 coexistence with imperialism.
The Cuban Revolution seemed the translated documents presented here constitute the first to prove Mao’s point.
In October 1959 he sharply quarreled major revelations from this until now untapped source. with Khrushchev who was just then advocating the “Spirit of Concentrating on the period 1960-62, they reveal not only Camp David” and talked up the prospects of a détente with a fascinating story of a budding relationship in the secretive the United States.
To Mao, Khrushchev’s efforts to ingratiate communist world—of two leaderships on different sides of himself with Eisenhower appeared cowardly and pathetic, the globe, each led by charismatic and iconic figures who just as Castro’s feat showed what true revolutionaries can had seized power through successful revolutions, assessing and should achieve.
From the beginning of China’s relationeach other and the prospects for collaborating to promote a ship with Castro’s Cuba, Mao engaged in implicit, and then shared cause—but specifically add a new, previously absent explicit, competition with the Soviet leaders to win over Cuba, perspective on the international history of the Cuban and to interpret the legacy and significance of its revolution.
The Communist world was reeling from the pains Roca on 28 April 1960 was the first major discussion he had of the 1950s, when Soviet brutality in Eastern Europe, had with a Cuban Communist delegation.
The Chairman revelations of Stalin’s crimes, crises in Poland and Hungary, pointed to the Cuban Revolution’s “global significance” and confusion in the Western communist parties dampened because it proved Mao’s point about the basic weakness of revolutionary enthusiasm worldwide.
At the time Mao saw similarities between the Chinese and Cuban revothe Chairman congratulated himself on scaring the Americans lutions.
Khrushchev, as a young man, marginNow, the Cubans were carrying Mao’s revolutionary banally participated in the Russian Civil War but he was basically ner forward.
In lutionary accomplishments on his CV but none that matched your eyes, there is no American imperialism, no tiger.
In his many meetKhrushchev’s ass. ings with the Cubans the Chairman keenly emphasized these Mao returned to this point in his conversation with similarities.
Batista, in his interpretation, was another version Ernesto “Che” Guevara on 19 November 1960.
This was the of Jiang Jieshi; both had used the same methods against the first encounter of these two great revolutionary icons.
Having revolutionaries, and both were ultimately defeated by the already contacted Chinese diplomats in third countries to same methods.
Che acknowledged that there were “almost urge the establishment of cordial relations,4 “Che” had come identical” aspects in the Chinese and the Cuban revolutions, to China at the head of an “economic” delegation, to discuss especially in the methods employed, respectively, by Jiang trade and aid, a few months after Castro, in his 2 September Jieshi and Batista to “encircle” and “suppress” the revolution1960 “Declaration of Havana,” formally recognized the PRC ary forces.
These youngsters clad in military fatigues For Mao, such similarities were immensely important, for made for they suggested the applicability of the Chinese revolutionary a curious contrast with Mao who took his rebel army on the experience to other Third World countries.
Cuba, though Long March before some of his Cuban guests learned how to significant, was, after all, a small fish.
This was not a problem for Mao, because the Cubans to be had in Latin America and elsewhere in the world.
Mao, who had just witnessed disastrous results had no direct security interests, Mao paid great attention to of his “Great Leap Forward,” spoke about Cuba but he indiwhat was happening on the other side of the globe.
He quizzed rectly criticized his own comrades-in-leadership for lacking his guests relentlessly about the prospects for a revolution in the revolutionary enthusiasm to build communism.
In a few just about every Latin American country, even tiny ones like years Mao would try to whip up this enthusiasm by unleashthe Dominican Republic or Haiti, though he was especially ing the wrath of the “Red Guards” on the party establishment interested in what would happen in Brazil, the greatest potenduring the Cultural Revolution. tial gain in that part of the world.
But waver João Goulart, a leftist who would be ousted in a military coup and compromise, and imperialism will find it easier [to deal three years later.
This lesson was not lost on the revolutionary he had all the reasons to be optimistic that Brazil would one romantic.
Che—in Africa and later in great interest, and the Americans with commensurate fears.
Latin America, where he died a martyr in 1967 at the hands John Kennedy’s nightmare, that Brazil would soon turn of the Bolivian government forces; Mao—in his own councommunist and become a “second Cuba,” was Khrushchev’s try, against his own people, amid the chaos of the so-called dream—and also Fidel Castro’s.
For Mao, though, exciting as this was, the coming Latin American revolutions were but a part of the much bigger developments that would engulf the entire world in a powDespite an auspicious beginning in 1960-61, Cuba and erful anti-imperialist storm.
Indeed, by 1962 Sino-Cuban between Cuba and different African and relations were in something of a state of flux.
On the surAsian countries that, in the Chairman’s view, were also ripe face they were very good, with ongoing cultural exchanges, for a revolution.
In their conversations with the Cubans, Mao trade, cordial diplomatic conversations, and protestations and Prime Minister Zhou Enlai made fascinating compariof revolutionary and ideological solidarity—but behind that sons between seemingly random places like the Dominican was a looming uncertainty and tension brought about by the Republic and South Vietnam, or Peru, South Africa and increasing schism between the two major communist powers.
Indeed, through these conversations one can trace the As observers noted at the time and the only serious scholarly evolution of Mao’s thinking on the Third World, and the study using Chinese-language sources agrees, Fidel Castro emergence of the narrative of the “Afro-Asian solidarity” that resolutely tried to maintain outward neutrality in the emerging Sino-Soviet split, especially given Cuba’s obvious ecopersisted through the mid-1960s.
This thinking was premised nomic dependency on economic aid from the Soviet Union. on the assumption that China’s revolution was welcomed in Yet it was also clear that on at least some ideological matters, most quarters of the world, and that the different African, especially the desirability and even necessity of pursuing Asian, and Latin American countries would follow Mao’s armed struggle to promote revolution in Latin America and leadership and China’s example.
When Che made his maiden tions were being planned to reduce or eliminate Sino-Soviet visit to China half a year later, he asked Beijing to purchase differences, which were damaging the revolutionary cause, sugar from Cuba.
They also becoming public until the end of time, which will raise seritold us that they preferred actions to hollow statements, and ous problems.”8 that the mighty Soviet Union would deliver a destructive strike A few months later, in late March 1962, Castro only deepupon anyone who dared to invade Cuba, etc.
Shortly before so, as is evident from a Chinese record of a conversation, Castro took that step, amid flourishing rumors in Havana included below, between Shen Jian and Guevara shortly after of rising tension between Fidel and the PSP, the resident the latter returned from the Soviet Union.
Castro agreed to the deployment during ever-looming threat of United States aggression was a prime topic for a visit to Cuba by a Soviet delegation (under the cover of an discussion.
In response Moscow by Defense Minister Raúl Castro in July and by to Shen Jian’s probing, Che evaded Emilio Aragonés and Che Guevara in late September/early giving a revealing description of his recent conversations in October.
He claimed confidence in Moscow’s “very still have not been declassified but the Chinese documents clear” backing by stating unequivocally that a United States invasion confirm one well-known anecdote that up to now has only would trigger World War III—yet he admitted a lack of clarbeen reflected in oral history.
Asked what he would do if the ity regarding precisely “what specific form” the Soviet support Americans reacted aggressively to the missile deployment, would take.
Beijing, Tianjin, and other cities in the ensuing days (as well During the crisis in late October, Shen Jian’s absence as blood drives and other symbolic gestures) were widely undoubtedly deprived China’s embassy in Havana of the posviewed by observers as less serious measures to back Cuba sibility of some high-level contacts (both with the Cubans and than implicit rebukes to Moscow.
China’s diplomats in fellow diplomats) facilitated by the relationships the ambassaCuba also flaunted their solidarity.
Worse, siles) the Chinese saw a steady stream of important Cuban he reported, PRC embassy officials “‘went to the masses’” figures to gain information and assessments.
Certainly, of the crisis belied Beijing’s claim that the Cold War was desthe Cubans’ attention was focused on the United States and tined to end in a military clash—and in the process mocked the Soviet Union—and diplomatically, Foreign Minister Raúl Mao Zedong’s disdain for their common, thermonuclearRoa seemed to consult more closely with ambassadors of such armed enemy.
Its border conflict with India, simmering for more as can be seen, is no paper tiger; it is a tiger that can give than three years, had erupted into large-scale fighting on you a nice bite in the backside.
Khrushchev praised his own wisdom, United States, seemed to make a stab at closing ranks with which allowed the Soviet Union and the United States to the Chinese despite their feuding.
Nehru, but in the midst of the missile crisis, on 25 October, In meetings with Chinese diplomats in Havana, a Pravda editorial on the Sino-Indian conflict appeared to described in their cables home printed here, Cuban offiside with Beijing. cials warmly thanked China for its support.
The Chinese harshly has been a great encouragement to us,” a Cuban foreign criticized Khrushchev’s decision on 28 October to remove ministry aide handling relations with socialist countries 25 told Huang Wenyou on 31 October.
These higher-level conversations were indeed polite, even Despite the politeness, at least some Cubans obviously felt cordial and friendly.
Roa formally expressed his government’s some dissatisfaction at the lack of a higher-level channel to appreciation for their support during the crisis; Che began by the Chinese even as they negotiated with Anastas Mikoyan, apologizing for his lack of candor about the Soviet missiles Khrushchev’s personal emissary, against the backdrop of when they had last spoken, just before Shen Jian had left acute resentment and bewilderment at Moscow.
Taken collectively, these Chinese documents, in ments with the Soviets, and on 2 November informed Beijing particular, offer a snapshot of the Sino-Cuban dialogue and that they believed it wise not to take the initiative to discuss mutual attitudes, allowing a comparison with the immedithe “very complex” Soviet-Cuban relationship.
Accordingly, ately preceding high-level Soviet-Cuban dialogue now availthe chargé d’affaire had received formal instructions from able with the release of essentially the full Soviet record of the foreign ministry to say as little as possible regarding the Mikoyan’s exchanges with his Cuban hosts.
Mikoyan-Castro negotiations or reports of Soviet-Cuban disTo many observers, the Cubans’ angry refusal or reluctance cord.
Reporting to his government on the Soviet embassy gruence to Mao Zedong’s extremist views.
The Chinese state news agency Xinhua, he added, Havana to its “vast plans” to contest Moscow for influence in was “making a special effort to feed those feelings with the communist world.
A Czechoslovak diplomat, speaking blatant nonsensical information in a bulletin that the local to a communist colleague, observed that Cuban leaders, feelpress willingly accepts.
After ally or potential savior—egged on the Cubans to consider meeting with Raúl Roa on 29 October, the Yugoslav ambassuch arguments.
Moscow’s ambasmet with socialist diplomats in Havana, since among those pressador in Havana reported that at the end of a conversation ent was China’s Huang Wenyou (Shen Jian had not yet returned about the missile crisis on 23 October the Cuban leader had from Beijing), shortly before he left Havana.
On 12 November, a cable from the Polish ambassafor its behavior during the Cuban crisis—and expressed dor in Havana, Bolesław Jeleń, quoted Raul Valdes Vivo (then confidence that the Cuban leadership agreed with his and the editor-in-chief of a major publication, Hoy , later Moscow’s view of their “totally wrong” Chinese behavior.
While Warsaw Pact nations had immediately put Comrade Mikoyan spoke very negatively about China’s their military forces on alert after activity in Cuba.
He said that with their ultra left-wing Kennedy’s speech on 22 October, China had hesitated and views the Chinese confused some of the leadreacted strongly only after Khrushchev had announced the ers, especially mid-level leaders, but they practically withdrawal of the missiles six days later.
For instance, they could China could have indirectly yet concretely aided Cuba’s cause have occupied Quemoy and Matsu or by using force against the Nationalist Chinese-controlled offshore islands , which would Macao without any real risk.
Instead, they were sending have distracted the Americans, forcing them to worry about hundreds of thousands of petitions and attacked India, a potential military clash in the Far East should Washington whereby they managed to turn India, at least temporarily, need to defend Taiwan.
So wild was the speculaKhrushchev’s emissary was more detailed, and more scathtion and pervasive the uncertainty concerning the extent ing.
Before his departure, Khrushchev was told (These alternatives seem fairly mutually incompatible, but by Castro that Cuba was with the USSR and would consuch was the state of Rusk’s reported speculation; other tinue to be with it.
In this connection Mikoyan reiterated alternatives he mentioned, allegedly on the basis of recent some of the arguments that he had used in discussions intelligence, were that the “extreme militant wing of the with Cuban representatives, concerning the pseudoCuban communist party could overthrow Castro with the revolutionary “positions” of the Chinese.
The Chinese are aid of the Russian troops” or, conversely, that the “moment very active in the use of revolutionary clichés, but have could be seized for a revolution which would be directed done virtually nothing useful for Cuba.
France’s ambashad attacked India and was even courtsador in Havana perceptively observed on 15 November, with ing Pakistan, a member of “aggressive” US-led alliances.
Moreover, it is clear that not all of the “barbudos” were completely convinced Behind closed doors, after considerable beating around by his arguments, and that the Chinese professions of the bush, the Cubans finally broached the subject directly to revolutionary solidarity appealed to some—notably Che Mikoyan just before he left Havana after three weeks of someGuevara.
Soviet-Cuban disagreements (over the recent past times contentious negotiations.
In sum, Mikoyan reported, “Raul gave an open analywith full understanding of our internationalist duty.
This sis of the Chinese government in connection with the Cuban is not resolutions, this is not cursing of imperialism, with crisis, which coincides with ours.”39 which it cannot be weakened.
As a Belorussian proverb Nevertheless, when another senior member of the leadergoes, you curse a landlord, and he only gets fatter.
This is ship, Carlos Rafael Rodriguez, journeyed to Moscow a couple truly so.
One can curse imperialism as much as you want, of weeks later, he found it necessary to clarify explicitly Cuban but he won’t lose any weight from this, it will not be sentiments regarding China’s role in the crisis and influweakened, and its insolence will not lessen.
It does not recognize of his talk with Khrushchev in the anything else.
Therefore, one can call imperialism a paper Kremlin, the Soviet leader stressed that despite making a tactiger, manure , or what not, but if imperialism tical retreat in Cuba the Soviets were not “in any way on the does not see that there is real force behind these words… defensive, I insist, not anywhere, even in Cuba,” but rather it will not be deterred, and its insolence and aggressivestill on the offensive.
I expressed that they knew well, and I did agitated and to pontificate on the ways in which one not wish to hide it from them, that among our leaders should have acted during the crisis, criticizing those there were some who sympathized in concrete ways with who carried the burden of the struggle.
That effort would fail, however, and Sino-Cuban relations would soon plummet, leading inevitably, in the zero-sum I said : “instead of concentrating our revorealm of the inter-communist dispute, to a tangible warmlutionary efforts against the enemy, they ing in relations with Moscow.
We left it , then picked most ideologically sympathetic to the Chinese, Che ironically up again.
And now, it seems, all of this, of course, had a played a key part in the final virtual break between Havana result. and Beijing.
During his hastily-arranged trip to China in February 1965 to try to salvage relations and convince the Indeed, after that intense bout of Soviet-Cuban summitry, Chinese to make concessions to ameliorate worsening Sinobilateral relations improved – something that did not escape Soviet tensions, Mao did not receive him (unlike his earlier Beijing’s attention.
On July 4 , CCP delegation led by Deng Xiaoping went to Moscow for and senior officials Liu Shaoqi and Deng Xiaoping, who talks that put the last nail in the coffin of the Sino-Soviet did, rejected his overture.
China boycotted, symbolizing the split in the movement51), Even China’s best friend, Che Guevara, whom Shen Jian Raúl Castro decried the CCP’s “erroneous positions” and questioned about Castro’s visit, refused to discuss the subject. recounted Mao’s rejection of the Cuban attempt at SinoSome days later, when Che was in Algeria, he appeared cauSoviet mediation, including his harsh accusation that the tiously supportive of the Chinese position in the quarrel with Cuban leaders were afraid of imperialism, the PRC, and their the USSR but whatever private misgivings he or Castro may own people.
Beijing’s conduct is no means fully in the Soviets’ pocket—like Beijing, Havana unprincipled and inconsistent.
Its objective is to damage refused to join the nuclear test-ban treaty Khrushchev signed the Soviet prestige and to promote at all costs its own with the Americans in August 1963 (although, selfish interests.
He stressed that Beijing undermines the a Czech document records, Carlos Rafael Rodriguez ardently unity of the ICM only to assume a leading role.
For supporting these extensive translathis narrow nationalistic policy, whose main protagonist tions, we thank CWIHP director Christian Ostermann.
He believes that after his departure, would also like to thank Zhang Tengfei in Beijing and Shi these factions will be more able to gain prominence.
The translations posed many challenges, but On the other hand, he emphasized the wide and one particular problem, not completely solved, involved the selfless assistance provided by the USSR, without which double-translation/transliteration of names, places, organizathe revolutionary and socialist Cuba could not even tions, etc., from Spanish to Chinese and then to English.
We exist….53 have tried to make correct identifications wherever possible, and apologize for any errors.
For aid in identifying some The pivot in early 1965 towards worse Sino-Cuban relamystery personages, we especially thank Cuban scholar Carlos tions and greater cooperation between Havana and Moscow Alzugaray Treto.
Eastern European allies for alleged interference in internal Cuban affairs.
My situation this time is better than oil, in the face of the United States embargo and economic pressure. four years ago.
So so. records from the Chinese Foreign Ministry Archives in Beijing (see the source notes at the end of each translation for more Roca: This bag is made of crocodile skin.
I’m now pre31 senting it as a gift to you in the name of the Central not kill all people.
We have nothing to give Trujillo of the Dominican attempting to attack, you in return.
All of these Xiuquan, help me out on this. were expected by you. in the worst scenario, would kill a few people, or drive you out of cities.
It seems 8 people are more resolute, because they acquire the name of the entire Chinese people and the Central experience.
Your guns were not given by socialist countries, nor Committee, I’m saluting Cuba’s revolution.
Cuba’s revolution is a great revolution, a revolution of global significance.
Being next to a huge tiger without paying the slightest Now imperialism and the bourgeoisie are also adopting a attention to it, you just break down the superstition.
Imperialism always relies on two-faced policy. wuren]: in your eyes, there is no American imperialism, no tiger.
Yes, on one hand, deceives people tion has been victorious for 15 months. by peace, on the other hand, prepares for war.
The revolution keeps advancing, for which American Cuban revolution, it also plans to destroy the entire socialimperialism feels loathing.
It exhausts all sorts of measures ist camp. to launch attacks upon our revolution.
To national independence movements [imperialism] represses on one hand and deceives on the other.
Asia, Africa, and Latin America it too strikes on the one The South Korean people support you.
There is a large United States hand, and offers a carrot on the other . army contingent there, Syngman Rhee had 25 divisions, and atomic bombs are also there.
In April of 1898, The problem is that people were left nowhere to go, just the American Congress passed a resolution [the Teller like you.
Batista killed 20 thousand Cubans, Syngman Amendment] declaring that Cuba should become an Rhee likewise claimed lives of nearly 10 thousand people. independent and free country, but afterwards the United States occuLao Tzu, the Chinese philosopher, observed, “How could pied Cuba with troops for as long as 4 years.
Now they still wish to occupy Cuba. half-year guerrilla warfare steels you, and the past year of the revolutionary regime steels you.
In 1898, the United States occupied Cuba in the name of cerned, let’s set a price.
Amendment which stipulated that the United States could You support us and we support you.
The way of assistance is bringing hand, supporting the Cuban government while on the down Batista, realizing land reform, implementing a series of other hand backing anti-government parties.
By doing government stops obeying the US, presthese, one has helped oneself and also the people of the world. sures Cuba with these parties.
At that moment, American imperialism told Fidel, “you are the Kerensky of Cuba.
This government is better than [Indian leader being encircled by communists who will kick you out.
The Americans demanded communist party, refuses to implement land reform and that he persecute communists.
Nehru still wants to reach a compromise with British Roca: went to the United States the end of last April imperialism. and returned to Cuba on 19 May.
The land reform has transformed the properties possessed by the United States into ones possessed by the Cuban people.
If the Americans were civilized and practiced one-faced tactics, you would have a more difficult time Chairman: Brave steps.
The United States has a military base in anything. your country, it also has in our country.
You could have the compensation settled in 30 wish that you could produce light weapons on your own. or 40 years.
We could help when necessary, as long as the Soviet Union could help transport there.
The price could be set lower. wouldn’t be good as far as your national prestige is con33 Roca: The United States demanded 3000 Pesos for every caballeria the United States holds us in contempt.
They nationalist states, revisionists such as Tito, all hold us in said that they should be paid in cash with fair price and contempt. couldn’t wait for 20 years. who knows what would happen in 20 years.
The imperialists and and of an ever greater importance to Latin American revisionists combined, people who oppose us, account for countries.
It has become a model, which is exactly what less than one tenth of the global population, the United States fears. nine tenths of the global population support China.
Betancourt of Venezuela is a rascal, declarthe Cuban revolution, Mexican president ing himself a revolutionary while in fact he is only a dog Mateos is now preparing to visit Cuba in the hope of winning of the Americans.
Venezuelans domestic support. are supporting the Cuban revolution whole-heartedly.
In general, Latin Betancourt said that Venezuela would not attend the America’s people are friendly towards Cuba while each govmeeting of underdeveloped countries held by Cuba.
He ernment holds an antagonistic view towards Cuba. opposed the meeting.
India, Indonesia, Egypt, Iraq, Guinea, Morocco, Tunisia, Philippines, and other Asian-African countries, all Chairman: But their people are friendly . accepted the invitation.
All Latin American peoples are friendly towards the tries aims not at discussing peace, but persuading these Cuban revolution.
Several thousand young men from Chile, Argentina, Indian government. and Ecuador registered to protect the Cuban revolution as volunteers.
Panama, Honduras, El Salvador, all underdeveloped countries which joined the United Costa Rica, etc., from Central America, offered great help Nations shall attend. to us.
The problem is that the domestic organization has yet to be established.
Tactically, we don’t give too much publicity to the paratively small. contributions of Fidel Castro.
Is there any possibility that he could accept Roca: The people’s struggle is firm.
He was born in a small bourgeois family rible repression. and now is leaning leftward.
It seems to me that these countries are too occupied with their internal affairs and will not threaten Cuba Chairman: He is different from [Iraqi Prime Minister Abd in terms of mounting attacks. al-Karim] Qasim who is an anti-communist.
It could instruct the troops of these countries, bourgeois politicians of Latin America.
He is not obsessed via the peace committee of the Organization of American with wealth nor does he indulge himself.
In March, he made could send troops. a 4-hour speech criticizing the anti-communists.
Imperialism says that it’s willing to tackle the ism to divide the country and suppress revolution. problem by peaceful measures rather than by war.
Eisenhower attacked Fidel Castro’s government saying that this government had betrayed the revolution.
He often talks to us and is US will hold an election and a meeting of world leaders.
A revolutionary is reasonable for the United States not to attack Cuba.
The minister of the Armed Forces election or a meeting, the United States always wants to put down is one of us.
Neither the election nor the leaders’ meeting will the military leadership in Oriente and Mantanzas, and also bother them , the question is that participate in the leadership of Las Villas Province.
In other Cuban people have a resolute will. words, three provinces out of six are in our hands.
Your program does not confer much real power to fact the major part is under communist leadership; it is the president.
I have raised this issue with Comrade is the leader of 26th of July Movement, and meanwhile the Deng Xiaoping.
Many other people of the Movement I have read the report from the organization secretary of are too, for example, director of the National Land Reform Las Villas Province, Comrade Peña’s report, the draft proCommittee in which many important offices are taken by gram of your party, and the material composed by our own our party members.
The National Bank is responsible for the comrades on the situation and problems Cuba faces after its industrialization of the country, the head of which [Ernesto successful revolution.
Short of time, I have read them only “Che”] Guevara is also our man. once, but I read them earnestly.
He developed some connection with the Youth League their own circumstances.
This program, in the case of China, while in Argentina, but he did not participate.
Later in is a combination of the universal truth of Marxism-Leninism Guatemala, when Arbenz was the presiand the practice of the Chinese revolution. take dent, he worked there and applied to join the communist hold of this, the universal truth of Marxism-Leninism, and party but was not permitted.
In 1957, he applied again and then adjust it to peculiarity of our own circumstances. was admitted by us.
His I very much agree with your document which is a document mind is yet in confusion.
At the present, are scared by impehim, in the hope of enabling him to become a true you are not scared by nist] party member, mature in thought. imperialism or by the revolution.
Many things were written so as to combat revisionism, Roca: His world outlook is Marxist-Leninist.
Although sometimes he to open up the representative assembly on 14 June.
We have struggles to find the right way to work things out, he does try sent our invitation to you. to do things properly.
I would love to express my views on these problems. opinion on our party program.
The program does not is concerned, Comrade Deng Xiaoping later could discuss fully reflect our policy.
My opinion is entirely individual and for your this area and have made lots of efforts in this regard.
Now reference only. there is a Cuban delegation visiting Latin American countries.
Tomorrow, on 23 April, Havana will host a big ist transition problem, and the other, the bank nationalizameeting of Latin American countries supporting the Cuban tion problem. revolution.
For the sake of the work, we have replaced him tant, better to be a bit implicit.
With respect to bank nationwith another person, more suitable for the ambassadorship. alization, Fidel believed that there are alternatives to putting nationalization, into the program.
You should talk a bit more about Latin America in transfer banks into state ownership through the program.
Because it goes beyond being Cuba’s program, it the National Bank. is the first socialist program among Latin American countries.
In your program, you should also mention nationcommunist parties. al bourgeoisie and other Latin American countries.
In particular it should stress that Cuba that peasants, accounting for 90 percent of the Cuban popumust ally with other Latin American countries to fight against lation, workers and the middle class, are on the side of the revimperialism. olution and support the revolution; every country within the socialist bloc is behind you; the American people also support Roca: Not enough attention has been given to the problem of you.
First comes the support the national bourgeoisie, which was also mentioned by Latin of the Cuban people, then the sympathy of people from other American comrades.
Therefore, reasonable emphasis on the problem American countries and Asian-African countries, and then of the national bourgeoisie is necessary.
In this way, all under the current circumstances, many of us couldn’t agree are included.
Please think about it. with this, and some people’s views differ from ours sharply.
Let me begin by thanking Comrade Mao Zedong and Roca: Nor is it easy to convince the bourgeoisie.
Their politiother comrades of the Central Committee for spending so cal representatives, such as Agramonte [y much time in discussions with us.
This is a tremendous help Pichardo] in the past, hold a hostile attitude towards us.
There are no excessive demands shall not be raised so as not to cause loss bourgeoisie who would not oppose you.
The As far as the 8-hour workday system is concerned, there industrialists were very happy, saying that Guevara spoke are differences between urban and rural areas, between particularly clearly.
Guevara said that they could contribute agriculture and industry, which should be taken into to the economy but shall not set foot in heavy industry.
Although the 1933 revolution failed, the 8-hour also showed them which sectors are open for their investment workday system has become popular ever since.
They read, and this is a published document, though demanded an increase in working hours regardless of only a draft so far.
Most workers did not obey bourgeoisie, peasants, workers, and people, and to ask for him though.
With respect to the suggestion that workers should not Chairman: Given that it has been instituted for 26 years, I raise excessive demands, we will ponder it. we paid agree that do not abolish it.
But does it have to be like attention to this problem when drafting the program.
But it is not always the left to eliminate unemployment is to increase employment case for agricultural workers, who sometimes work 5 hours a opportunities.
During the course of program-drafting, union day, sometimes 10 hours—in general, it is still 8 hours a day. leaders advanced a proposal requesting that the minimum Some workers work 9 hours which means providing 1 hour wage be stipulated.
The law stipulates an 8-hour workday system telephone companies, tobacco industry, and brewage induswhile workers voluntarily work one extra hour.
This is good. try, workers receive higher salaries and could live a decent Workers are willing to work for themselves. must pay petty bourgeois lifestyle.
We could not bring down the present wage levels, consumption. because this is expected to meet with tremendous resistance.
The problem concerning the patriotic united front is a serious question.
Castro’s attitude is to oppose an levels, but increase the lower ones. election.
It also has to do with the development of production. great pressure from Latin American countries.
Improvement in the living standard depends on an increase in production and production efficiency.
Distributing land among peasants is a practice of that the 26th of July Movement isn’t quite an organized bourgeois democratic revolution.
Castro maintains that this in the 18th century and gained support from peasants. those bad elements in the revolution shall be eliminated Later the bourgeoisie did it again. first.
We didn’t call the Cuban revolution a revolution of will have further discussions on this problem.
The enemies are: imperialism, feudalism, and the 26th of July Movement, and the Revolution Guidance comprador capitalists.
And a part of the bourgeoisie. ing China’s Political Consultative Committee, with which Cuba is now familiar.
Chinese democratic parties have no masses, be Roca: The bourgeoisie that colluded with imperialism and they workers, peasants, or students.
Our larger demostanding for imperialism and feudalism, while in the industry cratic parties have, at most, 20 or 30 thousand members, sector is bureaucratic capital. while smaller ones have only a few thousand.
You made a very good point democratic revolution, national liberation revolution, or land regarding the problem of peasants.
Yet there is a hierarchy within peasants, which was mentioned by Lenin.
About double ownership under the socialist About putting on the top relationship with Latin system, this program is not yet a socialist program.
Yet when it comes to a program of transition to socialism, aiming at socialism, but foreign trade, by no means should Latin American countries its current tasks are national liberation and land reform.
Because, more or less, every Latin American present tasks contains the seeds for the next stage, but it’s country produces the same stuff.
China purchased 80 thousand tons which is very important, for no one in Latin America bought 80 thousand tons from us. 39 plants.
Well said. way in Cuba, belong to Cuba, except they are registered under American names.
Some mines reported that they could barely pay the agree that they take a certain percentage of profits, but extra taxes, while not being allowed to suspend production, so they profits must go to the State. invited government representatives.
Our views are for your reference only, and you A successful production depends on the cooperation of two may weigh and consider the reality when putting them into sides.
South of the Tropic of Cancer, good climate, having supply companies, telephone companies, such as those in sea wind, neither too hot nor too cold, two crops every year.
US a defeated country, like Germany, Italy, or Japan, it would be easy, because they were the defeated.
Because of your resolve, and your strategy. were unwilling to leave, they would begin losing money the moment they started to produce things.
Before 1933 we had left no choice but to ask us to take over their factories.
Wang Ming was then working in the Comintern. them all; you have no reason for it, it is not a It is no good to draft a program for foreign communist pardefeated country. ties.
During the land reform, it doesn’t matter if the land to run for 12. thousand kilometers, and cost nine-tenths of belonged to a Cuban, an American, or a Briton, all lands revolutionary force with only one tenth left.
We made both “leftpanies, we hold down the prices, which makes the telephone ist” and rightist mistakes. companies feel they are running an unprofitable business.
Ten months since then, no conclusion has been reached as to whether the business is now profitable or not.
In the end, I thank you in the name of the Cuban communist party and the Cuban people.
This is because you got a job done which is of Cuba and received a warm welcome from Premier Castro and global significance. the Cuban people, for which I thank you again.
The wish to visit China, carried for years, is finally Premier: It should have. is also close to a tropirealized.
Charged with the mission given by our government, cal area, similar to yours. we come to discuss some issues.
Ramos 59 is an expert, specialized in Guevara: He did not feel well, because there was an epidemic researching this problem. in Latin America not long ago.
There is now a chemical factory producing fertilizers, which processes domestic raw materials.
We can produce forty thousand tons of iron annuGuevara: Ammonia and potassic fertilizers can be produced ally.
Yet the phosphatic fertilizers—one is calcium superhundred thousand tons.
Other than that, are setting up phosphate and the other, triple superphosphate—need to be equipment two hundred thousand tons.
The imports of all kinds of fertilizers add up to one Guevara: It still relies on import.
The multi-fertilizer producing company should proGuevara: We have paid constant attention to learning from duce two hundred thousand tons , for our populathe Chinese experience.
China is a big country, Cuba is a small Guevara: When we left Moscow yesterday, hadn’t arrived one, but both were colonies.
Chairman Liu , whom you have already lages are extremely poor; cities have been colonized, which met, is still in Moscow, and will be unable to accept the letter is discernible in Beijing, and most conspicuous in Shanghai. of credentials.
Vice-Chairman Sun Qingling,e. the wife of Let’s talk about detailed issues.
Sun Zhongshan, only, then trade specialists could stay; if will discuss all the pioneer of Chinese democratic revolution, staged the sorts of issues, then it will be also all right for everyone to stay.
Revolution in 1911, overthrew the feudalist monarchy and These people all could be trusted, even this journalist, who is founded the Republic.
Revolution not the kind of journalists in Western countries. has to go through constant failures before it succeeds.
Yet we 1924 advanced revolution, which happened during the do know the content of the meeting. period of the First Great Revolution, also known as the New Democratic Revolution.
Sun Zhongshan’s influence among the people cussed the price of sugar and the issue of socialist countries became huge.
Because sugar is our main product, if of the GMD-CCP cooperation, he died, our present deputy sugar is not discussed, no deal could be possibly made. head of the state, the Vice-Chairman, is his wife.
At the death of Sun Zhongshan, Jiang Jieshi seized the During the meeting, we mentioned conditions that the US power.
We have gave for purchasing our sugar, which were generous; fought for 22 years.
The GMD suppressed and forced some now socialist countries buy sugar at a price of four United States cents CCP to work underground.
We learned the milifor one pound, a price that is slightly higher than in the intertary way to deal with him.
At last, we drove away nomic point of view, but we raised it from the political point of view.
We have already put forth this idea in the meeting, Jiang Jieshi in 1949.
He was backed by the US, just like the and also discussed with Chairman Liu Shaoqi.
Given this know if there is a need to go through it again. fact, our anti-imperialist sentiments are the same.
Socialist countries in Eastern Europe will purchase have been able to meet each other today. three hundred thousand tons , and the Soviet Union 43 agrees to buy two million and seven hundred thousand tons; Guevara: Two hundred thousand spindles.
Besides, there both prices are four United States cents for each pound.
All together will be another fifteen thousand spindle put into operathere are three million tons.
The Democratic Germany [i.e., the German ment, will buy five hundred and fifty thousand tons.
But we Democratic Republic; East Germany] will help us establish wish that the total could add up to four million tons. fifty thousand spindles.
The questions that just discussed have already tory, which is raised based on the trade agreement established been discussed with you by Chairman Liu Shaoqi in Moscow. with the Vice-Minister of trade back in Havana.
Also, was of a colonial economy under complete United States control, producing sugar only; is] the issue of repaying loans.
The United States imperialeconomy, which could have a look at before making ists imposed an embargo, and perhaps a military blockade. decisions.
Recently Eisenhower of the United States ordered five warships from the The issue of technological aid is less important.
Standing at the we will send some students to learn Chinese, engiforefront of anti-US-imperialism, you are confronting these neering, sciences and agriculture.
Being on the same front, the Chinese people have technological aid] have been solved in Europe, but also a duty to support you.
We want many things. could let him (pointed international sugar price was manipulated by imperialism: the to Lataste) talk about it.
United States bought your sugar at a slightly higher price, which made it possible to sell goods back to you at high prices.
Fertilizer equipment; for factories of the Besides, these sugar factories, after all, were invested by them. automobile industry, such as a tire factory; a bulb factory; With one hand, they gave, with the other hand, they took. after these is equipment for the food processing industry, for example, for canning and agricultural product processing.
As long as other socialist countries, especially the Soviet Union, agree, we will surely follow suit.
The is about the problem of quantity and price of sugar. international market does not accept China’s Renminbi.
We The second problem is about the loan and equipment. therefore have to use our foreign reserves.
I suggest that you go to the industrial exhibition tomorrow, to see those suitable small and medium equipment.
The delivery should be made at Cuban docks, loans, instead, be put in the list for trade. because we don’t have the ability to ship sugar to China.
Lateste, Ramos, Piniela60 . we can, and underwrite the transportation expense.
On our side, Vice-Minister Li Qiang is responsible. freight also requires foreign currency, because we don’t have The third is the technological problem.
Let’s just temporarily leave the demands you raised for technological materials and learning matter aside.
With reference to the sugar procurement alone, of technological staff, we will help as we can. i.e. million USD, the problem then is whether China is When the industrial exhibition is visited, could raise able, or not, to provide the goods you need.
Fourth, about transportation problems, which you Guevara: We are not familiar with China’s possibilities, for did not mention but it is a problem that exists. example, variety, standard, and quality.
The Soviet Union has promised that transportation Premier: could have a discussion with departments problems that other countries cannot solve could be left to concerning foreign trade.
The Soviet Union will help Romania, Czechoslovakia, 45 and Bulgaria solve transportation problems.
But in the we can provide] is not remotely close to what the people meeting, did not mention need.
Both the heavy industry and the light industry could China’s transportation problem, because China is not in the not provide the products needed by the domestic market.
The transportation of over one million tons [of industrial products sugar] is a big task.
We are facing a blockade here, and there is for exportation, and trade back mechanical equipment.
In the future, there will probimpossible for our imports and exports not be influenced by ably be a total blockade.
The September onwards, cargoes of over twenty ships have been value of the ruble here is not estimated with reference to its exchange rate with the United States dollar, but based on other [refertransported.
Do you refer to the number of warehouses, or the imports is two and three billion.
Besides, we are constructing This is our situation. the trade with the special warehouses for oil and ammonia.
If you could sell oil Soviet Union accounts for half depots, we want too. is to repay loans.
Does your oil come from the Soviet nition to resist the United States and aid Korea.
The oil of Venezuela means the oil of Mobil and the processing of them, such as tea, cotton, tobacco, and raw Shell, etc. materials for industry.
The discussion of several detailed problems could original contracts stipulated. will have outstanding balstop where it is now. can’t reach conclusion today. ances, reduction in agricultural production, impact leave them to individuals specialized who on industry.
It’s impossible to recover within one year from will discuss separately. natural disasters of two years.
Despite these, as long as are friendly has been liberated for eleven years, its basis countries, with difficulties bigger than ours, we will always remains very backward.
Some accomplishments have been hundred and twenty thousand tons of rice, and another, one attained, which however become a very few when such a big hundred and eight thousand tons.
It’s estimated that by 1961, we could be self-sufficient in rice, less so in soybeans and maize.
No, we have two deputy ministers: one wheat, which is one of our problems. went with the foreign minister to the UN General Assembly, and I stayed.
But in the American] countries change, the situation will be different. north, also eat rice, along with wheat and maize.
The bad harvest this year is not due to a natural land for sugarcane planting, but there is land, three or four disaster.
When times more , not the technological staff was gone, the production of pesticide for cultivation but for livestock raising.
The United States United Fruit dropped, and the production of rice also dropped.
Nobody Company has seven thousand caballeria land, out of could be blamed for this. which only two thousand have been cultivated.
No matter wheth(At this moment, Lataste, official of the Industrial Division er it’s one hundred and twenty thousand tons, or one hunof Land Reform Commission of Cuba, produced the figure dred and eight thousand tons, it’s not much against China’s for the number of Cuba’s arable land.) population. will be able to provide you when Maj.
The cultivated arable land is about a million about China’s production and trade situation.
But as long as hectares. could supply you, we will do our best to supply.
We know our needs, and also know the efforts and a half. made by China, although not quite thoroughly.
We have only a hectare of arable land for five perPremier: It’s entirely a United States colonialist solution, the pain sons. that we all suffered.
If counting in terms of Cuba’s rural population, self-sufficient in main items.
This needs time and this is why everyone has three hectares of arable land. said that we need construction and a peaceful international environment.
The rural population accounts for 42 percent of country well, and imperialism will in part dare not bully us. total population.
Caribbean Sea, saying you were conducting subversive activities against Guatemala and Nicaragua.
It’s not that you are overthrowing Guatemala and forty horsepower, of various brands.
Nicaragua, but that their people should learn from you and people of the world should all learn from you.
The present international situation is better than Interpreters: Cai Tongguo, Liu Xiliang last year.
Zhang Zai Guevara: The entire nation is united, but every day the impeChairman: Cuban Delegation, welcome. rialists are expecting us to split.
Our government represents workers and peasants. tion, representing Cuba, but members of our delegation were Our country still has a petite bourgeoisie which has a friendly born in four nations. relationship and cooperates with us.
Lataste a Chilean, I was born in Argentina, not be counted as national bourgeoisie. all the rest born in Cuba.
We actually defend the Cuban revoluImperialism gave them capital, technology, patents, and martion.
Although they lived in their own country, their interests were entangled with imperialism, for example, sugar traders.
Asian people, African people, and the entire alized. socialist camp support you.
A few countries, such as India, Siam , Guevara: Not basically, but all.
If purchased over three million tons of sugar from us , would offer Premier : The American government protested a compensation of 5 percent-25 percent [of the value of sugar and you responded. purchased]. unfamiliar with the situation in Cuba would find it difficult to comprehend the irony embedded in Chairman: You are firm.
Be firm to the end, this is the hope this policy. , and imperialism will find itself in greater difficulty.
According to the press, you returned the capital find it easier . and profits on a 47-caballeria per year basis with an annual Guevara: In the first stage of our revolution, Fidel proposed a interest rate of 1 percent. way to solve the public housing problem, because the government bears the responsibility to make everyone own a house.
Only that purchased over 3 milWe confiscated properties of big house owners and distriblion tons of sugar would be compensated.
To temporarily tolerate the presence of some to end the phenomenon of one man exploiting another.
Latin American petite bourgeoisie and national bourgeoisie are afraid of socialism.
Some people from the bourgeoisie went against us should not rush on the social reform.
This approach will do and joined the enemy’s camp. good to win over Latin American small bourgeoisie and national bourgeoisie.
You businesses and those businesses previously owned by Germany, have done a great job in suppressing counter-revolutionaries.
Counter-revolutionaries conducted aggressive activfor 80 percent of all industrial capital.
Although national ities. sometimes occupied a few islands, bourgeoisie occupied only 20 percent , they would be annihilated soon afterwards. they employed more than 1 million workers and controlled the Nothing to worry about. executed their leader by shootentire commercial network.
Their equipment was this problem. gave them jobs, voting rights, joint privateparachuted, all from the US. and-public management and interest buy-outs, in the hope of solving this problem.
You have also captured several Americans [didn’t satisfied and delivered a relatively good effect abroad.
The imperialists did not concentrate their forces on dealing with problem of the urban handicraft sector and petite bourgeoisie us.
We should borrow experience from other countries, as Guatemala—the United States interfering by dispatching marines. including China and other socialist countries.
Traditionally, we do not have a handicraft industry; therefore no problem appears in this regard.
But socially speakployed into cooperatives which in return gave them jobs. ing, fall into only two or three categories.
The United States does not want Cuba to have national bourParaguay, Nicaragua, and Guatemala. geoisie.
This is the same case for Japan in Korea and China’s Northeast , and for France in Vietnam.
The United States now has turned its spear on did not allow local people to build bigger plants.
This phenomenon resembles Latin Guevara: In Columbia and Peru, the possibility for a great America.
In order to destroy feudalist forces, imperialism fostered people’s revolution movement emerges. the national bourgeoisie.
In Peru, as I said, the majority of the people need interests; they were, in fact, colluding with imperialism. land.
Major Brazilian metallurgical factories were founded nism did not die out due to that.
Brazil produces 1. million tons of steel . only the white people and the white/Indian mestizos could own land and be landlords.
The overall amount of capital for the largest Chairman: The local people have a population of from 9 milBrazilian factory is not quite clear.
Brazil is a big country, yet there measured only at ten thousand. is actually no substantial difference between it and other Latin American countries.
It took more than two million are whites. years for you from initially landing on Cuba to the moment of ultimate victory.
In my opinion, Cuba faced a more difficult most miserable situation of all.
Only the white people have setting for revolution than other Latin American countries. voting rights.
I have only seen the declaration of Arbenz on this Premier : Like Tibet in the past. issue before I left for China.
The situation in Columbia is somewhat different Chairman: He has been to China and the Soviet Union.
Does Cuba have diplomatic relations with other Guevara: Between China and Cuba there are two things almost identical which very much impress me.
Several countries colluded with each other and that were also used by reactionaries in our place.
These countries are Haiti, gies are the same. the Dominican Republic, and Guatemala.
When alien entities enter the body, white cells will persona non grata.
Jiang Jieshi treated us as bacteria however was for another reason. and wanted to destroy us.
We were left with no way, just countries , like Batista not leaving you any way out but killing people. there are Cuban chargé d’affaires, though no Cuban ambasJiang Jieshi taught us and also, the Chinese people, just like sador.
I have no idea [of the nature of their wars]. is just a subjective answer.
Defend the revolution. mistake of following] rightist opportunism; when the policy leaned excessively to the left, lost the base-area conseGuevara: China also shares another thing with Cuba.
The sitquently, and were forced to go away, which was the Long uation evaluation the 1945 CCP party congress March.
Gaining comfort from squandering forces—this Chairman: Jiang Jieshi is the dog of Britain and the US. is adventurism. unable to pay attention When Japan invaded , Jiang Jieshi did not approve. to villages, it is not at all easy for urban people to ally with In the third period, 8 years , peasants. cooperated with Jiang Jieshi to fight against Japan.
You have Binuo Island [the Isle of abstract of this article, and very much agree with your points.
But before Batista had the time to flee to this island, could possibly influence Latin America. they captured the Isle of Pines.
The Americans attempted to attack Chairman: You raised three principles in your articles.
People the Isle of Pines. could defeat reactionaries. don’t have to wait for all conditions to become matured so as to start revolution.
The third principle is that in Latin America, the main task lies in rural areas.
We hadn’t even been born when you started to wage revolution, except him having already Premier : It’s very important to connect [revolubeen born.
Some Latin American friends did not lion troops, and base-areas had a population of one hundred heed peasants, whereas you very much heeded this point and million.
That was not guerrilla warfare did not attach importance to the contribution of peasants, anymore; that was large-scale warfare.
Planes, cannons, tanks, whereas Comrade Mao Zedong very much heeded this point. as mentioned in your article, all failed to play any critical role.
A point in Chairman Mao’s works is found by Fidel Chairman: The main was to be very important, which I failed to notice at the artillery, which enabled us to set up artillery divisions, artillery beginning.
In my early time in war, the people I led barely away shoes and clothes from prisoners, because our soldiers exceeded a company.
I was unhappy, and agreed to submit only after a bazooka was brought to me for exchange.
Although planes fly in the sky every day, they could hardly make any casualties. could dress in camGuevara: couldn’t eat well when waging guerrilla ouflage.
Green clothes could be used to change one’s appearwarfare. were also short of spiritual food. couldn’t ance.
When Chairman Mao fought guerrilla was then suffering in jail. warfare, he often sent people for newspapers.
You were soldiers. thousand, and later grew into three hundred thousand, at which point committed the leftist mistake.
Rodriguez has been tortured in Japanese invaded , we wanted to cooperate with Jiang prison.
He said that we could , because his own gun. only twelve people. given so few , he did not fear us.
So your country could at least Guevara: Everybody opposes him, therefore he has to be grow to 30 million. replaced.
We are grateful to Batista also Premier : The life of a client is not easy. because he drove more people to our side.
American are worse than Jiang, who is just 99 percent proIt is our long-term educator.
I think you are expecting Jiang Guevara: Batista’s followers are now split into 5 factions, Jieshi to come back. which have together elected 5 presidential candidates.
As long as he disconnects himself from the US, we Batista while others behave like Batista more or less. shall provide him a place in our government.
Our Jiang Jieshi is now 74 years old, craving to return to Beijing every day.
People know their names and they too crave to return to Cuba every day.
They departed from Central America, four-five days after our victory, and planned to land in Cuba.
They said they came to overthrow Batista without being informed that we have already obtained the victory for the revolution.
We were glad to treat him, only afraid of having not second thing is about aid.
It was our first time treating so many comrades from frasuch as a paper-making factory and a textile factory.
Although we did want to treat them well, there cannot come up , you could many things that didn’t do well. complement it when in Shanghai.
When items are fixed, could be able to estimate a value, and then draft an agreement.
In line with this, developing medium and small scale projects is more beneficial.
He’s been to China. could help you, or send people , or you could send people to China to learn, either way will do.
Based on current situation, it’s estimated that delegation are all representatives of the capitalist class, filled will still be able to charter ships.
Please be patient when you are dissugar back; in the future, could have long-term chartercussing with them. ing and shuttles could be expected.
Our plan won’t be disturbed in terms of the industry. place is not enough, and loading Medium or small products, be it from light industry, heavy and unloading could be done somewhere else.
Fifth, producindustry, or handicraft industry, will produce based on ing some documents.
Comrade Li Xiannian and Comrade raw materials that you have (instead of importing raw materiGuevara could publishing some communiqués or other als), which is beneficial for the development of one country’s documents.
The delegation could study this with our side. national economy, helpful to you, but of no influWithin the delegation, you could also ence on us.
We know that you gained independence not long study with your deputy foreign minister. ago, and need technical experts whose performance we understand.
We with socialist countries’ practice,e. no patent rights and you agree to each point you mentioned.
We need staff go to your place, should receive the same treataid from socialist countries, but don’t want ourselves to turn ment as your workers have, instead of excessive . into your heavy burden.
It won’t be an imposition, but of course, there are difplace and received very good treatment.
Regarding commodity this is only a temporary phenomenon which could be solved prices, as long as there are prices [for the same commodiwithin two years.
As long as it is on our list, it means that ties] in international markets, we follow international market we could supply you and it is for you to choose.
In case that prices; if there are none of these prices, the two sides should selected agricultural and handicraft products is discuss and decide. still yet to reach 88 million USD, you could select industrial products and go to Shanghai for selection.
Cuban workers’ wages are very high, which is due to The fact that the light industry could not meet the plan is being close to the United States and therefore influenced by the United States and because of the reduction in raw materials.
But the heavy also because workers struggled against United States factory owners for industry has overfilled the quota.
We prefer factories that are big and produce on our initiative, give our opinions when in Moscow is that multiple goods, which is different from China.
I wish that we’re not part of the European Eight Countries’ Economic at least one complete of a Chinese company could Cooperation Organization ; we have no [expebe taken and put into production within a relatively short rience regarding] multilateral payment agreements; we also period, as a model. don’t have multilateral trade; our relationship with every socialist country has always been bilateral.
What we supply is a complete solution. will be of you know this point as Chairman Liu has mentioned it. responsible for technical materials, design, equipment, installation, and transportation.
Although China has the abilsugar, we pay the freight and price you received is FOB [Free ity , we don’t have the right to On Board]; when it comes to the procurement of our goods, damage the Chinese people’s life.
Yes, today the People’s Daily publishes the article writdifficulties for you. ten by Comrade Guevara for the Verde Olivio magazine on 5 October.
Of course, we could take this opportunity to talk about Lu: I very much want to point out that his (referring to other things.
The remaining banks that haven’t been nationalized are change of topic—trans.] only Canadian banks.
When I was about to come here, just thought that Zhou: Two . it would be great if there could be a discussion between one party member and another party member.
The delegation is of the Cuban government, which I didn’t participate in.
United States sugar factories and companies together worth over one billion USD have all been nationalized.
We keep it off record, which is why in the public speech I addressed Guevara as Your Excellency Major.
You also understand that cise,] an anti-imperialist, nationalist democratic revolutionary many things could be done in this way, but couldn’t be spoperiod. ken of as such.
Yes, this approach is good, also beneficial to obtain the Castro said, our agenda is, as the Havana Declaration prosolidarity of the Latin American people. posed, to constrain the phenomenon of one person exploiting another, which explains the way ahead for the development Lu: This is to say: this talk is a discussion between the delegaof revolution.
When we spoke to this summer, and has already explained the nature and the public, talked about four classes, which are classes problems of the Cuban revolution.
I don’t want to discuss the of workers, peasants, small capitalists, and big capitalists. details any more.
The major leadership goes to the workers’ with citizens and radical small capitalists participating.
But regime on these islands, like a small Taiwan, establish diplofacing the aggression of United States imperialism and resistance of the matic relations with the puppet regime, give them weapons, big capitalist class , we were and ships to besiege the island of Cuba.
Naturally, it’s impossible not to we can imagine the danger Cuba is facing.
Now Cuba is provoke deep hostility from the United States imperialists.
The Cuban people are invinbecause what Cuba confiscated was United States capital worth nearly cible, and they fully support the revolutionary government. one billion USD, it’s also because the Cuban revolution made The insurgent troops are the army of workers and peasants, an example for all other Latin American countries, which becoming better day by day and having been consolidated given Cuba’s proximity to the US, and developed day after day.
This revolution is profound, constantly develguerrillas in the past but now regular troops.
Therefore, the United States imperialists use all Guevara) is one of the men in charge.
You know head of the National Bank ; he’s, in fact, one of the that Cuba an oil problem.
We have organized revoluthwarted the United States attack on this front.
We’re continuously thwarting all forms of aggression and divided into regiments, battalions, and companies.
Under this circumstance, the United States is prepared to there are schools specialized in training militias.
They have good Americans] have many plans, the Latin American people morale, ready to protect the revolution and the homeland.
We support us, and people of the world, principally people of have weapons, relatively good weapons; we are learning to use socialist countries, support us.
More efforts should be made in this regard. will prepare to support us.
If one takes into account agricultural workers who joined and rule that Cuba is aggressive.
Within the trade impotent in terms of combating aggression, in accordance union, there are muhachi people (referring to traitors with the verdict of the Organization of American States, it’s among workers ) and up to the United States to provide troops to wage a small-scale war in opportunists.
Comrade Zhou Enlai’s suggestions could be considered, while our needs should also be pondered.
The important thing is that the 26th of July Movement be taken into account. wish that by exploiting this is consistent with us in terms of strategy and aggression opportunity, strengthen the fraternal contact between resistance.
Both sides agree that the new organization should two parties. be founded on a Marxist-Leninist base.
Its organizational principle should also be a Marxist-Leninist principle.
But other Latin American countries, in the near future, will consider establishing relations with China.
Thank you for your brave and just act. port] from the Soviet Union and China have been the most important.
Cuba established contact with Jiang Jieshi. and the entire socialist camp will not fail.
Driving away imperialism and tyranny opens up the the global socialist movement; it’s a political investment.
We door for establishing relations with [the People’s Republic destroyed one link of the imperialist chain in Latin America, of ] China. and hope that other links will break and fall too.
The friendship between the people of two countries is Lu: We’re very grateful for the aid of China. growing day by day.
We are also grateful for the efforts Lu: The friendship between two parties, too, is developing, aid in the future.
Comrade Guevara understands your diffion which Comrade Roca has been insisting.
But as a comrade, requested that correct and should follow . you meet our wishes as fully as you can, to prevent Cuba’s living standard from dropping.
The aim of Cuban people cracked a gap of the United States backyard. the Cuban revolution is not to reduce but to increase it.
We The fact that standing in the frontneed support from socialist countries, mainly anti-US is what the Chinese people as of ] buying sugar. wish that socialist countries could well as people of the world admire the most.
Once one China could buy 1 million tons, it would be of tremendous link breaks off, there will be other links following.
Therefore we have a duty American countries and operate puppet regimes. the to support you.
We have the United States uses Latin American countries to fight Latin American duty to help.
People of two countries stand together on the countries, could say that Europeans and Asians should path of struggling and oppose the same enemy.
Now our two mind their own business. need to think of your response countries have diplomatic relations and two parties if this situation emerged.
Has Premier Castro considered it have a closer tie, which are all happy things.
We strengthening the internal power. make ourselves keep a close eye on the two approaches you mentioned.
One capable of repulsing any attack, and therefore make it unnecis to provoke the conflict between you and Central American essary for the Soviet Union to aid with missiles.
Because countries, and then let the Organization of American States just as what Comrade Zhou Enlai said, that would start a world make further efforts to intervene.
Because the foundation of protecting Cuba once again attempt this, the newly elected President should be placed on a world war.
Around him, consolidate internally as much as you can and seek aid from diplomatic experts, papers, and other mass mediums are all other countries.
The fact that you tell me about Kennedy’s selling limited warfare, forest fire words makes me very happy.
In his campaign Kennedy they advocate that limiting the war to a region, in which case indicates that he is an implacable foe of the Cuban revolution. the Soviet Union will be unable to use missiles.
Very correct. world war, which is identical to what Khrushchev lays out in the five points.
Of course, he is an imperialist. two countries’ civilizations; do not let the atmospheres above the two countries polluted [with Lu: Khrushchev said that the aid of missiles is symbolic, but radioactive fallout]; fourth, both agree not to put nuclear the United States attacks are not symbolic.
Kennedy only wants one weapons in the hands of more countries, which side of Khrushchev’s speech, we want both sides.
You have the include China and France, and what’s worth attention is that duty to continue exposing imperialism, seeking the support West Germany and Japan are not mentioned; fifth, the two of Latin American people.
You are more familiar with Latin American problems. this sentence; he not to wage a big war, or a missile war, instead, he plots a partial war and non-nuclear war.
You know the UN voting results of the proposal conIn the way you said, Guatemala and Nicaragua create cerning Cuba.
Some Latin American countries abstained, provocations, and the United States then steps out, intervening and recincluding Mexico, Venezuela, Ecuador, Panama, onciling.
It’s not entirely a walk in the park of Pines, the possibility of which should be looked into.
In for the United States to realize its goal within the other words, the United States imperialists won’t stand on the frontline.
We will carefully study the Cuban comrades should study this situation. the United States stays problems raised by Comrade Zhou Enlai.
How should socialist 61 and exploit the conflict between the United States and Latin American of time. one could still resist with supplies when countries. external aid is cut off. don’t know if you are prepared.
We agree to strive for the best, but prepare for any possible situation.
Doing so is good for thwarting United States plans. nally in developing economy, cooperatives, and increasing production.
We are overcoming difficulties, promoting cooperatives, and accelerating plans in this regard.
As Comrade Lu has explained, Cuba’s situation is think of what people will eat once that kind of situation unique.
Waging a large-scale will provoke a world believe that Fidel Castro will fight to the end.
His position is people, and another is to defend world peace. becoming closer to ours every day.
As you two have said, preparing for the enemy’s raid. to finish us should expose the US, exploit conflicts, mobilize within two days, before Soviet aid arrives.
Without relying on reinforcement from others, when experience, one should prepare for the bad scenario while paratroopers land, could vanquish them immediately. striving for the good one.
The direction of our efforts should We have made preparation for long-term resistance both in be to strive for the best, but should prepare mountainous and urban areas.
Assuming that we have those preparations done, it storing weapons and explosives, building hospitals, transporwill be difficult for the United States to intervene.
When you visit Korea, you could year, salaries are low. even talk to them, to see what secret defensive works could be constructed in mountainous areas.
People with less 30 caballeria don’t have peasants are capable of bearing suffering. should eduto.
We are promoting joining cooperatives, in which case land becomes useless.
According to China’s experience, should also not take back land certificates.
Peasant workers earn 2.65 United States dollars per day with 25 days a month.
We have of several dozen people. for the time being, are not in a hurry to have their own land.
Domestic commodities are also all purchased by the government and sold.
China’s experience: a few capitalists, who supported or sympathized with us, have voting Zhou: You’ve managed foreign trade well.
Like in Berlin of East Germany, we have people here every day running for foreign countries.
This kind of people could only write stuff that imperialinviting Castro to visit China, Ambassador Shen ism likes.
They wrote about Cuban history only in the hope asked the Protocol Department to arrange a visit for Castro. to create a counterfeit Cuban history.
The geography books Prime Minister Castro, however, insisted on coming to see the they wrote are correct though.
Ambassador and had close to a one-hour long discussion with Ambassador Shen.
Our director of the Land Reform Committee has Shen, Attaché Huang , and Attaché Fang, accompanied by Prime Minister Castro, visited several training classes written a book about the geography of Cuba.
I was busy and therefore unable to attend the reception dinner you held for the Chinese delegaLu: Thank you very much for your opinions and questions tion (referring to the delegation led by Deputy Commissioner you raised today.
Foreign countries’ experience could only be seen as a tocols. reference. must according to the detailed situation.
Now I’m presenting to you a letter from Prime Lu: This is the only way to find the Minister Zhou Enlai who invites you to visit China.
Chinese government and Chinese people all look forward to your visit to our country.
Thank you spoke of the necessary integration with peasants and [the idea very much.
I have of ] armed revolution against armed counterrevolution, which hoped to know the People’s Republic of China. fits entirely, that is, word by word, the situation of Cuba.
When will the Chinese magazines arrive in Cuba Shen: This is what we should have done.
It’s mainly a transportation problem, because Cuba is distant from China.
If there are and things that occurred in China will also take place here. magazines in particular you want to read, please tell me the Recently we faced many problems.
Every time Latin America names of the books, and I could try using other quicker ways had a revolution, they then blamed Cuba.
We’re facing all to transport them to Cuba. sorts of aggression from imperialism.
In particular, on planting and the achievements of China in this a period between the next six and eight years, we will often regard, etc.
Our Spanish publications are not many, because our between the Cuban revolution and the Chinese revolution, translation staff is very few. accordingly, there will be similarities in problems we encounter and face.
A few days ago, I received a book on modern Chinese China will be blamed for every revolution that happens in an history.
I’m seeing you today, I should take this opportunity to tell you about it.
For Cuba, Kennedy’s speech is learn piloting, our country has everything ready now and wishextremely aggressive.
We are still selecting people, picking only the best proves that the United States is the one that provokes, not Cuba.
It’s reckoned that are half way hand, they want to earn sympathy from Latin America; on through now.
Among those selected, some people are from the other hand, his position towards Cuba stands the Volunteering Youth Guards who in the way of achieving the above-mentioned aim.
We want to send the best selected could not solve problems in Latin America by economic people to learn piloting and let the rest learn means, primarily, it is not willing, and secondly, it mechanics.
Kennedy talked a lot about private investment, whereas the short list to China. trying to send the first group Latin America has no interests at all in it.
United States dollars couldn’t even solve one Latin American country’s problems.
We have no plane to Cuba, therefore it has to be solved to play shabby tricks, he should have eased relations with by Cuba.
Then should take the way via Prague. to political exiles of each country.
The United States gave six billion United States dollars to Jiang Jieshi our full support to the Cuban revolution.
We would love to , but didn’t save him from his destiny. do our best to hand technologies to Cuban friends.
Back Miami, or any airfield in a country that participates in this then socialism hadn’t acquired global power as it has now, encirclement.
We’re encircled by enemies’ bases. therefore unable to help revolutions.
The Cuban revolution is a significant event in the Of course, Cuba is also afraid of the US, because the United States is as world.
But your revolution is advancing November 1960], we were arguing, partially, about a probto victory and you are happy.
More unselfish aid to Cuba, we didn’t agree and it should Latin American countries will march to victory, which means be written down as mutual aid instead of unselfish aid.
Prime and Kennedy both see the Cuba problem as one of their Minister Zhou Enlai also advocated that it should be not headaches.
Judging from the fact that Kennedy written as unselfish aid, but mutual aid. attacked Cuba five times after he assumed office, he is more afraid of Cuba.
Yes, both our countries share things of common interbut the Cuban revolution will receive support from the world. est.
The rapid development of the Cuban revolution accelerates When imperialism hasn’t disappeared, China, Cuba, and the arrival of the doomsday of imperialism.
In modern history, the first strike upon the United States impethe same interests in the disappearance of imperialism. rialists was delivered by China.
The success of the Cuban revolution is a great strike Shen: Then the second strike to the United States imperialists was against the United States imperialists.
The United States imperialists have even Cuba. occupied our country’s Taiwan.
Across the Taiwan Strait, we’re also facing the military threat from the United States imperialists.
Our aid to Cuba upon the United States imperialists and lead to its downfall. is very limited.
Some people thought that China sucrevolutionary, and China is revolutionary, too.
China’s success ceeded only because China is distant from the US, with a vast of revolution was several years earlier than Cuba’s, therefore territory and a huge population.
A wrong theory they held is have the duty to support the Cuban revolution.
With that one country, small and close to the US, will be unable the success of revolution being several years later than China’s, to attain revolutionary success.
Cuba’s revolution sucCuba also has the right to demand aid from countries that ceeded, and this absurd theory then perished. succeeded earlier.
This is how I think: if it was 15 or 20 years ago, that Castro: When revolution happens to another Latin American sort of argument might have been possible.
I’m speaking in full confisocialist world was not as powerful as it is now.
Without the dence that there will be anti-imperialist revolution in Latin support of the socialist world, the United States imperialists might have America which could be stopped by no one.
Because we are created severe difficulties, and Cuba’s revolutionary success the first country that achieved the success , all would have become much harder.
Between already directly sent their nario of ] Latin America having revolutions with Cuba facing troops.
I’m certain attack and Cuba being in peaceful environthat revolution will develop in Latin America. ment yet with no revolution in Latin American, we choose the former.
The presence of the socialist world amounts to the supPirate planes often fly in our territorial space; we don’t know port of Cuba, which is very important.
But mainly you have where they come from, perhaps from Guatemala, Nicaragua, to rely on your own force.
The United States finds their way into all others’ houses toppled a reactionary government, kept developing across the world.
We also hope that he could visit which would be a support won’t have an effect. big event in the world.
There would have been no Cuban revolution in the Shen: Chairman Mao speaks highly of Cuba’s revolution.
If you have expended tremendous effort, which was in line with could have the chance to visit China, it will be a great hope the law of historical development.
Our tasks are just part of to the party and government officials of our country and the the development of history.
Imperialism was also working Chinese people. hard, but were made in the opposite direction of the law of historical development.
When our country’s defense power becomes well of efforts, but only those that share the same direction with established, improved and unlikely to have major problems, historical development will find their way to victory.
This explains why the United States imperialists, having squan(The following is about the three yachts that the Cuban govdered so much money and built so many bases, are still unable ernment prepared for each friendly country.) to save themselves from downfall.
Chairman Mao used to describe bases established by the United States across the planet as nooses.
You mentioned that you wished us to send a circus, their head into the noose, one end of which has been handed which we’re preparing and it will come when it is ready. to the people of each country.
The art delegation has made a great contribution to imperialism and tighten these nooses together, the United States impethe friendship and fraternity of the two countries.
I wish I rialists will be dead. could have the opportunity to see China’s arts.
In line with Chairman Mao’s instructions, China’s arts and governments that have connections to United States bases, in the should serve workers, peasants, and soldiers, and should not UN General Assembly: does the United States have the right to occupy be the stuff of the ivory tower.
If they say does, then it of China’s arts not only gives pleasure to people, it also boosts will amount to selling their own sovereignty which leads to people’s revolutionary spirit.
In this sense, China’s arts are also internal conflicts. a form of education.
That was the struggle with the United States in parallel to the Sino-American meetfirst time for these peasant’s children to watch an artist perforing—our ambassador raised the difficult question to the United States mance.
So they schools across the country and deliver arts to people, making only said that they have a diplomatic relationship with Jiang the life of our peasants and workers happier and more joyful.
We established music schools at the houses of rich people who fled to foreign countries.
Even the children of United States millionaires would There is only one imperialism, United States imperialism.
Batista is a big running Ambassador to Cuba, Shen Jian, and Cuban Prime Minister dog, while there also exist small running dogs.
But old intellectuals Delegation, 19 April 1961 have old world perspectives.
We should not adopt the same way as how we deal with Batista’ists and Jiang Jieshi’ists to treat old intellectuals.
Shao Shiping [first governor of Jiangxi Province], Chu Tunan [President of the Chinese People’s Hart: I have arrived quite a few days ago.
It’s been our great Hart: We are all dealing with cultural and educational affairs. pleasure to meet you in person.
I’ve seen many Cuban friends. 69 rushed. should be done by persuasion, instead of coercive Hart: Your reception impressed many Cubans.
We’re genuinely happy to have been able to own peculiar circumstances. learn from the experiences you have accumulated.
We knew that Cuba is under the teacher, too. feet of imperialism, and understand how to struggle under these circumstances.
I just taught for four or five years, then imperialism refused to let me teach and forced us, educated Chairman Mao: It’s dogmatism if one is not marrying people, to march on the road of revolution.
But if stresses only one’s country’s own time, had no idea of the existence of Marxist-Leninist circumstances and experience and does not accept Marxismthought, also not prepared to conduct revolution, Leninism, right-leaning opportunism.
Our party has committed both kinds of mistakes in the drama of the revolution. the course of the revolution.
Making mistakes such as these is I think you also came to touch revolution in the same unavoidable for countries like ours.
Engels said that to be an educator one has to Jieshi who made us do so.
It’s because we committed a right-leaning opportunist would be no intellectuals, no professors, no teachers, no jourmistake.
We should not blame Jiang Jieshi; on nalists, most importantly, no engineers.
China, the Soviet Union, and your country’s cooperated with Jiang Jieshi.
But fraternity is just one part we didn’t expect that Jiang Jieshi would betray us.
Because they are that, we obtained experience and came to know why old intellectuals, have to be re-molded.
It’s because they had guns in their re-molding, it’s mainly about transforming old world perspechands.
We also had two hands, so we also looked for guns. tive into workers’ world perspective.
We understand that in major Chinese cities, such as Chairman Mao: The United States gave to Batista, and Batista Beijing, there were grand demonstrations [in support of handed to you.
We hope that places in US dropped by parachute to counter-revolutionaries, many which a revolutionary party is present should all support have been captured by us.
I only came to know yesterday, when I just arrived US imperialists will drop by parachute to Cuban counterhere from Changsha , that revolutionaries are also going to find their way into our hands. your departure has been put ahead of schedule.
The fact that the United States imperialists want to occupy the Isle of Pines is because wants to establish a puppet on our way back.
Projects left in the Soviet Union also need government and separate it from Cuba, which is a common to be accelerated.
But before we leave, we are determined to practice of dealing with other countries.
There are , especially because it has an imporChairman Mao asked Aerdeluosi : Will go back to tant prison.
Your Isle of Pines still has time for fortification, I find them success of which] will depend on your preparation. in China.
We believe in the solidarity of the Cuban people, and Chairman Mao: For your reference. are also moved by the aid offered by each country.
Our every university includes various colleges, regard to intellectuals.
Aerqiulaier is very much one of those such as industries and humanities.
In Cuba, advantage where the Chinese are in disadvantage. had intellectuals openly adopted positions the same as the enemies’, we would do what you said.
Among Chinese intellectuals, there are also people who disagree with the Chinese revolution, or are Chairman Mao: That’s not entirely correct.
To is a big intellectual, that is, Governor Shao , who them the policy I just mentioned becomes inapplicable.
Cuban intellectuals created obstacles to after finishing college studies.
There people are not working in the realm of education. several million intellectuals.
One good way is to expand primary education, to raise intellectuals of the future.
Some came back because have a difficult time part go to middle school; out of those graduating abroad.
As to who are doing harmless jobs such as from middle school, should not let an excessive part go being doctors, we let them live on. to college.
If all go to middle school and college, instead of into farming, there will be a shortage in the supply of labor.
There are a couple of gifts would like to offer you, point you may be unable to feel now, but will in the future. as our souvenirs to you.
Cuba has begun to feel a shortage of labor in the sugcopper figurine and national flags.) arcane harvest season. this problem will arrive only several years later, for we still have unemployment.
We’re prepared to eliminate unemployment, which relies on industrial development.
This painting a significant event in our histowe saw that industrial development hinges on educational ry: the proclamation of the Havana Statement by our people. development.
In that assembly, Prime Minister Castro asked the ularization process, should also look into the problem mass if they were willing to establish diplomatic relations of labor distribution.
Now our efforts in organizing an anti-Cuban demonstration, only to relationship becomes closer. assemble ten thousand people in the end.
Thanks very much for receiving us and treatDorticos: We were informed, more or less. ment.
Vice-president Goulart has now become the president Chairman Mao: wish Cuba success in the struggle.
Brazil has undergone a serious crisis which left the Hart: Thanks. people’s movement in a grave situation.
Translated for CWIHP by Zhang Qian.] struggle against imperialism and counter-revolutionaries.
The heads of the army, the navy, and the air force of Brazil were all replaced.
We believe that after the counter-revolutionary Time: 9:30PM -11 PM, 28 September 1961 forces within the Brazilian military made certain gains, they Venue: Qingzhen Hall in Zhongnanhai had to retreat in the face of the resistance of the Brazilian Present: Cuban Side: Head of the Delegation of Representatives people and the Latin American people’s vocal support of the of Integrated Revolutionary Organization Maj.
Liu Shaoqi, Zhou Enlai, Chen Yi, Luo Ruiqing, Zhou Enlai: The Brazilian congress appears to be on Goulart’s Zeng Yongquan, Shen Jian, Li Qixin side.
The Brazilian vice-president told me, the Dorticos: The imperialist conspiracy to isolate us has failed, US demanded an intervention in Cuba by the Organization but the imperialists do not give up. of American States who, however, failed to carry it out.
They are skilled in confiscating properties from imperialists and landlords, but just incompetent in construction.
But you have more agriculture. intellectuals, which means that you would perhaps achieve more in a few years.
We have the aid of the socialist camp, and could Dorticos: We are specialized in raising sugarcane, and also draw on the lessons of the socialist countries.
But we are in tobacco, of very high quality. dire need of intellectuals, professors, architects, and other professionals.
You will master On top of it, another headache for us is that many doctors, them.
But architects, intellectuals—some had the daylight scared out of setbacks could also be good.
They are like setbacks in your them by imperialists and others surrendered to the imperialist revolution.
In Cuba, in fact, there are of setbacks in our revolution, there are plenty.
Experience no national bourgeoisie intellectuals who could be counted comes from nowhere but setbacks.
No success arrives in this world without the companion The national bourgeoisie is closely connected to imperialof setbacks.
Because of the direct imperialist pressure, our efforts to and the enemy is falling behind.
But they did not participate in the managesation was a pleasure for me.
The they were just the people you mentioned in the land reform. national bourgeoisie in exile are now dwelling on an illusion, Although they do not know how to construct now, they will hoping American imperialists would sooner or later restore one day.
With enthusiasm, people always sustaining this illusion, indeed, for their own sake. find their way to understand things that they don’t know now.
This is indeed one of the immediate goals on which have had two years. we are putting tremendous efforts.
Sometimes, ecowill be achieved in socialist construction. nomic construction was interrupted by foreign intervention, and meanwhile we also had to learn to defend ourselves.
In our land reform, particularly in its early stage, officers Revolutionary government did not know how to run a counamong the insurgents took the full responsibility.
Once you do it, you get the ducting revolution but incapable of construction. experience.
During revolution, people, highly self-motivated Mao: Next year, according to what he told me.
But it is also all and acting at their best, proved to be fast learners. right with me if you try persuading him to go next year.
He concurred that, of course, the United States would not like Chen Yi: We too actually don’t know how to practice diplohim anyway.
One ought to be dipGuevara who mentioned that the way you lomatic towards Western countries, for they don’t speak to confiscated foreign companies from Canada and the UK difyou sincerely. fered from that of the United States.
Our intercourse with the People’s Republic of Dorticos: Yes, we treated different countries differently.
Therefore, Comrade Shen Jian shall train the staff of ferentiating. our embassy to act friendly towards Cuba.
For example, on confiscating foreign banks, we gave Dorticos: Our relationship with Ambassador resemno redemption to American banks.
It is for this reason that our ambassador visited Montgomery in Beijing.
With Britain, France, West Germany, and Japan, could develop diplomatic relations.
Apart from socialist countries, Japan is one he will come]. won’t stay long. of the major importers of Cuban sugar.
He asked me twice whether it is appropriate for him Britain and Japan to oppose us.
He also told me that he would visit Cuba next Montgomery one faction within the British year.
He said that disarmament Cuban President Osvaldo Dorticos, Beijing, 2 October will not succeed, but war is also not worth fighting.
It would not obtain peace, even if it Ambassador to China Pino Santos, Ambassador to Mexico dared to fight— is dangerous—so it canPortuono, Ambassador to Czechoslovakia not fight.
These ideas are bound to make the United States dislike him anyway, even without a visit to Cuba.
The Venezuelan government is leaning, day by day, towards reactionaries and imperialists.
Therefore, you could make further contact with him via politically influential, but often have to operate underground. your embassy in London when he returns to Britain.
Some contact will surely do good. perience of Venezuelan peasants, President Betancourt has Mao: He is a member of the Upper House, a lord, and also gained some popularity from the peasants in the rural areas. with the title of marshal.
He told me that he will be on a business tour to and compels Betancourt to look for measures of suppressions.
Central America this December, in which case he will drop by Cuba, though only for 24 hours.
No, it is legal, except some of its activities do have to go underground due to government suppression.
But no news of its establishnature could be expected at any minute in Venezuela which ment has yet arrived.
Each faction is scrambling is the country where Latin American communist parties call at the other’s expense, unable to reach an agreement.
Venezuela is preparing for this major reason, among many, is that everyone wants to be the scenario.
Recently the imperialists have intensified their reactionary military personnel. propaganda activities in America, which, especially after I left Cuba, have become ever more ruthless.
The purpose of establishing an exile governDorticos: But it wears a democratic face, also talking about ment is to sabotage and to unite all reactionaries. land reform.
The Dominican Republic, Costa Rica, Guatemala, El Salvador, Nicaragua, Honduras, Haiti, Peru, and Paraguay— During my visit to Latin American countries one year ago, we have no diplomatic relations with them anymore.
But you still have relations with big counthe airport was filled with slogans against him chanted by tries, Mexico, Brazil, and with Panama too. people, all terrible slogans.
I and foreign minister Roa together met Betancourt in his presidential compound.
We have relations with Panama, but only strained time we could hear chanting through the window: “long live relations.
This is relations with Brazil, Chile, Ecuador and etc., to some extent. not my fault, I replied.
The United States presNow, Jimenez retains some influence in sured it. the army, attempting to stage a coup d’état to overthrow Betancourt.
Some countries, for fronts, which is why he looks to Washington for help. instance, Central American countries, could possibly recognize the exile government.
Next day, the US Incident, in which the plan was to first occupy a region in the air force sent down ‘Sabre’ fighters, attempting to cover [the south of Cuba, then separate it from the rest of the country, invading force], but soon flew away before the real battle and finally establish a government which would receive recstarted.
Based on the bickering within the United States Congress and ognition from the United States and other countries.
We seized from Kennedy’s own words, later [we realized that the invaders the documents that had all details of the plan. withdrawal of ‘Sabre’ fighters] was because Kennedy at the last minute called off the idea of direct involvement of the The Giron Beach and Long Beach are in an area of quagmires.
They wished to secure the foothold by concentrating Now we need to cope with a new and ever bigger their force at the two highways, therefore, holding us off and invasion. fortifying the place.
It was afraid of an entrenched war in which you tended not to yield anyway.
But their construction proved not fast international situation was turning to its disadvantage. enough.
We believe the real reason for the United States not daring to Dorticos: Within 72 hours they were vanquished.
Under the publicly invade us was that it could not conquer our country personal command of Fidel , a counter-attack was within a short time, making it an established fact. soon organized and no chance was given to them to retain their foothold.
Near was only a platoon from Ambassador to Cuba Shen Jian and Cuban Finance Cienfuegos City.
They were the first to initiate the resistance, Minister Ernesto “Che” Guevara, Havana, 13 October 1962 only with some light weapons though.
The Conversation between Ernesto “Che” Guevara and air force started to attack at the first light of dawn, which Ambassador Shen Jian was of decisive significance.
Some of their Ambassador Shen began by offering maps of the strategic situships were armed with cannons targeting the highway and ations of several major campaigns of the Chinese Liberation ready to block us.
We had a small air force while the enemy’s War, as requested earlier by Guevara.
Guevara enquired about Indonesia, Nepal, and the tactical plan had been better prepared, our sacrifice could the Sino-Indian border issues. have been less.
Nevertheless, we expected the battle would be ended as soon as possible, and many of us were inexperienced.
Since I’m leaving for China for holiday on the 15th , any message you expect me to Guevara: The Soviet Union has given lots of aid.
Please forward my greetings is poorly organized and an industry without its own basis. to Chairman Mao , Chairman Liu , Prime Minister Zhou and other comrades.
Recently the United States has pressured other me, again, point out that it is important that China publish nations not to send their merchant ships to Cuba.
There will definitely be some difficulties in one way able articles. or another.
But in the end, we only the moment, we have only 18 Chinese students studying found ships which carried these bearings, no more willing to Spanish in Cuba. reach Cuba, to unload in Panama.
What’s the view of the ruling class of the she finishes her ongoing tasks in China.
I have not quite been informed of this Guevara: We think the ruling class has been divided into two issue. factions.
Please say hello to her for me when you meet her on United States foreign policy.
Let her know that she is always welcome in arrogant whereas the Pentagon does look more aggressive.
I’m afraid I will The Kennedy demonstrates their moderation on the be too busy to write her a reply.
Her book on people’s comissue of POWs exchange [i.e., anti-Castro Cubans held prismunes has already been published.
They are not quite the cup of tea for the cargoes worth 50 million. local readers.
Only 2 million cash and the total was 52 million. estimated that only some 50,000 people will enter the short The bargain is inseparable from negotiation.
Indeed, not many, but it’s meant to be selective. negotiation] is nothing but a deal.
The lawyer said that [reaching At least, we haven’t put this point in written form.
They, of course, attempted are so convinced, by what the Soviet Union told us, that there’s to deceive us by proposing unfairly high priced goods.
Also there are other issues that Soviet turned down their proposal, flatly. comrades believe are worth discussing at another time.
We couldn’t fear them less. want war, because peace was of paramount importance.
The Soviet Union knew that we are training new recruits; they, in fact, helped us.
The rumor goes that these the charge of Liweilong , new recruits will be sent to Latin American countries.
We are well equipped to information – the disappointing performance of the Cuban crush them however. delegation in Warsaw – to us.
They publicly reject the idea of a possible United States attack time will solve this problem. on Cuba touching off a new world war.
So far Albania has been the smallest fraternal country in the of the Soviet Union towards us is very clear. socialist camp, beleaguered by imperialism and capitalism.
This is a result of your trip [in late August/ socialism, and revisionism.
On the contrary, we within the framework of proletarian internationalism and discussed Soviet backing, and I went to Moscow only with all egalitarianism.
No one would seriously believe that Albania Soviet support already in hand. was bullying the Soviet Union, a powerful country.
Sadly, it is the Soviet Union that touched off the polemic with Albania.
That is not, in my opinparty Congress of the Soviet Union [in Moscow in ion, a socialist country.
My position is to avoid arguing with October 1961], as you know, we don’t it.
Yugoslavia, I was asked for my opinion towards this country’s political system.
The problem is that we don’t want the seeds of capitalism had been scattered everywhere.
It’s because we are weak speech touched off a grand debate. and have made little contribution to the development of However, the adverse impact of Yugoslavia has been Marxism-Leninism.
Cuba, there were people flirting with the ideas of following But there occurred an incident.
So I don’t think there is any trainees circulating a book from the Albanians, named “The reason for Yugoslavia to remain a serious issue.
Of course, by Clique of Khrushchevite Revisionism,” which was, of course, no means am I suggesting that Fidel visit Yugoslavia, or we considered as a negative attitude towards the upgrade our relations with it.
Although we didn’t mention this to Albania, meetings, if everyone condemns Yugoslavia, we also will agree we think this is bad. to this.
I don’t understand why Yugoslavia still continues to be The Soviet Union has given us great support, indeed, supa problem.
Admittedly, the influence of Yugoslav revimaintained an amicable relationship; we, for example, send sionism is diminishing, thanks to the efforts made by every exchange students to each other.
This is a true practice of proMarxist-Leninist to expose and criticize it.
On the contrary, Tito’s thoughts remain Cuba pushed onto the battlefield of the problem. influential to some extent.
Consider the case of Latin America in which of China , which re-states our strict adhermany communist parties are demanding a peaceful transition ence to our statements and declarations made in Moscow in 1957 to socialism.
Poland has received more money than Yugoslavia made many efforts and will continue doing so.
Tito even dared to openly feed American 1957 and the Moscow Statement of 1960—he attacked our imperialists, via the American journalist, Drew Pearson, advice socialist camp.
Of course, we have a funthat aimed to infiltrate and sabotage socialist countries.0 damental agreement on whether it is good or bad to receive Americans newspapers have published Tito’s speech.
Didn’t one of Jiang Jieshi’s generals Declaration of 1957, it developed a revisionist agenda.
Sometimes, things turn good from bad, solidarity, and stood in the way of the national liberation movesometimes the other way around.
To expose and criticize Yugoslavian modern revisionism is So far as I know, within Yugoslavia there are factions.
Yugoslav communist and Tito associate] Edvard Kardelj, for example, is slightly leaning towards the right.
This is a circum81 stance which we shall study, to see if change will be made in the understanding of Marxism-Leninism.
Anyhow, we don’t speak more than we should. cere person, willing to listen and learn.
We are suggesting that they that some bad people became good does not necessarily mean should open a guerrilla battlefield . that other people would also succeed.
Chairman , Shaoqi , Enlai , ZHU De, CHEN Yun, LIN Biao, Xiaoping Guevara: I agree that change is conditional.
Their ultimate demise lies in our constant efforts to fight Central Propaganda Office , Central Liaison Office , against them.
Marxism-Leninism has proven to grow along Central Investigation Office , Military Intelligence Office with its war on left-leaning and right-leaning thoughts.
The , Ministry of Public Security , Literature Commission principal danger facing us is the right-leaning thoughts, the , Headquarters of the General Staff , Lengxi (WU modern revisionist thought.
Research Office, Soviet-European Office of Foreign Ministry, Juan Peron appears left-leaning, seemingly American-Australian Office of Foreign Ministry, Ambassador wishing to join the revolution.
The Argentine communist party speaks against Tito while in action it supports Yugoslavia.
It’s said that a communist set up a guerrilla force after being A Report of the Conversation with Cuban Interior Minister expelled by the Columbian communist party.
Guevara: The Guatemalan revolution is developing, and On the morning of the 22nd , Cuba received Yon Sosa is currently in Cuba which is the information that Washington had been actively deployentirely confidential.
A son of an Indian person and a Chinese ing, and the United States would take strong measures.
In the afterimmigrant, he was an army officer of little education or noon, combat readiness was ordered by the Americans.
Now Cuba has adopted all necessary meaas to buy time , made arrangements in sures.
More than forty brigades have been raised with Yesterday, a United States airplane crashed in the Guantanamo Base. both civil defense and militias having started to be mobiBoth sides are on alert now.
In Havana, 96 million rifles, as long as they could still ering point of United States is Puerto Rico—there are two aircraft carshoot, have been distributed among soldiers.
On top of these, riers, ships on which helicopters could land, and amphibious thirteen anti-amphibious battalions have been established, vessels that could transport fifteen thousand troops—socialist which were small in number of personnel but very strong in countries’ ships normally all come from that direction. firepower.
Settlements have been made on industrial and agriThe United States navy commander made an order, thanking Latin cultural productions.
Because of the war and mobilization, American countries for faithful assistance. industrial production will shrink and perhaps even stagnate.
The United States demands that between naval units, the radio contact, By contrast, the agricultural sector will be different. will not starve to death; estimated to hold out for for the purpose of confidentiality, should be used as little some year and half.
This is a practice that is only adopted when the has drafted a proposal for restricting petrol consumption situation is tense.
The United States force involved in the blockade is which will be promulgated soon.
The people worked in a estimated to be of between 30 and 40 thousand personnel. high spirit, ready to engage at any minute, which At 9 o’clock this morning, two ships arrived.
Now several other Soviet ships are heading towards speech yesterday is correct, has received positive reacCuba.
The situation will definitely become tense if Soviet tions from the people. ships and United States warships meet each other head on. see On a American invasion, he reckoned that by what, in the end, the United States will do.
The development of the the end of this week, the United States would have mobilized four divisituation and which strategy the enemy will adopt will be sions.
An American aircraft carrier has already anchored in clearer within next 48 hours. the water not far from Cuba.
The American air force has Embassy in Cuba frequently intruded into Mariel, Matanzas, Oriente, and the 24 October 1962 hinterland of Havana Province.
American aircraft], on the only condition that the wreckage could be collected on Cuban territory.
He also mentioned the meeting between John F Kennedy and Gromyko, which appeared not good.
On the whole, the people are calm, and there is confidence towards the revolutionary government Prime Minister Fidel Castro made a speech which was and Castro. broadcast nation-wide by television.
In his speech, he critiAn American warship was reported early this morning to cized Kennedy’s statement published the day before have been seen off the Havana coast.
A cargo ship was expectyesterday and rejected unreasonable demands from the United States ed to arrive this morning but it has not arrived even this afterOn issues such as the so-called aggressive weaponry and noon.
The Cuban revolutionary government has informed defensive weaponry, disarmament, enquiries into Cuba by two airlines, the United Arab Airlines and Holland UN-assigned delegates, his attitude was clear and resolute.
Airlines , that no passenger He expressed firmly that will resist a comprehensive plane shall land in Cuban airports, until a new notice [to be embargo from the United States and a direct American invasion.
However, Czechoslovakia end of his speech, he touched on the statement issued by the and Cuba are still connected by an airline.
Soviet Union; instead of stressing Soviet support, he emphasized that the Cubans knew how to defend their motherland.
China’s Embassy in Cuba Fidel spoke with dignity and calmness, instead of 24 October 1962 appearing agitated as he used to be.
Translated for CWIHP by Zhang Qian.] ent audience, including the President, members of the United Revolutionary Leadership Committee, and the Interior Minister, all wore arms.
One journalist from the Latin American Press In accordance with Premier’s instruction, we Association told me, “the Soviet statement isn’t quite what have drafted a government statement in support of Cuba.
Prior to the broadcast, it is planned that copies of Havana is the same as usual.
Gas stations are restored the statement, in Chinese and in foreign languages, will be to normality but there is less traffic and fewer pedestrians distributed by the news division than before.
Businesses operate as usual, with no sign of among journalists of each country in Beijing, and handed by panic buying.
In the downtown, propaganda squads, filled the American-Australian division to by female militias, work with a high spirit.
Outpatient services whether is feasible. have already been suspended by hospitals, and patients with minor illnesses have been sent back to their homes.
Even if Cuba were be wiped out by Please send to Geng , Zhang , Marshal a possible nuclear war, as Castro said, imperialism would be Chen , and Premier for examination. closer to facing its demise and global socialism would arrive sooner.
Chinese Embassy, Accra, Ghana, Report on Conversation This morning , Ordoqui told us: with the Third Secretary of Cuban Embassy, 27 October 1962 The United States continues to clamor for war.
Yesterday in particular, they proposed to carry out an invasion; Cuba estimated, it Foreign Ministry, could get underway early this morning.
Special report. even insisted that the Cuban-Soviet agreement should be published, and added that Artemisa base was again reinforced.
China’s Embassy in Ghana It appears the United States is plotting an invasion.
It is reported that only asked 85 He spoke with considerable discretion today.
Fidel’s second declaration Staff, 30 October 1962 was reflected well among the masses, and today’s statement is also very important, to Foreign Ministry and the 2nd Department of the General which the detailed reactions are yet to emerge.
Cuba’s sovStaff, ereignty must be guaranteed, and the Cuban people have the right to decide their own matters.
Khrushchev, too, expressed the wish to negoa high spirit and on constant alarm, and that tiate.
Therefore, if the rocket weapons are to be withdrawn, would not believe the so-called guarantee from American it should be traded for the withdrawal of the missile bases in imperialism; instead, they believe in their own strength, the Turkey and the return of Guantanamo.
This is, if the negotiastrength of the people and the support of socialist countries tion succeeds, a good thing.
We enquired about the response United States will bomb the Soviet Union base, and after that of the troops towards Fidel ’s statement, letters it will say that it has achieved its goal, and claim from Khrushchev and Kennedy, and [UN winner itself.
It is a good opportunity for the United States to invade Secretary-General] U Thant’s visit to Cuba.
The deputy direcCuba; the situation depends on the development of events in tor of revolutionary education said that the general response is the next few days. that believe Fidel’s statement, believe our leader’s He said he did not know the news of Khrushchev with words.
The troops were discussing Fidel’s statement, during respect to the unconditional withdrawal of bases.
But the presexploded immediately with the wreckage spreading across an ent development of the people’s movement is slow in some area of 12 square kilometers. countries, such as in Chile which still needs the masses to take actions.
Some countries’ declarations remain on paper, with no Embassy in Cuba sign of struggle.
What the Cuban people need is active support, 30 October 1962 such as mass mobilization; because if there is no action, the crime of those who hold power will not be stopped.
One attendant of the protocol department said, “The situation is developing fast.
As to the reaction to China’s support, Fuxá said, Chinese Embassy in Cuba, Report on Conversation with “China’s support to Cuba via prompt organization of demonJoaquín Ordoqui, 31 October 1962 strations has been a great encouragement to us.
Martinez said, “China’s statement has increased our Foreign Ministry, strength.
With respect to the present situation, Martinez commented, “last week the world experienced an unparalleled, “Someone does not agree to unprecedented peril.
Now the perilous situation has gone, the five conditions we raised.” though a few questions are left and we need to continue the struggle.
That foreign minister, Roa, went 2) “When negotiating with U Thant, to the UN to open a new front is a mere change of form told struggle], and the revolution will continue progressing.
He him that an inspection, regardless of its form, also said, “This is the victory of peace, because the attempt of would not be approved , nor would it imperialists was to start a war, but now war has been preventbe approved by the Cuban people.
This incident proves that the peaceful forces have the five points; no other issues could be discussed.
This time U upper hand, and peace comes not at the mercy of imperialThant’s attendants, too, have returned with disappointment.” ism, but by active striving.
It is because of the Cuban people, the development of Soviet technology, and socialist countries Fidel said that we would not back down, not to mention conwho not only have atomic bombs but also people, such as ceding, and that should be firm; if not, will bring the Chinese people, etc., that the war was avoided.
One week ago, could not think about da Silva to Cuba, indicating that the the possibility of negotiation; we hope that this Brazilian government is willing to mediate in the hopes of negotiation will generate productive results.
Imperialism will solving the Cuban problem, that the United States is also willing to not easily abandon their attempt, and we should maintain maintain relations with Cuba, and that [the Brazilian government] wants Cuba to return to the Organization of American 87 States.
Fidel thanked them for their efforts, indicating to him ing United States security. abandoned the advantage that Cuba approves supporting Cuba, a sovereign country, tive to] do so.
Regarding the issue of joining the Organization in conducting a just struggle; it, instead, disadvantaged itself , it would not be approved, but we also by deserting Cuba and accepting all American conditions know the direction to which should march. mainwhich were compensated by a guarantee of empty words.
Embassy in Cuba The very situation encourages the arrogance of American 31 October 1962 imperialists while discouraging the global anti-American movement, indeed, to an unprecedented degree.
The reason why Khrushchev squandered the favorable situation of anti-imperialism, even at the expense of revolutionary interests, was his fear of war blackmail from American imperialists.
Meanwhile, Khrushchev’s reconciliation and submission to American the Soviet support to Cuba proved far from sincere, it was imperialism constitutes a fiasco in the diplomatic struggle carried out in line with the general strategy of promoting of the Soviet Union.
Its influence on future development is peaceful Soviet-American co-existence.
When American imperialists encircled Cuba with its troops, ready to attack at any A development, extremely favoring the struggle against minute, and charged the Soviet Union with deploying aggresAmerican imperialism, emerged at the moment when the sive weaponry, Khrushchev sent messages to John Kennedy, American imperialists declared a blockade against Cuba.
But yet, not to defend Cuba’s sovereignty and its legitimate right just when the people were being mobilized and about to take to weaponry of any form.
Rather, he reassured Kennedy by action and the contradiction within imperialism was deepenrepeatedly highlighting the fact that those weapons were in ing, Khrushchev did not take advantage of the development, the hands of Soviet troops and any worry would be therefore extremely unfavorable to the United States He unnecessary.
In the end, he yielded to American bidding did not conduct a tit-for-tat struggle and push the developby retrieving those weapons , giving not ment of the crisis . even the slightest attention to Cuba’s opinion.
Khrushchev Instead, after performing gestures of struggle, he even allowed, on Cuba’s behalf, for the UN to send officials gradually backed down, and started to make a series of conto conduct inspections on Cuban territory.
By doing all these, cessions, in the name of cautious, calm, and rational, the Soviet Union avoided being Cuba’s protector.
These activito the point of agreeing to dismantle and retrieve missiles ties have caused damage to Cuba’s pride and sovereignty, and previously deployed to Cuba, under United Nations superviare also considerably harmful to Cuba’s revolutionary struggle. sion.
On the part of Kennedy, his basic objecChinese Embassy, Havana, A Report on Fidel Castro’s tive was to remove Televised Address, 1 November 1962 Cuba, this nail in the eye. exploited the illusions of Khrushchev by releasing empty bait, and then demanded Foreign Ministry, further concessions from the Soviet Union on the Cuba question.
But this is not the right Khrushchev’s behavior will inevitably generate extremely place for discussing it, for the situation could be exploited by bitter fruits.
The counter-revolutionaries in the world will hail it sit and talk between two parties and between two governin one voice.
We are not happy with particular facts and details. enhanced, which will enable him to demand more concessions But we shall also bear in mind, especially at this moment, the in future bargains.
Second, Khrushchev’s activities amounted generous aid from the Soviet Union. demanded that to a bowl of cold water, poured right over the Cuban people people be disciplined. who have been fighting on the front line of the battle against the Americans.
Because of Khrushchev, those who sit on the 4) explained that the weaponry shipped away by the fence have now leaned rightward.
Soviet Union did not belong to Cuba. the Soviet-American reconciliation] has again exposed to the world the true face of the modern revisionists.
The people of 5) praised the fighting spirit demonstrated by [the the world have been offered an ever more unforgettable lesCuban] people during this period.
We hold that this speech was well written with a correct From now on, American imperialists will, under the banattitude.
With close reference to the confusion in people’s ner of the UN, create troubles for Cuba.
Modern revisionminds, delivered a powerful blow to imperialism ists will, regardless of Cuba’s interests, continue to seek the and revisionism. opportunity to reconcile with the US, or even the possibility of opening high-level meetings by imitating the model generEmbassy in Havana ated from the Cuba Missile Crisis management.
In the latter 1 November 1962 case, the development of the situation will become more complicated.
Foreign Trade Minister, Alberto Mora Becerra, 1 November 1962 89 with him.
Fidel decided not to let them in; Cuba rejected [U Foreign Ministry, Thant’s proposal] by expressing the inability of Cuba to host so many people.
But Fidel indicated that the Cubans The Cuban people unite around the leader and support too wish the problem could be simpler, why would the five conditions.
The Chinese people are 3) Insurgents and militias are both in a high spirit.
Cuba shot our real brothers and comrades. down a U-2 , but did not announce it.
Anderson was found after the Norwegian ship owners and forced it to go to Cuba, for crash with his corpse divided into two.
Out of of the airplane you will also understand that this [i.e. the incident of forcing Cuba found some documents.
The United States took more aerial photographs of Cuba than there are of the American film the Norwegian ship to go to Cuba] was regrettable, for it not star, Marilyn Monroe.
The United States also tries to find information only affected us, but also the global endeavor.
Along the coast of Key people were calm and vigilant, guarding as usual their combat West anti-aircraft missiles have been deployed, and troops are and production positions. still under mobilization.
The danger of an invasion remains, Finally, he asked Charge d’Affaires Huang to but it is less imminent.
If the United States did want a war, they would forward to the Chinese people the gratitude of the Cuban have blown up the Soviet missile bases a long time ago.
A people. nuclear war does not at all need an announcement. did not make an announcement before they dropped atomic Embassy in Cuba bombs in Japan, whereas this time Kennedy is kicking up 1 November 1962 a fuss by making many statements, which looks like deceit and blackmail.
Translated for CWIHP by Zhang Qian.] against Cuba is to start, these troops are far from enough.
Unless uses nuclear weapons to destroy Cuba, there is nothing to be feared.
Cuba could attack the United States fleet with the weapChinese Embassy, Havana, A Complementary Report of ons it now has.
Of course, we are unable to the Conversation with Joaquin Ordoqui, 1 November 1962 destroy their entire fleet, but we could shatter a part of it.
Embassy in Cuba On the Cuban-Soviet relationship, we do not mention at 1 November 1962 our initiative.
Translated for CWIHP by Zhang Qian] Foreign Ministry, In recent dealing with foreigners felt that Cuban government officials spoke very discreetly, avoiding mentioning the Soviet Union.
In view of the above-mentioned circumstance, the party committee of the Chinese Embassy in the Soviet Union, The Soviet Union embassy decided that when dealing with foreigners, embassy Continued a Reconciliatory Approach to the Cuban staff, exchange students, etc., should not, at our initiative, Problem, 2 November 1962 mention the Cuban-Soviet relationship, and all should, in accorForeign Ministry, dance to editorials from the homeland and leaders’ speeches, The Soviet Union continued a reconciliatory and submispositively indicate our support for the Cuban people.
Last night Fidel ’s report pointed out in In external propaganda, strove to defend particular that the Cuban-Soviet disagreement ought to be left and boast about its policy. published one after another to the party and government to solve, and requested that people cables from individual pacifists in the world to not discuss it everywhere.
Mikoyan arrived in Cuba Khrushchev, extolling his achievement of saving peace and this afternoon.
It did not mento continue referring to editorials published in the past and tion at all that no agreement was reached. speeches of leaders and positively indicate our support for the On the United States blockade and aerial surveillance of Cuba, and Cuban people clamoring for enlarging the scope of embargo, [the Soviet Union] only reported objectively but dared not con91 demn.
Translated from Chinese for CWIHP by Zhang American militant groups, whereas the White House was Qian.] comparatively cautious.
They even said something like that the US was in a contest between rationality and militant groups. avoided reporting our country’s important editorials and speeches in support of Cuba.
Cuba then became even of American airplanes conducting scouting and blockading more resolute, opposing firmly the Soviet Union’s selling its ; the American sovereignty.
Under these circumstances, the Soviet Union was aircraft carrier, Independence, was operating in these waters; very worried, which was why Mikoyan left ahead of it constantly sent and received airplanes, scouting and taking photography from Havana Province, schedule for Havana to mediate.
In the waters north of Jamaica island, was an American with the US aircraft carrier with several medium and small warships.
The However, in order to consolidate the first victory of its United States is transferring troops, weapons, and tanks to Guantanamo aggression on Cuba, the United States will not give much capital to via warships. the Soviet Union.
Besides blockading, also Union break the deadlock, Khrushchev is very likely to proconducted scouting, intercepting with pose another advanced meeting with Kennedy. increased activities of warships and airplanes.
Embassy in the Soviet Union The American U-2, shot down last week, is in the area near 2 November 1962 Nipe, Oriente Province.
Military Attaché of the Embassy in Cuba As the mayor of Havana said, from the 2 November 1962 Cuban revolution succeeding until now, China has consistently supported Cuba.
A director from the education ministry said, “The major target of this mobilization of war preparation is militias and Chinese Embassy, Havana, “The Reactions of Cuban government officials.
Foreign Ministry, A composer said, “The literature and art front of Cuba is normally filled by endless arguments and disagreements, but A continuing report [on Castro’s televised address on 1 facing a possible American invasion, it is now in an unprecNovember], edented solidarity and unity.
Embassy in Cuba According to the mayor of Havana, the salient point of 2 November 1962 Fidel’s address is that will not trade for peace by making concessions to imperialism.
Translated for CWIHP by Zhang Qian] A instructor at the Embassy observed that Fidel is a man of dignity.
Khrushchev allowed the UN to send personnel to supervise and the Red Cross to investigate.
Had Chinese Embassy to the Soviet Union, Information on Mikoyan’s visit preceded Fidel’s address, Mikoyan would have the report delivered by Maj.
Now it is good defense department of the Soviet Union in the Moscow because Fidel has made it clear.
Foreign Ministry, As the mayor of Havana claimed, the difficult moment is On the 30th of October, in the Moscow Engineering a good test for friendship with, and support for Cuba [by and Physics College, a report of current events was delivother countries]. ered.
Boris Gelibusiji from the One writer maintained that Soviet Union not only has Defense Ministry of the Soviet Union.
When it came to the committed a mistake on the Yugoslavia problem, but it did Sino-Indian border problem, the reporter said, “The Sino93 Indian border has never been demarcated.
Prior to 1961, the Foreign Ministry, position adopted by the Chinese government was wrong.
For China, with a large population, wanted more territory, Severo Aguirre , member of the national leadership we supported India.
When our exchange students expressed their and government are determined to defend soverdisagreement to the way the reporter spoke of , eignty and independence at any cost, including sacrificing added, “In the associated meeting of socialist one’s own life.
With reference to the reporter twisting our country’s policy, our exchange students lodged a protest to the Embassy in Cuba party secretary of the college.
The Soviet Union declared that the weapons were in the hands of Soviet officers and would be withdrawn.
Chinese Foreign Ministry Instruction to Diplomatic Posts When it came to the Albania problem, the reporter said, on How to Express Attitude in Response to Khrushchev’s “Albania originally wanted to form an alliance with Italy, but Letters, 5 November 1962 it was rejected.
Translated for CWIHP by Zhang Qian.] and 28 October, to Kennedy, don’t directly indicate the attitude. could refer to our government statement on 25 October, Comrade Peng Zhen’s speech on 28 October ( Renmin Ribao, 29 ), the note from Foreign Minister Chen to the Cuban chargé d’affaires in China (in Renmin Ribao, 2 November), the spirit of the two editorials of Renmin Ribao, respectively 31 October and 5 November.
Mikoyan said, “The party of Cuba is an interestRegarding the Cuba-Soviet Relationship, 6 November ing party.
It’s the only in the world in which the old 1962 and the new are married to each other, being more than a simple mingling but a fusion.
Mikoyan ing the external position on the question of supporting Cuba’s said, “What I meant was criticisms between fraternal parties, struggle.
With had to grind their machetes for sugarcane-cutting. respect to the Cuban-Soviet relationship, should not requested the charge d’affaires bring back the Ambassador speak but listen . earlier , for there were lots of things to do.
Aisikaluona told us, “Chairman Foreign Ministry Mao is not only the leader of the Chinese people, he is also the leader of all oppressed peoples in the world.
Translated for CWIHP by Zhang Qian.] there are people who describe a country, which has merely striven to defend itself, as a warmonger, because we did not approve people who violate Marxist-Leninist principles.
Towards us all walks of the Cuban society were cordial and friendly. thanked for our country’s great sup1) Judging from the conversation between Cuban leaders port, yet with no exception did not touch on the topic of the and Mikoyan, relationship remains strained.
Translated for CWIHP by Zhang Qian.] military revolution in Latin America and save Cuba. also gave us a copy of their detailed plan to open military struggle in Argentina, which symbolize their trust in Chinese comrades and wish for cooperation.
Chairman Mao was the leader of all oppressed peoples in the world, and that their plan was devised in accordance with the Chinese Embassy in Cuba Investigation Group, Guevara’s spirit of Chairman Mao’s thought. wished China Mother Talked About the Soviet-Cuban Relationship, 8 to accelerate the research on the hydrogen bomb, [saying that November 1962 only by this would] world peace could be guaranteed and etc.
Judging from the outcomes of this contact, Abraham is under Central Investigation Department, the leadership of Madam Moke.
Regarding what issues should receive attention in future Guevara’s mother , Madam Moke contacts, please instruct. , and Abraham Guillén , three people visited our embassy at their initiative.
After studying , Investigative Group of Embassy in Cuba decided to designate Comrade Xiong You to meet 8 November 1962 on our behalf.
Foreign Ministry, Investigation Department not speak but only listened regarding the Soviet-Cuban conflict.
Military Intelligence Official’s Talk, 8 November 1962 Abraham claimed to be born in Spain, had participated in the Spanish civil war, to be a military expert and Foreign Ministry and Military Intelligence Department, economist, with works such as Imperialism of the Dollar [and the Direct Inversions-Appendix], and The Agony of Imperialism.
According to Yitulinuo , head of the secgive one copy of each to Chairman Mao.
At the ond division of Cuban military intelligence department, the invitation of Cuban government came in secrecy to Cuba situation has been calm from the 4th of this month until now. to work as the staff of an Argentine secret academy which Two American aircraft carriers, once deployed near Cuba, now has over 40 students.
Abraham claimed to be a nonhave now reached the waters relatively distant from Cuba in party Marxist-Leninist and a Maoist; China, was his the Gulf of Mexico.
In the conversation, he appeared to hate scouting, surveillance, and intruding into territorial Khrushchev bitterly, holding that Khrushchev was afraid of airspace along the Cuban coast, it has become less frequent. war, not allowing Latin American people to wage revolution Today air intrusion has reached 23 sorties , and saying that Khrushchev had thrown Castro into yesterday’s was more than today’s.
United States to Invade Cuba, 9 November 1962 When speaking of the Cuba problem, he did not try advertising the wisdom of the Soviet policy.
Instead, he began Military Intelligence Department, by reminding the audience, “The situation remains grave; According to the third secretary of the Cuban , the Cuban crisis has yet to pass away.” quoted informamercenaries used by the United States to invade Cuba are mainly tion from Western news agencies, saying “that the primary recruited from Cuban counter-revolutionaries; also task of the West is to eliminate the Castro regime, enlisted some ordinary refugees and counter-revolutionaries to eliminate Castro and aggressive weapons altogether so as from other Latin American countries.
The ies, unified under the command of the American Central reporter claimed, “Although a contribution has been made Intelligence Agency , are divided into two groups.
One on our part, Western countries did not budge accordingly. group is the regular army, which, stationed in Florida, the They treated our activities as the projection of weakness.
This army has some 15,000 men, the opportunity and stepped out of the dark, saying that with a backbone of between 3,000 to 4,000 people, includto the Russians ought to be tough.
On group is special agents committed to sabotage and subversion the West Berlin problem, too, should be tough.” operations.
They were dispatched to difintroduced the situation of the Cuban crisis by referring to a ferent states of the US, received different training, and then plethora of news from foreign news agencies, and requested sent to West Germany, Japan, and Latin American the audience to keep a close eye on the further development. countries, to engage in various professions there.
China is a socialist of people, based in the US, assaulting and harassing Cuba’s country and India is a capitalist one.
India looked to the coastal cities from the high sea, and conducting sabotage.
October—China raised its proposals but the Indian government turned them down— quoted a paragraph from a Vietnamese newspaper and expressed the wish that the SinoIndian border problem could be peacefully resolved.
Chinese Embassy in Cuba, A Report of the Conversation with the Deputy Editor of Hoy, [Raúl On Cuba’s situation.
He said that Cuba’s situation has yet Valdes] Vivo, 12 November 1962 to stabilize.
One thing is critical, which is the coordinated and collective position of the Soviet Union and Cuba.
This According to Vivo, the deputy editor of Hoy, the poswill place American imperialism in a political difficulty.
We sibility of Paraguay severing diplomatic relations with Cuba know that imperialism will not abandon its is higher than that of Chile . aggressive attempt, and also understand that this struggle Chile is a long-lasting one.
We wish, via the discusmay do so earlier than Paraguay; Paraguay won’t sever the sion of various proposals and especially via the Soviet Union relationship before the general election.
The rightist Peronist and Cuba adopting a shared position, to expose to the world of Argentina also opposes Cuba. the true attempt , even if cannot make The present threat to Cuba has become less imminent, imperialism honor its promise.
The United States now wants to invade Cuba via the political victory over imperialism.
He said that I , warships and two Dominican warships, along with along with other leaders, have kept a close eye on it. three thousand Argentine soldiers, arrived in Panama.
With respect to the Sino-Indian conflict, we underIt is difficult for the United States to maintain the naval blockade. stand the proposals put forth by the Chinese government it wants to intensify the economic blockade and to in the hope to peacefully solve the border problem, agreed make ships from capitalist countries not go to Cuba.
The that these proposals could serve as the basis of negotiation. present number of vessels coming to Cuba is less than before.
What is regrettable is that the Indian government repeatThis problem is going to become worse during sugar season. edly turned them down.
A continuation of the Sino-Indian The Vietnamese ambassador holds that the reaborder conflict will do no good for the Indian people; son for the leaders of Latin American fraternal parties, who will only serve Indian counterrevolutionaries and imperialwere previously in Cuba, to return home at the Soviet Union ism.
The reason why Indian counterrevolutionaries are doing announcement of withdrawing missile bases, is mainly to pacify these [presumably referring to accusations against China for those confused minds within their parties as well as countries. invading Indian territory] is to arouse a deviating nationalistic sentiment, and to split the Indian people’s power.
By doing so, Embassy in Cuba Nehru is to gain his personal inter12 November 1962 ests and the interests of the class he represents.
Translated for CWIHP by Zhang Qian.] relationships with both countries.
When expressing opinions as deputy Foreign Minister, have to take into account the fact of Cuba having a relationship with India.
In some cases, we understand Cuba’s present situation. height was merely 2,000 meters.
Often traverse Cuba, either from east to west, or from south to Embassy in Cuba north.
Translated for CWIHP by Zhang Qian.] and twenty thousand , (mainly U-2) dare not go further and hide near Mariel Harbor, Pinar del Rio Province, conducting scouting.
On the 19th [of November], an American F-8U intruded into San Diego’s airspace but was driven away by anti-aircraft forces.
Foreign Ministry, The present concern is that American imperialism This afternoon, Castro sent U invade with the Latin American puppet countries’ Thant a letter, once again rejecting any country or internatroops and Cuban counter-revolutionary mercenaries, which tional organization conducting inspections on Cuban terriwill be politically beneficial to American imperialism. tory and reiterating that the five points raised by Cuba are Castro’s two letters to U Thant are historical documents, the basics.
It firmly expresses make intrusions into territorial air , [Cuban that Cuba is determined to defend its sovereignty and rights, people] will shoot them down.
Today, Americans could claim and will never beg for survival on its knees. that missiles and bombers are aggressive weapons; tomorrow, they too could say that cannons, even submachine guns, are Embassy in Cuba aggressive weapons.
He said that this time once again, [Indian leader Jawaharlal] Nehru’s mask of peace and neutrality was stripped off.
On the 14th of November, the Cuban armed force sent Chinese Embassy in Cuba, Report of Military Intelligence an instruction, requiring that troops and civilians all keep Department of Cuban General Staff’s Talking about military secrets.
It is now conducting education via papers, American Air Intrusion, 20 November 1962 magazines, television stations, and radios.
Foreign Ministry and Military Intelligence Department, Military Attaché of Embassy in Cuba 20 November 1962 99 their reactions earnestly.
This is what I bring from Beijing. 20th , conducted shooting at invading US naval airplanes.
Many strengthened, industry development is accordingly going to comrades will envy me because of it. be slowed down.
This is a copy of the statement issued by our governNehru, whereas Indian people were still good. ment on 30 November in support of the IRO [Integrated Revolutionary Organizations] and the statement of the counMilitary attaché office of embassy in Cuba cil of ministers.
Without spending more words, as Comrade Mother, 27 November 1962 Ambassador is bound to know, the United States will not accept it.
This is the Ambassador Shen returned to the embassy, could current situation.
In this period, there are many extraorment of the situation leaves Cuba with no other choices.
We hold that peace pay whatever cost, this people will win sooner or later.
This could not be achieved by handing over our power; must is how Comrade Fidel told us.
We said many and stick to principles, has to prepare for all sorts of times that Cuba would not fail.
When you are ready as such, you will be victorious. that Cuba, indeed, did not fail.
Now our people’s awareness becomes higher. current situation and the prospect for the Security Council band with each other more closely, with firmer resolve due in the early next week. and clearer vision.
On my arrival bombs, whatever their sorts are, is able to affect the Cuban in Beijing, the situation in Cuba became tense.
Our government issued statements sevweapon of the Cuban people is the people themselves. eral times in support of Cuba, and people voluntarily rallied in both cities and villages, demonstrated and assembled.
I prefer until dark, in front of the Cuban embassy with to talk to you at another opportunity.
Over those days, the comrades of briefly tell you that over this period, our people behaved your embassy, especially the chargé d’affaires, Comrade Bide extraordinarily well, very calmly.
Unlike Luosuo , chanted slogans and condemned United States imperialsome European countries, there was no event, such as panic ism.
I bring a documentary film this time and you could buying of fuel or bread. watch it when free.
We are prepared to give as a presWhen U Thant arrived, I went to ent one to the Cuban government.
We believe that meet him at the airport, and came back with him via downCuba has made great achievements in this struggle.
He said that he was surprised at such a calm struggle is not just for Cuba, but also for the Latin American communist life on our streets.
This struggle proves calmness and sufficient supply really surprised him and that that a people, or a nation, could defend its sovereignty or our people’s behavior was truly moving.
I have been away presence of Western ambassadors could barely be noticed at from Cuba for one month, during which was receiving the foreign ministry; it was them, the only people, news only from papers.
He told me, “I am already an old person. have seen know, over these days, apart from our soldiers and our people, many things in the world.
Few things could now still move this department is the center of all these tasks.
The Cuban people’s behavior is a good lesson for tries support Nehru does not surprise us.
This speech of mine is, diplofraternal countries saying that Nehru is peace-loving.
You see, even an ambassador from a country that capitalist class; Nehru colluded closely with imperialism.
I bring some materials and maps concerning the Sinoary nationalist country, adopted an incorrect position.
I want to present you briefly this fundamental problem is that evaluate Nehru problem. in terms of the class interests that Nehru represents.
We have kept a close eye on this issue, and conconducted face-to-face struggle with Nehru. ducted several discussions.
It was well written, giving a comprehensive and long time ago, he has begun to play a reactionary role.
From a detailed presentation of the Sino-Indian border problem long time ago, he has turned to imperialism.
He is a man of Asian-African country leaders.) hypocrisy, pretense, and braggadocio.
We advocate solving the English than Williamson, because he also speaks the political Sino-Indian problem by peaceful and friendly negotiations. language of imperialism.
We know that the fraternal country Cuba is backing us sary struggle should be conducted.
I will forward that Asian-African friendly countries will exert influence and these materials and maps to the comrades of the Socialist prompt Nehru to go back to the negotiation table.
I want to ask Comrade Ambassador: what is the prospect this problem does not mean that they were wrong.
From our part, we wish to negotiate. gain straight-forward information from knowledge and impression from maps.
It depends on how the Indians will act, and also on the imperialist attitude.
Translated for CWIHP by Zhang Qian.] imperialists, in particular, United States imperialists, and also British imperialists, which obviously complicates the issue.
What happened in Cuba was a bad thing, facilitating revolution, some parties were effectively supwhich, however, could also turn into a good one.
Indeed, to Latin lution, some did so only because they thought the Cuban revAmerica, it is genuinely a defeat.
So soon after we declared tion in which some countries are going to shift their attitudes that we were Marxist-Leninists, they wavered, and after the towards us.
Although we were very careful when we expressed withdrawal of Soviet missiles they vowed to initiate their own our disagreement with the Soviet Union, some countries revolution which, in their vocabulary, basically means the have initiated corresponding economic measures.
However, these been determined, even if we were to be pulverized by nuclear people actually could be won over by a determined Leftist bombs; after all, our lives are God-given.
In Bulgaria, we had force. a very interesting discussion with brother parties.
Representatives of a few fraternal parties– don’t know what countries exactly they removed their disguise earlier.
Even without that operation were from–responded by saying that the overarching priority of the Soviet Union, there are still people, in America or the should have been to preserve peace.
Venezuela did not turn up because they disagree when there is disarray and people don’t see clearly, the Leftists with our position, but Uruguayan party representatives did should act and raise their distinct flag.
Before, facing the American aggression, we had firm division within the progressive movement, is inevitable.
Not only did the world in general would check the growth of people’s power, or reduce it. stand firmly behind us, but also Latin America in particular offered unwavering support.
But now the Soviet missiles are gone good thing as well as a bad thing.
Marxist-Leninist party members to stand up to some party leaders who subscribe themselves to Revisionism.
This is, however, a great exposure of the revisionists. division between the Marxist-Leninist communists and the Guevara: Some revisionist countries remain unexposed. revisionist communists is to be expected.
Consider the time when the Second International, after the death of Marx and Engels, found its way to Revisionism.
Did the Soviet missiles come to Cuba as a result of with an excuse for war.
Yet on second thought, we felt guilty given the one month from the moment of the Soviet Union deciding fact that such a radical proposal might actually drag them on withdrawing all of their experts , to the into war whereas we remained undecided point of the last Soviet specialist leaving China.
We that some of them stay until contracts were fully impleaccepted their proposal only in the hope of helping them mented.
We suggested the Soviet Union issue with they were being withdrawn, some Soviet experts cried too.
Cuba a joint statement condemning the US, and publicizAdmittedly, the sudden departure of so many experts caused ing their support to us.
But it, again, encouraged what Kennedy had done was merely orchestrated to win the presidential election.
Some tactical weapons have been transferred to us and a destructive strike upon anyone who dared to invade Cuba, our personnel will be trained to operate them.
At the time we believed their words were true. to-air missiles are in their hands.
I remember I asked you in our last conversation anti-aircraft missiles.
But these surface-to-air missiles will not wondering if a possible American invasion would inevitably leave, they will stay. provoke another world war.
In other words, I was asking if the Soviet Union would support Cuba with its missiles.
They say [these tinue their support, only the naïve would keep buying their weapons] will stay. empty words.
But another harbor has Because the Americans were expected to attack us the next already been closed. day, the letter was not short of agitated words.
Soviet policies are not policies of Khrushchev alone, Guevara: We have no idea of his mission’s purpose.
One day he said he would leave immediately, but the would visit Yugoslavia.
They said next day he changed his mind saying that this was because a Tito attempted to foster a conciliatory position and he was new government order arrived.
In another case, he originally now fighting against the Rightists within the party.
They also assured us that IL-28s would not be a problem, said some bad things about Albania.
I don’t know what million and 18 million people but Albania has only sort of policy this is.
He also mentioned that he would not more than one million. leave Cuba until the moment he completed his mission.
Presumably this is why, as I saw from the television, he why we cannot use our MiG-21s. did not give you a hug on leaving.
They have not been willing to give any concrete are either Tibetan or belonging to ethnic groups that have guarantee.
They if there is no supervision, there will be kinship with the Tibetans.
A mind, in the most difficult period of the past, you had only vast number of people began to support us.
Yet in the end, you succeeded in topthese democratic reforms on neighboring areas is considerpling the US-imperialist-backed Batista regime and obtaining able.
Therefore, people are leaning towards our side, which nation-wide victory.
And now you are far stronger than before; is feared by Nehru. the general international situation has, too, become better.
This is the Xingjian-Tibetan but if there is one man left, we will still kill the Americans. highway.
If, after you check the map and the materials, you still have questions, I’m happy to answer them.
The Rightists, rallying behind the party of the Secretariat, Biwu , HE Long, Boda leader Dange, accounted for another third. , Fuzhi , KONG Yuan, FANG Yi, It was they who initiated this statement.
The remaining one Central Secrecy Office, Foreign Liaison Office , Central third were people sitting on the fence.
Printed by Admin Office of Foreign Ministry 4 January 1963 We must fully understand the great significance of the Cuban people’s victory in this struggle.
Translated for CWIHP by Zhang Qian.] tained their sovereignty and have defended the revolution, while at the same time giving a powerful blow to the intervention and serious war provocation by the United States imperialists.
After winning this valuable experience, Top Secret the revolutionary forces in Cuba have not been weakened but rather have been further strengthened.
This is an extremely important develForeign Ministry and Central Committee Foreign Liaison opment of the international communist movement.
The revolutionary cause of Latin America the Indian reactionaries and the great victory of the Cuban has a very bright future. people’s struggle against the United States imperialists and their lackeys are the two most outstanding events in the international The victory of the Cuban people’s struggle once again struggle at present.
The two events happened simultaneously has proved that United States imperialism is strong in appearance but during the past month.
The serious struggle during the past weak in essence, and can only bully the weak but will fear the month has examined and tested various political forces in strong.
The imperialists, reactionary nationalists, and has done all kinds of bad things.
Therefore, we should not modern revisionists have all fully exposed their true faces in have any unrealistic illusion about this representative of the front of the people of the whole world.
Second, now Kennedy and the revolutionary people in various countries have fully dares not fight a nuclear war.
The United States faces great demonstrated their strength in the struggle.
The people of the people in the world have raised their consciousness and ability whole world, including the American people, are against to tell the truth through these two struggles.
Under the current situation that a nuclear produce profound impact upon the international struggle in stalemate has actually existed in the world, the monopoly the future. capitalist class in the United States is unwilling to conduct Concerning the Cuban people’s anti-American struggle, a nuclear war on their own soil.
Third, only by conducting a tit-for-tat struggle forces have consistently carried out in the past. will we force the United States imperialists to retreat in the face of difficulty.
Concessions with no principle and accompanied We should sufficiently consider the difficulties facing by humiliation will only increase the aggressor’s ambition, Cuba’s revolutionary cause, and should sufficiently undermaking him ask for a foot after gaining an inch with a bigger stand the circumstances of the Cuban comrades.
Fourth, what Kennedy fears the most imperialists are determined to eliminate Socialist Cuba.
The are the revolutionary struggles by the Cuban people and the tension between the United States and Cuba will continue revolutionary struggles by the people in Latin America and all for a long period—sometimes more tense, and sometimes less over the world.
Sometimes the Cuban side will even face very serious people in various countries will the war and aggressive plans difficulties.
For a certain period, Cuba still needs to depend of the imperialists be smashed.
This is the only correct way to upon Soviet support in production, trade, transportation, and defend world peace. arms and ammunition supply.
The Cuban comrades, while In the face of such a ferocious yet crafty enemy as Kennedy, sticking to revolutionary principles, have to make necessary we must follow the policy-line set up by Comrade Mao compromises, which will not harm their sovereignty and Zedong, “in a strategic sense we must despise the enemy, in a independence, from time to time.
In the struggle against tactical sense, we must carefully study the enemy,” and then imperialism, modern revisionism, and reactionary nationalwe will win victory in this struggle.
The victorious struggle by ism, it is inevitable that some of their policies may differ from the Cuban people has once again proven that this is the truth. those of ours.
It is our internationalist duty to wholeheartedly support the Cuban revolution.
When the Cuban comrades The modern revisionists have been frightened to death in are persistently carrying out their revolutionary struggle, that the face of Kennedy’s nuclear bluffing.
We should not the enemy in a strategic sense while carefully dealing with make excessive demands on the Cuban comrades. the enemy in a tactical sense,” they carried out a policy of adventurism, using missiles and nuclear weapons as bargainIn the past month or so, the whole ing chips to engage in a game of speculation.
They made one concession nationalist education in the two huge mass movements— after another and fell into passivity completely.
The perforsupporting Cuba’s revolutionary struggle and repulsing the mance of the modern revisionists during the Cuban incident Indian reactionaries.
The shining greatness of Mao first place, it was a mistake that the modern revisionists decidZedong’s thought has been fully demonstrated in these ed to establish missile bases in Cuba.
Under the wise leadership of Comrade Mao not to support the Cuban people, but to control the Cuban Zedong, we have been able to command the initiative, catch revolution through violating Cuba’s sovereignty.
They were the right timing, fully realize our potential and capacity, and there not for the purpose of supporting the Cuban people in influence the whole situation in the external struggles of our struggling against imperialism, but using Cuba as a bargaincountry, thus creating a new and more advantageous environing chip in dealing with the United States imperialists.
We must continue to study diligently Mao Zedong’s were allowed to prevail, that would be extremely disadvantathought in practice and struggle, and raise the standard of our geous for the Cuban revolution and the revolution in Latin consciousness.
Cuba has learned a profound lesson in this incident. at directing the enthusiasm of the masses to production, daily The most effective weapon that can be used in opposing United States work and study.
We must hold high the three banners of the imperialism is not the missiles and strategic bombers that General Line, Great Leap Forward, and People’s Commune, the modern revisionists have boasted , but the correct and continue to march forward victoriously, so that we will policy line of firmly depending upon the peoples and masses win even greater successes on all fronts.
In external propaganda and conread quite a few relevant documents and reports.
Now China’s economic situation is very should not be made openly, and please pay attention to this. good.
As Comrade President knows, China has been hit, intermittently over recent years, by natural disasters.
But The Central Committee the harvest of 1961 was better than that of 1960, and this 4 December 1962 year’s turns out to be even more encouraging than last year’s.
One can say the darkest period of economic difficulty due to (This is a top secret document.
Opting for a socialist conAdministrative Office of the Central Committee and should struction blueprint, the Great Leap Forward, the institution then be destroyed.) of People’s Communes, is undoubtedly correct.
Based on lessons and experiences of the past, our central committee now has devised a detailed implementation plan.
With a correct direction and a series of fitting general polices already in position, the Chinese people feel that there is no reason that they won’t do better in future socialist constructions.
Being a big country has a lot of advantages but also has some difficulties.
I’m happy to learn that the Chinese comrades Cuba Shen Jian, undated overcame difficulties and are making progress.
I know that the darkest period of China’s economic difficulty is now over.
Top Secret We are quite concerned about the Sino-Indian conflict, on which we have kept a close eye.
Before I left China to return to Cuba, Chairman Mao, Chairman Liu Shaoqi, and Prime Minister Ambassador Shen: I remember that before I left Cuba, Zhou Enlai asked me to forward their greetings to Comrade Comrade President expressed his wish to discuss with me President. the Sino-Indian border problems on my future arrival.
Of course I have time, and I am very much looking Ambassador Shen: Very well.
Our 10th plenum of the our forward to it. party’s central committee, which they [Mao Zedong, Liu Shaoqi, Zhou Enlai] started to prepare and direct a long time ago, successfully opened this September.
This is the 4th volume of The Selected stake has become how to implement those policies produced Works of Mao Zedong, which I brought from Beijing as a gift at this meeting. to you.
From 1945 to 1949, prior to the over-all Ambassador Shen: It was hatched by Nehru and American national liberation. imperialism.
Comrade Mao Zedong’s works are the ones that we could American imperialists conduct their subversive activioften read.
Via its consulate consul located in Tibet, India Mao Zedong’s works published in Spanish.
This [colSpanish edition of the 1st and 2nd volumes of The Selected lusion] has now been proven by the following fact that the Works of Mao Zedong.
Dalai Lama, the major boss of the rebels, fled to India after the rebellion was vanquished.
These are the contribution of Argentine conduct his sabotage activities.
By this practice Nehru has confused many people, which was in fact his plot.
This is a brief introduction to the SinoDo send me a copy of volumes 1, 2 and 3 after publication.
Minister Fidel Castro’s work, recently published by us, which of course Comrade President would find incomprehensible.
These are… . complete understanding of the Sino-Indian border problems.
I have learnt this news [of the PRC publishing China’s position in the Sino-Indian border dispute.
Naturally we understand that China is not Comrade Fidel’s most important works. to blame.
To make them reader-friendly, we have for it to lean, totally, to the imperialists. published these works in the form of booklets.
Recently Pakistan has publicized a docuThis is Comrade Fidel’s television speech on 1 November, this ment.
On the very night of this speech being broadcast, our tested against the American military aid to India.
In response, people chose to walk to the street, rallying and demonstrating, the Americans showed Pakistan a secret military treaty, which to express their support for Cuba. was signed by Nehru and the United States in 1951.
At the heart of the complexity of the Sinonized a large number of marches and demonstrations.
We Indian border dispute is the fact that British and American thank you for your support, the significance of which is very imperialists together have thrown their weight behind Nehru. much understood.
We have done our utmost to strive for the border. possibility of the Sino-Indian border dispute being solved peacefully.
Our retaliation, therefore, came only after we were pushed into the last corner.
Now the threat of direct military intervention Nehru] a huge chunk of territory.
But has become less imminent, though the possibility remains. once he obtained one , he would ask for To secure Cuba and the peace of the Caribbean Sea, the five another.
No one could twist the arms of capitalists as to make demands raised by Castro are in fact the them part of the imperialist camp.
Also in this crisis emerged the conflict pushed or not, lean to the imperialists.
Indeed, we faced an extremely difficult situation in which it had to maintain friendship with the Soviet Union.
We appreciate stand up to the powerful American imperialists, at the very much for its economic, military, and techsame time resist pressures from the other side [i.e., the Soviet nological aid.
But sticking to its five demands, Cuba flatly rejected division between us continues.
What divided us is the fact any inspection that might damage Cuba’s prestige, soverthat the Soviet Union decided to withdraw, without prior eignty, and independence.
Therefore, revolutionaries are revoconsultation with Cuba in the first place, its missiles deployed lutionaries.
Those, who wish to submit to the imperialists, in Cuba as stipulated by the Soviet Union-Cuban military would submit to the imperialists anyway.
Furthermore, it permitted the on-site inspection of the of being pushed by someone. had we missiles’ removal without obtaining our agreement.
In this offered more concessions, they would have not submitted to struggle, Cuba did not adopt small bourgeoisies’ romantic imperialism.
Comrade President attended the meeting of the attitude; on the contrary, we have insisted on the correct Non-Aligned Movement , at Marxist-Leninist revolutionary position and defended Cuba’s which time the Sino-Indian border dispute had yet to become sovereignty.
But in fact, he had already defected we made the opinion extremely clear and firm to Anastas to imperialism.
Comrade President had a face-to-face struggle Mikoyan, the representative of the Soviet Union.
Cuba firmly with him, of which I should speak no more. insists on its five demands, and stands against any attempt Of course, it does not mean that we shall abandon proper to conduct unilateral inspection in Cuba.
Still we should separate him from would Cuba budge from this position. imperialism.
Furthermore, fighting in this complex and intriNow the Soviet Union expresses its respect towards our cate battle will bring the Indian people to the truth, raise their position.
In the Security Council, the United States and the Soviet consciousness.
We hope withdrawal of its missiles from Cuba and a guarantee of no that the Sino-Indian border problem could be resolved peacedeliberate attempt in the future to transfer weapons of this fully.
Our side sees no value in this hollow promise; nor do we Comrade Ambassador mentioned that I have met Nehru in trust Kennedy’s words.
In fact, not only have I met him, I have also come to to a circumstance in which Cuba ceases to act as a missile know his character from his actions.
It could still invade us with the excuse of Cuba remainmeeting failed due to the ing a base for subversive activities targeted at the United firm position of the Cuban delegation.
Such a guarantee, besides, will not stand in the way of noticed that Nehru’s position of neutrality appeared dubithe United States pressuring other countries to economically blockade ous.
And the reality has brought us to the nature of and politically isolate Cuba, devising diplomatic conspiracy, his position. conducting infiltration and espionage, operating pirate-like I would love to talk to Comrade Ambassador about Cuba’s naval assaults alongside the Cuban coast like the one that situation.
There is not much I wish to tell the Ambassador happened the day before yesterday. about, because I’m sure that you must have mastered Cuba’s Our willingness to negotiate is unquestionable, but we situation, though you weren’t in Cuba at that time [of the need concrete evidence of a guarantee.
Has Cuba acquired any information 1963 bilateral trade bring both sides the most profitable outon the negotiation between Mikoyan, Kennedy, and [US come.
As far as we know, the Soviet Union friendship between us is true friendship. did try to defend Cuba’s five demands, which were dismissed and refused by the Americans to be included in discussion.
Thanks for all this information, Comrade Until now no agreement has been reached.
As Comrade President is aware, the Chinese doubtful that it will be reached any moment in the future.
Recently, our government has issued a series of the negotiations], for we have our independent position on statements indicating our support to Cuba. support this matter.
This agreement, highly limited in a sense that the five demands raised by Prime Minister Fidel.
We support it confined its content only to issues appearing in the corCuba in rejecting of any form of inspection that leads to the respondence between Khrushchev and Kennedy, would not damage of Cuban independence, sovereignty, and prestige. include Cuba’s five demands.
Cuba will issue an indepenCuba has followed a correct Marxist-Leninist position in dent statement in the Security Council, in order to express this struggle. provides a Cuba’s own view towards development of the entire crisis. shining example, not only to the Cuban people but also to the The Soviet Union is expected to support Cuba by issuing a people of Latin America and of the world as a whole, of how separate statement and publicizing the agreement with the a nation defends its independence.
I fully understand Cuba’s situation in general and ment as I have mentioned previously; stage two, opening a fully understand the several difficulties that Cuba faces.
I’m negotiation focusing on Cuba’s five demands, in the hope of expecting an upgrading of our relations, both economic and resolving the Caribbean crisis once for all. political, to be realized by mutual assistance.
After all, this is Yet, according to our observation, there is no great hope the target of all my efforts as an ambassador. for attaining the stage-one agreement.
And such an agreement, even if being reached, still means nothing to Cuba.
Your efforts have already made very valuable Yesterday, we sent a delegation to the Soviet Union, to achievements.
You know how much we cherish all these deal with economic and trade matters.
They will attend a cultural congress and activithe 1963 fiscal year, and economic relations between the two ties intended to celebrate the anniversary of the victory of the countries in the future.
The delegation is headed by comrade Zhou Yang. our export situation tends to be in extremely bad shape, with As an alternate member of the central committee and deputy export income shrinking noticeably from the 1962 level. minister of central propaganda department, comrade Zhou Because our foreign trade will not start to bounce back until Yang has carried out a lot of work in the area of cultural and 1964, we badly need foreign financial aid for the upcoming ideological struggle.
The delegation also includes comrade Lin 1963 fiscal year.63 will see a great improvement in the Mohan, who is the deputy minister of both the Propaganda supply of staple foods and other necessities.
Department and Cultural Department. our export income is also expected to rise dramatically from 1964 onwards.
Their area for sugarcane planting this year, we could not use it next presence will be our honor.
Please forward my greeting to the should work hand-in-hand and to our utmost, to make the President’s wife.
Central Propaganda Office , Central Liaison Office , 11 Fursenko and Naftali, “One Hell of a Gamble”, 168.
However, having second thoughts, on 26 diplomats in these countries and expressed the hope of developing October Bobby Kennedy reversed his earlier decision and revoked relations with China,” also urging Beijing to buy sugar from Cuba if authority to conduct “major acts of sabotage” while tensions were so the United States cut off purchses.
Zhou Enlai passed such reports high, and there is no indication that such an assault on China’s embassy to Mao Zedong, who approved a positive response.
Savranskaya. the latest meeting of Cuban leaders, Alekseev identified Guillermo 32 See the 3 December 1962 cable from the Hungarian Garcia Frias, Haydée Santamaría Cuadrado, Raúl Curbelo Morales, Embassy in Havana reporting on Mikoyan’s 20 November Ramiro Valdés Menéndez, and President Osvaldo Dorticos as openly meeting with socialist ambassadors in Havana, reproduced in the critical of Khrushchev’s decision; Joaquín Ordoqui and Carlos Rafael collection of translated Hungarian documents elsewhere in this issue Rodriguez as defending it; and Ernesto “Che” Guevara.
Aragones, and Raul Castro as either silent or absent; and he noted 33 See the report by the Hungarian chargé in Washington, János that Fidel Castro let others speak and “apparently has not drawn any Radványi, on Mikoyan’s visit to Washington, 5 December 1962, in conclusions.” the collection of Hungarian documents printed elsewhere in this 21 See the translated excerpt of the Czech record of the 30 issue of the CWIHP Bulletin.
October 1962 Khrushchev-Novotný conversation printed elsewhere 34 See the report on Mikoyan’s 29 November 1962 by the in this issue of the CWIHP Bulletin.
J Herman van Roijen, on his 27 December 1962 conversation with 25 See telegram from the Brazilian ambassador in Belgrade, Bux Rusk, included in the collection of translated Dutch documents Ribeiro Courto, 19 November 1962, in the collection of translated elsewhere in this issue of the CWIHP Bulletin.
See Mikoyan cable from Havana re talks with Cubans, 26 27 Yinghong Cheng, “Sino-Cuban Relations during the Early November 1962, in the appendices to Mikoyan, The Soviet Cuban Years of the Castro Regime, 1959-1966,” 100.
Aleksandr Fursenko, ed., Prezidium TsK KPSS, 1954-1964, by compelling Washington to focus its military attention elsewhere.
After ruling South Korea since the end of World War II, Rhee was forced to resign on 26 April following student-led demonstrations, and flew into exile two days later, the same day Mao and Roca met.
On a trip to South America from 22 February-7 March 1960, Eisenhower visited Brazil, Argentina, Chile, and Uruguay.
Possibly Claudio Ramos, later Cuba’s ambassador to Algeria—thanks to Carlos Alzergaray for help on this identification.
Ministry of the Interior Vice Minister in charge of the National Liberation Directorate.
Japanese Foreign Ministry Archives (“Cuban Domestic because it imported a considerable amount of Cuban sugar.
The Cuban Reaction to the Announcement of the US blockade Transmitted from Moscow 10/24/1962 19:53 Received in Tokyo 10/25/1962 05:31 1.
The Cuban press briefly reported the content of President Kennedy’s announcement and then called this an act of To Foreign Minister Ohira from Chargés unreasonable aggression by the United States imperialists in a very critid’affaires ad interim Shigemitsu cal tone.
The Situation in Moscow on the Cuban Blockade mobilizing the revolutionary army and parts of the militia and placing them where they should be.
Several dozen policemen have been dispatched to guard the United States naval blockade was piracy and a clear violation of the United States Embassy since the afternoon of the 24th of October. international law.
Cuba is firmly opposed to this action and if the United States decides to embark on military intervention in this 2.
There were people on the street in front of the Embassy (about country, they would make an all-out effort to beat it.
He did not say anything about Soviet assistance, criticized United States actions against Cuba.
More people gathered with but declared that any inspections of Cuban bases by outsiders placards in their hands.
They mentioned that “the United States should should not be allowed because it ignored Cuba’s sovereignty keep away from Cuba” or that “Cuban freedom is our freedom.” as an independent nation.
The entire city looked a bit tense and threatening because of on crucial places in Havana.
Street broadcasting and street the increased number of armed militiamen on alert in the streets demonstrations by communist youth groups are trying to and the incessant loud radio broadcasts to uplift the morale of boost the people’s morale. the nation through public speakers.
The public here has stayed calm as usual and the Japanese here are living a normal life so far.
Japanese Foreign Ministry archives (“Cuban Domestic This cable has been also transferred to the Embassies Policies and Situation: 1959-1975” file), Tokyo.
Japanese Foreign Ministry archives (“Cuban Domestic Policies and Situation: 1959-1975” file), Tokyo.
When the Soviet government issued a statement on the on a daily basis and highly appreciates Soviet support.
It also Cuban issue on the 24th , one Soviet intellectual reported how widespread the pro-Cuban demonstrations working at a newspaper company made the following arguin the world have been and blamed the pro-US attitude by ment which reflected suspicion and anxiety shared by others.
NATO and the Latin American governments as means of “It’s hard to understand why we had to build a military base evidence showing that they were giving in to the United States imperialin Cuba in the first place.
They have not reported the Japanese policy on this issue looks gentle and timid.
But the Cuban government’s posihad a conversation with one of our Embassy staff.
Responding tion on this has not been made public because it might have to the staffer’s comment that he felt little sense of crisis by readnot yet received detailed information on the entire proposal. ing newspapers or watching the people in Moscow, the teacher However, it is estimated that they are covertly expecting more countered that people felt so relieved just after the crisis was hawkish measures from the Soviet side. over, which meant that a real sense of crisis had been widespread in the society.
The domestic wartime alert system has been strengthened in the workplace meetings he attended and that you could not and the revolutionary armed militias are keeping close watch feel that atmosphere just by reading the papers.
Checkpoint gates were show such feelings, he talked about some mothers he knew who established all over the town.
They rushed to the nearby stores ammunition were brought in from outside.
But for the last few days, the system has from stores temporarily because of these excessive behaviors. seemed to loosen slightly.
Japanese Foreign Ministry archives (“Cuban The population of the island has reached nearly 20,000, Domestic Policies and Situation: 1959-1975” file), Tokyo. which is twice the number as before the incident.
Around 2,000 prisoners, except for political offenders, have been released and joined the lowest class militias.
The jailhouses are all packed with political offenders brought from other states.
Cubana Airlines offers DOCUMENT NO. 5 one flight a week between Mexico City and here.
Transmitted from Havana 11/16/1962 16:25 Received in Tokyo 11/17/1962 09:49 This cable has been also transferred to Embassies in the United States and Mexico.
Inside the local stores, you can see only small amounts of 1962 commodities available.
Large amounts of food, other than Transmitting from Havana 11/21/1962 11:51 weapons, used to be imported from the Soviet.
But it seems Received in Tokyo 11/22/1962 07:20 now that there are only a few items available, such as salted fish.
The Cuban Situation the incident the number of official emigrants with government permission reached five or six thousand.
The reason why the Mikoyan-Castro talks are making slow be stripped of all their possessions in defecting.) progress is possibly related to Castro’s feeling betrayed by the 6.
The following are the findings of military importance on Soviets, which bypassed Cuba in negotiating with the US the situation on the Isle of Pines.
Mikoyan’s efforts to perCable from Japanese Embassy, Havana, 28 November suade Castro will bear fruit sooner or later because the Soviets 1962 intend to tide over this crisis by all means and they hold the oil supply route which is so vital for the Cuban economy.
Transmitting from Havana 11/28/1962 11:00 Received in Tokyo 11/29/1962 05:14 2.
According to other diplomatic sources, there seems to be a bitter discrepancy inside the revolutionary government.
There is much speculation over the reason and purpose of who tend to take Moscow’s leadership philosophy as a model.
If the purpose of Mikoyan’s visit was to Director of Agricultural Reform Bureau Pena, and persuade Cuba to accept UN base inspections in accordance the Secretary General of the Central Labor Association belong with Khrushchev’s pledge to the UN, you might say it turned to this faction.
They are old-type Communists who are in an out to be perfect failure for the moment.
Yet there is tive that the purpose of Mikoyan’s long stay was to reexamine little likelihood of the break-up of the revolutionary governthe value of Cuba as a strategic beachhead and the prospects ment or Castro turning pro-Soviet because of this in-house of the revolutionary government.
Whether this is right or not all depends on how the by Mikoyan, the Castro brothers didn’t show up, although Soviets will provide assistance to Cuba from now on.
Foreign Minister Roa, Industry Minister [Ernesto “Che”] Guevara, and Chief of the Militia Army 2.
Regarding the reasons why Castro reportedly refused to Aragones attended.
Some view this as a clear proof of ill feelaccept Mikoyan’s offer, there is the possibility that Castro may ings that the Castro brothers keep . be considering the current domestic situation as dangerous as when he entered Cuba with his army five or six years ago.
The whole nation is totally exhausted after a series of tense might really be afraid of the breakdown of the revolutionary events over the last four and a half years (the revolution, its government as the result of loosening the current defense sysfailure, and this crisis). tem because the measures would let overseas anti-government people return to the country and regain a beachhead.
He might need the possibility of a United States invasion because he wants may accept it on the condition of the normalization of the to crack down on the anti-government movements by stirring US-Cuban economic relations.
Even in that case, the United States side an excessive crisis mentality among the nation.
That’s why would not accept the demand, which means it is unlikely to he cannot accept the base inspections offer.
The cable has been transferred to Embassies in the United States and Mexico.
According to Chinese reports of and economic and military planning dramatically the meeting, the Standing Committee decided to “enhance shifted in the early 1960s in response to two events. our vigilance, concentrate forces on strengthening national The first was a May 1961 coup d’état in South Korea that defense, and delay the original Seven-Year Plan until 1963. brought to power an anti-communist military junta led by Otherwise economic construction and the national defense General Park Chung Hee.
Within two months of the South Korean military coup, North Korean leaders greeted the 1960s with optimism.
North Korea signed a Treaty of Friendship, Cooperation The country continued its phoenix-like rise from the ashes and Mutual Assistance with the Soviet Union.
Within days, of the devastating Korean War by successfully Pyongyang signed a similar agreement with Beijing.
With the completing, ahead of schedule, a Three-Year Plan for national inclusion of mutual defense clauses that committed both parreconstruction and a Five-Year Plan for comprehensive industies to aid one another if attacked, both agreements provided trialization.
Premier Kim Il Sung had also survived the most North Korea with a greater sense of security. serious political challenge of his long tenure in 1956.
In fact, Kim had been trying to get such an which the pace of development would be slowed down before agreement from the Soviets for over two years.
Conditions on after the withdrawal in October 1958 of the Chinese People’s the divided peninsula also appeared more favorable to North Volunteer Army (which had entered North Korea in late 1950 Korea.
In April 1960, South Korean president Syngman Rhee to fight the Americans), Kim Il Sung traveled to Moscow was forced from office following a series of massive studentin late January 1959 to attend the CPSU XXI Congress. led demonstrations.
The North Korean leadership identified During this trip, Kim proposed the signing of a mutual in this an opportunity for unification, and proposed the cooperation treaty with the Soviet Union, Pyongyang’s chief establishment of a Korean Confederation that would allow for supplier of advanced weaponry and machinery.
Though both regimes to temporarily maintain their social systems as Khrushchev acceeded to his request, and agreed to visit they transitioned to a unified system of government.
Pyongyang later that year to sign the agreement, for over two All of this changed on 16 May 1961 when Park Chung years, the Kremlin leader found reasons to postpone his trip.
Hee led a coup against the democratically elected government Khrushchev finally signed the agreement in July 1961 when of President Yun Po Sun and Prime Minister Chang Myong, Kim traveled to Moscow. who had been in power for less than a year after President The North Korean leadership believed that their suspiSyngman Rhee was forced from office.
As that, in the eyes of the North Koreans, were vulnerable to Vice Premier Kim Il would later describe, because of the lesbeing picked off, one by one, by the United States.
In the immediate wake of the Cuban Missile amounts of money it involved.
That is why we are curCrisis, on 1 November Kim Il Sung expressed his concern rently falling behind in completing the 7-year plan by one to Soviet Ambassador Vasily Moskovsky that the North’s air year, and we still need 3 to 5 years in order to fulfill the seven year plan at least in basic parameters.
Major cities, such as years and 2 months have passed and we have fulfilled less Pyongyang, Wonsan, Chongjin, and Hamheung, were poorly than half of the 7-year plan’s goals. protected from air raids.
He therefore requested permission to send a delegation to Moscow to discuss military aid.
Specifically, to disagreements between Moscow and Pyongyang over North enhance coastal defenses, he asked for submarines.
For air Korea’s autarkic development strategy, relations remained cordefenses, Kim requested an unspecified number of MIGdial through 1962.
In a 14 however, North Korea publicly sided with the Chinese in the November conversation with Ambassador Moskovsky, Kim Sino-Soviet split, and expressed opposition to Khrushchev’s Il Sung played up the threat to North Korea, remarking “I purported revisionism, particularly his policy of peaceful know that [First Secretary Khrushchev and Second Secretary coexistence with the United States.
Moscow would sell the weapons to drew closer to the People’s Republic of China than at any Pyongyang, but not give them on credit.
The fear of North Korea regime escalated its efforts to achieve self-relilosing their freedom of action due to long-term exclusive ance in national defense.
One week later, the Fifth Plenum of orientation toward the PRC eventually forced North Korean the Fourth KWP Central Committee formally adopted what leaders to change their approach to developing international it referred to as the equal emphasis policy, initially launched contacts with the USSR and European socialist countries. in the wake of the May 1960 military coup in South Korea, This change coincided with Khrushchev’s involuntary deparwhich called for simultaneous development of heavy industure, in October 1964, from the leadership of the CPSU and try and defense capabilities.
Hungarian was forced to take in light of the perceived betrayal to the diplomats reported that by February 1963 “large-scale work smaller countries in the socialist camp.
The Soviet Union, Kosygin argued, was in fact fore they were compelled to keep an army of 700,000 and a fighting imperialism.
These huge armed forces constituted Kim elaborated on the tremendous economic difficulties the enormous expenses for the national economy of the DPRK, DPRK faced as a result of measures to strengthen national and this is why neither industry nor agriculture had made defense that were adopted in December 1962 because of the headway in the last two years, they could perceived unwillingness of Moscow to live up to its security not invest substantial sums in these . commitments to Pyongyang.
The February 1965 Kosygin Comrade Kosygin asked him what caused this distrust.
In visit became an important catalyst of the favorable change in the view of Kim Il, the Soviet Union had betrayed Cuba at Pyongyang’s attitude toward the Moscow. the time of the Caribbean crisis, and later it also betrayed the While the shift in North Korea’s foreign relations after Vietnamese.
It was incomprehensible to him how cross-border raids and engaged in other provocative acts could the Korean leaders be so uninformed, they had not the against South Korea at a rate of nearly one a day.
A careful reading of the available documentary of the Caribbean crisis, Comrade Kosygin said, the whole evidence from the archives of Pyongyang’s former communist Soviet merchant fleet and several warships had been busy allies suggests that Kim Il Sung never fully trusted the Soviets with shipments to Cuba.
Before the crisis, Cuba had faced American imperialstate of mobilization for decades and escalated efforts to ism, which was armed to the teeth, almost unarmed.
Apart achieve self-reliance in national defense, particularly through from the known missiles, the Soviet Union provided Cuba the aquisition of a nuclear deterrent.
This contributed in part with all the modern arms, including the most up-to-date to North Korea’s eventual economic slowdown. aircraft, tactical missiles, and other military equipment, that now enabled it to resist the pressure of American imperialism efficiently.
He set forth in detail what sort of and how many aircraft, tanks, etc. had been shipped to Cuba as aid.
As for the Tonkin provocation, Comrade Kosygin went Report, Embassy of Hungary in North Korea to the on, for one thing, the Soviet government had assumed the Hungarian Foreign Ministry, 8 January 1965 Chinese and Korean military forces to be strong enough to protect the Democratic Republic of Vietnam against the In mid-December Comrade American imperialist attacks, for these were closer Moskovsky returned from Moscow, and told me the folto Vietnam than the Soviet Union.
As a request that he finds out whether the delegation led by consequence of this decision, various military equipment of Kosygin would accept an invitation to visit the DPRK. an adequate quantity was launched for Vietnam.
The Chinese C Moskovsky immediately promised to pass the request government gave its consent to their transport via China by on but asked why it was necessary to discuss this matter at air and by rail.
Kim Yong Nam replied that they wanted to use this the airborne units had already arrived in Vietnam, while the “common diplomatic way.” trains transporting other military equipment were on their C Gromyko and the delegation were informed about way.
Then he enumerated everything that had been sent to Kim Il Sung’s wish the same evening.
After that, Comrade Kosygin said if it could be only a two or three day excursion.
The Korean that he was sorry to see that the Korean comrades, due to their side was informed about it.
Then, on 10 February, the Soviet lack of information, raised the issue of distrust with regard to Embassy received a written invitation where the name of the the Soviet Union for no reason. delegation was not specified (a dotted line was in the place In the view of Kim Il, the Soviet Union did not support the for the name), and the USSR titulary was asked to also relay national liberation struggle of the Asian and African peoples. to Kosygin that the Korean side was leaving it up to him Thereupon Comrade Kosygin asked him whether the freedom to determine the character of the delegation (c.
MOL, XIX-J-1-j Korea, 1965, 73. doboz, IV-100, The whole time until the delegation’s arrival in Beijing, the 001819/1965.
It was a bit disappointed when it learned that the delegation would leave the PRC for the DPRK as early as on 11 February.
During the initial Embassy in Pyongyang on 16 February 1965. conversation, a program for the delegation’s stay in the DPRK was also approved in general.
He again pointed out that the delegation could stay in chargé ď affairesi.
Moskovsky said at the beginning that the Korean side In his 4-hour presentation, Kosygin talked about following initiated the delegation’s visit.
On 6 February, this invitation was hastily changed to Sunday, • He informed the KWP leadership about the internal situa7 February.
Among other things, session. a proposal was discussed there about setting up a Warsaw Pact Right at the beginning he also pointed out that his presenCommand Center that would be in charge of a permanent tation should not be taken as his subjective opinion; he was build-up of defenses.
He also mentioned a negative position going to show in talks how the whole leadership of the CPSU of the Romanian delegation, which so far prevented carryviews these issues and what is its position. ing out this measure.
He further mentioned the Romanian delegation’s initiative for abolishing all pacts, including the In the course of the conversation he then informed the Warsaw Pact.
KWP leadership about the situation and good results in He further briefly touched upon meetings of [Soviet USSR manufacturing and its successful planned developForeign Minister Andrei] Gromyko with [US President ment.
He said that about which the USSR Ambassador already informed as it appears, shortcomings of the USSR agriculture are not Kim Il Sung earlier.
In connection with that, Kim Il Sung affecting only the USSR but are characteristic for all socialist again pointed out that during these meetings, the DPRK countries.
He said that practically all our countries must buy and its request of American troops’ withdrawal from South grain abroad these days.
C Kosygin assured him again sell grain after the harvest but have shortages of it soon after that the USSR identifies fully with support of the DPRK and must buy it back.
When talking about the USSR foreign policy, in the USSR this year, we had to buy again.
Many of these Kosygin said that until the October plenary of the difficulties were caused by Khrushchev’s incorrect directive CPSU CC, this part of the CPSU policy was also affected by to substitute the shortage of bread in the population’s diet number of Khrushchev’s subjective influences that the CPSU with increased consumption of meat, that is, with increased CC does not agree with.
While talking about foreign policy, Kosygin informed C Kosygin did not react to this remark and continued the KWP leadership about all the most complicated problems that after the October , different relations prevailed of current international relations, and also advised it about in the CPSU CC, the evidence of which are also the delegathe CPSU CC position on these issues. tion’s talks with the KWP leadership.
He said that it was sumThat is the fundamental pre-requisite for mutual relations moned at the request of the GDR [German Democratic among fraternal parties.
This collective reason can better Republic; East Germany] on concerns of growing danger judge what unites us, what divides us, and what we do not from the FRG . agree with.
C Kosygin said yes but at the same time every country has many special features, especially of national pointed out that the Albanian leadership responded with an character.
Therefore it was agreed not to discuss the letconsidering these differences.
In “Vietnam has special features; by the way, we delivered there connection with Kim Il Sung’s question, Kosygin informed a lot of weapons and ammunition recently; Cuba has special the Korean side about the recent initiative of the USSR to features; our aid there also represents a considerable contriburenew mutual diplomatic representation between the USSR tion to the struggle of the Cuban people; every country has and the PRA, which the Albanian side completely ignored. special features, and we have to take it into account.
However, That all illustrates, as Kosygin then commented, that the these special features must not override our common line.
To that, Kim Il Sung retorted that the KWP committee unanimously called for taking necessary measures line has always been independent and not Chinese.
These relations, How is the CPSU CC dealing with the problem of calling though not by our fault, deteriorated considerably in the last an international meeting of fraternal parties; whether and years.
I would like to tell you that we are aware of your specihow the USSR supports the liberation movement. ficities, and therefore we visited you in order to talk with you Whether the CPSU CC has any critical comments on the about what unites us.
You are accusing us that we do not fight with imperialism C Kosygin reacted to it immediately.
Do you really think that namely leaving the UN, he said that they exchanged very nice letters we would be capable to align ourselves with imperialism with Mr Sukarno.
The Soviet side assured him that the USSR that Khrushchev was buddy-buddy with Eisenhower and policy towards Indonesia would not change and remains Kennedy.
Sukarno allegedly replied with a nice letter consensus about what method is better, whether yours and where he expressed how glad he was that relations with the the Vietnamese, that is Chinese, or ours and that of other USSR would not change. fraternal countries.
By the way, that is one of the main issues About consultations of fraternal parties, Kosygin said we want to discuss at meetings.” that the date March 1 for the meeting of the “You ask how we are helping the national liberation moveeditorial commission would be kept.
We provided all their ings would only be of consultative character, and no joint military equipment.
Indonesian aircraft, weapons for ground document is expected to be issued.
C Kosygin replied that the have to understand that the time for meetings is behind us. position of the CPSU CC and all 60 fraternal parties is solid Only actions count today.
Should we now reject this requirement, And who provided both clothing and all weapons and orgawe would get into a conflict with those 60 fraternal parties.
Or how about the PRV, who was again the meeting is organized, only 3 parties will be against it.
The date of the “I would like to tell you that I talked about it with Mao meeting is firmly set on March 1, and we have a final comZedong during our stopover in Beijing.
But why wait for a big war, I asked, main topic at the talks will be how to achieve unification of when Vietnam needs help now, immediately.
He then especially thanked but help. for clarification of the situation in Vietnam and the Soviet “Mao Zedong also talked about how 4 American cruisers Union.
He therefore also wants to openly and honestly operate in Vietnamese waters.
We will inform the Soviet delegation about the situation in the DPRK give you weapons even for that, our most modern submarines. and about the KWP CC position on the discussed issues.
We will give you completely free of lacked most of all necessary experience for working it out.
We charge all the necessary weapons and planes and submarines. used what we learned from the previous threeand five-year And if they destroy them, we are willing to give you new ones and twice as many.
To make things worse, we suffered delegation listened especially to this part of Kosygin’s talk. greatly because of disagreements with you and other socialist Kim Il Sung himself in no time asked Kosygin how he views countries, and because of disagreements within the ICWM. the current situation in South Vietnam, and with an obvious That is, the goals of the 7-year plan presumed aid from and concern he then asked whether American provocations would further broadening of cooperation with you and other socialnot lead to a “great war.” ist countries.
We were counting on this aid but, unfortuIn the ensuing conversation, Kosygin made the KWP nately, it did not materialize.
That was the main reason why leadership familiar in detail with the USSR aid to the we did not fulfill the plan.
C Moskovsky told us about the second meeting on February 13 that it started at 10 o’clock and lasted till 2:30 pm.
C Kim Il Sung was talking and was occasionally interrupted by Kosygin’s questions.
According to Moskovsky’s assessment, Kim Il Sung acted objectively and calmly.
He first thanked C Kosygin for accepting the invitation and for his presentation at the meeting in the Great Theatre.
Transform our popular military into a military of cadres, which means a strong military in terms of quality and which will “Comrade Kim Il Sung teaches us that we must not forget be able to rise up to its feet immediately after being called upon. that the construction of socialism in our country is being Modernize our military.
In other words, we must have done while imperialism, which is the enemy of socialism, a military which possesses modern technology and strategic continues to exist and that is why we need to achieve both capability. the economic construction and the military construction.
We must use the course of the we should overvalue one of them or undervalue the other, we masses in the military, so that it may be able to face the preswould be going to the extreme, so we must combine the two. ent conditions.
The workers must defend the factories and the “Comrade Kim Il Sung teaches us that we must fight the peasants, their cooperatives. belief that should the war start, the economy will be destroyed Fortify the entire country.
We must make sure that and that is why we must concentrate our forces into the Korea is turned into a gigantic bunker that can withmilitary construction.
At the same time we must fight the stand rockets, tanks, chemical weapons, aviation, etc. tendency to think that we are doing well and that is why we need to only pay attention to the economic construction and “It is possible that the Albanian military delegation that disregard the military one. visited our country saw these preparations and construction.
We are fully prepared ple and our defensive power are increased and we can show that should the enemy dare to attack us, we will deliver sudthe world the supremacy of the socialist system.
By getting den, death-spelling blows to him.” stronger militarily, we will be able to withstand any aggression, and that is why our enemies will never dare to attack us.
Translated for the continents wars of an aggressive character, is threatening CWIHP by Enkel Daljani.] the socialist countries, and is following the strategy of leaving the large states alone while turning the blade of its weapons against the small or separated socialist countries to swallow Notes them.
In other words, the American imperialism is follow1 James F Person is the Senior Program Associate for the ing the strategy of swallowing one by one the small socialist History and Public Policy Program and coordinator of the North countries and leaving the larger ones for later.
Soviet-DPRK Relations and the Roots of North Korean East, and due to the provocations at the line of demarcation Despotism, 1953-1964 (Washington, DC: Woodrow Wilson Center in Korea.
XIX-J-1-j Korea (Top Secret Hungarian Foreign Ministry, 15 February 1963, XIX-J-1-j Korea, 6.
Moskovsky about the negotiations between the Korea, 1965, 73. doboz, IV-100, 001819/1965.
Cuban crisis in particular, increasing numbers on both sides The Soviet premier had been humiliated, and had embarrassed of the seventeenth parallel clamored for an escalation of the the entire socialist camp by extension.
This of course increased southern insurgency and for greater DRVN involvement in the allure of Beijing’s radical prescriptions on national liberait.
In late October Prime Minister Pham Van Dong told Liberation Front told the DRVN national assembly in a reporter from the French communist newspaper L’Humanité late 1962.
Phien hop ngay amenable than ever to a resumption of war below the sev08.5.1963: Tham luan cua DBQH ve dau tranh thong nhat dat enteenth parallel, Moscow, which remained committed to nuoc o mien Nam, ve tinh hinh Tay Nguyen, ve tang cuong quan ly precluding the outbreak of another major conflagration in kinh te tai chinh, Nghi quyet va bao cao cua CP; Phong Quoc hoi; Vietnam, dispatched Yuri Andropov to Hanoi in January Vietnam National Archives Center 3, Hanoi , 4.
Nguyen Van settle its differences with Saigon and the Americans in the Hien, truong dai bieu MTDTGPMNVN, 23.10.1962 [Welcome same way.
Ho so ky hop thu nam cua QH khoa II tu ngay 22.27.10.1962. of the same event underscored the widening “credibility gap” Tap 2: Phien hop ngay 23.10.1962: Bao cao to trinh, Nghi quyet cua QH UBTVQH, PTT ve cong tac cua UBTVQH, ve tong quyet toan between Moscow and its Vietnamese allies, and those among ngan sach Nha nuoc, ket qua Hoi nghi Gionevo ve Lao, ve to chuc the latter who espoused hardline positions in particular.
Phieu hop ngay 27.10.1962: Tham luan cua DBQH ve to chuc it was important in authenticating the views of Vietnamese HDND va UBHC cac cap, ve tinh hinh mien Nam va thong nhat hardliners and invalidating the notion that the crisis in the nuoc; Phong Quoc hoi; VNAC3.
South could be resolved by negotiations with the Kennedy 12 “Report of Visit to North Vietnam by a Delegation of the administration.
Asie-Océanie: Vietnam Nord , Archives 2 British Consul-General Hanoi to Southeast Asia Diplomatiques de France, La Courneuve , 2.
AO: VN; ADF, 3 371/166712; The National Archives, United Kingdom , and FGDH to MFA, 21 January 1963; AO: VN; ADF, 1-2.
Dien van, 4 Dong’s remarks and the western response to them appear in dien tu va cac loi phat bieu trong thoi gian doan o Viet Nam; Phong BCGH to SEAD, 3 November 1962, 1.
For both parties, it was like establishing Minister of Foreign Trade Alberto Mora.
Mongolia then and later course various gatherings of party secretaries in Moscow), served as a pro-Soviet voice in the Third World.
Mora so there was a relationship there that defied purely geoavoided polemics and instead brought Luvsan up to date graphical realities. on Cuba’s relations with Chile and Brazil.
Mongolian diplomats were witness sion, during the Soviet-dominated, communist period to these events and had something to say.
By exploring from 1924 until the USSR’s collapse in 1991—was a these documents—like documents of Cuba’s other socialist natural place to check out the documentary trace of this allies—we can gain a better understanding of the dynamic somewhat artificial relationship. of “fraternal” relationships within the Eastern bloc.
I learned that there was in fact considerable traffic in cables between Ulaanbaatar and Havana from about 1961 onwards.
Most cables turned out, on inspection, to be congratulatory messages related to different anniversaries.
Alekseev opined that Mongolia could serve as a model for Cuba, EMBASSY OF THE MPR as a country that successfully escaped feudalism.
About a meeting between the minister of foreign December 1962 conversation between the Mongolian trade of Cuba Alberto Mora Becerra and Ambassador Luvsan.
Ambassador of Cuba in the USSR Arnoldo Peres Pinto, trade representative Hishigsuren, I will bring a list of our and interpreters, and from our side: deputy trade representagoods in Russian. tive Hishigsuren and interpreters Ilyin and Erdene.
At the beginning of the conversation Ambassador Luvsan Luvsan—We will carefully study your list of goods.
Although asked Alberto Mora Becerra whether he travelled well and our country is small, we will help the Cuban comrades within whether he likes the Moscow weather.
Alberto Mora, after our possibilities. expressing his happiness, asked Ambassador Luvsan how his health was after he had visited Cuba this spring, to which Alberto—Now, after finishing negotiations in Moscow, I will Ambassador Luvsan said that it was great to be in Havana, go to China.
Because I may not be able to meet with you in and that he came back very content.
He answered that Cuban Havana, you will probably conduct negotiations with my air and atmosphere were very suitable for his health. deputy Rodriguez.
In general, because ministers travel here and there a lot, there is little time to meet.
Alberto—On the occasion of being in Moscow I wanted to talk to you about our two countries’ trade discussions.
I am happy to conduct our first negotiation in Ulaanbaatar, and the next in Moscow. negotiations with an old acquaintance comrade Rodriguez.
Khrushchev and the victorious leader of the own trip to Cuba to participate in the Cuban Cuban Revolution Fidel Castro, the Socialist camp, headed celebration. by the Soviet Union, and the people who struggle for peace, saved the entire world from the danger of a nuclear war.
This delegation, other than me, will consist of our deputy trade representatives Hishigsuren, and the third will be a Alberto—During the last crisis, our people bravely and herotechnical expert who will come from Ulaanbaatar.
F Castro, resentatives were invited to your national day celebrations after the crisis, spoke on Havana television.
Other than that, the celebration, will be the deputy member of the MPRP Central USSR truly carried out a great duty.
Committee Politburo, deputy of the State Khural, first secretary of Ulaanbaatar city committee, head of the MongolLuvsan—People of every socialist country provide Cuba with Cuban Friendship Society Luvsanravdan, as the head, and all necessary help, and Cuba has friends in all corners of the another person. world.
Therefore, I firmly believe that if there is no war, Cuba’s difficult questions can all easily be resolved.
Luvsan—On the occasion of your being in Moscow, and in Alberto—Because the governments of these countries are order to ease our negotiations in Havana, I would like to hear under the pressure of American imperialism, they are very your main thoughts about what goods could be exchanged irresolute.
Chile stopped buying our sugar, and buys sugar on the world market at prices that are twice the price of our sugar.
It is clear what Chile-Cuban Notes relations will be like after the meeting between Kennedy and the Chilean President that will 1 On Interkit, see James Hershberg, Sergey Radchenko, Péter take place soon.
A Window into the In general it is difficult to believe any of the governments of Final Decades of the Sino-Soviet Relationship,” CWIHP Working Latin America but one can believe the people.
Alberto—This of course had a negative influence but while 4 Mora may have been in Moscow as part of a delegation led our men hold guns defending the country, women and chilby the head of Cuba’s National Institute of Agrarian Reform , dren successfully gather the harvest.
Carlos Rafael Rodriguez, a senior communist member of Fidel Castro’s inner circle.
Only a small percentage of the Cuban materials opened , in for the 2002 conference (or a predecessor in March 2001 to mark cooperation with the United States co-sponsors, Cuba released hundreds of the 40th anniversary of the Bay of Pigs/Playa Giron events) dealt pages of additional documents pertaining to the events of the fall with top-level Cuban decision-making or exchanges with the of 1962, from a variety of sources—party, military, intelligence, Soviet Union.
What follows below is a selection of some of the most sigincludes essentially the complete record of those November 1962 nificant, high-level materials made available by Cuba for the Soviet-Cuban exchanges from the Soviet side.
This new book, in 2002 conference, which are appearing in English and in print turn, builds on an already substantial record of Soviet materials for the first time.
According to the estimations made, we have fuel and fleet for making four daily missions for 20 days.
The reserve anti-aircraft batteries in Havana must be in such conditions that they can be moved when it is necessary.
Príncipe, because those can be moved; and do not take them The American base at Key West has been reinfrom the refineries either. forced, and has acquired a quite interesting importance.
They should be concentrated in three points, division, they could move their first troops here in five or six at least 24 batteries in three points; not disorderly, but carehours.
But if they move the 82nd division, we would certainly fully placed, not in assigned places but so that they can be know, moved toward any other place.
Commander Alto Santamaría : An idea that we have is that we must think through a reserve to cover the highways in case of immediate aggression, in Specifically, I believe the most serious weakness that we have order to move through them. among tanks, is that of the independent companies [2 lines The most dire deficiency we have is in communications. redacted and part of a third] because they are very small Those that we should have are still coming by sea or leaving units and to not have real control over them makes it difficult the Soviet Union.
Our primary method of communications to have security in general. is telephones.
We have radio communications as well but there are many things yet to arrive that have not; they were Analyzing them quickly, regarding the combat preparation expected between October and December, and this is a grave of the LT, we can say that they have made up to nine daily difficulty that comrade Chief of Communications knows well. torpedo launches, but have not conducted any at night, since we are precisely in that stage of training.
All artillery groups that were ready to fight, occupying their The frigates do not have personnel with very good experizones of concentration within a time between one and oneence in shooting artillery devices. and-a-half hours.
The Brigades took a little longer, but the We consider one of the problems we have to be the lack groups in general occupied their positions in this time. of rapid coordination with our aviation and coastal forces to All units were provided between 95 and 100% of both know the regions in which we can operate.
All units are provisioned with the modsary to establish this coordination. ules that correspond to them.
The General Staff approved in the last few days some With the fleet of Soviet rocket launchers, we have a antiaircraft equipment for our bases, but they have not arrived problem with respect to transportation.
We have a concern about the base of Baneis; we need, at trucks to move the munitions. least, to have a battery in Baneis, one in Cienfuegos, another in Siguanea and also in Cabañas, primarily.
Commander Fidel Castro: It is good that the weapons found in Ceiba del Agua have been moved.
In SAU we are very poor in vehicles, because we The one in Siguanea is not important; there you do not have less than one full module.
In 82mm mortars, we are a need anti-aircraft capabilities; for the others, yes.
The two in little short with 0.83 modules, however, there is a huge numCabañas and the 30mm in Cienfuegos make three. ber of mortar projectiles.
And at the same time, we must What they have are radio stations, fixed or mobile, but still ask infantry units of the Army of the West to send trucks taking them away from the fronts of battle.
I believe it is terms of this are Aviation and anti-landing battalions.
Those very important to facilitate mobility from the storage facilibattalions have some German stations that are not ideal for ties, with strong people accustomed to carrying much weight. military uses, and they consume a great deal of current from We must be careful placing personnel in the storage facilithe batteries. ties for explosives.
These stations are very secure, and these comrades politica 40 años despues”) organized by the National Security do not need them right now.
October 22 — Considered denouncing the United States for its blockade in the Security Council.
We should do as much as possible to resume fumi24 — Arinos (Alfonso Arinos de Melo Franco, delegate gation, because lacking that can damage us more than the from Brazil in the General Assembly) -ambassador in enemy.
I believe we should see how soon fumigation flights Havana instructed to take steps in favor of observers. can be reestablished.
Brazil and Mexico ready to support actions to prein waters under their jurisdiction, and place aircraft-hunters vent war – they propose suspension of USSR shipments and there.
We have no political reason, of any type or any kind, withdrawal of American ships.
If it’s still over the sea, one, three miles…fine, but anything flying here, we bring down, making sure it falls — United States threats might be to enable negotiating in better in our territory. conditions for them.
Quick fix, consisting of suspension of the blockfour or five places and place four or five batteries in these sites, ade and shipment of arms.
United States wishes and give only to these crews orders to shoot at that moment. for suppression of arms and construction in Cuba and then Concentrate batteries of 30mm guns in four or five places, they will lift the blockade.
He must establish good coordination to avoid the possibility of wants guarantees and asks Cuba.
Stevenson, who stated that he would It is necessary to start to fire some shots, because the consider it. have a mess stirred up.
Remember what U If they begin with the “little mess” we will start to fire, but Thant said in the Security Council on the 24th controlled shots, because now they will begin flying Piper about Dorticós’ words concerning United States guarantees about Cuba. over our defenses.
He says U Thant that Fidel’s letter had matched up with that of that United States and USSR gave encouraging answers toward a Khrushchev. peaceful solution. — U Thant introduced the issue of verification on the 27 — Zorin and U high seas by the Red Cross, neutrals, or the UN, to the Soviets.
Chile, Venezuela, and Ireland (and permacrucial point in the negotiations. nent Western powers) will oppose a long-term solution in the Security Council.
Kennedy] referring to Cuba and Turkey, he confirmed that tion on inspection, considering not only Cuba but the entire his reaction was positive.
I suggest that to complicate the matter, some country should suggest inspec— Riad, from the United tion of Puerto Rico, Central America and the Panama Canal.
Arab Republic , said that the United States insisted on the liquiSoviets do not have a clear idea on Council procedures. dation of the bases as a foundation for understanding and that they were prepared to give Cuba guarantees…Stevenson told 2 — Arinos suggests that Cuba invite neutral ambassadors him that observers were necessary but it would be preferable based in Havana, without prior warning, to resolve Cuba to the UN not only to have observers, but also a no-invasion inspection issue.
They would visit bases and after dismantling, guarantee. make declarations in confirmation.
He sees an advantage, that this would be the initiative of the Cuban government and not another from outside.
He says this is his own idea and if it is 28 — U Thant said that, during his stay in Cuba, “Radio accepted, he will convince Brazil to support it.
They will do it the “Dorticós alternative.” no more inspection of Soviet ships going to Cuba.
At the last minute, Red Cross said its constitution forbids carrying out 3 — The impression that socialist countries were inspection with its insignias and those of the UN would need worried about war and that they still are. to be used, because in practice they were the body doing the inspection.
Socialists will do the same as us. age U Thant’s administration and that it was advisable to strengthen the UN for the defense of small countries.
Urged 10 — Brazil asked me to study an amendment to the Cuba to cooperate with the UN and said that UN intervenmotion.
This came about because I said we objected to the tion contributed to halting the crisis and it would be better to reference to verification for the connotation it has right now. support the UN in future steps.
Socialists agree as they always favor denuclearized zones and will make a similar area in Europe as a precedent.
They tell me Nov. — Irish Ambassador said in they accept control or verification because it can be no other conversation that he regarded as appropriate Cuba’s demand way.
I see as positive the negotiations among Latin American that United States counterrevolutionary activities be stopped and that countries because a door is being opened. this increased tensions in the Caribbean and incited militaristic hysteria in American public opinion. — Zorin reports to me that in the last meeting with Americans, they insisted on inspection and avoided giving guarantees; upon proposing some demands containing the 5 — U Thant consults with countries for the Council sesfive points, McCloy said that the hand of Castro lurked in sion.
Said that possibility for future negotiations with Cuba exists, as well US and USSR were in agreement and that our acceptance as for the resumption of diplomatic and economic relations. was missing.
Nov. — USSR mentions that inspection would be done 10 — I have the impression that the United States insists on inspecwithin next five days.
Impression in United Nations is that tion and shies away from giving guarantees so that they there is no time. strengthen their negotiating position.
After the elections, public 8—U Thant confidentially proposed that accredited Latin tension will dissipate, and after the missiles are withdrawn, American ambassadors in Cuba be invited by our government the United States lacks political justification.
They seem to feel to visit bases and later make an informal declaration.
Every day their is that the group would continue afterwards to serve as a link position in the UN is weaker as they try to win a political between Cuba and the UN for a permanent solution.
He victory in this second stage. believes this is crucial in getting the United States to give guarantees, lift the blockade, and suspend its flights.
U Thant has written 10 — Regarding the Brazilian plan [for Latin American an unsigned letter about this, but awaits a reaction.
Zorin told me his 12 — U Thant brought to my attention that now there observations that the prohibition on bomb transport equipwould be no inspection, but rather verification.
I told him the ment must not be accepted, because they might apply to the effects were the same.
He also affirms that nuclear weapon states must guarantee not to use such weapons against 12 — Seeking joint interview with the USSR and us for Latin America since the United States can do so from their bases.
Kuznetsov had the is also in Rapacki’s plan for idea that he and I would go to see the Americans tonight to Central Europe. present the plan, and I told him no.
I talked about the protocol to Fidel stating he proposed to solve the crisis 1) expulsion in general terms.
The Soviets made modifications and I too of Cuban refugees from the United States who propose invasion by and until Havana is aware of it, I will not presAmerican personnel, 2) lifting of the blockade, 3) cessation ent it formally.
I asked Kuznetsov not to see the Americans of the transport of nuclear weapons to Cuba.
USSR anxious to conclude this should submit themselves to UN arbitration. as soon as possible.
Changes group of 45 countries that made appeal to U Thant never to Article 12 for U Thant. acted as such a group, and that the majority of them feared displeasing the United States; the appeal was aimed toward 13 — Explanation by U Thant of Article 12. peace and not solidarity with Cuba.
The group 14 — About Kuznetsov and modification and my critehas disintegrated.
Chanderly also rion, by which it was substantially altered. confirmed this to me.
He told me of the difficult situation in which the would send a note in protest.
Regarding the protocol he said it Soviets found themselves due to Khrushchev’s letter and was unacceptable and stated that it contained the five points. the United States’ insistence.
U Thant now proposes the Soviets said it was the basis for negotiation, Americans that same but with countries from different geographic areas, they saw it as difficult.
Zorin recalled that the Council had almost all from the group of Belgrade [i.e., the Non-Aligned Movement], and neutrals.
He did not mention countries but agreed on this after UAR and Ghana delegates had spoken. proposed Guinea and Ghana from Black Africa, Mexico and Brazil from Latin America, Austria and Sweden from Europe, 16 — Modification of Brazil plan and reminded me that Sweden is opposed to the blockade; Indonesia and India for Asia and the UAR from the 17 — Arinos told me he would postpone voting on the Arab nations.
He will send a letter to Fidel so that, should he plan. maintain his rejection of the inspection, considering the idea that those countries offer their “good offices” for a permanent 17 — Kuznetsov with U Thant.
Then U Thant would talk negotiations would be tripartite with the United States about the two letters.
He spoke also on Article 12 of the protothat the acceptance of “good offices” will serve to nourish 5 col.
U Thant said that he saw no problem in presenting his points propaganda.
The letter from Kennedy to Khrushchev proposal on this issue if the parties could agree on eleven of refers to missiles, and no subsequent solution.
Verification would Council anyway. occur in all places agreed on by the three parties.
Each party would be able to send groups to determined locations on its Nov. — U Thant letter own initiative, as would the Secretary General.
Suppressed refer21 — U Thant gave me a letter for Fidel acknowledging ence to the Treaty of Rio. receipt of his note from November 19.
He noted that the Cuban government is prepared to withdraw its IL-28 bomb7 — Brazil will postpone the Latin American group meeters, and also that Cuba is open to a wide-ranging solution.
I told the Soviets to ask 26 — U Thant invited Mikoyan and the Soviets to dinner, this of U Thant also. and they asked that he also invite the Americans.
They are waiting for Kennedy to return from the Bahamas [where 26 — I told U Thant that the Americans have said nothing about the documents that the Soviets gave them.
McCloy told us that he did not wish for the USSR the Soviets that it was very important that the UN not lose to send its letter from October 27, because Kennedy did not control.
The Americans refer to it in his own letter. have two alternatives for the proceedings to continue in the Council.
One is that each party makes a declaration and the 3 January 1963 — Americans say if USSR sends letter President summarizes them.
The other would be to not hold from October 27 and 28 then they will send additional docua session and send written documents then gather them in ments.
The Americans submitted this idea to the Soviets. any documents , but rather a letI asked U Thant if now there might be an opportunity to ter.
McCloy’s observation in the letter was that the Caribbean obtain a letter about the neutrals.
He told me he would area was mentioned, and not Cuba. include it in his report.
If they submitted the modified document today. succeed, they will write a second one about the matters on which there is no agreement, supporting the 5 points.
Dec. — I gave the Cuban declaration plan to U Thant in 7—US and USSR agree to send document tonight after case there is agreement among the three parties. pm or tomorrow morning.
Provided by the Cuban Government for the October propaganda at 8 pm.02 Havana conference (“La Crisis de Octubre: Una vision politica 40 años despues”) organized by the National Security 10 — Very cordially, I explained to U Thant that his proArchive.
Translated from Spanish for CWIHP by Chris Dunlap.] posal concerning informal invitation, besides being an abdication of our position on principle, is futile, since the Yankee government is inspecting Soviet ships, and it is known that the dismantling and packing have concluded, and they are now making their departures.
Cables from Cuban Foreign Minister Raúl Roa to Cuban Mission to the 11— Government opposes inspection.
Even though they are opposed to returning planes, we have reached agreement with the USSR that demands an end to Republic of Cuba the blockade in exchange for their withdrawal.
Cuba Mission to the UN Government resolved to present following amendments to Brazilian proposal.
Specifically include Puerto Rico Cable from Cuban Foreign Minister Raúl and Panama Canal Zone as territories with the objective of Roa to Cuban Mission to the United denuclearization.
Guarantees from nuclear powNations , New ers – should give guarantees not to deploy bombs against York, 10 November 1962 Latin America.
Withdrawal of all existing military bases in Latin American territory and Africa belonging to nuclear powers.
Secretariat of the Minister Explicit instructions to discuss and negotiate amendments 10 November 1962 first and second.
In case it is not accepted CLASSIFIED Cuba will vote “abstention”, explaining that although it may be in essential agreement with the substance of the motion, Cuba Mission to the UN it cannot vote for it because Cuban amendment is not included.
Friendly and explanatory arguments and language Very cordially, I explained to U Thant14 that his proposal for Brazil.
Absurd that other nuclear powers cannot have bases concerning informal invitation [sic; in Latin America and the United States has one in Cuba. i.e., inspection—trans./ed.], besides being an abdication of A promise not to use Guantánamo as a nuclear base is not our position on principle, is futile, since the Yankee government is inspecting Soviet ships, and it is known that the enough, because it lacks effective validity.
Regards, ROA dismantling and packing have concluded, and they are now making their departures.
On the other hand, so that you may decide your course of action, informed visitors represent countries that are practically on the side of the enemy.
Insist with Arinos on inclusion of our points of view USSR approved the document as sent.
Essential to demand should be substituted for another in which Soviets confirm nuclear powers promise not to have bases in Latin America having honored the commitment contracted in article eight. and guarantee not to use nuclear weapons against it.
An avenue for further formulation of paragraph of discussion with U Thant is presentation of the tripartite Article Two, the part on devices, to avoid characterizing these protocol.
See devices, and vehicles for air and naval launches, as nuclear Kuznetsov immediately.
In case the United States opposes the protocol, weapons when they are not.
Establishing a denucleaccept U Thant’s idea of independent declaration in which arized zone is worth nothing without guarantees against the each country would promise to uphold its corresponding part only nuclear power on the continent.
Postponing this declaration until the content tal point is withdrawal of military bases by nuclear powers. of that of the United States is known satisfies points raised by the proIn any case, it should be asked that voting on the resolution tocol and Cuban government gives approval.
ROA be separate, the goal being to vote affirmatively on whatever position or abstain.
If the resolution excludes Cuban concerns vote against position according to agreed terms.
In truth, it does not CLASSIFIED interest us to push the Brazilian proposal.
Prepared to consider U Government opposes inspection, favorable that efforts will Thant proposal on Article Twelve, always within the general lead to permanent solution and in agreement that U Thant and permanent solution envisioned in the protocol project. send confidential letter along the lines indicated.
Provided by the Cuban Government for the October 2002 Havana conference (“La Crisis de Octubre: Una vision [Source: Provided by the Cuban Government for the October politica 40 años despues”) organized by the National Security 2002 Havana conference (“La Crisis de Octubre: Una vision Archive.
Translated from Spanish for CWIHP by Chris Dunlap.] politica 40 años despues”) organized by the National Security Archive.
And the USSR does not need bases near the United States, as its missile forces are powerful and Here I will inform you about the conversation with comprecise enough to strike the enemy in any place in the world rade Mikoyan last night when he paid a visit to my house. from within the USSR’s own territory.
Recall that Khrushchev This visit was announced to me by the USSR’s ambassador to said that the precision of our technology permits us to hit a Cuba, comrade Alexeiev , who told me bull’s-eye on a point situated out in the cosmos.
Our missile bases in Cuba, having been discovbecause by way of my presence in the USSR as the Cuban ered by the USA and become perfectly known to them.
This ambassador, I met him and we got together countless times, situation allowed them to destroy the missile bases before they and I befriended his son Sergo, but Mikoyan quickly began could be used.
The situation would have been different as it would his return that was barely an hour later, but he immediately not have produced the crisis.
Talking about this point, one jumped to the topic of discussion. can reach the conclusion that Mikoyan tried to indicate that First, he made a long statement, and upon finishing, I the USSR transferred and installed missiles in Cuba thinking indicated to him that I already knew, through reports of the not of using them, but rather as a political maneuver.
And comrades in the Secretariat and by those which he too had that they proceeded to install them in a way that allowed the learned our points of view.
It must be understood that the situation of humanity toward socialism and the defeat of imperialhas improved for Cuba.
We thought about six months beforehand; then Cuba had no Communism is not imposed by cannon fire or nuclear missiles and there was the danger of an immediate invasion. bombs.
Our guarantee or assurance that war can be avoided, The problem was stopping the aggressors, and this has been that imperialism can be stopped, is in our military strength. accomplished in Kennedy’s promise not to invade Cuba.
We It is clear that if we did not have that military power, the must believe this promise.
Besides, in the next election, he situation would be different and we would have war instead.” will doubtlessly be reelected and will need to keep his word.
They are very costly, So we think Cuba will not have problems for the next five or because they are made deep under the ground, but we have six years.” already made them.
We can affirm that the immense territory “If Cuba is assaulted in another way, it must be underof the USSR ends up being inappropriate for such instalstood that the USSR will retaliate in other parts of the world lations.
But those other important parts of the world are close to the USSR and far from the United States, say, Laos or Berlin.” “The outcome of the crisis in “In Berlin they are in a mousetrap; we have them in a fist.
Our line for With just some artillery and a few tanks, we will crush them. peaceful coexistence is correct.
Before, the men of the USSR If not having the missiles in Cuba ceases to be an advantage, could not go to Africa.
Despite the fact that since I left Cuba I have not had information or even received the HOY newspaper or any other, my principal interpretations of the crisis have aligned fully with This is in general what was said by Mikoyan during an those of the National Leadership.
My opinions and words, up hour and a half of conversation and brought together here to to and including in many details, coincided with what I have the extent that our memory could recall. seen since in the newspapers and Fidel ’s speeches.
Provided by the Cuban Government for the October commission, or that of any other organization, inspecting 2002 Havana conference (“La Crisis de Octubre: Una vision Cuba.
The United States, politica 40 años despues”) organized by the National Security Guatemala, Costa Rica, and Nicaragua should be inspected, Archive.
Translated from Spanish for CWIHP by Chris Dunlap.] and other countries that violate rules and principles of international law and the UN Charter itself – they have been organizing, arming and conducting mercenary invasions from their territories against Cuba and today they train mercenaries, arm pirate ships, infiltrate saboteurs and assassins, etc.
It had the right President Osvaldo Dorticos to Emilio to install atomic weapons, and installed them.
Only if they are fulfilled by the United States, those Five Points will create relative security if Havana, November 27, 1962 that nation disarms the apparatus of the military invasion of “YEAR OF PLANNING” Cuba.
Achieving these Five Points would give us a decided advantage in the entire situation.
Emilio Aragones what I consider among the greatest probability of success – is the withdrawal of the naval base at Guantánamo.
The I send to you, enclosed, a copy of the letter sent by Comrade incongruence of the existence of the base in the current status Blas Roca for your knowledge. of relations between Cuba and the United States has been made quite obvious.
Fraternally, HOMELAND OR DEATH This base today lacks its value for defense of the Panama WE WILL WIN Canal.
The existence of the base is a point of friction more dangerous to the United In Copenhagen, I did not state in my speech, nor in any States’ troops than for us.
It is inconceivable that troops declaration, that peace could have been saved.
I don’t know would now leave from that base to intervene in Venezuela how this version was given or who might have thought it.
The American leaders underFrench journalist from Le Monde asked me for an interview, stand very well that this base, surrounded by well-armed but I did not grant one.
If it had taken even one week longer, what haplaw, and actions contrary to explicit laws of the United States pened in Venezuela would have been equaled or surpassed in itself.
The economic freeze, or, better put, the suspension of many countries. all import and export trade with Cuba, in spite of its absolute lack of morality, has a certain foundation in the fact that each These factors can weigh decisively in the intentions of country is free to trade or not trade with another, to have the Yankee leaders to obligate them to accept and respect the diplomatic relations or not.
To maintain the suspension of promise of non-invasion of Cuba. import and export trade with Cuba is to maintain economic But what they cannot seriously promise is not to seek aggression.
To keep economic aggression is to keep the door many other ways of fighting against the Cuban Revolution, open to military aggression. in hopes of diverting, corrupting, or crushing it.
Even so, I see no possibility that this kind of aggression I am in complete agreement with the way that comrade might cease, unless the leaders of the United States does Fidel set out the matter of our relations and discrepancies a U-turn and tries to establish similar relations with Cuba as with the Soviet Union.
We have much they have with Yugoslavia and with the same ends, if they to be grateful for from the USSR and we are thankful.
We have some hope for a similar arrangement. know of the respect that they have shown for our sovereignty But as I see things, this is not likely.
We are identified with them in of the cardinal difference between our leadership and the the ideal of socialism and communism and the theory of Yugoslavian one, of course, here I have only thought of the Marxism-Leninism.
But United States must try to defeat the Cuban Revolution so even between brothers and friends, differences arise.
As we that no doubt remains among Latin American nations that have done, we wish to overcome these differences within the the path of Cuba cannot be taken.
The United States cannot renounce framework of fraternal discussion, direct and private, or semithe fight against the Cuban Revolution in the same way private, since the differences are very obvious and the points that we cannot give up the struggle against capitalism.
The of view of all concerned are well enough known. problem is that of the forms of conflict.
Effectively, the United States Frank, brotherly discussion of differences should lead us turning to invasion can be avoided.
It is the beginning of the Revolution in Latin America. risking everything for Cuba.
At the same time, the socialist camp means a great deal is a significant factor – precisely against invasion, when faced to Cuba.
It means weapons, breaking the economic blockade, with the prospect of war. facilitating the construction of socialism to the maximum extent.
Invasion of Cuba is costly in terms of life for the social victory in the shortest time possible and with the fewest Yankees because Cuba is well armed and prepared to defend possible sacrifices.
That is why Fidel’s position, which I share itself with the spirit of Homeland or Death. from the heart, is so wise and fair, and so Marxist-Leninist.
It is not possible at this stage to carry out an in Kennedy’s statements.
I have previously stated the reasons invasion that would quickly triumph.
These reasons the invasion drags out, its results would be uncertain and make the promise possible, but it also could be that no such problematic, even in the case that it did not lead – as it would promise is made. lead – to world war.
The invasion of Cuba, as soon as it unfolds, Khrushchev] of the step that would be taken.
Even more seriwould unleash a series of anti-American actions in Latin ously, the necessity of relying upon the Cuban government American countries as well as others in the world.
Apparently, there is no solution It has been very dire that the USSR did not previously for this besides accepting what would satisfy the Soviet governwarn Cuba about its determination [to remove the misment, guaranteeing us in the future that it would not happen siles] and that the message under any circumstances, and fighting together for the FIVE did not take the government of Cuba into account.
More POINTS of guarantee against direct military aggression by the serious yet is that the message discusses inspection, when United States against Cuba.
Of course, I believe that, with firmit is known that Cuba will not accept this in any way.
I ness and good sense, resolute opposition to inspection must be believe the crisis could have gone another way that would maintained, whether in Cuban territory or Cuban waters. have given us advantages and guarantees for the peace and My primary reaction to the problem of the provocative integrity of Cuba.
The brazen Yankees a compromise and we should see it as such. exploit the USSR’s eagerness for peace and Cuba’s good sense to commit these unspeakable acts of abuse.
The only thing In Prague, I talked with Caderca , with that goes against my first reaction is that previously, we have Hendrix , with the leaders of the International tolerated these flights and starting to shoot down planes now Journal, Soboliev and Rumiantsev.
In these conversations I could appear to be a desire to provoke a situation that would stated the same thing, with a heavier emphasis on one matmake agreement impossible.
And we must be very careful ter or another, according to the conflict most pertinent to the not to give that impression.
With Caderca, for example, the subject was that we ficult—or impossible—any valid and worthy accord in favor could not consider it a victory, but rather a compromise.
Our opposition to inspection defends Peace, because Hendrix, it was that I thought bringing Soviet cruise ships to if Cuba gives up its sovereignty and declares itself defeated by the Caribbean and having merchant vessels cross under their the United States, there cannot be peace in the world.
This will not make an agreement easier; it will the course that the crisis had taken delayed the solution to the only make countless new, humiliating petitions presented by Berlin crisis.
They also showed a great deal of interest in the the United States easier.
Inspection is important because if we normalization of diplomatic relations with Cuba. accede to it, the United States will present themselves [i.e., In conclusion, here I have done as much as I could in itself ] as victorious and omnipotent.
It will not facilitate an the middle of a complex situation in which I, unfortunately, agreement because inspection is not necessary to prove that lacked reports, sometimes of the most basic kind, since the the bases were dismantled and missiles withdrawn.
We would lack of language hindered me from seeing information in the not choose the countries or the personnel.
We would have to press directly and in its entirety. accept countries that the United States finds acceptable; the With regards and an embrace, Blas.
Provided by the Cuban Government for the October 2002 cerning control and disarmament.
Accepting control as the United States wishes is to make disarmament more difficult and accelerate preparations for war.
Going along with inspection is to speed up the march Confidential Memo from Cuban Mission to a situation advantageous to the imperialists that also would to the United Nations Concerning Anastas bring us closer to war.
In Germany, I visited the Soviet Mikoyan’s Conversations with US ambassador Pervukhin to sort out matters concernPresident John F Kennedy (and Secretary ing the trip to Moscow, before receiving any indication that of State Dean Rusk), 2 December 1962, it should not be done. with cover note from Cuban President In the conversation, the crisis became the main topic.
Kennedy said that the idea of agreeing on the three declaHavana, 5 December 1962 rations before the Security Council is generally not acceptable because they cannot vote for Cuba’s declaration and Cuba “YEAR OF PLANNING” was not going to vote for that of the United States.
He said it would be better not to arrive at similar declarations and To Dr.
Raúl Roa García limit the process to U Thant taking note of the declarations from the USSR and USA, without any voting by the Security I am returning the confidential memo from 2 December, Council.
He also suggested not going to the Council in any directed to you regarding the interview of Mikoyan with form – neither to the session, nor to the proceedings through Kennedy.
U Thant – but rather producing the declarations, he in Washington and Khrushchev in Moscow.
Osvaldo Dorticos Torrado Kennedy stated that if they went to the Council they would have to mention the Rio de Janeiro Pact and interAmerican obligations because the USA and the other Latin American countries were signatories of that Pact.
He added that in this situation feels obligated to fly Mikoyan spoke extensively on his visit to Cuba.
He said over Cuban territory, even though the USSR criticizes them the Revolution had accomplished many tasks, and specially for doing so.
He then showed a newspaper clipping in which pointed out the schools and hospitals, referring also to proit was said that Cuba was still hiding some Soviet missiles, and duction.
Mikoyan said that this all seemed like the talk of crazy Kennedy made no comment.
He only expressed “that men, and expressed his confidence that the USA would not he was pleased Castro worried about the people.” be swayed by such foolishness.
Provided by the Cuban Government for the October American “right” to interfere with these flights, as this was 2002 Havana conference (“La Crisis de Octubre: Una vision against international law. politica 40 años despues”) organized by the National Security Kennedy said they would not carry out any more lowArchive.
Translated from Spanish for CWIHP by Chris Dunlap.] altitude flights, but that higher flights would continue.
Mikoyan responded that low flights were an act of blatant piracy, and the rest were piracy in the high skies.
In that way, he said, the USA could Official Carlos Rafael Rodriguez and Soviet Leader Nikita Khrushchev,11-12 assure themselves that Cuba was not subverting order in Latin December 1962 America, a charge that he rejected.
He added that Cuba could also talk of subversion in its territory, not only by the United States but also by other countries in the Western Hemisphere.
Subsequently, I will send you the report on the result of Do I tell him that you are going to fulfill the obligations you the negotiations.
Kennedy said that it seemed that the translator had not summarized his observations well, and that he was prepared Fraternal regards, to reiterate the promise of no Cuban invasion, but that there were some difficulties in the editing of the text.
In the interview of Mikoyan with Dean Rusk, the next REPORT ON THE CONVERSATION OF day, the Cuban issue was not discussed.
They discussed nucleCOMRADE CARLOS RAFAEL RODRIGUEZ ar tests and other matters.
Rusk, however, spoke of Brazil’s WITH COMRADE NIKITA KHRUSHCHEV proposal to denuclearize Latin America.
Martin to the Brazilian ambassador [to the United States Roberto de Oliveira] Campos, whom I informed in a recent Upon arrival, comrade Carlos Rafael Rodríguez was received confidential memo.) by comrades Khrushchev and Mikoyan.
The press, televiRusk told Mikoyan that they were prepared to add sion and film crews were there, took various photos, some of Guantanamo and the Panama Canal to Brazil’s resolution for which have already appeared in Pravda and Izvestia. a territory free of nuclear weapons, with the only reservation Once photographers left, we were alone with the translator being that the USA could use the Canal to transport nuclear Vladimir Titmienev. arms from the Atlantic to the Pacific, or vice versa.
We all want this matter to your attitudes get in the way of solving problems, not only be settled, the moment of declarations to pass, and to begin in Cuba but elsewhere.
We have more free in interpretation; the word “estorban” was that used made an effort to have the smallest possible discrepancies in by Comrade Khrushchev.) our declarations before the Security Council, but evidently, I must admit to you that we have not moved beyond this some public disagreements will inevitably continue. shock either.
We did it fulfill all their commitments to the USSR. thinking of Cuba, we have thought principally of Cuba, and On the other hand, we must take into account that they now answer us in this way.
Under these conditions, the Soviet Union If we speak of blasphemy, we are in better conditions to is helping to shape the development of events in the desired do so; we have 45 years of experience in speaking blasphemies direction, that is, forcing the imperialists to accept a public to the imperialists, and if this were all that we had to do, it commitment with respect to Cuba. would be very easy.
Only the foolish could argue that we placed the mishis interview with Adschuvey , he made an omisiles there with the purpose of keeping them in that location. nous comparison between Cuba and Hungary.
We think that we have gained a victory for Cuba and for “We have not finished our work in Cuba.
We failed there. the Soviet Union, and that the objectives that we sought in Khrushchev resolved his problems in Hungary in three days.” bringing the missiles there have been achieved.
Because of this, we decided to ists have been claiming victory and the American press has place the missiles to frighten the imperialists. made many arguments along these lines.
We have not wished Of course you are proud, for you can “die like heroes,” to answer them, though they have used even the press organs you are prepared to do it, but that does not resolve our probclosest to Kennedy.
I asked Malinovski, brusque arguments to answer them, if we were to show that who knows all that you have in Cuba, how much time it we had won a victory and boasted too much about it, those would take him with forces like those of the United States to arguments would work against Kennedy and not allow him occupy Cuba, and he answered three days.
I am completely in to develop his policies, making him feel obligated to threaten agreement with Malinovski’s judgment.
We have achieved our botbombard the territory of Cuba from a distance, without tom line.
We cannot give them that the attack would come, and because of that we decided a program to die. to place our missiles there.
Mikoyan reminded me of the lyrics of a song from However, we must not get excited.
Khrushchev that remembered this song) in which we too Cuba is in a different situation.
Cuba can shout more. talked about dying heroically, but that is good for songs.
However, speaking frankly, we do not think it is necessary to We have ordered the Soviet troops to die alongside the egg on the enemies, who are strong.
We have become bitter about the fact that after having In making our decisions, we have thought this action made an extraordinary effort by situating the missiles in would be beneficial to Cuba, but it did not seem this way Cuba, the effort that brought us to move men, weapons, risk to you.
You walked out in order to bring up our differences. war and spend enormous sums of money, when we believed There is another way to solve this problem, through we had arrived at the end victorious, suddenly your rude nuclear strikes, but we will only do this when there is no other criticism of us crops up.
When the decision reached lines excised] the diplomatic core, we had more problems with you than Cuba is not a convenient weapons station.
Mikoyan barely left Cuba alive . and geographic conditions do not let it become such a thing.
I’ve told Mikoyan that only he would be able to complete You have Spanish blood – you are proud, you speak of that mission, that no other member of the Presidium could principles.
Maybe you think that we Russians have a difcarry it out. ferent temperament, and maybe you do not appreciate this I have told him that if I had gone to Cuba, in spite of about us, but we too are proud.
Khrushchev then reminded how much I love and respect Fidel, perhaps we would have us that Lenin in 1905 tried for a revolution, failed, and was fought and I would have exited long before Mikoyan did. required to emigrate.
At the beginning, we only then fight. were quite upset, but when Mikoyan arrived, he softened us He then explained that previously the United States did up.
I don’t know what you did to him there, what kind of not accept the presence of forces of socialism in the Americas. treatment you gave him.
I have told him “You have become They talked about the Monroe Doctrine, etc.
They have yielded guarantees, besides, from other States not We share your ideas, we support them, but at the time it to invade. was necessary to do things more sensibly.
You have behaved “This skirmish has been the most interesting in all of hissomething like fighting roosters.
We know that for you things tory between imperialism and socialism, and it is imperialism have been difficult, but for the United States they have not that has retreated.” been easy.
Later we will know how many pairs of underwear We have retreated tactically, but they have withdrawn in have been changed during this crisis. essence.
We have not retreated on any front, we are We think that the non-aggression against Cuba is assured not in any way on the defensive; I insist, not anywhere, even for six years.
Six years is a good But the Cubans did not understand us, and they began to period.
In these years, the correlation of forces will be favorattack us in their press, using the words of the Albanians and able to us.
If you are in favor of this position, please tell revolution. us so, and we promise you that we can shout more than the We feel that it has been hard to resolve these things with Albanians and the Chinese. you, the bearded ones, but things have been settled.
In transport alone, we have spent tired, and I have vented to you now, comrades.” 20 million dollars, since we had to concentrate our whole fleet When comrade Khrushchev finished speaking, an hour on this operation and rent capitalist vessels for the shipment and a half had passed.
I asked him if he had time to listen of our merchandise to other countries. [1 line and a couple to me, because I had to talk about many topics.
He told me words excised] Now there is the promise not to attack Cuba, that he did.
Cuba will be a catalyst for the revolution in matter I wished to “clear up” some problems about which I Latin America.
We have dedicated all of our efforts to saving believed they had certain erroneous interpretations.
At the same time, it advised him, once the impression that the Cuban people and leadership underesattack against Cuba was done, not to vacillate on deploying timated their Soviet counterparts, that we believed them to atomic weapons, since the attack on Cuba be a people susceptible to weakening in the face of danger, would be apparently followed by atomic aggression against while we thought Cuba and its leaders capable of all types of the Soviet Union and socialist countries should not allow an heroism.
Certainly, we Cubans were proud, as he even at the cost of our pride, as they said, of our own love and said, but our pride in the bravery of our people, and in their even our military needs; they had tolerated situations (that I revolutionary position, we did not regard relative to other described) that other leaders would have found difficult to countries, but only with respect to our own national attitude. withstand, all to block a conflict that could degenerate into He added that comrade Mikoyan had been able to confirm a war of universal proportions.
I explained the firm but cauthis admiration and affection by the Cuban people for the tious position of Fidel in the whole process of relations with Soviet people, because in spite of the crisis, and notwiththe United States. standing the bitterness of the Cubans, he found everywhere I then told him that I wished to get more deeply into the matter.
I set out with all possible clarity our points of view, the affection to which I had referred.
I expressed that they knew but that I understood that a serious error had occurred in the well, and I did not wish to hide it from them, that among our process.
If they had developed a stratwished to explain how, in this crisis, even the comrades that egy that imagined the withdrawal of the missiles at a given felt more sympathy toward some Chinese positions found the moment, this strategy had to be discussed carefully with us. attitude of the Chinese government erroneous, and that the Things had not been this way, and we had all held an intersolidarity they had expressed was too late and not sufficiently pretation of the presence of the missiles that, evidently, did enthusiastic. not correspond to the intentions of the Soviet government.
I stated, thirdly, that I wished to pause to discuss some I explained that for Fidel, the acceptance of the missiles statements by comrade Khrushchev which had given off the was not grounded in the needs of Cuba but in the considimpression that he had attributed to comrade Fidel a position eration that installing the missiles meant the Soviet Union prepared to provoke a war, discounting the importance of was devising a global strategy, and the presence of the misnuclear devastation, and that comrade Khrushchev insisted siles would be beneficial for the socialist area.
I told him these ideas were false and one of the accepted the danger of atomic destruction, in the same way things that most irritated Fidel during the crisis had been the that they had risked atomic warfare by placing the missiles letter from Khrushchev in which he insinuated these opin, but that we had done so thinking it was best for ions.
His ests where the missiles would not be seen, about the lack of interviews with Che and Aragonés [when attention to Khrushchev’s order to locate them in horizontal they visited the Soviet Union in late August/early September positions during the day, etc. etc.
In my conversations and after his decision to remove them, we were overwhelmed with Raúl, I started from the idea that no declaration would by the surprise and disoriented by the choice they made.
The fault is ours for of leading the process, Cuba has had to adopt a position that having spoken badly, but in spite of all the serious dangers that clashed with the commitment from the USSR. have threatened us, we can all be happy today, because Cuba Once these two initial positions had been adopted, each exists, the Revolution exists, and the red flag flies.
The development of each made criticize us harshly, but someday you will understand us. convergence of our positions practically impossible, which We were convinced that Kennedy had a complex, having brought us to maintain different positions until the last posfailed in the previous invasion, and therefore felt a necessity sible moment in the UN, in spite of all the efforts that we to raise his prestige by attacking Cuba, and had the forces to were making to reduce these divergences to a minimum.
His references to Hungary, comparing it to the case of our leadership there had been an overwhelming desire that the Cuba, were statements of this sort of inferiority.
The impeprocess unfold at the UN so that we did not remain in this rialists have tried to “appeal” to our conscience so that we dead-end alley, to which we had been driven by the way the understand their actions, starting from what they understand crisis was managed. us to have done in the Hungarian case.
We expected the aggression before the American electhink that we placed the missiles to defend the socialist world. tions on November 6, so we began the transport of weapons The missiles were placed for Cuba and thinking only about and incurred great costs in currency to rush the date of arrival.
We have intercontinental missiles, capable of striking But things were done poorly, and the agents of the Federal severe blows against the United States and all countries allied Republic of Germany were the first to discover them.
Their reports said that the way in which the then focused on explaining the incapability of Cuba serving as Soviets were acting gave the idea that they wanted to impress, a weapons storehouse, due to its narrowness, the vulnerability that they wanted Western powers to know that they had the of the missile sites, the fact that the open emplacements could missiles in Cuba. have been destroyed or rendered ineffective by bombs exploding many kilometers away from its coasts, but with waves able My idea came from there.
It cost three times as much to install the missiles Soviet generals, and even spoke about Marshal Briusov there as to add a device of the same power among the interin a way that I did not understand clearly and continental missiles installed at Soviet bases.
Apparently, our that I refused to confirm because it did not seem opportune ideas were not clear from the beginning. to me Regarding the military agreement, this is a problem that has concerned us.
Put on that tomorrow, I would have the opportunity to hear a report your coat and we’ll leave together.” that would contain a strong Leaving the place where we had put our coats, the news declaration on Cuba, in that if the Americans did not fulfill that we were heading out with Khrushchev caused a firestorm, their promises, neither would the Soviet Union, and the since on principle, people did not understand what it meant.
Khrushchev asked the driver to go to He also explained that the report would link the problem of some other places to show me the other new things that were Cuba to the beginning of a war. along the way, and finally we arrived at the home.
Then comrade Khrushchev said he must confess that I climbed out of the car, and we said goodbye, but the car we Cubans had scared them.
You have scared us a great deal, them at a distance then stepped out of the car.
We invited apparently, as relations are worse now. him to enter and he accepted with great enthusiasm.
We must think, in, we had some time together telling stories and joking, and and have some amount of control.
I don’t have the formula soon after he left for his own house. right now.
We’ll keep thinking about this and return to the The meal with Khrushchev discussion.
I decided that my similar to those who stayed and worked in Indonesia, exactly guests would be all the official delegates, and they were offias he talked about them in the conversation with us.
These cially invited during the session. specialists would stay in Cuba, showing Cubans how to operWhen the session ended, Tito left immediately, and ate weapons, and leave the country as soon as our troops were Khrushchev directed me to sit down and take tea.
Tomorrow I will say that if Kennedy had vetted his speech with him by telephone from Geneva. does not come through, we will feel unconstrained.
I felt somehow implicated Mikoyan left at this time, 7:15 in this statement but did not think it necessary to say anyin the evening, for an interview with the Yugoslavians, as thing in response.
Upon our arrival, on television, I’ll say that we have spoken, that you have told Mora told us that he needed to send off his mother at the airus your needs, and that we still have differences around this port and, as he had not known about the dinner beforehand, problem… “but, as you are he would need to leave.
Then Khrushchev said, He said that of course it was necessary for him to go to see his “Yes, I will also establish publicly that we have differences.” mother off, but he wanted him to have a drink with us first.
Provided by the Cuban Government for the October 12 Trans. note: My best estimate, as “cerece,” a typographical error, 2002 Havana conference (“La Crisis de Octubre: Una vision resembles “carece” meaning to lack or fall short.
This is part of the original text, in capital letters and politica 40 años despues”) organized by the National Security in Spanish.
The Cuban documents were Cuba at the annual commemorations of the Bolshevik Revolution in contained in two “briefing books” for participants in the conference; Moscow, but his instructions were changed and he was instead directed see the Archive’s digital archive for these materials. to fly from Prague to Sofia.
See the 30 November 1962 report on signs of Around that time, scholars were also able to obtain an important Cuban Soviet-Cuba strains from the Hungarian Embassy in Cuba, printed in the record of a secret speech by Fidel Castro in January 1968 to a closed collection of Hungarian documents elsewhere in this issue of the CWIHP party meeting that covered the 1962 events during a discussion on Bulletin.
David Salvador was a Cuban trade union leader, Luminous Days: Cuba’s Struggle with the Superpowers after the Missile Crisis ex-communist, and member of the “26 of July” movement who had . been arrested for alleged counter-revolutionary activities in 1960 and 4 Lechuga may have subsequently prepared these chronologies sentenced to 30 years in prison in August 1962.
Given the context, I feel this must be an error, since Todd and Cuba and the the author seems to wish to make the opposite point.
But “no” – that is, Missile Crisis . “not” -is indeed in the original Spanish text.
Hendrych, dated 3 November 1962, see the collection of translated 6 See,g., the translated Soviet cables published in CWIHP Czechoslovak documents on the missile crisis published elsewhere in this Bulletins no. and no.
Relations between the German Democratic Republic since the end of the Cold War—Aleksandr Fursenko and Timothy and Cuba were normalized on 11 January 1963, Naftali, “One Hell of a Gamble”—Khrushchev, Castro, and Kennedy, 1958prompting the Federal Republic of Germany to sever 1964 , and Michael Dobbs, One Minute to relations with Havana under the so-called Hallstein Doctrine in which Midnight: Kennedy, Khrushchev, and Castro on the Brink of Nuclear War the FRG broke or reduced relations with countries recognizing the GDR —both of which rely heavily on United States . and Russian sources.
In the original, there is a clear numeral 2, then Port in November 1961, a conversation that was subsequently published, a letter , then a clear letter but the reference here is to his private talk with JFK in Washington in n.
This could be “2en,” or “2 in” 2 hours, or simply an error and thus a January 1962.
This is one of Castro’s more innovative turns of as saying, after slamming his fist on his desk: “Once I summoned [CIA phrase, as it does not seem to be common military slang in the present director] Allen Dulles and rebuked him.
Mario Garcia-Inchaustegui was replaced as Cuba’s end to the conflict in just three days.
When they didn’t like the events ambassador to the United Nations by Carlos M Lechuga, until then in Finland, the president of that country went to meet with the Soviet Havana’s ambassador to Mexico, at the end of October 1962.
In fact, was a key force behind the conception of JFK’s Alliance Kennedy was not behind the press revelations, and would for Progress, the program of economic aid, introduced go forward, albeit grudgingly and in a constricted form five months earlier, that had occasioned the meeting of , with the covert operation high-level representatives of member-countries of the that had begun a year earlier under Eisenhower—leadOrganization of American States in the coastal ing to the utter failure that got the foreign policy part of Uruguayan resort.
Although the massive program of prohis presidency off to a disastrous start.
Though the Kennedy Administration was still licking its wounds from situation remained “quite tense,” he told Kudryavtsev on the failure at the Bay of Pigs four months before, and 14 April 1961, “he personally believes that the danger of had not yet agreed on the covert CIA program (known as invasion of the country by large beachheads of the exter“Mongoose”) to undermine Castro that would be organal counterrevolutionary forces has now in all likelihood nized in the fall.
The counterrevolution understands that given the pervasive hostility in United States domestic politics and the US the presence of large contingents of well-armed people’s government that precluded any formal or open contacts militia and the revolutionary army, an operation of or negotiations with Havana—yet, informally, Brazilian deploying paratroopers, even numbering several thousand and Argentine diplomats at the Punta del Este conference, troops would be doomed to failure.
One Havana; some of the translations have appeared on-line, may also read declassified contemporaneous United States docubut never in print.
A Revolução Cubana e a reported to Fidel Castro and the leadership, could indeed América Latina . have been fascinating—the Brazilian record presented The translation from Portuguese, by Hershberg, was also below finally offers a non-US perspective on the Checirculated to participants at the Havana conference but, until Goodwin meeting.
While space limitations preclude a now, has not appeared in print. careful analysis of the significance of the Brazilian record, which would require careful comparison to the existing record both of the meeting and overall US-Cuban relations, it clearly offers fresh information.
In accordance with my instructions from the State Bank of the USSR, I informed Guevara that at the present time we could The Soviet documents presented here were generously sell up to thirty tons of pure gold in blocks no less than 99 contributed by the Mexican scholar (and former foreign minproof at the fixed gold prices in London on the day of payment ister) Jorge Castaneda, who obtained them from the Russian in pounds to the National Bank of Cuba.
They were then translated by Svetlana Savranskaya Moscow in the National Bank’s disposal, or, by instruction of of the National Security Archive for circulation at the March the latter, at the disposal of third persons or organizations.
The 2001 conference in Havana to mark the 40th anniversary of State Bank will not charge any fees for depositing the gold.
The implemented mobilization of the people’s militia gold to the account of the National Bank of Cuba.
The State helped the Cuban government to be assured of the further Bank will process transactions in pounds.
Then I said that of growth of the revolutionary consciousness of the masses and course we believe that by the time of the gold purchase the their readiness to defend their Motherland, on the one hand.
Then I informed Guevara that to discover a number of organizational drawbacks and misthe State Bank would send specifications for the deposited takes, which are being corrected now, and that in its turn will gold to the National Bank of Cuba through our Embassy.
The enable it to further strengthen the entire governmental strucNational Bank, on its part, can give instructions to the State ture, and to improve the preparedness and the organization Bank to give the authorized representatives of the National both of the people’s militia and the army in general.
Bank in Moscow a part or the whole of the gold deposited in Using the experience of the mobilization, the Cuban the State Bank in its name at any time, or to transfer a part or government, continued Guevara, drew a conclusion that the the whole of the deposited gold with given destination to other people’s militia was the main force on which it could rely on locations.
All expenses incurred in connection with transportafully both in the political and in the military respect.
During tion of gold to the locations specified by the National Bank the period of mobilization, the internal counterrevolution has will be the responsibility of the National Bank.
This can be explained, on the regarding transportation of gold and relevant transactions will one hand, by the measures introduced by the government, be coordinated between the State Bank and the National Bank beginning from 4 January, and by the general demoralization in each individual case.
All correspondence regarding these of these forces hostile to the Cuban revolution, which were issues should be conducted confidentially through our Embassy hoping that the United States would come to their rescue immediately in Havana or the Cuban Embassy in Moscow.
Guevara said after the breakup of its relations with Cuba, on the other hand. that he was very grateful that the State Bank of the USSR was At the present time, continued Guevara, we are observing willing to satisfy the requests of the National Bank regarding the flight of the counterrevolutionaries from the cities, and the purchase of gold.
We will probably buy part of the proespecially Havana, to the mountains.
Those counterrevolutionary answer to this proposal, said Guevara, I would have to discuss forces in Escambray are not united, and they represent sepathis issue with Fidel Castro.
Presently, the revolutionary army and some time later. the people’s militia, said Guevara, have surrounded all the On 17 January, Guevara informed me that he consulted locations where those counterrevolutionaries are . with Fidel Castro on the issue of buying gold from the Soviet Gradually, the army and the people’s militia are pursuing Union.
The operations for clearing sum of 20 million dollars from the State bank.
The Cuban mountain forests of those counterrevolutionary groups will government, said Guevara, presently has 25 million dollars in continue for some time, noted Guevara, because the counits account in Mosnarbank in London.
In addition, they are terrevolutionaries avoid clashes with the people’s militia and presently processing a transfer of 8 million dollars.
Those isolated and surthe sum of over 20 million dollars that the Cuban governrounded counterrevolutionary groups in Escambray, noted ment has at its disposal, is needed for other expenses.
Guevara Guevara, in our opinion, do not present any danger to the stated that they agreed to purchase approximately 20 tons of government today.
The most counterrevolutiongold on the conditions proposed by the State Bank, which we ary group in the province of Pinar del Rio, said Guevara, had discussed in our conversation on 11 January. been totally liquidated.
In the conversation with Guevara, in addition to the quesIn the course of further conversation, we touched upon tion mentioned above, we touched upon some other issues the question of the danger of possible direct military intervenof the situation that are developing in Cuba.
Guevara said that in his opinion, danger of a direct aggresThe internal political situation, in the opinion of the sion on the part of the American armed forces has essentially Cuban government, does not give any reason for concern at passed.
It is impossible for Eisenhower, for a number of interthe present time.
It could be seen clearly from Kennedy’s state30 January 1961 ment regarding the break-up of relations with Cuba.
Besides, in the last several days, the Democrats’ press started to actively 1.
I visited Guevara at the National Bank and in accorreveal the training of the Cuban counterrevolutionaries by the dance with my instructions informed him that the State Bank Eisenhower government in Florida, Guatemala, on the Swan of the Soviet Union, in accordance with the preference of Island and in other locations for an attack on Cuba.
Such the National Bank of Cuba deposited 17,523,008 grams of revelations, noted Guevara, in our opinion, clearly speak to pure gold in the name of the National Bank of Cuba.
On 23 the fact that Kennedy does not want to associate himself with January, the State Bank received 11,874,800 pounds from the this kind of operations from the start, and wants to make it Mosnarbank in London and deposited them to the account impossible for Eisenhower beforehand.
The State Bank withdrew In the course of our conversation, I told him that every7,124,377 pounds from this account for the amount of gold thing said notwithstanding, they should still exercise caution mentioned above, which was transferred to the National Bank and restraint in order not to give the Americans any pretext of Cuba.
Specifications for the deposited gold will be sent to for any provocations against Cuba, especially in the days left the National Bank shortly after they are received from Moscow. before Kennedy assumes power.
However, noted Guevara jokingly, presently we do not have Thanking me for the information, Guevara told me that anything where we could respond to the Americans’ new the storage of gold and currency reserves proposed by the State challenges as we have done it in the past.
All that remains is Bank of the USSR fully satisfied the Cuban side, and that they essentially the American base in Guantanamo.
Foreign Policy Archive of the Russian Federation , involved in this issue.
However, he Translated by Svetlana Savranskaya .] was confident that they would be able to send if not all l00 people, then at least 70 to 80 people in accordance with the signed agreement.
At the present time one can be sure, continued Guevara, 14 April 1961 that Kennedy’s main efforts would be directed at achieving a more perfect isolation of Cuba from the countries of Latin In the conversation with E Guevara, inquired about America and the external world.
At the present time Cuba has his point of view regarding the situation, which recentair communications only with Mexico, and that line is hanging ly developed in Cuba, and also about his assessment of by a thread.
We should conIn response, Guevara said that the situation remained duct our foreign policy in such a way, emphasized Guevara, so quite tense, although he personally believes that the danger as not to allow isolation of Cuba from the countries of Latin of invasion of the country by large beachheads of the external America.
At the present time, we have great, though maybe counterrevolutionary forces has now in all likelihood receded. unfounded hopes for Quadros’ The counterrevolution understands that given the presence of assumption of power in Brazil.
Quadros, representing interests large contingents of well-armed people’s militia and the revoof Brazil, cannot benefit from the United States strangling of Cuba. lutionary army, an operation of deploying paratroopers, even Therefore, it would be possible to rely on him, or rather use numbering several thousand troops, would be doomed to his interest in strengthening the national independence of failure.
Therefore, mentioned Guevara, it is unlikely that the Brazil in the Cuban interests.
A number of counterrevolutionary officers believe that it would be risky and senseless to go forward without a direct military support from the United States.
Besides, it will exert some demoralizing influArchive).] ence on the internal counterrevolution.
However, this influence will be very limited, because the chiefs of the counterrevolutionary gangs know perfectly well that the United States policy toward Cuba has not changed and that Kennedy’s statement represents some kind of camouflage.
Kudryavtsev’s Diary The current American president follows the same line toward Cuba , though the tactics are Secret being somewhat changed.
The main emphasis here is of American imperialism’s fight against revolutionary Cuba. toward undermining the Cuban economy through stronger In the course of further conversation, Guevara said that the acts of sabotage, subversion and the like.
Also, the United States is transferring large quantities of explocan help Cuba, but the Soviet Union already provides enorsives and weapons to Cuba. mous assistance and support to Cuba.
And yet, nonetheless, In the recent days the internal counterrevolution, continsaid Guevara, it looks like we will have to ask the Soviet Union ued Guevara, stepped up its activity and has practically begun to help us in some areas, especially in supplying some kinds of an attack.
It would suffice to say that just in the last several raw materials to ensure uninterrupted work of our industry. days there were explosions in the Havana water system, power Evidently, we will not be able to avoid rationing on fat-constation; several warehouses were burned down, a sugar plant taining products and soap.
Cuba imported all fat-containing products and raw materials All this occurred over the period of 3 or 4 days, and it is for production of soap from the United States for hard currency.
At the extremely difficult for the government to undertake anything present time, the hard currency inflows do not cover the needs effective to prevent acts of that kind.
The El Encanton store, of the country, and therefore, we would have to sharply cut as it has been established, was put on fire with special thermal the import of fat-containing products and ingredients for soap bombs, which produce very high temperature and burning production.
The bombs themselves, however, are very politically, but it is unavoidable.
One of such bombs was found unexploded in sized Guevara, is to provide the industry with raw materials the store building after the fire with a stamp “US Army” [on and the workers with work.
The nationalized industry works well, and its organization is improving.
Damages from sabotage and subversive acts, continued quotas are under-fulfilled by 15 to 20% as a result of deficit of Guevara, are estimated in tens of millions of dollars.
One can raw materials, and also as a result of distraction of a significant say that the internal counterrevolution has inflicted a serious number of workers from production in the period of mobilizaeconomic damage upon us during these days. tion of units of the people’s militia.
Guevara said then that the revolutionary government In the course of further conversations, we touched upon would respond to these strikes of the counterrevolution with several general issues.
First of all, the repressive measures will be uled trips to the Soviet Union for a number of Cuban delegastrengthened.
A significant number of captured terrorists and tions, and also gave him a film about his stay in Moscow. subversive elements will be executed, and the people will be called to even more vigilance and more decisive struggle with USSR Ambassador to the Republic of Cuba. the enemy of the revolution.
The political situation in the country, emphasized Guevara, is generally good.
Foreign Policy Archive of the Russian Federation tion only unites people and revolutionalizes them.
If winning of the peasantry over to the side of the revolution has been already accomplished, noted Guevara, much still can be done in regard to the working class.
RECORD OF CONVERSATION Touching upon Fidel Castro’s plan to exchange the capwith Minister of Industry of the Republic of Cuba tured participants of the intervention for tractors, Guevara said Ernesto Guevara that apparently it would not work.
The United States would drag this 3 June 1961 process out and would not agree to pay compensation because it is not in their interest politically.
He got such an impresDuring the conversation, Guevara, touching upon the intersion from his conversations with the commission of prisoners nal situation in Cuba, noted that the situation in the country of war, who participated in the intervention, who recently was in general good.
Elections to the organs of state apparatus returned from the US, and who conducted negotiations with both in the center and in the provinces were proceeding sucthe American authorities and with the Roosevelt cessfully.
Last week he, Guevara, completed his tour of the committee. province Oriente, with which he was very satisfied.
In the In the course of further conversation we spoke about province Oriente, he inspected the state of industrial objects, the economic situation of the country.
In this connection, and first of all the progress of work on opening the nickel Guevara expressed the following considerations.
The ecoplant in Moa, and also the functioning of the nickel plant in nomic situation remains in general satisfactory, although, of Nicaro, where Soviet specialists were employed. course, our difficulties are growing as well.
These difficulties, In this connection, Guevara expressed great satisfaction however, turned out to be much smaller than the government with the Soviet-Cuban agreement signed in June on providing expected in the beginning of May.
The assistance from the technical assistance in organizing the Cuba nickel industry, Soviet Union and a number of countries of the socialist camp and he asked me to pass his gratitude, as well as the gratitude played a big role in removing those difficulties.
However, the of the entire Cuban leadership to the Soviet government for issue of supplying the country with fat-containing food prodproviding help in this area, which is important to Cuba. ucts still remains problem number one.
Speaking about the internal political situation, Guevara Speaking about the international situation developing emphasized that after the defeat of the counterrevolutionary around Cuba, Guevara said that the United States now has landing force, the revolution in general grew even stronger, and to face the growing resistance on the part of Latin American started moving ahead with more confidence.
Touching upon countries in realization of the Kennedy plans of Cuba’s isolathe possibility of revitalization of the internal counterrevolution.
The mission of acting Cuban Minister of Foreign Affairs tion’s activity, Guevara said that in his opinion, the counterrevOlivares to the countries of Latin America was sucolutionaries would need at least two to three months to recover cessful overall and helped strengthen Cuban positions in such from the strikes against them implemented by the organs of important countries as Brazil, Mexico, and Ecuador.
Only after that the counterrevoluOf course, noted Guevara, Communist parties of many tion would be capable to renew its fight against the revolutionLatin American countries could do much more in defense of ary government.
It is likely that the U.S., continued Guevara, Cuba, but unfortunately the majority of them acts extremely will keep sending their agents to Cuba during these months in indecisively.
Ray recently left the a possibility that the recent assassination of [Dominican so-called “ Revolutionary Council” of Miro Cardona.
Republic President Rafael] Trujillo would most likely be used This shows, noted Guevara, that the external counterrevoluin the United States to create a certain precedent for future tion would remain split, and that the contradictions within interference in the Cuban affairs.
States apparently will try to get an OAS agreement to introduce In the course of further conversation, Guevara stated order in the Dominican Republic.
They need it in order to be that in his opinion, it was unlikely that the internal counterable to persuade the OAS to interfere in the Cuban affairs.
However, nobody believes such statements, Montevideo at an informal gathering in the early morning of and the United States probably will have to leave them behind the 18th between, Commandante Ernesto soon.
The Kennedy government in all likelihood will use the Guevara and Mister Richard Goodwin, with also the particicrisis in the Dominican Republic in order to create a certain pation of Mister Rodrigues Larreta, of Argentina.
In this precedent of interference in the internal affairs of that country meeting, Mister Guevara and Mister Goodwin, speaking as with the approval and sanction of the OAS, so that they could “enemies”, made a general appreciation of use this precedent also against Cuba at a later stage.
This regimentation of the left can be illustrated by the example with what occurred in CONFIDENTIAL Uruguay.
Continuing in his exposition and insisting about 600. the necessity of establishing a dialogue between the Cuban SEC/DPC/DEC/Dor/591.7 Government and the American Government, Commandante Guevara pointed out that both have ahead serious difficulties, Cuba.
I) United States: a) the great discontent of the Of the President of the Republic with the Minister of Latin American peoples; b) some debilities of the “Alliance for Economics of Cuba, Mr Guevara.
Ambassador Barbosa exports of sugar; b) lack of consumer goods to meet the da Silva stressed the importance of his affirmation that the popular necessities, amplified by the extremely accelerated sympathies or affinities of the Cuban regime had not led his process of development realized by the revolution; c) lack of Government to the point of a political alliance or other form spare parts for the factories “inherited” by the Government, of affiliation the Soviet Union.
He pointed out the which frequently are paralyzed or diminish their rate of proaffirmative reiterations of a general character made by the duction for reason of the lack of the aforementioned parts.
The who are not despicable ; b ) the firm Brazilian position, would be in case of a collective reactions of the bourgeoisie to the socialization of the counaction against Cuba, would be on other international try; c ) the reaction of the Catholic Church.
Mister questions such as Algeria, for example, indicates the indepenGoodwin explained to Mister Guevara that he did not have dence of the Brazilian position within the western camp. qualification, nor authority, to appreciate, concretely, all Without prejudice to the position of the President of Brazil, aspects of the problems raised in the conversaone may ponder regarding the gravity of the sitution.
He explained, however, that there did not exist illusions ation that is created for Brazil, in case Cuba is to in his country regarding the irreversible character of the revoincline for an alliance with the Soviet world.
Mister Guevara some positive aspects for the people of the Continent and that recognized these difficulties, saying, however, that perhaps he hoped some Cuban suggestions would come to be incorone could think of official conversations about a secondary porated in the final document, as in fact occurred.
The American Government nificant political triumph for the United States, he declared would have problems in order to justify the start of official that no, once that the internal problems that are created for negotiations owing to the reactions of public opinion, which the consultation of the postulates of Punta del Estate will would not be the case of the Cuban Government.
By the way, Guevara stressed that political incompatibilities about the concepts in the same the Cuban Government had nothing to do with the theft of contents, but also because it has the certainty that it will not airplanes.
Mister Goodwin asked him if the affirmation was facilitate any of the recourses linked to the Alliance for valid for the first airplane hijacked.
Mister Guevara mentioned next that Cuba does not matively, saying that the performer of the theft was a good ignore the American condition, but that his country was conboy, who acted on his own account, he being presently incarstantly attacked, including by things that were not realized cerated.
In a certain moment the help of President was not his responsibility, the Cuban Government having Betancourt of Venezuela was procured, but straightaway since judged until the same was realized by “provocateurs.” the signing of the Commercial Accord with the Soviet Union, Mister Goodwin declared that such could not be, since the President Betancourt has made public declarations American Government has not explained this act to its public for the Cuban Government.
He registered the information and suggestions of counts on the spontaneous support in various countries, but Commandante Guevera and assured him that they would be in this it does not intend to intervene deliberately.
Martin’s Press, 1999). political factors already mentioned; 2) the continental sector, 2 On Che’s African efforts, see esp.
The and writings, the lack of open scholarly access to pertinent party and preoccupation on making a good impression on the American state archives in Havana containing the original records of Che’s official Republics reveals unquestionably the fear of continental colactivities, views, and actions unfortunately compels increased reliance on foreign, non-Cuban records. lective action.
Quadros and Frondizi is A Revolução Cubana e a América Latina (Rio de Janeiro: Civilizaçío motivated by his interest in strengthening the non-intervenBrasileira, 1998). tionist line, eliminating doubts as for its alliance or political 7 A little more than twenty years later, in November 1981, an even affiliation the Soviet Union.
I believe that this inforhigher-level furtive U.S.-Cuban diplomatic encounter occurred when United States Secretary of State Alexander M Haig, Jr. met near Mexico City mation could be useful to Your Excellence in your audience with senior Cuban official Carlos Rafael Rodriguez.
Nevertheless, these sources at least begin to provide the began, Guevara, then head of Cuba’s national bank, still doubted opportunity to document the perspective, until now largely that an attempted invasion was imminent, since it would missing, of the Cuban intelligence services responsible for undoubtedly fail. monitoring the activities of the “enemies of the revolution” It is still not known precisely what Fidel Castro and (or “gusanos”— worms—as Castro’s government then scorned his top associates thought was coming, but the four transthem) as the Bay of Pigs approached.
G-2 MINFAR developed, plans in which “democrats”[former Costa CENTRAL Rican President] PEPE “CACHUCHA” FIGUERES, HEADQUARTERS ROMULO BETANCOURT, and APR 7 1961 MUNOZ MARIN were not RECEIVED NO. 2681 uninvolved, the forces of imperialism transferred out of Santo Domingo their most important preparation center for an attack against Cuba.
From that day forward, Guatemala THIS REPORT IS EXCLUSIVELY FOR THE became the main focal point for mercenary training in camps INFORMATION OF THE CHIEF OF REVOLUTION and bases established there.
The distinguishing feature was TO WHOM IT IS ADDRESSED. that this operation was no longer run by PEDRAZA and TRUJILLO, but rather by the CIA, with North American IT SHOULD BE RETURNED TO THE DEPARTMENT officials directly training the mercenaries, and provisioning CHIEF INF G-2 MINFAR [MINISTRY OF THE them with equipment, arms, supplies, aircraft, etc.
REVOLUTIONARY ARMED FORCES] Thus, by the first few months of 1960, an important airstrip, as well as a major mercenary camp, had already been CONFIDENTIAL built in Retalhuleu under the direction of “yanki” officials.
Commander Ramiro Valdes Menendez plied, according to reports, by the CIA (Central Intelligence Agency) and businesses such as the United Fruit Company.
G-2 MINFAR More than twenty such camps were quickly established in different areas of Guatemala, comprising a total of more Dpt.
G-2 MINFAR than six thousand mercenaries as well as a large number of January 12, 1961 airplanes and huge quantities of arms.
Report on mercenary camps and bases in Guatemala, an invasion were evident.
Nicaragua, and Florida In mid-October there was a marked increase in activity on bases established in the Department of Retalhuleu.
The numIn 1959, the “yanki” Department of ber of airplanes arriving and unloading was higher than usual.
State made the Dominican Republic its main mercenary People working in those centers observed that there was every training center.
Adventurers and murderers from different indication of an impending attack on Cuba.
The airplanes had countries, Falangists from the Blue Legion, Nazis, Japanese, unloaded parachutes, field hammocks, and stretchers. “yankis”, war criminals, European renegades, and other The mercenaries were concentrated mainly in the riffraff assembled there and trained under the direction Department of Retalhuleu.
An individand TRUJILLO’S ual who was in one of those tents reported that there was an Officers for an invasion of Cuba.
Every day, the Dominican average of ten men in each tent, which added up to six thou169 sand mercenaries.
These included Cubans, Guatemalans, in the area known as Cerro Nil, on the banks of the Nima other nationalities, and North Americans.
There are approximately two hunrecently was installed on the central Guatemalan Air Force dred North Americans, who direct training, construction, base located at “La Aurora” airport in Guatemala City, and the radar station, etc.
One of these camps is situated 3 kms. on the base at San Jose airport on the Pacific coast. north of the center of the above-mentioned farm.
The areas where the aggressors have focused their The airstrip at Retalhuleu airport is built to withstand activities are Retalhuleu; Chinaja; “La Aurora” international bombardment and to last an average of two years.
Its estiairport which also houses the FAG mated cost is placed at over one million dollars.
Although base, located on the outskirts of Guatemala City; the base this airstrip was recently built, repair crews are there every located at the port of San Jose on the Pacific coast; and the day, which can only be interpreted as a preventive measure base in Puerto Barrios, on the Atlantic coast.
It has been closed to the public for the national farm called “La Aurora” the past several weeks, however, having been placed under located in the municipality of Nuevo San Carlo, also in military jurisdiction during the state of siege.
And although Retalhuleu, whose airport is made of concrete cemented on it is ostensibly under the control of the Guatemalan Army, piles ten meters deep and two meters wide and is outfitted, the fact is that the airport actually is controlled by North according to unconfirmed data, with underground hangars.
Americans, to the extent that truck drivers who arrive Other information sources indicate that there is a there to unload cargo are replaced by North Americans to 45,000-gallon gasoline tank covered over with sandbags keep them from entering.
Airplanes usually take off Department does not even have access to this airport. from Retalhuleu on Mondays at four o’clock in the morning There are an estimated 48 airplanes based in Guatemala and return on Wednesdays between four and five o’clock in for use in the attack and invasion of Cuba.
During the first week of last October, a cargo B-26 airplanes, some propulsion aircraft, and Globemaster of leather boots was received for the alleged invaders.
There are an estimated fifty North American unmarked and most are painted black.
This can be construed not only as a means Since 11 August 1960, several jets and Mustang airplanes to remain inconspicuous and cover up these activities, but have landed at the base at the port of San Jose.
On the 1 3 also as a means of preparing the men to operate at night August, a Globemaster landed at the main “La Aurora” airagainst Cuba.
As a result, there have been a number of air port in Guatemala City supposedly to deliver milk to CARE, accidents on the coast of Retalhuleu and the area known but was actually carrying weapons and ammunition that as Flores, in the Peten.
The plane that crashed in the Peten were unloaded by Guatemalan Army soldiers.
The following had taken off from Tapachula, located almost on week, other Globemasters landed at the San Jose airport and the Mexican-Guatemalan border.
Nighttime parachute drills their cargo was transported to Retalhuleu. also are taking place.
As a result, October 14, two North American B-29 bombers and a the Ydigoras government has publicly acknowledged that transport plane landed at “La Aurora” central airport in several men have been killed or wounded, while alleging that Guatemala City.
During the third week of October, airthis occurred during the training of Guatemalan troops with planes marked with registration numbers, or alleged registramodern weapons. tion numbers, L-F-5, L-F-8, L-F-9, L-F-11 conducted night On the “Helvetia” farm, municipality of El Palmar, flights between “La Aurora” central airport and Retalhuleu Department of Quetzaltenango, but also accessible via the airport.
This past October 14, a large number of airplanes municipality of San Sebastian, Department of Retalhuleu, landed at Retalhuleu airport.
Department has been chosen for mercenary camps because It is common knowledge that the Retalhuleu airport several national farms are located there.
In other words, was outfitted hastily by North American engineers at an farms that were owned by Germans, were expropriated estimated cost of more than one million dollars.
Its main following World War II, and are now administrated by facility is the airstrip.
Pacific has been under military control recently and other “Helvetia” farm, currently owned by ROBERTO meteorological centers in the country also operate under a ALEJOS ARZU, former coordinator of “North American quasi-military system.
Aid to the Guatemalan Government,” friend and advisor A ten kilowatt radio transmitter has been installed at of YDIGORAS, currently diplomatic representative of the Puerto Matias de Galvez, at a cost of 35,000 dollars.
Its Knights of Malta, and his brother, CARLOS broadcasts on official frequencies and primarily target Belize.
ALEJOS ARZU, currently the Ambassador to It is therefore possible to surmise that its broadcasts could Washington, is one of the most important mercenary also reach Cuba on other frequencies; that it is able to concentration points.
Many A fleet of fishing vessels on the Atlantic Coast is well workers and peasant farmers from the national and private equipped with artillery, data that was gleaned from a public farms in the area were persuaded, or obliged, to sign up. statement made by MARCO ANTONIO VILLAMAR, At the end of the third week of October, a large number secretary of the organization PUR. of North American soldiers were brought in by railway via Military preparations also extend to other areas of the Puerto Barrios, and were taken to “Helvetia” farm. country.
A few kilometers from Champerico Port, work has Some regular troops of the Guatemalan National Army, begun on a new air base in a place called “El Manchon,” about four infantry companies, have been assigned to guard some eight kms. to the east, and for the installation of the zone and are deployed at “Helvetia,” “Aurora,” “La troops on “Montecristo” farm, approximately 12 kms. from Suiza,” “Tambor,” and “Culsin” farms. there.
Punta de Manabique, enclosing Amatique Bay in the Reports have been received regarding the presence of an Atlantic, is fortified.
On the banks of the Polochic River, airplane-launching catapult at “La Suiza” farm, which serves what appears to be a new airstrip is under construction; and the dual purpose of instructing pilots for aircraft carrier­ construction took place at a rapid pace in an area known as based operations and impeding detection of the base from “Rama Blanca,” Izabal Department. the air.
These installations were built by the North American Other reports indicate that it is likely that YDIGORAS company “Johnson Powers.” and the “yankis” plan to unleash hostilities between Other camps worth mentioning are located at “Rancho Guatemala and Cuba by falsely claiming the incursion of Florida” farm in Escuintla Department, “Campo Corriente,” an alleged Cuban aircraft that would be shot down in owned by United Fruit Company; “Helvetia” and “Aurora” Guatemalan territory.
Chinaja is located in northern Alta has raised concerns inside the army over preparations for an Verapaz department, latitude approximately 16 degrees attack on Cuba.
Certain reports indicate that last 26 October, north and longitude 90 degrees, fifteen minutes.
Because there were discussions inside the army chief of staff headquarthere are no roads, this area is virtually cut off by land from ters regarding the position the army should the rest of the country.
It is located in an area spanning take regarding these matters.1,601 hectares, that was obtained by a North American At the same time, the political opposition to YDIGORAS corporation, “The Ohio Oil Company,” through oil claim in the Parliament denounced the existence of the camps, number three.
This was where the first oil well was drilled in issuing summons in the matter and calling for an imme1958.
The Company built an airstrip there, which is the londiate investigation.
At first the government rejected their gest in the country and currently is used by aircraft stationed demands, but a few days later, YDIGORAS invited opposithere by the United States for the invasion of Cuba.
We should also mention that some distance from Chinaja, 27 October 1960, the authorities had just finished dispersin the Peten, there are airstrips in Poptun and Flores. ing the mercenaries to other areas.
Airports also were under construction in Champerico The considerable level of air traffic registered during the and in Carmelita, on “Concepcion” farm, equipped with first weeks of October in the zone of Retalhuleu diminished radar and military personnel stationed there by the CIA. and nearly disappeared after the opposition began to agitate.
The matter is that most of the mercenaries were removed from rural workers and peasant farmers who signed up were “Helvetia” farm on the night of 27 October. demobilized and returned to their agricultural pursuits, Mercenaries taken out of “Helvetia” farm were distribalthough under strict vigilance.
Upon arriving in that country, Although the latter figure coincides with YDIGORAS’ statethey disembarked at the mouth of the Prinsapolka River, ment on 13 October, the start of the military uprising, in where an air base is located, and were later taken to a camp his threatening words to Guatemalan Air Force pilots six miles away. who refused to bomb Zacapa and Puerto Barrios, so far we The ships left Puerto Barrios at 22:30 hours on that have not been able to obtain exact figures. night, 27 October.
This mercenary contingent was mainly North American instructors had already concluded other composed of Cubans, as well as Salvadorans, Hondurans, aspects of mercenary training; therefore, those who remain etc.
Other reports add that some of these mercenaries camped at “Helvetia” and other bases are only undergoing were left in the area of Puerto Cabezas, Blue Fields, Cabo training in parachute jumping, for which a huge transport Gracias a Dios and the Islas de Maiz in plane is used.
It also indicates that a group disembarked at Public protests against preparations for the invasion of Swan Island in Honduran territory.
That same night, 27 October, another group of some The fact that a Cuban invasion was being planned was fifteen hundred mercenaries was removed from “Helvetia” widely reported in Guatemala and had a strong impact on farm in an extraordinary movement of trains and aircraft. public opinion there.
Colonel achieving a certain degree of organization as well as a core CARLOS A PAZ TEJADA’s allegations, widely circulated of five members who directed the conspiracy.
Another prominent event had to do with country, the derogation of the 1956 Constitution in effect, the summons of the Foreign Minister that was issued by conand the formation of a Junta to be headed by PAZ TEJADA gressmen JULIO VALLADARES CASTILLO and MARCO and a government cabinet including three or four PUR ANTONIO VILLAMAR CONTRERAS, and the public Ministers. letter issued by the latter.
Nonetheless, the position taken by these Officers was The allegations emanating from within the Guatemalan patently indecisive and opportunistic.
They did not want Congress and the motion to be identified with the 1944-1954 Revolution; nor did presented by congressman VALLADARES CASTILLO they wish to acquire commitments with the revolutionary of the PUR, at the request of the Student Associations, organizations that would entail difficulties with the North calling for an investigation of the activities and camps at American government, or publicly express sympathy for the Retalhuleu; the declaration by the “Federacion Autonoma Cuban revolution.
In fact, their conspiracy outright rejection of the military preparations taking place tended to hamper grassroots revolutionary action, and against Cuba, all of which had an impact on YDIGORAS’ sought to establish the traditional government by military frame of mind and that of his “yanki” protectors. junta, accompanied by a lot of “democratic” rhetoric and the same submission to imperialism in practice.
The military uprising of 13 November 1960 Last 2 8 October, Lieutenant Colonel SESSAN PEREIRA, who while not part of the plotters’ leadership The YDIGORAS government, consumed by a serious ecowas very much taken into account because of his personal nomic, political, and social crisis, a substantial foreign debt, commitment and his influence at Military Zone I General and completely discredited in public opinion, is facing the Headquarters, was willing to launch a coup and requested active opposition of the Guatemalan masses. the approval of the Group’s leadership.
After initially giving For some time, a significant number of Army Officers had its approval, the group changed its mind after considering been expressing their disagreement with the YDIGORAS the situation, and told him it would be better to wait awhile regime.
In late June, 1960 a conspiratorial circle had formed and further develop the plans. comprising some 60 officers.
Most of those involved were Inside the army there was considerable concern over young officers from different army divisions and a few troop preparations underway in the mercenary camps for an commanders.
Unconfirmed reports indicated that on 26 ment emerged around the seniority law and other demands, October, a discussion took place inside the Army Chief of this group of soldiers tried to act, seeking the opportunity Staff Headquarters regarding the position and means to bring about a change of government.
They expanded their directorate to seven Puerto Barrios and Jutiapa. members, with a strengthened centrist position favoring a But the rebellious officers were unable to take over the coup d’etat that did not involve alliances with the left so as Mariscal Zabala Regiment.
The Zacapa zone was taken over the officers in support of their halfhearted approach, pushas planned, as was Puerto Barrios, but they failed to gain ing aside Colonel PAZ TEJADA and his friends. control of the base at Jutiapa.
On 5 November, the army officers presented YDIGORAS The rebels gained military control over the departments of with a memorandum giving him 72 hours to modify certain Zacapa and Izabal; but their best hope for triumph had been aspects of his policy of internal repression and to remove placed in the rapid support they anticipated from their counfrom the country all mercenaries remaining in the camps. terparts in the capital, that could lead to a rapid coup d’état It appears that, from a military standpoint, these officers without too much struggle.
They also were counting on the viewed the presence of government-sponsored armed merfact that the Guatemalan Air Force would not attack them. cenaries as a blow to their military ego.
On 11 and 12 November, the principal They published just two proclamations, one in Zacapa officers who had presented the memorandum were arrested, and the other in Puerto Barrios, about which the rest of the and 97 others were relieved of their duties and discharged. country remained virtually unaware.
The plan essentially was The detainees were taken to jail cells located in the General to wait and see how the situation played out in the Capital.
Headquarters of Military Zone 1 , YDIGORAS had difficulties mobilizing the Air Force a hub of rebellion since Colonel SESSAN PEREIRA had against the rebels.
Approximately 25 pilots, more than half, won over to the conspiracy many officers from the military refused to attack their fellow soldiers.
The President could police, who were headquartered there, many of whom were only count on the full support of the Air Force chief of pushing for a coup. operations, who also piloted his Comander aircraft, and When the plotters realized that YDIGORAS had begun two or three other aviators.
On not do so, and some of these probably were discharged for that same day, 13 November, the United States Embassy’s Air suspicion.
Several young Force Attache, together with other “yanki” military attaches, officers who played prominent roles in this military action directed operations from the Presidential Palace, where pilots are university students, and others had received specialized presented themselves in person to report and receive their “ranger” training in the United States and the Panama Canal instructions.
Although it is still weak, a certain nationalism is FAG pilots were used for nothing more than to taxi the unquestionably taking root among young officers, and some aircraft out onto the runway where they would deboard the wish that “things not continue as they are.” plane and a “yanki” pilot would take over the controls.
They Democratic forces continue to struggle to overthrow used B-2 bombers and Mustangs.
To this end, they orgaLater, there were reports from Puerto Barrios that nize and assemble, awaiting new battles in the struggle against “Catalina” airplanes had been sighted, which could have taken the sell-out government. off from the “Shan-gri-la” aircraft carrier.
The military uprising has accentuated the government’s While the FAG had few bombs, during those days they internal contradictions and weaknesses.
Colonel JOSE LUIS were amply stocked from the arsenals of the North American CRUZ SALAZAR, a favorite of the North Americans and mercenary bases.
This included Napalm bombs. the government’s Minister of Communications and Public YDIGORAS’ army chief of staff, AUGUSTIN DONNIS Works, at one point during the uprising looked for an KESTLER, with strong ties to the “yankis” dating back to opportunity to carry out a coup d’etat with Castillo Armas 1954, stated that the Army Chief of Staff intended to request followers. the deployment of North American marine infantry if the Colonel ENRIQUE PERALTA AZURDIA, who was situation got complicated.
EISENHOWER’s order to send, as he YDIGORAS] is grooming to be his presidential successor by did, several United States Marine units and an aircraft carrier to guard appointing him Minister of National Defense.
YDIGORAS and the forces of imperialism tried to take 13 and 14 November were very insecure days for the govadvantage of this army uprising devoid of revolutionary plans ernment.
The Government regained from the Military Police headquarters in the Capital; b) those control in the other areas without resorting to armed force.
As from the Zacapa zone; c) the Puerto Barrios garrison. for the mutinous soldiers, who numbered close to a thousand, The entire city of Zacapa was bombed and, particularly, some fled into the mountains, others were captured, and still the railway stations.
One group of chiefs and Officers reached bombed, the airstrips, and the recently-built radio station. the Honduran border.
Colonel EDUARDO LLERENA Military casualties were insignificant on both sides, but many refused to leave Puerto Barrios, and remained in hiding in civilians, women and children, were killed in the bombings of the area.
On 16 November, the uprising was considered to be under control, but the army remained very divided.
The movement Current situation in Guatemala led by the group of officers had implicated some two hundred officers, of which at least fifty had participated actively in YDIGORAS, who in late October, 1960 had been obliged the rebellion.
Further, EISENHOWER’s active support of his flounis supporting this action not only with personnel, but also dering government, the deployment of naval guard units in with materials and the construction of facilities for air and Guatemala’s Atlantic waters, is considered a decisive factor ground services. likely to quell any threat by the opposition against his regime.
While ground forces train on the spurs of the mountain YDIGORAS, then is considered to be in a strong position, range a few kilometers from the Pacific, intense air training in charge of the situation.
And therefore, in compliance with is taking place here in a partially camouflaged aerodrome. orders from his “yanki” bosses, he is resuming mercenary President YDIGORAS admitted in an interview that trainactivities in the Guatemalan camps. ing in guerrilla warfare was taking place on the spurs of In light of Guatemala’s internal situation at the end of the “Helvetia” hacienda, located a few kilometers from the October,1960 it is easy to appreciate the threats that hovered provincial capital.
He further stated that the air base located over the mercenary camps and, as a consequence, over the approximately 5 kms. west of the Capital on the Pacific side “yanki” plans to attack Cuba.
According of YDIGORAS by invoking the already stale and false excuse to this source, most of these were North American guerof a possible attack by Cuba and communism.
This reactivation of the mercenary camps has become so rilla warfare specialists; experts also had been imported from obvious that it has been reported openly in the “yanki” press, other countries.
They added the United States, acknowledged on 10 January that North that each week, fifty or sixty counterrevolutionaries depart American officials are assisting Guatemalan forces and troops from Miami International Airport in a plane headed for one of other nationalities with training in the environs of the of the three secret training camps.
Retalhuleu air base and other parts of the country, but said They confirmed that, as part of this operation, pilots are that the training was not for the purpose of invading Cuba. trained on an airstrip located in Guatemala just 56 kms.
The declaration was made after revelations published by from the Mexican border.
This announcement was lished an article, including text and photographs, on Cuban made by LINCOLN WHITE who had stated at noon that counterrevolutionary training camps in Miami, reporting the Department would have an official statement to make that preparations are openly underway to invade Cuba. on the subject.
In fact, it appears that YDIGORAS now wants camps before the Christmas holidays, seeking asylum in the to cover up these mercenary activities by saying that they Mexican Embassy in Guatemala.
Upon being denied safe actually correspond to the Guatemalan Army. conduct he fled the Embassy and headed for Mexico where, After visiting Guatemala last November, the head of UPI according to reports, he informed the Cuban Ambassador in Mexico confirmed the presence of the invasion plans. of an air base in Retalhuleu.
The dispatch that armed soldiers man a guard post on a neighboring agriadds that the base at Retalhuleu is used to train commando cultural farm, from which they are able to observe activities forces with the assistance of specialists from North America, in the military center and keep strangers from entering.
In September and October of last year, a considerable KENNEDY asserts that the base was built with financial number of North Americans, military in appearance and assistance from the United States, which also supplied arms. with tattoos customary among members of the United States He added that an official who participated in the negoArmed Forces, were observed around Retalhuleu and on tiations in Washington confirmed for him that the North nearby Pacific beaches.
American government refused to send more arms than those The opposition asserted that those North Americans already sent, because it believed that the supplies requested were responsible for training commandos, but the governexceeded the requirements of defensive operations. ment only stated that they were engineers assisting with He added that the base’s main facility is an airstrip built construction of the base. by a North American firm, but that the aerodrome is not a As Guatemalan Minister of Defense Colonel Enrique military facility in the true sense of the word.
He went on Peralta just indicated, recently there has been a resumption of to report that military personnel wearing North American intensive activity at Retalhuleu. uniforms have been sighted in the city of Retalhuleu.
In addition, a Naval Mission existence of a military base in Retalhuleu.
All access routes will be arriving shortly. to the aerodrome are closed off.
Rifle-bearing guards are They provide valuable training services to Guatemalan posted on roads leading to the base.
The airstrip is built on terrain belonging to MANUEL As can be observed, there are two falsehoods in these RALDA, a prominent Guatemalan cattle rancher.
Since there are no flights to and from edge that infantry forces did not operate there and that the the Department of Retalhuleu, there is no doubt as to the air power used was operated by “yanki” pilots.
With regard to the presence of North American officers, replete with exiles who were planning a Cuban invasion via it must be recalled that there are United States military and Isla de los Pinos; this information was published in “The air missions in Guatemala, which usually provide valuable Nation.” assistance to our Army.
These plans include establishing a strong plans, forces would be concentrated in Puerto Barrios, which military base in Retalhuleu.
The troops there played a sucwould serve as a springboard during the maneuver. cessful role in putting down the 13 November uprising One report indicates that Retalhuleu is a training base for against the government. air and ground forces pertaining to a burgeoning “volunteer” The Minister said that it is not true that Retalhuleu is army comprising OAS member countries.
These KENNEDY reported from Retalhuleu that the United States also has rumors even describe mercenary groups leaving Retalhuleu helped finance the construction of a landing camp where for Isla Cisne in Honduras; in recent weeks, there has been daily training in air maneuvers is taking place.
He also talk of the presence of numerous Cubans in Retalhuleu, reported that the hacienda is mostly owned by ROBERTO which official sources deny.
ALEJOS ARZU, one of the largest independent coffee As can be observed, all of these reports by North growers in Guatemala and an intimate friend and advisor American correspondents that caused an international scanof YDIGORAS. dal provided very little information about the mercenary Two B-26s and two DC-4 or DC6s, without registration bases in Guatemala.
The camp structures appear already had complete information, which was recounted in to be army barracks, one of which is used as a radio station. the first part of this report.
These activities were condemned News correspondent KENNEDY said that he was able in a timely fashion by the Cuban government and by its to penetrate twelve kilometers into the hacienda where the representative at the U.N., Dr.
A Guatemalan authority told him that Guatemalans originally were in charge of training Mercenary activities in Florida. at the base, but that the project expanded so quickly that guerrilla warfare specialists, mainly from the United States, Besides Guatemala, the United States is the other country were brought in. where significant mercenary and counterrevolutionary activIt was reported that they used two Russians so that the ity in training camps is visible. recruits could get used to hearing Russian commands.
The Florida has become an important center for conspiracy source denied, however, that Cubans currently are being and training camps operate blatantly in different parts of trained on that hacienda. the state.
Officers who appear to be wearing United States Air The camp run by the FRD [Frente Revolucionario Force uniforms have been seen driving vehicles in downtown Democrático; Democratic Revolutionary Front] by Retalhuleu, but none with that type of uniform have been TONY VARONA is well known and contains some 1,400 seen on foot in the streets. mercenaries.
In Formosa, for example, MARTIN DIAZ TAMAYO, GARCIA TUNON, it uses a publishing house and in the Philippines, a restaurant.
SANCHEZ MOSQUERA, MEROB SOSA, ROLANDO In Los Angeles, California, there is talk of an incredMASFERRER, and others. ible air raid operation planned for early 1961.
They are All in all, approximately 5,000 mercenaries are receiving offering 25,000 dollars to pilots willing to participate in training in different regions of the United States. this mission.
Those offering the money are “big shots” in On 10 January, the “Miami Herald” reported that the the Government.
The plan is to fly low over the water, used Opa-Loka aerodrome, and this was explained as merely appear suddenly on the Cuban coast at four o’clock in the an airplane that was low on gasoline. morning, and bomb petroleum tanks and refineries.
PATTEN, made a proposal to assemble mercenaries bar, an aviator described an intermediary who throughout Florida in Opa-Loka, for an invasion of Cuba. handles secret messages for members of the recently formed The newspaper also stated that a few weeks ago Hendry “Caribbean Legion” comprising mercenary aviators.
Mercenary training in the United States is carried out The newspaper further reported that recruits, some of so blatantly that the 31 October edition of “Life” magazine them North American, have been active in the Miami area included photographs of mercenary camps in the State for several months, screening exiles for men considered to of Florida.
Last 2 5 October, CBS television (Columbia be qualified and trustworthy.
One agent screened volunteers Broadcasting System) ran footage of several of these counterfrom his home.
The recruits are not allowed a single suitcase, revolutionary centers in Miami. nor can they carry identification documents or money; they Last 22 November, the “Diario de las Americas” reported are allowed to take only the clothes on their backs which the death of North American RUSSELL F MASKER, vicis exchanged for a field uniform once they arrive at their tim of a stray shot from Cuban ROLANDO MARTINEZ destination.
CAMPANERIA during military instruction in a camp locatOn 10 January, a 28-year-old North American named ed in “Cayo Sin Nombre,” thirty miles from Cayo Hueso.
GURULE, a Korean war veteran, said that is also talk that mercenaries assembled in camps in Miami, the force he plans to mobilize will join the invading force Orlando, Homestead, Fort Lauderdale and Fort Myers earn undergoing training in Florida.
Isla Cisne is used as a transfer Intelligence Agency, for a total of 45,000 spies who meddle point where mercenaries remain for several days before being in the affairs of Cuba, Guatemala, El Congo, Indonesia, transferred to Guantanamo Naval Base.
Recently, mercenaries in The vessel that leaves Miami every day broadcasts the Guatemala have gone directly to the Guantanamo Naval program “Radio Independent Cuba” in which they give direcBase without stopping over in Isla Cisne. tions to sabotage cinemas, theaters, and other meeting places.
These expeditions will depart from Florida, some Isla Cisne serves as a transit point for groups of mercenaradjacent keys, and possibly Isla Cisne.
Though it belongs to Honduras, it is occupied by the tion, mercenaries camped at the Guantanamo Naval Base United States, which has installed a Meteorological Bureau will head toward Sierra Maestra, which will be used as an station for the Caribbean to study hurricanes there.
This operations center to launch attacks on several cities in the island is almost entirely the property of Summer Smith, a Oriente province, with air support from bases in Isla Cisne merchant from Boston and descendant of Captain Alonzo and Guatemala.
The mercenary air force also plans to bomb Adams, who established himself there in 1893. different locations in the La Habana province.
He is supported by Representative There already have been reports that the FRD under Pucinsky of Illinois, and retired Commander Pilot Nicholas TONY VARONA has the approval of the United States Nonnemather. authorities and transfers contraband weapons, supplies, and Everything stated above is as much as we can report to the explosives to the Isla.
Further, this counterrevolutionary present moment about the mercenary camps in Guatemala, group’s camp, mercenaries may not return to civilian life Nicaragua, Florida, as well as other counterrevolutionary after they have been accepted.
Alberto American army during the Second World War to conceal the status of the troops.
The group, led by ROLANDO Ramiro Valdés Menéndez, Commander Chief Dept.
Infirmary MASFERRER, included North Americans KENNETH G-2 MINFAR PROCTOR, age 33, from Boston; LARRY BRICENT, age 22, from Columbus, Ohio.
Translated grams maintained and financed by the Washington adminby National Security Archive.] istration, that engage in defamation and encourage treachery while simultaneously transmitting coded orders for counterrevolutionaries based in Cuba, all under the CIA’s direction.
Information about preparations of American warships part pertaining to the mortars. and transfer of mercenaries and henchmen by air to Panama We inform you of this as appropriate.
Yesterday afternoon, the loading of three USA destroyers was completed at the naval base of Key West.
These ships travel loaded to their maximum capacity and carry weapons of all classes including bombs to be launched from airplanes, obusos , munitions of all calibers, and have double the number of mortars than they do of other weapons.
These vessels left today in the early morning, headed for the naval base at Guantanamo, carrying only regular crew Cuban Intelligence Report, 15 April 1961 members in each destroyer.
From the air base in Key West, Boxcar type 15 April 1961 transport planes are leaving daily, as of five or six days ago, “Year of Education” with Panama as their destination.
Commander Ramiro Valdés Menéndez, Chief of return with another contingent.
Department of G-2, Ministry of the Revolutionary The majority of these flights have left for Panama in the Armed Forces night and early morning hours, and return to Key West in the afternoon or at dusk.
This is clear evidence that an In Washington, meetings and exchanges of opinions [took attack on our Island is being prepared, since these men place] between public officials in the Department of State, the could also be transported from Panama in the vessels of the White House, the CIA, and the Pentagon, but there were no American Marines. common, unanimous views with regard to Cuba.
Opinions Please respond to this.” were divided into two families, each one of which included It does not say whether they have communicated to the its reasoning and conclusions.
The counterrevolutionary groups, mere peons of imperialIn this manner, it seems [excision or marker bleedism, have neared one of the two positions as well. through] facing them8 with principles of non-intervention 6 affirmed that Kennedy’s advisers and the free determination of peoples, which until now has were divided.
While the CIA applied pressure to the President been exercised in Latin America with interventionist aims to support an invasion with bases in Florida and Guatemala, a against Cuba. position that was shared by some officials in the Department have discarded the idea of sending of State, other members of the White House and the same one large invasion because it would lay bare to America and Department of State exhorted Kennedy to not act hurriedly, the world the flagrant intervention of the government of the because this decision would have to end the matter.
Some When journalists asked him where his exile army was trainwere so convinced that special reporters started to arrive in ing, Miró categorically denied that they were training in Miami from all Yankee and Spanish publication organizations Guatemala, where he said only Guatemalans trained, which in anticipation of the sensational news of the invasion. had been “clarified” by Idígoras’ government.
Afterwards, Kennedy said that he would oppose any effort to launch an offensive against Cuba from the United States.
Following his statements, Kennedy made reference to b) The position decided by Mexico and Ecuador holding Rolando Rasferrer under custody in a hospital, saying in favor of non-intervention determination by that American authorities will act against “those who want to the populace vacillation to break establish in Cuba a regime in the style of Batista.” relations with our country and through pressure by Kennedy knows of the continent’s snub it is not decided either to abandon the defense of Batista, the protégé of Eisenhower.
Latin America, alarmed by the repeated announcements In addition, according to his plans, it is not advantageous Yankee government is assisting all to Kennedy now to have an expedition leave from the Yankee counterrevolutionaries in that country, in an essential way coasts.
Because of this, in part, they have detained with weapons, equipment, airplanes, money and Yankee Masferrer in fear that he, now diminished in importance, will instructors to the mercenaries in the 11 rush to send another expedition of Cuban and Yankee merof Florida, Louisiana, Guatemala, [illegible, bleedcenaries, as he did the other time, which would give the US through] other places.
Of course, Kennedy’s objective government a “headache” at present. here is in vain.
The posture of some Latin American governments is firm enough on this issue that their delegates at the UN recently “Homeland or death.
We will win.” rejected the United States delegate’s intentions to include in a project the “arguments” contained in the “white book” of Capt.
The means of support of the clandestine groups [words The delegations of Guinea and Mali, accompanied by excised] is the alliance of MRP groups and the November other African and Asian countries, are also preparing a similar 30th Movement.
The basic unity of the Once Kennedy stated that the basic matter of Cuba was to MRP is the nucleus composed of seven men, set up in a way be left among Cubans, he showed his boundless cynicism.
He that the rest of its members would not put another group in attempts to present the problem as an issue among Cubans danger.
To Kennedy’s statement is based on the recently approved ensure that the movement does not lose all its leaders in one plan of aggression toward Cuba, one that tries to frame the stroke, the national executive has met only four times in pleattack on our country as a problem only among Cubans.
A happy group of 15 Cuban have already, in another part of this report, pointed out plans youth and their friends on the beach of Varadero hid one of that make the infiltration of numerous groups in our territory the recent conclaves of the MRP. into the norm.
They carry detonators and fuses inside mercenary invasion from Guatemala, which they will attempt shopping crates.
All people active in the clandestine force try to present not as an act of intervention by the United States and its in every way to lead a normal life.
If one of them has a feeling that to the appeal from the puppet government of he is being pursued or watched, the organization tries to send Miró Cardona. him outside the country or obtain asylum in the embassy In another part of his statements Kennedy “screws up” of a friendly nation.
Each “fireKennedy, after being confronted, looked perplexed and cracker” is lined with dynamite cartridges.
When the fuse is confused, did not know what to say and only managed to lit, the firecracker serves as a detonator. mumble some endless sentences to try to hide the truth, never arriving at a concrete answer.
CIA sent to Cuba clandestinely in order to prepare condiAfter the group that constituted the FUR was imprisoned tions that would allow for a mercenary invasion,” 5 May and the majority shot, the CIA chose another Executive for 1961 the composition of the FUR, including Commander Gonzalo Miranda of the Marines of the Revolutionary War and others, almost all being detained.
Republic of Cuba – Ministry of Revolutionary Armed Here is a diagram of how the FUR is organized in our Forces – Rebel Army country, following direct instructions from the CIA in 5 May 1961 “Year of Education” Washington, its form of operation and current conditions, and measures that should be taken for its annihilation.
Liaisons, Revolutionary United themselves to the task of directly organizing these groups, Front as well as the training of the mercenaries and saboteurs in the camps already set up in Guatemala, Nicaragua, Panama, Under Liaisons: Operational Groups: Armament, and some marine bases in the states of Florida and North Sabotage, Radio14 Carolina, and also in Puerto Rico.
Military Coordinator, Supplies, Finances, among war criminals displaced from political power, and also Propaganda, Coordination, Action and Sabotage, Political from the national bourgeoisie, and from some organizations Coordinator that played a role against tyranny like the Second Front of Escambray, the OA and elements of the right 1.
CIA, intelligence and counterintelligence organization wing from 26 July and the Directorate.
This recruitment led of the United States government, controlled directly by to the result that a so-called Government would be formed the President of that nation, charged with preparing any in exile, into which they integrated, among others, Miró actions that can harm our Revolutionary Government, Cardona as President and Tony Varona as Vice . from an act of sabotage to an assassination.
They did this with the goal of uniting all counterrevolutionary groups under one leadership, as well as for the effect of propaganda, preparing the way for when the invasion came 2.
FUR, Revolutionary United Front, encompassing at and power was taken, according to them, over a piece of our its core all counterrevolutionary groups that operate land, a beachhead.
They would be able to dedicate all necesin our country, forming an Executive , sary aid and possibly be recognized by some puppet governwho is chosen by the leaders of counterrevolutionary ments in America, and therefore gave themselves over organizations, and whose function is military and to the work of preparing these personnel in the handling of political coordination, supplies, finances, propaganda, weapons and armed struggle. action and sabotage, communications, etc.
These counterrevolutionary groups are formed by the 22) Anticommunist League following organizations.
Some “nomes de guerre” appear among leaders, almost always highlighting them as a CIA 23) Insurrectional Movement for the Revival of the Delegate, for example, Rafael, mentioned above, now Revolution shot, appeared as National Coordinator.
Gonzalo Miranda, presently 10) Anticommunist Youth of America – Raúl detained; work consisted of coordinating military matters, 11) Constitutional Democratic Legion (Nelson attempting to capture members of the Revolutionary Armed Granado) Forces, as well as all those who were discharged soldiers for whatever reason and still assisted active military personnel, 12) November 30th Alejandro and those who were prisoners or fugitives.
Tobarich, as well, was 14) Cuban Action – Demetrio in charge of Action and Sabotage, and substituted 15) Insurrectional Democratic Organization – for Engineer Ray, responsible for various bombs that Ludovies produced an explosion in Havana, and the entrance of arms and explosives into the capital, including among 16) Student Revolutionary Democratic Federation their missions the occupation of Celimar and the lading – Raúl near Eufemio Cay.
This position was occupied by Salvador García who found himself a fugitive, 18) Christianity Against Communism – Teté and substituting for one within the group who had been shot previously, as the CIA had foreseen that its 19) Anticommunist Front – Felipe leaders would be taken prisoner and stipulated that each 20) Naval Revolutionary Corps – Benito Executive member would have a substitute.
His work consisted of distributing money for operations and the 21) Action 62 counterrevolutionary elements’ needs.
This task fell to Bebo Borrón, prisoner, c) They travel with a lot of money, and use lighted watches and Tony Díaz, fugitive; their obligation comprised the that they had in the camps. propaganda for said organization although they carried out an infinity of other work. d) They frequent elegant clubs, bars, and cabarets.
Executive office unknown to he who e) They often use women as camouflage, who dress as occupied it, his task being possibly, but never surely, that militiawomen and travel on buses, just as all these of communicating with the CIA and preparing places for elements go unarmed. the installation of a plant.
They also have the function of all municipalities. teaching counterrevolutionary elements that the political apparatus, FUR, positions them to accomplish sabotage, Measures that must be taken for the destruction and as well as armament and disarmament, which they learn obliteration of these groups through the Liaisons.
The chief of these operations groups is Frank Bernardino, who received training a) Introduction of activists17 in the prisons. outside the country, remaining within the country16 in b) Addition of VR in hotels, guest houses, clubs and cabarets, the coastal zone lying between Matanzas and Havana, in in order to infiltrate the greatest number of active personnel the northern part, until the moment of his introduction; among the counterrevolutionary organizations. some were also brought in by parachute through the c) Recruitment of troops among elements that have been province of Camagüey.
Without the context in the preceding few Jones, The Bay of Pigs . excised words, it is difficult to translate “enfrentarse,” which means 2 See the Soviet ambassador’s reports of his conversations with something along the lines of meeting, facing, or confronting.
Lynne Rienner Publishers, 11 Trans. note: The word “readicados” is clearly in the original 1998), incorporating the findings from a prior “critical oral history” document in print, but I cannot make it into a word that makes conference held in the United States, organized by the same United States sense in this context, even by substituting vowels or correcting likely co-sponsors, which included veterans of the Kennedy Administration typographical errors.
The typing is very faint, but the word could be The Bay of Pigs Declassified—The Secret CIA Report on the Invasion of Ray.
Here its 5 At the March 2001 conference in Havana, in which Fidel meaning seems more specific and sinister.
Spanish “radista” is not commonly used and government had perhaps over-estimated the size of the impending does not appear in major dictionaries but is my best educated guess assault, which in turn prompted an even larger mobilization by the based on context in this document.
Original Spanish “Mazónico” looks very similar they did not know in advance the precise landing spot, which to “Masonic,” and may be a typo, but given mention of the name had in fact changed in the weeks preceding the invasion.
Author’s Mazones later and context, this interpretation seems correct. recollection.
These here, and I am not sure, given the limited context of the list, documents were probably originally printed on both sides and the that my interpretation is fully correct.
The gist seems to be that black marker used to excise bled through to the other side, but those prisoners will be recruited into the counterrevolution unless the marks are more diffuse and sometimes readable text shows through.
Aside from the story of Brazil’s mediation War battles in Latin America, making them arguably more efforts in Cuba1, we still know relatively little about how intense and centered on Cuba.
In part, this was because the crisis affected Cuba’s Latin American and Caribbean many governments in the hemisphere were alarmed both by neighbors, let alone the significance it had for the interPresident Kennedy’s promise not to invade Cuba in return American system.
This is right military president embraced Kennedy’s insistence that now beginning to change thanks to the opening of archives the missiles must be removed as evidence that Washington in the region.
Indeed, in the years to come, we can expect was finally ready to do battle.
Guatemala’s armed forces new research and revelations on the crisis as seen from were proclaimed ready for action, a state of emergency was Latin America along with studies of how it altered Cuba’s imposed in the Dominican Republic, Costa Rica offered its ports and airspace to help impose a blockade , relationships with its neighbors.
This will be highly signifiand Argentina proclaimed its navy was ready to defend the cant to those of us seeking to understand the Cold War in Western Hemisphere.
After all, this was where Cuba most actively was still in power, more intransigent and revolutionary than supported revolutionary endeavors and where the United ever, now in open defiance of the Soviet Union and even more States and Cuba (sometimes, but not always, in conjunccommitted to supporting revolution abroad. tion with the Soviet Union) battled intensively for influMoreover, the perceived danger revolutionary Cuba posed ence.
El Salvador’s OAS representaoverthrow Castro, Cuba’s understandable feeling of insecurity, tive asked.
The Cuban exile leader, José Miró Cardona, was so and mounting tensions that had arisen over Cuba’s influence angered by what he saw as a lack of support from the United and stated aims of supporting socialist revolution in the States in the shadow of the crisis that he resigned his post region.
In fact, given the way that events had unfolded over as head of the Cuban Revolutionary Council in exile, citing the two years before October 1962, the crisis was a showdown what he saw as United States negligence as the reason.
Preoccupations about the fragility of the status quo to intervene against them.
The Cuban government, meanafter October 1962 nevertheless continued into 1963 and while, sought direct diplomatic support from Mexico and the efforts to isolate Cuba escalated, culminating with the impoMexicans remained relatively well informed about what was sition of collective OAS diplomatic and economic sanctions happening in Havana. against the island in 1964.
Rather than being imposed on Indeed, Mexico’s government and diplomats had a panLatin America by the United States as is commonly assumed, what the oramic view of developments.
On the one hand, its refusal was grounded in its and Cuban operations via Mexico.
This in turn sparked susproud tradition of non-interference in the internal affairs of picion and distrust from the Cuban government who came other countries as a cardinal principle of its foreign policy. to regard Mexico as being awash with CIA operatives.
But President Adolfo Lopez Mateos was also wary of domestic in many ways Mexico’s officially non-committal stance on opinion and a widespread support for Cuba within Mexico.
Cuba allowed it to remain a bridge within Latin America Alongside, and in coordination with, Brazil, it therefore and the inter-American system, a home to exiles of differabstained from US-backed OAS resolutions sanctioning the ent political persuasions, and a nationalist Third Worldist use of armed force against Cuba to enforce the “quarantine” country at the same time as belonging to the United States sphere. and condemnation of the Cuban regime at the OAS during The downside to this position, as suggested by these docuthe crisis.
Indeed, serving its non-interventionist position and not being seen so close both to the United States and Cuba, dependent on to be advocating an invasion of Cuba while not opposing United States trade, with a revolutionary history and a sizeable leftthe basis for the OAS’ position of support for the removal wing population, the Mexican government remained torn of Soviet missiles and an end to the transport of offensive between different positions and unable to fulfill its bridgeweapons to Cuba overall.
Due to its proximity to Cuba, Mexico crisis that helped propel the Cold War conflict and battle was meanwhile a transit route for goods travelling to the over Cuba forward.
However, the crisis ampliabout US-Cuban tensions over fied already hysterical fears about Cuba and strengthened Guantanamo, 25 September 1962 those calling for anti-Castro measures within the Western Hemisphere.
The press does give news about this because 2. – Without explaining the reason why this shooting it is said that…. continues, the Czechoslovakian Ambassador limited himself to reporting that Cuban troops are “in trenches” and that this is why until now they have not suffered any losses; he also assured, that the practice of shootings continues, and that he fears that in one moment Secretaría de Relaciones Exteriores, Mexico City.
Archivo Histórico Diplomático Genaro Estrada, Secretaría de Relaciones Exteriores, Mexico City.
He had between Mexican Foreign Ministry official offered this attention to different colleagues of mine and and Mexican Ambassador to Brazil, 23 I remember that Ambassador Sanz de October 1962 Santamaría – who at that time represented Colombia at the Council – preceded the April invasion of Cuba last year by a few days.
Minister of Foreign Relations, he had a long meeting with him to examine the Cuban situation.
Attentively, Professor Lima informed Ambassador García Robles that ACTING DIRECTOR GENERAL the government of Brazil had asked its Ambassador in Cuba Lic.
Archivo Histórico Diplomático Genaro Estrada, Brazilian government that it would be advisable for Cuba to Secretaría de Relaciones Exteriores, Mexico City.
Obtained by examine the possibility of taking the initiative itself of suggestJorge Mendoza Castro, translated by Tanya Harmer.] ing a UN Investigating Commission (composed naturally of countries that have an independent position) go to the island.
The Brazilian government thinks that this measure could contribute towards finding a solution and undoubtedly lessening the current tension.
The resolution was resolution should make reference to the voted for in parts and Mexico, Brazil, and Bolivia abstained investigation that the United Nations carries out and indicate from second part.
In the block vote Mexico and Brazil that they should await results of this investigation. voted in favor with the Mexican representative having raised the caveat relatThe Prime Minister of Brazil asked the Mexican ing to the constitutional limitations of facilitating executive Ambassador that he communicate this to this Secretariat power.
Our representative has maintained close contact with with the wish that Brazil keeps in closest Brazilian representative.
Our impression is that the prespossible contact with it in these moments. ent international situation is of great seriousness.
Finally Ambassador García Robles asked that he be kept Relations up to date with what the Secretariat of Foreign Relations considers pertinent to communicate.
DIPL times have I publicly expressed the danger that Castro in To: III/210/72911/31558 Cuba embodied, I was branded as trying to camouflage a movement against my government that was not communist, Mexico, D F., 23 October 1962 making it seem as if it was a projection from Cuba.
Guatemala in its great anticommunist majority as Mexican representative at the Organization of American it demonstrated on 20 October, is prepared as a democratic States Council voted in favor of calling the Organ country to align with our brothers of America, and its army of Consultation and in keeping with our information will occupy the position that is required to, within its borBrazilian representative did the same.
Archivo Histórico Diplomático Genaro Estrada, resolve by arms what has not been able to be resolved within Secretaría de Relaciones Exteriores, Mexico City.
Obtained by the assigned peace that our countries, enemies of war and of James Hershberg, translated by Eduardo Baudet and Tanya aggression, deserve.
Given state of emerthe type referred to could constitute a serious threat not only gency, measures have been given public force to suppress to the security of the peoples in the American continent [i.e., possible disorders and agreement government to hemisphere—ed.] but for the peace of the world. give wide protection embassies.
According to non-official I think that neither the government nor the Cuban sources possibility of suspension of individual people wish to be constituted as a threat to the peoples of guarantees with decreeing state of emergency counAmerica nor as factors that may lead to a breach of the peace. try.
This afternoon the text communicated delivered Humanity as a whole would be in danger. diplomatic corps so that it can be made known fully In the name of the friendly relations that unite and have to our governments.
Apostolic Nuncio characunited our countries, I fervently wish that Cuban territory ter senior member diplomatic corps convened a has not become a base for weapons of aggression and in the meeting this afternoon. city is restless because of troop case that this were to have occurred, I believe it is my duty movements maintaining order.
I will keep informing. in the name of peace which all the Mexicans have the wish to preserve, to cordially make a call to your government so 125545 that those bases are not used in any form whatsoever and the SOTO REYES. offensive weapons are withdrawn from Cuban territory.
James Hershberg, translated by Eduardo Baudet and Tanya This Chargé d’Affaires commented with regards to the Harmer.] first point, that the information was late, since the resolutions had already been approved.
With regards to the second point, Campos Ortiz thanked him for his information, and mentioned the fact that Mexico is not member of the Security Council.
The Chargé d’Affaires ended by saying that his Government Message from Mexican Embassy, would have, as always, special interest in exchanging informaWashington , 24 tion with Mexico in everything related to the situation of the October 1962 moment.
Archivo Histórico Diplomático Genaro Estrada, Manuel Tello Secretaría de Relaciones Exteriores, Mexico City.
Obtained by James Hershberg, translated by Eduardo Baudet and Tanya 140. As the OAS session was ending Secretary Rusk took Harmer.] care to thank our country for its attitude.
I would MEMORANDUM be grateful if you could orient me about this and similar affairs our country’s role OAS Mexico, DF, 24 October 1962 UN and other international fora given that the press this country concedes extremely special attention Latin The Chilean Chargé d’Affaires visited Second Undersecretary American countries.
Archivo Histórico Diplomático Genaro Estrada, the Organ of Consultation under the terms of the TIAR Secretaría de Relaciones Exteriores, Mexico City.
Foreign Ministry official and Peruvian That the government of Canada has dictated the necesDiplomat, Mexico City, 25 October 1962 sary provisions so that airplanes with a Cuban flag that land in Canadian territory will be inspected, in search of weapons.
That this will proceed as such in accordance with provisions MEMORANDUM contained in international agreements, according to which Mexico, D F., 25 October 1962 civilian airplanes are not allowed to transport arms unless previous approval is obtained.
The Ambassador added that The Peruvian Chargé d’affaires Mr Don Carlos Pérez the above is independent of the provisions also dictated by Cánepa, visited the Second Undersecretary Campos the Canadian authorities, to the effect that Russian airplanes Ortiz, last Tuesday the 23rd.
Campos is not under the Executive’s authority, but requires previous Ortiz asked him, even, if it might not be a Peruvian initiative. authorization by Congress.
Campos Ortiz noted that Mexico Today in the morning, the Peruvian Chargé d’Affaires had voted in favor of the Resolution overall. called to express that he had received a telegram from his Foreign Ministry which told him, with regards to this matter, P.C.O. that it was not a Peruvian initiative.
Archivo Histórico Diplomático Genaro Estrada, from Lima the day of the 23rd, said as follows: Secretaría de Relaciones Exteriores, Mexico City.
Archivo Histórico Diplomático Genaro Estrada, Secretaría , Washington, 25 October 1962 de Relaciones Exteriores, Mexico City.
In a separate oficio, I will inform you about the Inter-American Treaty of Reciprocal Assistance, that the the afternoon session on the same 23rd of October. organ of consultation be immediately called and authorized, in accordance of Article 12 of that Treaty, to act provisionally Very attentively, as such.
As annex 1 I enclose the note from the Representative Vicente Sanchez Gavito of the United States.
Archivo Histórico Diplomático Genaro Estrada, Secretaría country, read a long declaration about the situation in Cuba de Relaciones Exteriores, Mexico City.
Obtained by James that has been created because of the existence in this country Hershberg, translated by Eduardo Baudet and Tanya Harmer.] of weapons of an offensive character.
Once his declaration was finished, the Representatives in the Council pronounced in favor of the call.
It was my turn to speak after about the Representatives of Argentina and Guatemala.
Letter from Mexican Ambassador to the The last session of the Council that was convened to Organization of American States , examine a request to call the Organ of Consultation was that Washington, to Mexican Foreign Minister, of 14 November 1961.
Consistent with the above, the Secretariat C Manuel Tello of Foreign Relations has given me instructions to vote in Secretariat of Foreign Relations favor of the draft resolution presented by the United States General Directorate of International Organs Delegation, to call the Organ of Consultation and ask the Mexico, DF Council to constitute itself and act provisionally as such.
Submitted to a vote, the Resolution that I enclose as Please find enclosed three examples of the reports by annex 2, was approved by the 18 favorable votes.
Bolivia Argentina, Costa Rica, the United States and the Dominican and Uruguay abstained.
Morrison asked, in name of the North American govof Consultation today, Friday, precisely to receive the inforernment, that the resolution be read, that I enclose as annex 3 mation that has been sent to me by mail.
Mr Allen added that Brazilian President Goulart, 26 October in this way it would be possible to avoid governments that 1962 have not yet taken measures and those that have decided not to take measures of any kind, being seen to be placed in an LETTER DIRECTED BY THE PRESIDENT OF embarrassing situation.
Although his attitude had displeased me a great deal, The critical situation that, with a rapidity that is causing today I did not look for Mr Allen since I knew that he worry, develops around Cuba impels me to address this brief had interest in talking to me about the need of summoning message to you.
We received with a certain relief I told him that he could be sure that, in the whole process the first results of the efforts already realized in the United that the OAS observes with respect to the serious situation Nations and we share the determination of the Secretary that we are going through, the Mexican government would General U Thant in the sense that the tension might be lessnever view itself as being in an embarrassing situation and ened by means of direct negotiations.
We consider, however, that, for the same reason, this possibility should be discarded that, as much as for the success of the current initial conversawhen he would be collaborating in determining the course of tions as for the success of the previous efforts destined to put action of the Delegation of the United States.
I limited myself in saying to course of this grave crisis – is that the United Nations is him that the difficulty lies in his lack of understanding and the instrument that in the present situation can and should that, instead of going over things that have already past, the act with most efficiency to put an end to the crisis.
As such important thing, was to clearly establish that the Mexican we completely support the efforts that have been made at Government has no objection to the Organ of Consultation the United Nations by countries that do not belong to any having as many meetings as the member states wish. bloc and other countries, as well as the indefatigable effort by U Thant.
Even so, in the case that, as unfortunately has Very attentively, occurred with frequency in the past, the Security Council finds itself paralyzed and shows itself unable to undertake Vicente Sanchez Gavito adequate action, it will be, as everything makes us believe, Ambassador indispensible to immediately move this serious dispute to the General Assembly.
Archivo Histórico Diplomático Genaro Estrada, Secretaría In my opinion in the present serious moment it would be de Relaciones Exteriores, Mexico City.
As far as I am a journalistic summary of these declarations . concerned I have the intention of doing this as soon as possible.
On the other hand, the Foreign Minister I ask that you excuse me for the liberty that I have taken Hermes Lima affirmed on the 24th of the current month and for the brevity of this message, which is the consequence before a group of women and students that went to the of the seriousness of the situation and its urgent character.
Archivo Histórico Diplomático Genaro Estrada, Secretaría as an Organ of Consultation, in the course of the voting of de Relaciones Exteriores, Mexico City.
Janeiro, 27 October 1962 What we did not vote on and will not vote for is a condemnation of the Cuban regime or for an authorization of the invasion.
It is necessary to distinguish between the accumulation AIR MAIL of nuclear weapons in the Americas and the measures that From Brazilian Embassy tend towards overthrowing a population’s domestic regime.
Number 1607 Expedient 81-0/210 The “Jornal do Brasil” on the 25th of the current publishes a journalistic report about this.
Brazil’s international policy Finally, I enclose the text of an editorial published the Rio de Janeiro, 27 October 1962 same day in the “Diario de Noticias” that refers likewise to the Cuban question.
Secretary of Foreign Relations I reiterate to you the assurances of my most esteemed and General Directorate of the Diplomatic Service [Dirección distinguished consideration.
Minister of War, General Amaury Kruel, declared on the 23rd of the current , to the “Journal do Brasil” that “the Attached. armed forces of Brazil are united and closely adhered to the c.p.
Archivo Histórico Diplomático Genaro Estrada, Secretaría Este, especially in the anticipated case that a foreign nation prode Relaciones Exteriores, Mexico City.
Cuban situation Number 2551 Washington, DC Washington, 29 October 1962 29 October 1962 RELACIONES MEXICO CONFIDENTIAL 144. I confirm telephone conversation last night.
Secretary Rusk summoned Ambassadors [to C Manuel Tello, the] White House and OAS to specify development Secretariat of Foreign Relations international crisis last few days.
He told [us General Directorate of International Organizations that the] message transmitted by Moscow yesterday and immediate response by President Kennedy had fundamentally I am enclosing the memorandum that I have written of alleviated tension.
Rusk asked us to tell our governments imminent Vicente Sanchez Gavito, danger removed through withdrawal of nuclear Ambassador weapons from Cuba Cuban problem remains alive and that President Kennedy taken nor will he take any commitment contrary resolutions approved [at the] consultation meeting of Foreign Ministers at Punta del Este without consulting the Organization system. long oficio I expand information and commentary.
With regards the United States decided to reply to the letter of the 26th to this last issue, he announced that the Secretary General of and not allude to this message of the 27th; the United Nations, with a group of numerous experts, will go to Cuba on the 30th of this month.
Likewise, he repeated 3. The message disseminated on the morning of the 28th that one should not consider that there had been “a great vicin which the USSR announces that it is prepared to suspend tory” and that the problem had ended.
With regards to the the construction of the bases in Cuba, dismantle them and latter, he told us that it is his understanding that there had return the armaments to its territory, all under supervision been changes in the Kremlin over the last two days and that of United Nations representatives.
As a counterpart, the it was important that the position of Mr Khrushchev did not aforementioned power has requested assurances that the weaken too much.
With regards to the question of the Salvadorian The Secretary of State reported that his government had Ambassador, Mr Rusk also said that there had been no deals accepted this proposition and that the same terms of the or secret arrangements; that the “record” from North American agreement are present in the letter from the letter of 26 October onwards is public.
In the occur since the Soviet ships are already now on their way to following days it is possible that difficulties may arise.
Castro, in today’s speech, refers to “the lated two questions that served so that the Secretary of State abandonment by the United States of Guantanamo” and that would confirm that the situation on the day before, Saturday, is even more problematic than the issue of Turkey, because as had reached the point of extreme danger and that surely long as a regime like that of Castro’s remains in power, one Moscow’s knowledge of this had influenced the decision to cannot even take seriously the possibility of modifying “the dismantle the bases.
In summary, the United gave the impression that, the previous day, the United States States has reacted favorably to today’s Soviet message, but it has been about to bomb the bases.
His last words consticautious, he gave the impression of being seriously worried tuted an appeal to his interlocutors for them to be discreet in about the turn that events had taken.
Archivo Histórico Diplomático Genaro Estrada, James Hershberg, translated by Eduardo Baudet and Tanya Secretaría de Relaciones Exteriores, Mexico City.
TRANSLATION OF CODED TELEGRAM 759. PROCEDURAL COPY I beg you take note that due to the situation that prevails in Number 2557 Cuba it is not possible for the time being to carry out interPrague, 29 October 1962 views to deal with urgent or pending matters with officials of RELACIONCES MEXICO the Ministry of Foreign Relations in light of most of them 104. Continuing on from my 98.
Panic purchases being mobilized. the population ran out of existing basic food INZUNZA . supplies.
Archivo Histórico Diplomático Genaro Estrada, with Cuba in front of the embassies of those countries.
Friday by Foreign Minister David, both violent tone and terms, described American attitude irresponsible hysteria and warmongering and piratical act that constitutes infringement without precedent internal affairs free Latin Memo of Conversation of Mexican Foreign American country, act that threatens aggression in violaMinistry official with Cuban charge tion United Nations Charter, against freedom of the d’affaires, Mexico City, 30 October 1962 seas and international law.
Czechoslovakia repudiates blockade, declared its support Cuba, and supports declaration Soviet delegate Security Council.
EP 31558 Last Saturday Czechoslovak Foreign Minister returned 2nd PART American notes relating to blockade.
Campos Ortiz responded to the Chargé d’Affaires TOP LEVEL INFORMATION MEMORANDUM that the answer was negative, since the opinion that Mexican authorities have in this respect and that was Our Embassy in Caracas, Venezuela, in oficio dated 30 applied the first time in the case of the Norwegian Ship October recently past, informed this Secretariat “Teneriffa” applies in respect to any port facility, use of the about the most important events registered in that country, in dock, use of quay or transfer inside the ship. relation with the crisis that the Caribbean zone is going through.
Subsistence] four thousand five hundred tons of rice; that The same day Mr President Betancourt noted that Cuba, this operation is already concluded and that the only thing before transforming into a Soviet atomic base, was already missing is to send it to Veracruz, where a Cuban ship or exporting slogans, money and weapons to and destroy a ship that the Government of Cuba charters will pick democratic American regimes. it up.
The beans would be cy of Venezuela referring specially to the area of the Caribbean sent to Cuba at the same time as the rice.
UNDERSECRETARY Prime Minister and Minister of Foreign Relations Professor DON JOSE GOROSTIZA.Hermes Lima, conceded a group press interview yesterday in which he, in keeping with the coincidental version published 1.
The Prime Minister and Foreign Minister emphasized that the most important in this respect would be the 3.
In addition to communicating these facts to the Mexican reestablishment of the relations between Cuba and the other Foreign Ministry, the Chilean Government would be American countries that are broken since this “will be a guargreatly indebted if you could give your points of view about antee for Cuba as much as for said countries.” the specific matter.
The Prime Minister denied that part of the Brazilian envoy’s mission was to propose that Cuba held elections, Mexico City, 31 October 1962 affirming that a proposal of this kind would constitute interference in the internal affairs of Cuba.
Obtained by 2) The Government of Brazil and its envoy are well aware James Hershberg, translated by Eduardo Baudet and Tanya that the fundamental conditions for overcoming the crisis Harmer.] will be “proof of the existence of the nuclear bases and its dismantling,” which must have as a counterpart the commitment of the United States to not invade Cuba.
This proves the high political capacity and statesmanlike Hermes Lima. ability of President Kennedy.
The same can be affirmed of Rio de Janeiro, 31 October 1962 Prime Minister Khrushchev.
Archivo Histórico Diplomático Genaro Estrada, sonal Representative of the President is to present the Cuban Secretaría de Relaciones Exteriores, Mexico City.
I take the opportunity to reiterate to you assurances of my most high and distinguished consideration.
Archivo Histórico Diplomático Genaro Estrada, MEMORANDUM Secretaría de Relaciones Exteriores, Mexico City.
Obtained by Mexico, DF, 7 November 1962 James Hershberg, translated by Eduardo Baudet and Tanya The Cuban Chargé d’Affaires, Mr Ramon Sinobas, visHarmer.] ited today, by prior appointment, the Undersecretary Campos Ortiz.
He said he had instructions to ask us if we could give him an answer yet to the request his government had made to us Memo of Conversation between Mexican for the Delegation of Mexico to give its support in the United Foreign Ministry official and Cuban diploNations, more concretely in the General Assembly, to the Five mat, Mexico City, 1 November 1962 Points that Prime Minister Castro made known recently, and that are related to the crisis situation that has been taking place between Cuba and the United States.
MEMORANDUM Mr Sinobas dealt with this matter with Undersecretary 1 November 1962 Campos Ortiz in the visit he made to him on 1 November.
He did not have with him the text of the Five Points, but he The Cuban Chargé d’Affairs, Mr Ramon Sinobas, requested gave it to us that same day in the afternoon in a note. to be received by Secretary Tello.
The Campos Ortiz said to Mr Sinobas that the General Secretary gave instructions to Mr Licenciado Campos Assembly of the UN could not approve any resolution nor Ortiz to receive him in his name. make any recommendation about this matter, as it is already Mr Sinobas said that he had instructions from his governbeing considered by the Security Council.
That is set out, ment to ask the Mexican government for its support in the Campos Ortiz added, in the first paragraph of Article 12 of United Nations, to obtain acceptance of the five points that the Charter, which he then read.
This, he added, because Prime Minister Castro had just made known. of what the four first Points that Prime Minister Castro’s Campos Ortiz asked Mr Sinobas if he had an official text Declaration includes. of the said five points.
He answered that he did and that he Mr Sinobas asked Campos Ortiz if we could disclose to would send it to him immediately. him what would be our position would be in the event that Mr Sinobas expressed to Campos Ortiz that the Cuban the matter was discussed in the Assembly.
Campos Ortiz told government considered the support of Mexico, in this case, as him that, should that case arise, we would consider the matbeing of the highest importance. ter, but that for now we could not disclose anything.
Campos Ortiz offered to comment will abstain from pronouncing on this problem in any municate with him by telephone during the course of the day way.
Campos Ortiz added that in analogous cases, but in in this respect. other circumstances, the Mexican position has been different; for example, in the recent case of Panama (efforts of the 3.
Thirdly, Mr Sinobas told Campo Ortiz that he had telePanamanian Government regarding the Canal) or in the case, graphic instructions from his Government to kindly request a while ago, of the abrogation of the Platt Amendment, that that the Secretariat of Foreign Relations provide all posthe Cuban Government obtained. sible information about the nature of Mexico’s policy and attitude in relation to the problem of territorial waters and 2.
The second point that Mr Sinobas touched upon refers to jurisdiction over its air space.
He would also like to have, he the Cuban Government’s purchase of 4,500 tons of rice, that added, reports regarding Mexico’s posture in International were obtained from CONASUPO [the National Company Organizations on these two matters. of Popular Subsistence] and of 1,500 tons of beans, that Campos Ortiz answered Mr Sinobas that he would do were obtained from the Agriculture Bank.
Mr Sinobas what was possible to provide him with the concrete data had already informed the Secretary about these transacabout these points throughout the course of tomorrow and tions.
It is now to do with, the Chargé d’Affairs said, their in addition, possibly, an official publication of the Secretariat. dispatch to Cuba.
Since the 3rd of November – he added – the steamship “Bahia de Marriel” has been in Veracruz, Mr Sinobas thanked Mr Campos Ortiz’s offer and combut the merchandise has not been able to board given that mented that he would very much like to have these reports in the Head of the ANDSA at the time to send them to Havana on next Friday’s airplane.
Port, a gentleman with the surname Vega, is not allowing its dispatch because of not having, he says, instructions for 4.
Fourthly, Mr Sinobas asked Undersecretary Campos Ortiz it from the seller.
In addition, Mr Vega is requesting that if any resolution had been taken yet in relation to Cuba the proper contract of the freight be presented.
Mr Sinobas joining the Convention on the Inter-American Indigenous considers that perhaps there is a misunderstanding in this Institute.
Campos Ortiz answered him that an answer to the case, given that the Embassy’s Commercial Counselor was note that the Cuban Embassy had sent with regards to this informed that CONASUPO had given instructions for dismatter was still pending. patching the merchandise.
With respect to the freight contract, Mr Sinobas commented, he understands that this is 5.
Lastly, Mr Sinobas said that he had communicated with not necessary, as the buyer of the merchandise is the Cuban Ambassador Lechuga, who told him Government and the boat that plans to take it to Cuba is that he is thinking of coming to Mexico, that he does not yet property of the State.
In addition, he added, in the previous know exactly when, but that at latest it will be by the end of cases, similar to this one, presentation of the freight contract the United Nations General Assembly meeting. has never been requested.
Memo of Conversation between Mexican With respect to the rice, he said that the 4,500 tons of rice officials regarding shipment to Cuba, 7 that were obtained from CONASUPO and that brings in November 1962 $9,000,000, appeared consigned to a Swiss firm in Lausanne, but that it was later known that the rice was destined to Cuba.
That because of this, the Treasury communicated with Mr MEMORANDUM Amoroz and he does not know what Mexico, D F., 7 November 1962 was resolved with regards to authorizing the dispatch of the 4,500 tons of rice.
Manuel Tello appeared to have previously agreed to participate in a maraSecretary of Foreign Relations thon of senselessness and lack of dignity.
He finished saying that when in his country communists are not pursued his governtions between Mikoyan and Castro are not ment is accused of being unfriendly to the United States and known.
He seemed to suggest he was worried they missing—trans.] were discussing some points of friction between the United States and Cuba.
He gave the impression that his government c) Measures to increase pressure on the Cuban regime. did not attribute importance to the problem of denuclearizaUnfortunately, he did not offer us his ideas on this last point tion.
But as this explanation has not reassured edly, that the governments in question will not be satisfied these governments, nor those of Honduras and Panama, and while the United States, directly or indirectly, does not overas all these make a common cause with those of Argentina, throw the Cuban regime.
The method that they use for this, Paraguay, Peru, and Colombia, there is various evidence that does not interest them, given that all their attention seems the Department of State is trying to find a way of pleasing its focused on the time factor. most dedicated allies in the battle against the Cuban regime.
Ambassador Campos, of Brazil, elevated the I do not think that what they are doing now in the tone of the meeting.
According to him, it would not be until the docuChina seems to have directed at Khrushchev for ment that was going to be signed was made known that “on having given way in its confrontation with the United States. which side Puerto Rico was, if with those that had nuclear A new Meeting of Consultation could very well be an weapons or those that had agreed never to have them” could escape valve.
Cuban problem have as their stage, like yesterday, Cuba in Among a considerable number of Latin American reprefirst place and, in second, the place that the United States and sentatives there undoubtedly exists unrest over the possible the Soviet Union choose to hold their negotiations. repercussions of a North American agreement not to invade However, the reaction of the majority of the Latin Cuba.
In effect, many of my colleagues have been talking, American governments to these events will create growing both in the Council and in conversations with me, about the problems for us in the Council.
Archivo Histórico Diplomático Genaro Estrada, Secretaría Very attentively, de Relaciones Exteriores, Mexico City.
Ambassador of Mexico, representatives of the Soviet Union, after the exchange of Rio de Janeiro, Brazil letters between President Kennedy and Mr Khrushchev last October.
I have the pleasure of making reference to your attentive First he referred to the efforts aimed at replacing the quaroficio number 1619 dated this past 31 October in which antine established by the United States with an inspection you informed this Secretariat at length about the by the International Red Cross.
He reported that the USSR press interview granted on the date of the 30th of the presagreed that its boats would be inspected but that it could not ent month by the Prime Minister and Minister of Foreign do anything to make other nationalities of the Soviet bloc do Relations of Brazil, Professor Hermes Lima. the same.
Another aspect, that he was examining at this stage This Secretariat is aware of the Brazilian government’s of the conversations, related to whether representatives of the various proposals to intervene in the resolution of the CubanRed Cross should use a North American boat, a Soviet one, or North American problem. one from a neutral country.
He added that, by this time, the USSR had already withdrawn the offensive arms that it had Attentively in Cuba and begun to dismantle the corresponding platforms.
DEL SECRETARIO. boats so that the United States could verify their withdrawal EL DIRECTOR GENERAL INTERINO. on the high seas easily.
After quite a lot having been achieved “in considerable measure,” and assure of time and at the cost of great effort, Mikoyan that, although it was not possible to resolve all debated persuaded “President Castro” to allow these bombers to leave, points, they thought that the topic did not need to occupy having the operation verified by means of reconnaissance and the Security Council’s attention.
This note, inspection on the ground to verify the departure of the Ambassador Stevenson added, would be delivered tomorrow offensive arms and the guarantee that they would not be and immediately distributed to the Security Council.
At the reinserted in Cuba. same time, he added, its text would be sent to the North Stevenson said that in view of Mikoyan’s efforts with American diplomatic missions throughout the Continent and Castro, in relation to the inspection having failed, the respective Foreign Ministries.
Secretary General of the United Nations had sugFinishing his declaration, Ambassador Stevenson offered gested the establishment of a United Nations inspection systo answer any questions that members of the Council wanted tem that would include the territory of the United States and to ask him. countries of the Caribbean.
The United States replied that if The first to ask a question was the Alternate Representative the inspection was not going to limit itself to Cuba, it would from Uruguay to investigate what conclusion had been have to cover not only the United States and the Caribbean, reached in relation to the presence of Russian troops in Cuba. but also Soviet ports.
In this way, this chapter of the negotiaMr Stevenson expressed that the Soviet Union had withtion was brought to an end. drawn at the very least a thousand soldiers of the twenty-one By then, the United States had become convinced that it thousand that were calculated to have been in Cuba and he was very doubtful that the United Nations could carry out added that, naturally, despite these troops leaving, there was an effective inspection on the ground.
On the other hand, still a strong Soviet base in Cuba, although it does not aerial reconnaissance had produced very good results.
Even have nuclear weapons, undoubtedly it has existing and effecso, the North American plan was as unacceptable to the tive anti-aircraft equipment.
Council, where Cuba would be present and could take advanIn turn, Mr Martin expressed that the negotiations with tage of the opportunity to begin launching diatribes and the Soviet Union were finished as of this morning, meaning insults again.
Fortunately, Stevenson said, the USSR did not that the problem of Cuba and its relations with American only share this point of view but, in fact, gave the appearance countries would continue to be a question for consideration of having an even greater interest than the North American in the Council.
We should bear in mind, he said, that the delegation of avoiding debate in the Security Council.
The During the next stage, the possibility of sending a joint United States has reserved its right to aerial reconnaissance. letter to Secretary General of United Nations was examined The other members of the OAS would also have to keen on and, after this, what would be two separate letters with the guard.
Castro’s policy, in relation to Latin America, Martin interpretations of each government.
My government, he added, Washington, DC, 7 January 1963 will not allow any of our republics to be attacked and is ready to act where necessary.
Archivo Histórico Diplomático Genaro Estrada, outlined by President Kennedy last 20 November in his press Secretaría de Relaciones Exteriores, Mexico City.
He finished Jorge Mendoza Castro, translated by Tanya Harmer.] saying that, for now, they do not have concrete proposals to make and that what is next is to undertake consultations to consider what measures can be taken.
Mr Martin declared that for now there were no Organ of Consultation, on the case of Cuba. indications that these activities were going to decrease.
The object of the meeting was to listen to Mr Alexis The Argentine ambassador asked if there were signs that Johnson, Undersecretary of State for Political Affairs, about communist China would try to spread in America what he the latest developments registered in Cuba. called the most aggressive doctrines of communism.
Mr Martin replied that this was one of the points that the Department of State wanted to 1) Presence of Soviet Troops in Cuba. consult other American Foreign Ministries about.
He said that the presence of these that emphasis is being placed on the need to consolidate Fidel troops did not represent any threat to the Continent in view Castro’s government in Cuba.
He declared that the Cuban of the lack of boats to transport them outside the island.
That, economy is continuing to deteriorate and, as an example, he even so, his government continues to make efforts designed mentioned the fact that, this year, the production of sugar will to get them to leave Cuba.
Since last February, he added, only be 3. million tons, which is the lowest figure registered approximately five thousand men had left.
He mentioned the shortage of certain items such remain on the island continue controlling arms such as the as shoes and others, which they are rationing.
In terms of guided missiles but, as far as he can tell, they are traintransport, he said that the situation is also difficult due to the ing Cuban elements to operate “MiG” airplanes and torpedo lack of replacement parts, since they have run into serious boats . difficulties with the equipment that the Soviet Union has provided them with.
He reported that the level of morale among 2) Visit by Prime Minister Fidel Castro to the Soviet Union. workers was very low and that the lack of certain products obliged the government to take measures that aggravated the Undersecretary Johnson reported that, apparently, the pursituation.
In spite of this, he added, you could not say that the pose of Mr Castro’s trip to the Soviet Union was to “inject regime in Cuba was in a dangerous situation, given that, the new life” into the alliance between both countries.
He that it is a triumph for the Soviet Union that Prime Minister commented that the subversive radio propaganda from Cuba Khrushchev has obtained Castro’s support in relation to the had declined while, in other countries in America, it had existing dispute between his country and Communist China increased.
That the United States are trying and, in relation to this point, he stressed the importance that to cooperate with the Governments that see themselves as was given, during the conversations that both prime ministers seriously threatened.
Finally, he said that the lack of controls had, to “coexistence,” in relation with other affairs that were on journeys to and from Cuba continues to be a real problem only loosely touched upon.
That, but, he added, via Europe. even so, the North American government harbors serious Ending his speech, Undersecretary Johnson offered to doubts about Castro’s intention to tie himself totally to the answer questions to him.
Permit me to mention only the political line followed by the Soviet Union.
He said that trade between these countries he would not be surprised if in the more or less near future the and Cuba had notably declined.
He reported that those adopted by the states, that is to say, specialize each of them in a certain activOrgan of Consultation had been very useful to ity, production, industry, etc.
In the case of Cuba, he said, other Governments and he ended saying that, for now, they the only product that was spoken about during the talks was did not have in mind any proposal that the Organization of sugar.
At no point is the possibility of establishing industries American States could intervene in. of any kind mentioned.
Prime Minister Hermes Lima at that time was temporarily also serving as foreign minister due to the illness of San Tiago Dantas.
This refers to a resolution passed at the January 1962 meeting in Punta del Este, Uruguay, at which hemispheric countries approved measures against Cuba.
M-1, M-3, machineguns, pistols and abundant difficulty in documenting this sometimes tense relationship due ammunition.” to the classification of many pertinent United States documents.
However, It also informs us that in the first days of September Prio, the five translated documents below represent a potentially valuat the request of the State Department, visited Mexico in able new source base to explore this aspect of the US-Cuban order to unify all the groups of counter-revolutionary Cuban confrontation—the Mexican archives.
The idea was the satisfaction among the anti-Castro activists at the declining level formation of only one supposed Cuban government-in-exile of United States government support, finally leading to the resignation in with Dr.
Pio Elizalde and with other representatives of the April 1963 of one of the leading figures, Jose Miro Cardona, the Cuban immigrants.
Pio Elizalde, José the activities of the anti-Castro Cuban exiles are contained in Rodríguez and Julieta Zambrano, the Spaniards Luis de la a much-larger collection of records produced by the Mexican Garza, Eduardo González and Felipe de la Rosa, the Chilean Federal Directorate of Security which is now available in the journalist Luis Farías, the Mexicans Castro Leal, Fernando Archivo General de la Nación.
The documents were obtained by del la Mota, Prieto Laurens and the priest Jorge Mendoza Castro and translated by Tanya Harmer.
We have received information that in Puerto Juárez [today, part of the city of Cancún] there is a center of recruitment, that men of different nationalities go to and are distributed to different training centers.
Yucatán Peninsula, Quintana Roo movements of about 80 foreigners, who carry long weapons , and Belize. and pistols.
M. camps do not have uniforms yet, they are hoping for them on the date of departure.
Archivo General de la Nación, Mexico City, Dirección report due to the bad weather that existed in this region.
Archivo General de la Nación, Mexico City, Dirección Federal de Seguridad, Exp: 12-0-61; H24 L10.
Respectfully It is said that as a result of the above, it is possible that the Council in question will dissolve.
Information relating to the which I chair, to resign from the post which I have held to this CUBAN REVOLUTIONARY COUNCIL IN EXILE day, which I was appointed to on 22 March 1961 by unanimous agreement of the organizations and dignitaries which I am honored to address.
Mexico, D F., 9 April 1963 The only reason for my irrevocable decision is extremely serious.
In view of the fact that the II Historical Account answer of the aforementioned president was negative, MIRO CARDONA chose to resign the position that he occupies, Before explaining the main reason for my irrevocable deci“because the anti-Castro forces can not count in any way, on sion, I feel obliged to give, in a short synthesis, an account of North American backing.” the main events which occurred after 17th April 1961.
I made At 1600 hours today, in Miami, FL, Cuban leaders in exile it my duty to maintain absolute silence regarding the agreemet, to try and stop and convince MIRO CARDONA not to ments with the United States and the Council’s plans, thinkresign, saying “anti-Castro Cubans without North American ing it would better serve the cause.
That judgment stopped support or support from another nation, should form combat me, until now, from clearing up the situation and offering the brigades on their own in every country, whether their governguidance, which exile continuously demands.
Today it cannot ments oppose them or not, that is to say, that these groups be negated in any way. would integrate themselves clandestinely.” a) Two Bitter Years Respectfully.
The alliance circumstances, precise dates and relevant details we have between free Cubans and this nation became crystalized on worked with fervor and in silence for a homeland for every“the basis of mutual respect” in order to eradicate commuone.
To summarize the road after the disaster, we put Cuba nism from the homeland of Martí and to reaffirm the pillars above our pain.
For this reason, we were able to suppress of Democracy, in the throes of perishing on the anger, close the road to resentment, not listen to ungrateful American Continent. voices of hurt pride and dented dignity.
And with a spirit clean of all hostile sentiment, we started the great task of c) The Activities of the Council reconstructing the forces of the broken Revolution.
The presiding organization also had with the exemplary honesty of a head of—government—had to fight on other fronts.
In October we appeared before the taken complete responsibility for the experienced failure, in Inter-American Press Society to mobilize continental public clear pronouncements that also expressed “his decision not opinion in favor of Cuba.
His offers of cooperation were categorical and his human rights to the Inter-American Commission for Peace of backing absolute and total.
Thanks to his personal decision, the Organization of American States , in permanent economic aid to the widows and orphans of the charge of harmonizing and supporting Peru and Colombia’s expeditionary forces, was made possible.
The relationship of interviews with Continental sible to provide help for clandestine forces in Cuba, he diplomats and politicians seemed to go on forever. planned the first recruitment program of Cuban volunteers in different United States military units for very brief training and then d) The Honorable Dean Rusk grouping them into one military corps with their natural leaders at an opportune moment, which we would disWith the actions agreed by the Revolutionary organizations cuss together.
In his name, I invited officials from the Cuban represented on the Council already under way (November Armed Forces and December 1961), we had a long…meeting with the to receive specialized courses in different United States schools aimed Honorable Secretary of State to hear about the policy that at fighting on Castro’s island, as well as other things that it would be advocated at the Conference of Foreign is not necessary to record at this moment.
The road travelled Ministers due to take place in Punta del Este, Uruguay.
After analyzing each nation’s position, he put an end for Washington again.
Whilst engaging in “I assure you that the San Jose de Costa Rica declaration will anxious requests, which I will have to refer to immediately, I not be repeated and I beg you to inform your people that the reiterated my request for Dr.
Varona and myself to have an United States will not permit Communism to continue in audience with the President.
I will inform the President of your points of view this person, Mr Mac George Bundy.
The seriousness of this correct gentleman was only lifted slightly as a result of a certain e) Punta del Este expression by Dr.
The Hemisphere was in firm solidarity with suffer and die for the homeland.
May God be with them.” the Cuba in combat and exile; the right of individual and colDr.
Varona agreed with me that we should stay in lective legitimate defense of American nations in danger was Washington until the end of the trial and that I should try consecrated, as well as other measures which were agreed.
He returned was a brilliant and fruitful conference in terms of results.
We were not asking for clemenbeing at the threshold of great achievements. cy.
We quoted the stipulations on “prisoners of war’ in the Geneva Convention, with the aim of stopping the iniquitous f ) Richard N Goodwin and Mac George Bundy and illegal trial.
He worked tirelessly until he managed to get political prisoners, whose “status” had been unidentified by an agreement, with “the inevitable abstention of Mexico and Fidel Castro, who was already planning the dubious tactic Brazil,” on a declaration in support of the proposal put forth of holding trials.
The United Nations, as always, was deaf to We had several meetings with important officials at the State our appeals.
The neutralists in the useless and prejudiced Department, and principally with Mr Richard N Goodwin, organization have a narrow outlook on human rights when one of the President’s closest advisors.
With this official, we they are violated by a Communist regime. raised various aspects of the Cuban problem, as well as the political prisoners; but in this case, he evaded the conversag) Robert F Kennedy tion.
I am referring to the Attorney writing in a letter to me on 25 September , which put General, the Honorable Robert F Kennedy.
Two journalan end to one of the crises I alluded to earlier and to which the ists, true friends of Cuba, made that meeting possible, Hal “Agreement” of October, which I have referred to, formally Hendrix and Joe Mallin, both editors at the Miami News.
As Mr Goodwin was dealing with the quesaired two subjects with Mr Kennedy.
The first, because of its tions about Cuba very reluctantly, I, there and then, asked for urgency, was the freeing of the prisoners, an issue which until a meeting with President Kennedy. then Mr Goodwin had disrupted or delayed.
The atmosphere of the exiles was arguments, he promised to take charge of solving the matter. charged.
I gave him a summary of the the session we held for me to inform them of my efforts. whole question and I expressed my worries about the differThe councilors, fully aware of the need for discretion, did ences I had observed between Mr Goodwin’s vagueness and not want me to be too explicit.
He gave me a date for a further for the patriotic work I had undertaken.
The internal crisis meeting on Tuesday 10th April at 4 pm. was averted but I lost the effective collaboration of nationally relevant figure at the time I most needed them.
After talking briefly with the Attorney General in his office General Lansdale on the appointed day, he invited me to accompany him to The sugar quota the President’s house.
It was From that moment on, under tremendous attack by the exiles satisfactory and enlightening.
During the meeting, I outin opposition, whilst the revolutionary organizations were lined Cuba’s internal crisis, the hemispheric crisis, the crisis carrying out truly brave acts, we prepared a register of posof a lack of trust of those exiled and the troubled position sible combatants and without vetoes or exclusions, the lists of the Council.
General had a genuine dialogue in which he assured me emphatiLansdale came to Miami to discuss certain aspects of the cally, conclusively and with finality “that it was essentially military problem, which had no simple solution and implied a military problem of six divisions,” and that the Council inevitable delays.
Whilst these matters were being fleshed had to contribute the largest contingent of fighters possible; out, the Council defended Cuba’s right to the sugar quota that unilateral action should not be adopted, because, in at the House of Representatives , under the total agreement with my judgment, it would be a very seridirection of Professor Arturo Manas, who I am grateful to. ous error with continental repercussions.
He listened to my Afterwards, for international political reasons, I visited the opinions attentively and repeated his request that the Cubans nations of Central America and Panama , should continue their training in the military units.
When I whose unity of thought and action were due, in part, to the informed him that the agreed plan was on its way to being a agreements of Punta del Este.
The exiles who were there disaster, because of the bureaucratic delays, excessive demands welcomed us affectionately.
I met with all the presidents and of certain physical conditions, because of the limit on the ministers.
President Kennedy’s visit, which had just taken agreed age and because officers had not been invited, he place, was outlined.
Meeting of Ministers President dictated orders, then and there, for massive recruitment, without as many requirements and with a formal inviOn our return, we had to wait a while longer, which was tation to the Officers.
But it was an intense time of meetings with Latin aspects which it is not my place to reveal.
You have my support and organizations did a great job of providing intelligence.
I left the White House certain that about the missile bases and the presence of Russian troops. the liberation of the homeland with a Cuban presence at the On 25 August , at a press conference on the subject, forefront of battle, was getting close. we denounced the arsenal in the Antilles and the invasion of Russian troops.
We asked for a naval and air blockade of the i) Crisis in the Council island, we alerted all the nations of the continent.
A month later, after many conversations at the revolutionary organizations of the Council who alerted, with Pentagon, I was told about the massive recruitment program. no indiscretions, their fighting cadres in Cuba.
My objections were accepted, Corporations worked at a fast pace in the next twelve months and on 25 September the Council made a proclamation urgto ensure Cuban supplies.
I was informed in good time of The proclamation made was a sign of great future events.
The the content of the Proclamation that the Honorable President continent was closing ranks.
I felt confident, despite criticism was to make public at six in the evening.
The of the proclamation, which was described as flimsy and insigfree world resonated with enthusiasm at President Kennedy’s nificant as was the announcement calling for recruitment.
Nations of abstention, neutrality, and indifNonetheless, the offices were filled with volunteers of all ages. ference aligned themselves with the United States.
The Council declared itself to be in Yarmolinsky permanent session and its members in their designated places.
Khrushchev was negotiating. a meeting with important people in the city of Miami, on I warned that delaying tactics were being employed, which Sunday 14 at 3 in the afternoon.
Mr Adan Yarmolinsky [a senior Pentagon date arrived, the “quarantine,” that is to say the blockade, was aide to Defense Secretary Robert McNamara] was chairing it, lifted.
This produced a negative reception with the assistance of Mr Robert F Hurtwich , at Fort Knox.
A wave of disaffection started in an impresan exemplary official sive way.
Mistrust was being reignited in force and defeatism from the State Department and high-ranking officials from spread.
The meeting which took place at n) The Return of the Combatants; Orange Bowl the Carrillon Hotel that Sunday, lasted exactly four hours.
We were asked, with unusual urgency, for a massive incorporation Another intensely dramatic event rekindled the lost confiof all Cubans of military age, even those who were arriving dence.
Those who did not return, those who professionals and liberators) were discussed.
And the classification of “cadres” and by another of great political importance.
I am referring to the of “civil advisers” according to whether they were professional President Kennedy’s presence at the Orange Bowl proceedings or rebels.
Those recruited to Fort Knox were underished by lead, he made statements of unequivocal alliance, as going intense training.
Fidel Castro “Soon, very soon, Cuba will be liberated.” suspiciously suddenly observes – now! – formal diplomatic courtesies and offers excuses that are accepted.
Before the III broken agreement that Russia referred to in the note that we The Current Situation have made reference to , Fidel Castro shot down an airplane that the unfortunate [US After that, three more months have transpired with despairMajor] Rudolph Anderson piloted, without any reprisals and it ingly slow progress.
During this time, [in answer to continuhas tirelessly undertaken piratical actions, of real international ous requests] I have received the same assurances given to me delinquency, such as the continued robbery of airplanes, the beforehand.
However, there have been events that obviously attacks on North American fishing boats, the kidnapping of contradict them.
Of course, he did not give explanations. the direct inspection of terrain, put forward as a indomitable 4) The categorical order that has been communicated question and compromised by the United States after the to various compatriots confining them to Dade mediation of U Than and Mikoyen’s [sic; County.
Honor, for them, is a naïve powers in the world. bourgeois prejudice.) the inaction that revolutionary organizations have been forced into.
These two things persuaded b) Critical analysis of the adopted measures me to put together summary memorandums (14 February and 28 March) for the Office of Coordination established Wracked by uncertainty, I have thought about three reasons in Miami after 22 October past and that will be made for the adopted measures.
They told me actions were carried out by groups of Cubans (not North in Washington that, despite my opposition, they would Americans) against Russian vessels out of the be graduates in a few days [i.e. not retained for immediate territorial waters of this country.
I discarded 1) The illuminating Russian note of protest that warned the this reason as well because, in accordance with what was United States that it had violated agreements. agreed, I should have been previously informed, a condition 2) The note from the Department of State “condemning that was adhered to by cable on 22 October 1962.
Cuban actions that had been carried out,” which contradicts 3) The agreed measures are probably due to not wanting to the Joint Resolution of Congress in September 1962.
On 22 October the Russian soldiers ) Conclusions were to be found in Cuba, and North American and Cuban citizens in prison were freed a long time after this.
The United States of America has been the victim of a masterful Russian game.
This provision that signals a brilliant Continent, as disappointed as the Cuban patriots future to Cubans in a Nation that is not their own, is not and as bewildered as them with respect to the future. autonomous.
With the United States immobilized, Cuba became all, activities in relation with Cuba. entrenched in the strange twists and turns of a willing psychological war between the two great powers of the world, [as c) The trip to Washington a result of which] it has become necessary to also immobilize Cuban patriots, in an obscure agreement.
In the capital, free of the pressure of the Organization of American States, the Punta del Este that the ideas I had come up with had been agitating me over Resolutions, the sovereign will of this nation expressed in the the course of 48 hours in Miami, after a serene analysis, I Resolution of Congress in September 1962 and the repeated adopted, in principal, the decision that I am making known offers of cooperation I have received. today.
The Office of Coordination for Cuban Affairs, argument in which they might offer me the minimum sense recently created and with headquarters in Miami, implementof security.
When the Union’s territory and its territorial waters I did not manage to get the necessary definitions, even 3) the persecution of revolutionaries in the ways I have though after 17 April 1961 they had promised to discuss outlined already, committed now to inquisitive interrogations with me before any change of policy they were considering, my doubts were confirmed.
Until today, I was encouraged, not by optimism withing of the Hungarian revolt in 1956—ed.]; 2) to creating the out any basis, but rather by a rational feeling of security that myth of the invincibility of Fidel Castro; and 3) to bringing Cuba would be liberated soon as a result of joint action by about negotiations for a coexistence that America has just Cuban and North American forces with the unlimited supcondemned. port, moral and material, of the majority of the nations in the Hemisphere.
I have maintained and maintain that Khrushchev that does not have any other reasonable explanation than will not trigger a world war, due to the presence of North the deal that refers to Russia’s protest against Cuban action.
Geographically, Cuba is outside the Soviet sphere Russian vessel was not carried out by North American forces of influence.
Khrushchev will not provoke armed conflict. nor in territorial waters of that country.
To the contrary, protected be condemned with total vehemence, not only by the Cubans by his policy of threats, his hold over local communists in but by all free men of the Continent.
No power can change different parts of the Hemisphere will grow, day by day, and the fate of our Homeland, because our freedom cannot be an he will continue to extend his frontiers in America. object of negotiation.
Venezuela is already Faced with this unexpected situation that destroys the burning thanks to Castro’s decision, Colombia is burning patient work of the two years that I have been overseeing thanks to Castro’s decision, the convulsion in Argentina is it in a minute, with the Council’s total trust in me, I am consistent, and Marxist ferment in all other nations is a frightleft with no alternative but to resign the thorniest position ening sign of great cataclysms. that I have held.
I have been opposed and I oppose the idea that the rigidly upheld in the course of these two years. problem of Cuba is separated from the regional system and situated within a global strategy that leads the Comintern of a) The Alliance for Progress imperial Russia towards achieving its unceasing hegemonic purpose.
I have maintained and I maintain that the “Latin from the American community so American experts” do not sense the imminence of disaster that eventually, on any day of an uncertain year, Cuba’s fate for the whole Continent.
They guarantee that the Alliance is unilaterally decided, is totally unacceptable for the decency for Progress alone is the panacea for all the social ills of the of those of us that are proposing an honorable alliance.
It is certainly a generous and necessary would mean the nation’s sovereignty would be devastatingly effort, whose success, in my opinion is conditional, on the shipwrecked.
Our proposal in the hills of San Juan and put an end to Spanish power in was rejected in this opportunity.
Today time again, that we be given an analogous warlike capability our country has been converted into a Soviet province and to the one that Fidel Castro receives from the Soviet Union, so the security of the United States is being threatened by a as to win a battle alone or succumb to a Holocaust together. communist fortress in the Caribbean.
For the reasons outlined above and many others that V Final could be added I have favored the alliance with the United States so that it is understood, with very good reason, that With the principles that have shaped my conduct in this Cuba should be helped by the whole hemisphere.
God, homeland, and family; as are as a consequence imprecise and far-off liberation, denied by objective facts in invaluable assets such as: democracy, independence, freedom, the present.
Dominated by the specter of uncertainty and the justice, and social well-being.
The battle that Cuban patriohaving lost trust in the realization of offered assurances, I cantism is upholding is far more profound that the insurrection not continue in the position of chair of the Council. of a people against a typical American dictatorship.
The sources of Cuban patriotism are inexhaustible, in the past, the intervention is undertaken in favor of the as inexhaustible as its moral reserves.
With an extra-continental I leave this post with the hope that another Cuban will power having intervened evidently in our Homeland, the be appointed who, with the same love for his homeland but Rio de Janeiro Treaty [Inter-American Treaty of Reciprocal Assistance] and other international instruments demand colwith more capacity and more ability than I, can achieve betlective hemispheric action to put an end to this intervention. ter auspices in the struggle that we are committed to.
I leave These instruments specifically state that this type of action this post, I repeat, but I do not desert the ranks.
I will condoes not constitute intervention. tinue fighting as I have done until today, without measuring the hours, until I destroy Fidel Castro and his dishonorable f ) Holocaust regime if, by the will of God, something does not happen beforehand to rescue us from all our anguish and suffering.
I have said and exhaustively repeated that we aim to raise, through joint effort, a monument to Victory, not an Miami, Tuesday 9 April 1963 obelisk to martyrdom.
Archivo Histórico Diplomático Genaro Estrada, Notes Secretaría de Relaciones Exteriores, Mexico City.
UN on-site inspection of the missiles’ dismantling and removal, yet most observers—including Khrushchev—viewed JFK’s vow as politically binding, at least on his administration.
Landsdale had been put in charge of the CIA’s “Operation Mongoose” program of covert operations against Cuba in 1961.
Relations with the United States were presence of Soviet nuclear missiles in Cuba—to seek support difficult.
Goulart, who had taken over after his predecessor for the blockade of the island to bar the entry Janio Quadros’ sudden resignation in August 1961, had in of additional “offensive” weapons.
Carefully hedging its bets, April 1962 visited Washington where he was hailed as a Brazil ended up voting for the “quarantine” but refused to potential partner in the Kennedy Administration’s “Alliance endorse the use of force for any other objectives. for Progress”—a program of economic aid intended to proA second theme of many reports, especially but not only mote a democratic, reformist alternative to both right-wing from Brazil’s ambassador to the United Nations, concerns military juntas and left-wing communist revolution.
Yet, in Brazil’s promotion of a scheme to “denuclearize” Latin the ensuing months, top United States officials increasingly worried America as a means to defuse the crisis that Goulart might lead his country toward communism, over nuclear missiles in Cuba.
As the documents show, at either deliberately or through ineptitude and miscalculation, various moments Brazilian diplomats obtained encouraging approved covert aid to his opponents, and flirted with a covert hints from American and Soviet officials CIA plot to topple him. that such a plan would be acceptable.
Indeed, after Brazil One factor that stirred United States distrust of Brazil was its conadvanced the idea at the UN at a time when Kennedy and tinued refusal to break relations with Havana, and continued his advisors were desperately seeking a way to get the Soviet promotion of a scheme to “neutralize” the island that would missile out of Cuba without risking World War III, the leave Fidel Castro’s revolution in power.
After several weeks of diplomatic discussions, ism,” JFK bluntly warned Goulart’s ambassador.
All this, of course, Washington Havana, Luis Bastian Pinto, who convey both their contacts rejected; and with Cuba so strongly opposed, Moscow also with host government officials and other diplomatic colbacked off; and by late November the plan had foundered, to leagues, and their own interpretation of events.
Yet it was fairly high-level access, which makes their cables particularly not a total failure, as it foreshadowed the adoption, within five valuable; Campos had conversations with Dean Rusk and years, of the Treaty of Tlatelolco, which was signed in Mexico President Kennedy himself, while Pinto, during the crisis and City in 1967 and proimmediately afterwards, had regular encounters with Cuban hibited nuclear weapons in Latin America and the Caribbean.
Foreign Minister Raúl Roa, relayed an important talk with (In another ultimately futile initiative at the UN, Brazil also Cuban President Osvaldo Dorticos on 27 October, amid promoted the notion for ambassadors from neutral countries fears of an imminent United States invasion; and facilitated the visit to inspect the dismantling and removal of Soviet missiles from of Gen.
In addition to spot cables, several longer analyses of the odically sought to mediate between Washington and Cuba’s impact of the crisis are also included. revolutionary leadership since early 1960—both through its It is also important to note what is missing from these ambassador in Havana and various special missions—but documents.
For one thing, as diplomatic cables, they do not it was during the missile crisis that this effort reached its discuss directly the Brazilian domestic political component of climax.
As reflected in the Chilean documents on this epithe missile crisis, which was very critical.
United States officials at many sode , many outside observers who noticed the points suspected domestic political motives for Goulart’s sudden trip to Cuba by Goulart’s military aide, Gen.
Albino actions (i.e., a desire not to alienate Cuban supporters and Silva, presumed it was a purely Brazilian initiative, most sympathizers on the Brazilian left).11 Washington also closely likely in a misguided, vain, and even pretentious gesture monitored what was widely believed to be a to try to claim its relevance to the event that had seized serious blow to Cuba’s image in Brazil sustained by the revthe globe’s attention.
What no one realized, however, was elation that it had permitted the Soviets to station nuclear that in fact the trip had been inspired by a secret United States appeal weapons on the island.
By Finally, even within the foreign ministry materials, while I had the time Gen.
Albino Silva made it to Havana, of course, considerable success obtaining cable traffic between Itamaraty Khrushchev had already agreed to remove the missiles, and and various Brazilian diplomatic missions, I was generally exactly what transpired between him and Castro to find the personal records of unaware of any United States inspiration for the Brazilian’s visit), and the foreign minister himself (i.e., contacts with other senior the consequences, if any, remain somewhat mysterious.
The officials or with foreign counterparts or ambassadors) or the Cubans have not released any records on the visit, and the records of diplomatic contacts in Brazil itself—hence their Brazilian’s own 14-page record has not been found.
Translated from Portuguese greatly enrich the international history of both stories, and of by James G Hershberg.] the cold war as a whole.
Naval and aerial surveillance of the United States of America around Cuba. – TUESDAY – 23hs30 – Supplementary to my secret oficio no 239.
There does not remain any doubt that the United States in the last two months there have arrived a great number is already exercising, in a systematic character, strict naval and of Czechoslovak and Russian anti-aircraft batteries already aerial vigilance around Cuba.
Personally, I have seen on the quay of Havana at a distance of a few miles the entrances to various ports of roads, there are some already disembarked, of the models used this country.
In the last days, the vigilance seems to have been here for transport of these armaments; 2) convoys of tanks reinforced, since, almost daily, the local press publishes photoand some launchers against torpedoes have been sighted in graphs of Latin American planes flying over ships in the vicinthe early morning on the roads near the port of Mariel; 3) ity of Cuba.
According to a equipment are arriving, having, however, only speculation of declaration to me, confidentially, the captain of what is its exact application; 4) there is no information about a French ship that just arrived in Havana from rockets of any type; 5) various news about the arrival and Russia, American planes, more than one time, requested that movement of paths of concrete , that their ship identify themselves when it came near to Cuban there appear to be significant application of known Cuban waters.
Beyond the of the Polish minister was to hear the Brazilian delegation in experts of the systems of communications, they have, also, respect to the informal meeting in Washington.
I gave him chauffeurs, builders, etc.; 7) the Russian military personnel an account that, not without touching on certain details are seen in encampments of canvas in areas situated around of importance, did not go beyond which could be found Havana, Trinidad, Caibarien, and Banes.
Before they are published in the news sections and in the editoinstalled, the local residents have been evacuated.
All wear ordinary sports seems seriously preoccupied with the consequences of what clothes.
This afternoon, I was personally this afternoon in two Rapacki called the “economic blockade” of Cuba, giving sites where some hundreds of them are camped.
There is no the impression that they fear Soviet retaliation which could doubt that they exist and that their physical type is unequivoprejudice their own commercial interests and the relative cally Russian.
Rapacki told us expressly that the closure of maritime routes to normal commerce might be followed JOSÉ MARIA DINIZ RUIZ DE GAMBOA by similar measures as for land routes in other regions.
I tried to give him the impression that the current severity against Cuba may diminish after the American elections or with the progress of negotiations in other fields, including in the disarmament but he did not seem to me at all convinced.
He gave the impression that Cuba could evolve in any case into a type of the Yugoslav regime.
We are surprised SECRETARY OF STATE FOR EXTERNAL RELATIONS with this declaration, but it was with us like I have indicated.
DÓRTICOS SAID TO ME THAT HE measures the comportment of the revolutionary government CAME TO NEW YORK TO INFORM THE WORLD OF in international politics.
A DEVICE OF AGGRESSION communication of the 30th , Dorticós declared IS FORMING AROUND CUBA AT THE SAME TIME that his Government is ready to negotiate its differences with THAT A WORLD CAMPAIGN TO SHOW CUBA AS the United States and to challenge that country to introduce THE AGGRESSOR COUNTRY IS BEING MOUNTED. an identical proposition.
TO Havana—1962/1964,” CX 229, Ministry of External Relations HIM IT WOULD BE THE BEGINNING OF A WORLD Archives, Brasilia, Brazil.
THIS REMARK OF SHARP CTs—RECEBIDAS E EXPEDIDAS—1962, MISSÃO DO FORM WAS HEARD WITHOUT COMMENTARIES, BRASIL À ONU,” Cx 49, Ministry of External Relations THAT BRAZIL ALSO DEFENDED, I Archives, Brasilia, Brazil.
THE PRESIDENT FROM THE EMBASSY IN WASHINGTON SAID THEN THAT HE UNDERSTANDS AND AGREES ON/22/23/X/62 WITH OUR POSITION AND ASSURED THAT CUBA NEVER WILL CARRY OUT ANY ACTS OR ACTIVITIES CONFIDENTIAL—EXTREMELY URGENT AGAINST THE BRAZILIAN ORGANIZATION DAC/DAS/600.
THE PRESIDENT Fulbright, the head of the Committee on LISTENED ATTENTIVELY AND RETORTED THAT Foreign Relations in the Senate.
I observed also that since yesHIS VIEW THAT THE RISK CONTINUES SINCE terday there have been frequent meetings and consultations THIS COUNTRY HAS RESERVED THE RIGHT between the principal members and organs of the governIN CERTAIN CASES OF INTERVENTION AND ment, especially of the Department of State and the Pentagon.
It is speculated that this decision may refer to SECRET—URGENT Berlin or to Cuba or to the situation of the conflict between DAC/DAS/DCET/DEA/600.
The facts however appear, to indicate that it probably deals with Cuba; the aircraft carrier “Enterprise” Return to Washington of the North-American Secretary of was launched yesterday from the coast of Puerto Rico, sailTreasury.
As I pondered to him the repercussions that against the coasts of Cuba.
International Security met today at 1500hs with the President, who convened the Cabinet CELSO FURTADO at 1600hs today.
FROM THE DELEGATION OF BRAZIL AT THE ANNUAL CONFERENCE OF CIES – MEXICO 20 – MONDAY – 2330hs – Supplementary to my telegram ON/22/23/X/62 no 19.
Beyond this, the internal political press blocks Kennedy from any accommodating CELSO FURTADO attitude.
The Council of the OAS will TELEGRAM convene tomorrow, the 23rd, at nine o’clock in the morning RECEIVED and transforming in a provisional meeting of consulta12602 tion, the United States is hoping, also tomorrow, for approval of the resolution the text already transmitted to Ambassador FROM THE EMBASSY IN WASHINGTON Penna Marinho, authorizing individual and collective action, ON/22/22/X/62 including the use of armed forces for blocking the arrival of offensive armament or installation of missiles.
I call attenCONFIDENTIAL—URGENT tion to the language used in paragraph two of the resolution DAS/DAC/DOr/DEA//600. giving a blank check not only for the blockade but for any other military action, in the individual judgment Question of Cuba.
Declaration of President Kennedy. of the country that adopts it, agreeing that we are alerted by not having specified the measures.
I have been informed, after a meetfor Cuba and declaring that the blockade will cease when ing at the Department of State, that UN observers, admitted onto Cuban territory, verify the disRusk justifies as follows the severity of the American reaction mantling of the offensive remote-controlled missiles.
In case to the installation of remote-controlled missiles of medium of a probable veto in the Security Council the matter will be and intermediate range, detected by aerial photography, only raised to the General Assembly.
IF 1962 IT IS STILL LIKE THIS YOUR EXCELLENCY CALLED TO VOTE ON THE DRAFT RESOLUTION IN THE SECRETARY OF STATE CURRENT TERMS, YOU SHOULD DECLARE THAT, FOR EXTERNAL RELATIONS WITHOUT PREJUDICE TO OUR SOLIDARITY WITH TO THE DELEGATION OF BRAZIL AT THE THE COUNTRIES OF THE HEMISPHERE AND WITH ORGANIZATION OF AMERICAN STATES -THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, AND THE WASHINGTON FUTURE POSITIONS THAT WE WILL ADOPT IN CONFIDENTIAL LIGHT OF THE MAIN EXPLANATIONS REGARDING On 23 of October of 1962 THE SITUATION, WE ARE UNABLE TO PARTICIPATE SSE/DEA/DAS/DAC/DAM/DOR/600.
ACCORDING the character of the offensive arms already installed in Cuba TO A NOTE THE SOVIET VICE-MINISTER FOR by further measures intended to stop their nuclear activation.
A UN DECISION gravity that should not be taken before Cuba and the Soviet TO INTERNATIONALIZE THE QUESTION WOULD Union, under international pressure, have had an opportunity PERMIT CUBA SOVIET UNION TO SAVE to interrupt the installation of remote-controlled missiles.
FACE DIMINISHING THE DANGEROUS DIRECT Martin responded 1) That there is no time for further negoCONFRONTATION. tiations with a view to the unanimity of the text since it is necessary to have a solution even today preferably, before 16 ROBERTO DE OLIVEIRA CAMPOS hours when the UN Security Council will meet; 2) That they are not able to predict the rapid evolution of events the Exped.—1962 , , Ministry of External North American government does not desire to be dependent Relations Archives, Brasilia, Brazil.
Translated from Portuguese on the UN and the OAS making new decisions if one admits by James G Hershberg.] various hypotheses as voluntary decisions of the Russians or Cubans to suspend the assembly of the remote-controlled rockets pressure of the mode of the blockade to provoke an insurrection in Cuba limited bombardments specifically on rocket bases and invasion.
The OAS ON/23/23/X/62 Council now starts the session headed to approve the NorthAmerican draft resolution.
The Secretary Martin put forward that, soon, and would favor a summit meeting.
There is an urgent necesthere will be fully disseminated, to convince Latin American sity for creative formulas that, avoiding humiliation for both public opinion of the gravity of the threat, photographs of the sides, reduces the tension.
In case the question by virtue of a veto Exped.—1962 , , Ministry of External in the ecurity Council, it can pass to the General Assembly, Relations Archives, Brasilia, Brazil.
Translated from Portuguese where Brazil itself could lead the pro-denuclearby James G Hershberg.] ization movement, certainly all of Latin America and the neutral world would combine, with perhaps the exception of the UAR, given the nuclear program of Nasser.
These measurements represent a SECRETARY OF STATE FOR EXTERNAL RELATIONS smaller price to pay for world peace than concessions in Berlin, where the allied position is irreducible, and in Formosa, where TELEGRAM it can become more difficult, the Chinese RECEIVED aggressiveness in relation to India.
MD—Washington—Telgr.-Cartas—Receb.Exped.—1962 , , Ministry of External CONFIDENTIAL—EXTREMELY URGENT Relations Archives, Brasilia, Brazil.
The supply of foodstuffs and other articles for memCONFIDENTIAL—EXTREMELY URGENT bers of this Embassy and for the asylum-seekers will become DAS/C/430. a grave problem within a few days.
It is possible, also, that at Postponement of visit of President Kennedy’s visit to Brazil. any moment telegram and telephone communications may be cut as has already happened here several times, includ782 – WEDNESDAY – 1715hs – THE DEPARTMENT OF ing recently, during the attack on Havana, last August.
MD—Washington—Telgr.-Cartas—Receb.Exped.—1962 , , Ministry of External Relations Archives, Brasilia, Brazil.
He appeared to be relatively cheerful with the latest Commission of Security, still without statutes, can have news originating from the UN. other functions besides those clearly prescribed in the second Resolution of Punta del Este.
A) TO BLOCK NEW OFFENSIVE by this government, it is making difficult a retreat for considARMS FROM ARRIVING IN CUBA; B) TO OBTAIN THE erations of international prestige and national pride.
Others DISMANTLING OR REMOVAL OF THE PRESENT yes, manifest apprehension before the fact of that about two WARLIKE INSTALLATIONS OF AN OFFENSIVE tens of Soviet ships if find the way to Cuba.
IMMEDIATE BEGINNING order to put in practice the points announced by Kennedy.
OF THE BLOCKADE, UNANIMITY OF SUPPORT I request to give knowledge of this telegram to Ambassador OF LATIN-AMERICA AND GENERAL SUPPORT OF Afonso Arinos.
MD—Washington—Telgr.-Cartas—Receb.BLOCKADE, LINKED TO THE INCREDIBLITY THAT Exped.—1962 , , Ministry of External THERE WILL BE APPLIED DIRECT MILITARY Relations Archives, Brasilia, Brazil.
Since UNITED STATES TO A DIRECT MILITARY ACTION yesterday, one can perceive a certain relief with the efforts of AGAINST THE CUBAN TERRITORY, VICTIMIZING the Secretary-General and of numerous memberCUBA AND OBTAINING WITH IT A POLITICAL AND countries of the UN to avoid aggravating the situation.
FACED WITH SUCH POSSIBILITIES, for the defense, at the same time, insisting that world opinion THE ONLY HOPE IS TO STILL INTENSIFY THE is mobilizing in favor of Cuba.
However, a ON THE INTERNATIONAL. high functionary of the chancellor said, still yesterday, to my colleague that Cuba considers Brazil more firm, in its favor, than Mexico.
I was informed at 3 in the afternoon, with President Dorticós, in by the substitute deputy representative of the United States order to inform him about the gesture of President Tito to in the OAS Council, gather together various heads of state, including the Brazilian, Mr Ward Allen, that the State Department determined that and to probe regarding the receptivity for a proposal of a soluthe American Delegation at the General Assembly of the tion of the crisis.
Dorticós, extremely perturbed, told him that United Nations would enter into contact with the Brazilian American planes are making low-level flights over Delegation to examine the proposal for banning nuclear arms Cuba and, according to information obtained in recent hours, in Latin America and Africa.
I am led to this supposition ization, repeat the neutralization, since it would not surrender for it is obvious that the Soviet Union will see with great with tied hands to the United States of America.
In case Your interest and sympathy the de-nuclearization of the aboveExcellency thinks it appropriate, it may be possible to get in mentioned regions, as I incidentally had an opportunity to touch with the president to confirm the account. confirm in a conversation with one of the secretaries of the Soviet Embassy, Mr Goundarev, who saw this Delegation on LUIZ LEIVAS BASTIAN PINTO a courtesy visit.
He told me even that Mexico permit, at the choice of the Cuban government, a small comjudges that the recourses to avoid an anti-juridical solution of mission of the United Nations to certify the paralization and the Cuban case have been exhausted and will not oppose [nâo dismantling of the bases that the commission judges necessary se oporá] a forceful solution that it will be unable to impede, to dismantle.
I reaffirm our full support to obtain guarantees but it will not cooperate in such a sense as for the situation in for the territorial integrity of Cuba. the long term; he finds indisputable that in case of an acute aggravation of the world crisis, historical, geographical and EXTERIORES ideological reasons make doubtless the homogeneity of the position of the American countries, in spite of some possible NOTE OF DCA – This telegram was dictated by telephone internal dissent in some of them.
Mexico does not anticipate by the Mr Minister of State. any dissent, since the government has solid control of the internal situation.
In spite of the demand to remind Your Excellency that this matter is very delicate in lift the blockade, it seems to me that the response of Fidel view of the publicly reiterated affirmation, of this Castro to UN Secretary-General , offers favorable government, that it would not accept any type of audit [fispossibilities that should be explored.
However, already today, the response diate visit of the UN Secretary-General to Havana will be of of Fidel Castro to the UN Secretary General, in his long major importance and, I have the impression that the Cuban initial section, strongly affirms to reject the blockade as the government is disposed to make important concessions in pretension of the United States of America to determine the direct negotiations with him.
The Yugoslav Government still sovereign acts of Cuba such as the type of defensive arms, insisted today, with the UN Secretary-General so that he ……………………………………………. [ellipsis/undeaccepts the invitation of Fidel Castro.
Permit me to suggest a coded section in original] its relations with the USSR and the similar gesture by Brazil, next to the UN Secretary-General. steps of internal politics; but does not make any reference to inspection or to an audit , which could indicate a LUIZ LEIVAS BASTIAN PINTO softening in this matter.
We are of the exchange of incomplete installations in Cuba for operational conviction that the delays in the delivery to this Embassy of installations in Turkey; 2) the NATO missiles in Turkey, in a our messages, of vital importance at this moment, are delibernumber estimated at thirty, of the Jupiter type, of intermediate.
We are making an energetic protest here together with ate range, were openly installed, are not considered offensive, Radiobrás and I suggest to Your Excellency to act in the same that are under the collective and defensive control of NATO form to the correspondent of this company there.
Translated from Portuguese in the current crisis would generate future Soviet demands if by James G Hershberg.] not in relation to Berlin, known to be not negotiable, at least in relation to Northern Italy, where there exist roughly thirty Jupiter missiles.
The other possible measures, total blockade, support to SECRETARY OF STATE FOR EXTERNAL RELATIONS guerrilla wars and invasion, the first two having a slow effect and the extreme danger before the previous declarations of TELEGRAM Khrushchev, significantly not repeated since of the beginning RECEIVED of the current crisis, that the Soviet Union would intervene 12895 in defense of Cuba.
Exists in Latin American diploalleviation, soon destroyed by the rejection by Kennedy of matic circles in Washington contrastthe second part of the proposal by Khrushchev, as is known, ing, before the State Department, the vigorous support that the simultaneous abandonment, under international inspecis being given to the OAS resolution, including the offer of tion, of the Soviet installations in Cuba and the American ships and bases to support the blockade, with the call of the in Turkey, with an exchange of commitments of Brazilian , based, as some allege, on an insufficient non-aggression.
I denied similar guarantees, without promising explicitly, however, to tendentious news in the Miami newspaper according to impede the operation of guerrilla war or infiltration on the which this Embassy is being pressured by the Soviet Embassy part of the Cuban exiles.
It is possible that the United States to obtain authorization for landing rights in Northeast Brazil maintains the point-of-view that which, given the nature of for a Soviet airlift.
Cuban ideological infiltration, it’s not under absolute prohibition of counter-infiltration.
The White House still declares that it has not the crisis, Khrushchev appears in the eyes of neutralist world received officially the third proposal of Khrushchev, which he opinion as a peace-maker.
It is admitted, also, the obsoleshas already fully divulged on the radio.
The first note of Khrushchev, respondcollective negotiations between NATO and the Warsaw Pact; ed to by Kennedy on Friday night, had been encouraging, 2) since the Soviets abandoned their intransigent opposition for not having mentioned the Turkish quid pro quo.
The to international inspection, considering that it encouraged second note, to which Kennedy has referred only indirectly, procedure created in Cuba.
Convened by [Secretary of State in the response to the first, opened the problem of reciprocDean] Rusk, I will attend today at five hours [a meetity and specifically that a North American commitment of ing] at the Department of State with many Latin American non-invasion did refer only to the North American forces, Ambassadors. but to expeditions mounted in North American territory, or originating from other Latin American countries.
This government will coming negotiations; he also told me that, receive with much pleasure General Albino Silva.
The flight , that these demands would be, repeat, would authorization has already been granted, but, in view of the be, an object of negotiations.
He referred at length to the emergency measures, it is indispensable to know with all important and sympathetic role of Brazil in the present criurgency the type of plane, the insignia and the sis.
Translated from Portuguese POLITICA—OUTUBRO DE 1962//,” Ministry of External Relations Archives, Brasilia, Brazil.
The ambassador of Cuba SSE/DAC/DAS/600. and the president of the company will follow also.
Translated from Portuguese Your Excellency and the general have the necessity of an by James G Hershberg.] immediate encounter with Prime Minister Fidel Castro.
However, Secretary Rusk declared that one should not TELEGRAM believe that the Cuban crisis is resolved, since it is not imposRECEIVED sible that another Soviet message could come to be published 12962 tomorrow, presenting other conditions.
I understood this declaration of the secretary of state as a prudent position in case FROM THE EMBASSY IN WASHINGTON of new demands on the part of Soviet leaders who advocate a ON/29/29/X/62 “harder line” , making them, the conditions established by Fidel Castro in the pronouncement already CONFIDENTIAL published by the world press.
As concrete fact, Secretary Rusk DAS/DAC/DOr/DNU/DEA/DAM/600. communicated the texts of the message transmitted today by Question of Cuba.
However, at the condition of the dismantling of NATO bases in Turkey; the end of a meeting at the Department of State it was decided President Kennedy only responded to the first of these letters; to postpone the Meeting of the Organ of Consultation, under 3) on the 28th by the hand of Moscow radio announced the the pretext that they already have all information and no new letter in which Khrushchev communicated the decision of disfacts exist, before the visit of U Thant to Cuba, scheduled for mantling of bases; this letter was responded to by Kennedy in the day after tomorrow.
I request to Your Excellency to orient an affirmative tone, even before receiving the official text; 4) the me about the line of conduct I should assume in discussion of United States of America has not made any bargain, not even the next meetings of the Organ of Consultation. assuming a weak attitude, in any manner, of North American compromises with the inter-American system of defense.
This action was received with visible gratitude, put forward by the prime minister, even SECRET—URGENT before the meeting with other members of the Council, the DCA/346.2 favorable disposition of the Cuban Government.
He affirmed Transmission of telegrams. his intent to keep the Brazilian envoy perfectly informed of Question of Cuba. the conversations of the secretary general of the UN with his 600. government.
We are no longer transmitting rejected, de plano , the unilateral inspection by telegraphed dispatches by Raidobrás, that we transmitted Via the UN of the territory of Cuba as offensive to the self-esteem Tropical-New Orleans. of his people.
He expressed to me, in particular, that he had all confidence in frank language and the objective of using during the lecture that we held.
IF THIS ALLEGATION WAS TRUE, NO LESS TRUE WAS THE FACT THAT THE CONFIDENTIAL PRINCIPAL HALL OF THE MEETINGS OF THE “STATE DEA/DAC/DAS/DOr/DAM/DNU/600.
I request to conserve the secret , 6:30m., Wednesday, 31 October 1962 character of this communication.
FROM THE EMBASSY IN WASHINGTON ON/31/X/1/XI/62 SECRET—URGENT DAS/DAC/DEA/600.
I should explain that until this moment I have not received any request or Analysis of the Cuban Crisis. pressure from the State Department in this sense.
I have, yes, 600. sensed the desire of responsible elements that the Brazilian Mister Minister, government do so and a certain disappointment for not having done so until now.
I take advantage of the opportunity to renew to Your Senators Keating and Thummond advoExcellency the protests of my esteem and my distinct concate the invasion of the island. sideration.
However, he said, they do not have evidence that these are of an offensive character.
If, Roberto de Oliveira Campos subsequently, it is verified that they are of such character, Ambassador the administration will consider the adoption of pertinent measures.
CONFIDENTIAL 11 September – The Tass Agency gave publicity to a communication in which the Soviet Union declared that it would Analysis of the Cuban crisis. retaliate with nuclear arms to any attack of the United States on Cuba or Soviet ships, sailing toward that island.
It was I – Retrospective added that the government of the Soviet Union would discuss the problem of Berlin after the American elections.
The last shipments do not constitute a threat on any part of the 8 August – the press published that more than 4,000 Russian hemisphere.
A unilateral military intervention would not be soldiers have arrived in Cuba.
He criticized what he described as “irresponsible not have any information in this respect. conversation” about invasion.
September – Congress approved a resolution authorizing the administration to use force, if necessary.
In the United Nations, Stevenson requested a withdrawal of the Russian 13 October – President Kennedy, speaking in Indianapolis, bases from Cuba.
Zorin called for the lifting of the blockade spoke against the “self-appointed generals and and proposed negotiations between the Soviet Union, the admirals who want to send someone else’s sons to war” United States, and Cuba.
The neutral countries did not show . a disposition to support the American military action in Cuba and made pressure in the sense of realizing negotiations.
Russian ships, transporting planes to Cuba would 16 October – President Kennedy ordered an intensification of change course, avoiding thereby, for the moment, a confronaerial surveillance of the island. tation with the American ships.
He reiterated that the arms that were encountered Cuba and to Fidel Castro for an acceptance of negotiations. in Cuba are of a defensive character.
The president did not Khrushchev accepts the proposal of the Secretary-General and reveal to his interlocutor the information that he had in hand. is ready to negotiate.
Kennedy accepts, pointing out, however, that U Thant, in his appeal, did not mention the dismantling 21 October – At 2:30 the President received information that of the missile bases in Cuba. missiles with a 1,000 range were in position of launching; platforms for launching missiles of 2,000 miles range, 26 October – U Thant received promises, from the United under construction.
States and from Russia, of avoiding incidents with their respective ships.
The White House declared that the construc22 October – President Kennedy called the party leaders tion of the bases, in Cuba, continues at an accelerated pace. urgently to Washington.
He passes all the evening in conKhrushchev sends a letter to Kennedy, whose text still has not ferences with Rusk, McNamara, Hillebrand, been divulged.
At mid-day it was announced that the President would one think of internal difficulties inside the Kremlin.
Ambassador Dobrynin was invited to the White House and gives him knowledge of the points which a) The Soviet Union agrees to withdraw its missile bases were covered in the speech and delivered to him a letter for from Cuba, under inspection of the United Nations, and will Khrushchev.
Following that the Latin American chiefs of misnot send more warlike material to Fidel Castro; sion were invited to the White House, at 19 hours b) The United States will lift the blockade and will give addressed the Nation announcing the existence of offensive guarantees that Cuba will not be invaded, either by the nuclear armaments in Cuba.
It offers to withdraw their bases in Cuba if the United adoption of “other measures,” in case the referred-to bases are States agrees to proceed in the same form in relation to its not dismantled.
The White House declares that, before any States considers itself to be on the brink of war and waits negotiations, it is necessary to stop the construction of the anxiously for the Soviet reaction.
It gives publicity to the text of the 23 October – The Tass Agency described the American letter of Kennedy to Khrushchev, responding to the two of blockade as an act of piracy.
It announced that it has ordered the dismantling governors and the public opinion of the Latin American of the bases and the re-embarking of the same with the countries; destination the Soviet Union. c) the possibility of a split, other than in our governments, at least in the public opinion of the countries of Western Europe; 29 October – Fidel Castro demands the return of Guantanamo d) the possibility of adopting parallel measures in other areas as a basis for negotiations.
The observation flights of the of tension, notably Turkey, Iran or Southeast Asia, otherwise American planes continue over Cuba.
This reaction appears hardly comprehensible [pouco the Caribbean. comprsensíval], since, according to information from the c) that the development of national communism not Secretary of State , Ambassador aggressive will be difficult to conceive of without a substitution Gordon was fully informed of the results of this action, of leadership, since Fidel Castro is so excessively involved with with which he expressed agreement.
Maço “600.—SITUAÇÃO POLITICA—CUBA in the coming year, when the institutional problem will be de novembro a dezembro de 1,962//6223,” Ministry of External resolved by plebiscite and our economic planning will be Relations Archives, Brasilia, Brazil.
General Albino, asking about the ideological inclinations of the official in question.
I responded that his affiliation is to the anticommunist nationalist line and that he gave support to the mission of U Thant for maintaining the system of international inspection.
In view, however, of the rumors referred to above, it would be appropriate, beyond SECRETARY OF STATE FOR EXTERNAL RELATIONS the work of explaining that was carried out here privately, 13087 that Ambassador Gordon was informed of the misunderTELEGRAM standing that appears to be emerging here.
With reference RECEIVED to the meeting next Monday of the Organ of Inter-American Consultation, already communicated to FROM THE EMBASSY IN WASHINGTON Your Excellency through the mission at the OEA , ON/1/3/XI/62 permit me to call attention to my telegram no 810.
SECRET – URGENT ROBERTO DE OLIVEIRA CAMPOS DAM/DAS/DAC/DEA/DNU/Dor/600.
I perceived, behind the long exposition of the Argentine Delegate, perhaps a glimpse of the SECRETARY OF STATE FOR EXTERNAL RELATIONS intention of that country to develop a nuclear potential for non-pacific aims.
I responded to all the objections and made in TELEGRAM a special manner in relation to the reflections of the Argentine RECEIVED Delegate, pointing out that in my view Latin America should 13094 dedicate itself to the utilization of nuclear energy solely for peaceful ends.
I recalled that any nuclear competition on the FROM THE DELEGATION OF BRAZIL AT THE XVII continent, in view of the tremendous financial cost of the SESSION OF THE GENERAL-ASSEMBLY OF THE same, would imply a gigantic delay in economic development UNITED NATIONS—NEW YORK in the entire continent.
Delegations recalled the Brazilian initiative and showed pro953. found interest in the same Given the exceptional impor953. tance of the matter, it would stay combined that the Denuclearization of Latin America and of Africa. group would meet again in order to study it.
I explained that the fact that the Brazilian Relations Archives, Brasilia, Brazil.
Translated from Portuguese Delegation has presented the draft only with its signature as by James G Hershberg.] a result of the extreme gravity of the situation created with the introduction of nuclear arms by the Soviet Union on Cuban territory and the urgency of presenting a proposal that could constitute a solution for the crisis.
The Nicaraguan Delegation supported that of SECRETARY OF STATE FOR EXTERNAL RELATIONS Panama.
The Panamanian suggestion was counterpoised with the North American desire, since Dean TELEGRAM already has declared to me that the American Government RECEIVED desires to reserve the right to transport nuclear arms through 13166 the Panama Canal.
Belaunde, Head of the Peruvian Delegation, raised FROM THE EMBASSY IN WARSAW vague doubts about the opportunity of the project, alleging ON/5/5/XI/62 that the rockets-anti-rockets could carry nuclear warheads and that, however, the denuclearization SECRET could see the continent deprived of an important arm of DAC/DOr/DAS/DNU/600. defense.
ON/5/5/XI/62 According to my interlocutor, Brazil is the only country capable to mediate, although “the rigidity” of Fidel Castro CONFIDENTIAL constitutes the major obstacle.
After pious words DOr/DAC/DAS/DEA/DNU/600. about Khrushchev’s “desire for peace,” he admitted that Question of Cuba.
Visit of Novotny, Ulbricht and Gomulka Kennedy was under pressure from “reactionary circles” and to Moscow. from the Pentagon not to abandon the base at Guantanamo.
These rapid encounters with those who have not counted d’horizon” of the international situation, before now leave no doubt that the principal motive is the the same source told me that the intransigence of Adenauer’s Cuban crisis and its repercussions.
The recent international in not having diplomatic relations with Warsaw provoked a events ought to have brought a reasonable of confuhardening of Poland in the sense of its joining the German sion between the leaders of countries of the socialist bloc, Democratic Republic to demand express recognition of the above all because the reactions and likewise the concessions Oder-Neisse frontier, under which De Gaulle realistically of this government were excessively rapid for which, certainly, would accept to recognize that the “status quo” could only be it did not have time to consult its allies.
The Polish position, contrary to that the relations with China have encountered the edge of new of Bonn, is that the frontier is definitive, not being an object important events by cause simultaneously of the questions of negotiations.
There is the impression that the recent took to be similar to the Cuban intransiinternational events have created a state of disorientation in gence, my interlocutor admitted as inexplicable the aggression the community of socialist countries and that the great chaltoward India.
Before departing for Brazil, I requested an interlenge of Khrushchev will be to accommodate this state of view with Rapacki to inform affairs in the short term.
Since the question of Hungary [in myself better about the Polish position in relation to Cuba.56] the leadership of Khrushchev has not suffered a more difficult test.
Kennedy on last Friday CONFIDENTIAL URGENT contributed to this, above all for not having threatened to DAC/DOr/DEA/DAS/DNU/600. adopt new measures against Cuba.
This will permit a complete review it is difficult to perceive what will be the effects of the last of relations between Cuba and Russia, in face of the last events regarding the internal prestige of Fidel, but it does events.
The Minister of External Relations intends pects of future Soviet aid are good for Cuba. to travel soon to the UN in order to defend personally the Cuban position that the solution to the crisis only can be LUIZ LEIVAS BASTIAN PINTO attained on the basis of the Five Points.
Translated from Portuguese accord between the American and Soviet governments about by James G Hershberg.] some immediate questions, in the present moment, I have the impression that the crisis has entered a less critical phase and will go on in a type of status quo, in case it does not return to become suddenly aggravated.
Translated from Portuguese at the UN, Carlos Lechuga, enjoys prestige in this governby James G Hershberg.] ment beyond being an experienced diplomat.
I 1962 took advantage of the opportunity, however, to repeat to him the suggestion that I made already some days ago in a personal SECRETARY OF STATE FOR EXTERNAL RELATIONS character to the Cuban ambassador Lechuga, who promised to send it to his government.
I approve the suggestion of Your Excellency to the he pass on the proposal to the Americans; 7) I told him that secretary general agreeing also in that the scheme will gain yes but that would ask such a thing of him [que o fizesse como visibility if it is presented to the directly interested parties by coisa dele], because it would give more authority and because U Thant.
Your Excellency, however, should coordinate your I did not have authorization of Your Excellency; 8) without action with that of the secretary general, insisting together to hesitating U Thant responded that he would take on the the Cuban representatives about the advantages that a soluinitiative and requested me to maintain secrecy until he called tion of this nature would have for the Government of Havana. on me again.
As U Thant spoke to me of the importance of a As for the intercession of the president of the republic, that personal demarche of President Goulart, I would depend on the progress made in these first contacts. consult Your Excellency it would not be appropriate for the president of the republic to telephone the prime EXTERIORES minister of Cuba.
The attitude of the FROM THE DELEGATION OF BRAZIL AT THE XVII Government seems to be more cautious.
Habituated for years SESSION OF THE GENERAL-ASSEMBLY OF THE of the threat and with the blockade in front of Havana, the UNITED NATIONS—NEW YORK revolutionary government is plainly conscious that the danger ON/8/8/XI/62 has not passed and can reemerge at any moment; it is also conscious that, after the elections of yesterday, it could SECRET produce in the United States of America at most a favorable DEA/DAC/DAS/DAM/DNU/DOr/600. pull for negotiations, but that the American Government has Question of Cuba. not given up its intentions.
HE SAID TO ME ALSO THAT the gravity of the situation and some are visibly affected in the THE SECRETARY GENERAL U THANT HAD SPOKEN most acute moment of the crisis and know, for survival, they TO HIM OF THE MATTER AS HE MADE THE will have to make concessions.
HOWEVER THE PROBLEM OF LOCAL of the position of Fidel Castro in terms of his program of INSPECTION CONTINUES TO BE THE PRINCIPAL five points.
However, I do not have the ability to confirm this information, I transmit it with due reservations.
Maço “600.—SITUAÇÃO POLITICA—CUBA de novembro a dezembro de 1,962//6223,” Ministry of External TELEGRAM Relations Archives, Brasilia, Brazil.
On the other UNITED NATIONS—NEW YORK hand, from a fairly sure source, we obtained information that ON/9/9/XI/62 the declarations of Governor Brizola profoundly impressed the Cuban leaders and Fidel Castro, that they are utilizing CONFIDENTIAL—URGENT them to explain to Mikoyan the necessity of the Cuban DNU/DAS/DAC/DOr/DEA/600.
Government maintaining a minimum of its own demands as Question of Cuba.
According to Kuznetsov, exhaustively to the Brazilian draft about denuclearization of the American insistence on the question of inspection is Latin America and expressed support to the ideas it contains. becoming moot since the United States has declared The Delegate from Ghana formulated an appeal to the govsatisfaction with the removal of offensive material existing in ernment of Cuba in the sense to accept the idea of inspection Cuba, it is only a pretext to postpone indefinitely the comon the part of the United Nations.
He praised highly the efforts of non-aligned countries Relations Archives, Brasilia, Brazil.
Translated from Portuguese in the Geneva Conference, especially of Brazil, and the peaceby James G Hershberg.] ful initiatives of our Government in the Cuban crisis.
I have the impression that the Soviet Minister insinuated our manifestation in the sense of exposing to the Washington government our disquiet faced with the possibility of a return of the crisis that was so difficult to surmount.
In a meeting with a Latin American group, SECRETARY OF STATE FOR EXTERNAL RELATIONS Stevenson alluded to the possibility of the Organization of American States to meet and, having verified the compliTELEGRAM ance of the commitment of the Soviet Union and the Cuban RECEIVED Government, to suspend the coercive measures taken in the 13383 last meeting of Consultation of the Chancellors.
In another meeting, with European delegates, Stevenson SESSION OF THE GENERAL-ASSEMBLY OF THE repeated his previous declarations and, according to what UNITED NATIONS—NEW YORK I collected from various sources, had even referred to the ON/9/9/XI/62 reestablishment of economic help to the Cuban government.
These declarations transpired this morning and were comSECRET mented on in private conversations by various correspondents DAC/DAS/DNU/DEA/DOr/600. accredited to the United Nations.
The shipping is diminishing ing confirmed my impressions, transmitted by my telegram progressively by pressure of the United States regarding other no 372, in the sense that the Cuban government, conscious of countries, by the attitudes of dockers of various ports, who the gravity of the situation, is disposed to make concessions refuse to operate ships that stop in Cuba, and, now, by the to reach a minimal guarantee; he requested anew the support blockade, which greatly damages foreign commerce.
There of Brazil that Cuba “has the right” to present in the UN its is contradictory information that it is possible to obtain how program of Five Points only, I repeat, as a basis for discussion; much is the reserve of gasoline, foodstuffs, and consumer he insinuated plainly the disposition to renounce the fifth goods.
Evidently, the damage that the Cuban economy is sufpoint relative to the Naval Base of Guantanamo; he did fering is turning this country still more dependent on Soviet not hide the fear how much the measures that were proposed help in the immediate future. to the OAS and insisted in the present confidence that Cuba reposed in the attitude of Brazil that he knows will be very LUIZ LEIVAS BASTIAN PINTO firm; and judged, however, that the discussions in the UN will be decisive.
Maço “600.—SITUAÇÃO POLITICA—CUBA de novembro a dezembro de 1,962//6223,” Ministry of External Relations Archives, Brasilia, Brazil.
BRAZIL DECLARED DNU/DEA/DAS/DAC/DOr/DAf/604 YESTERDAY IN THE UN GENERAL ASSEMBLY Denuclearization of Latin America.
In these conditions it SECRETARY OF STATE FOR EXTERNAL RELATIONS would seem to him more reasonable the second hypothesis, that would bring a tolerable economic effort to assure the TELEGRAM economic survival of Cuba without transforming it into a RECEIVED model of development.
I argued that this policy does not 13488 seem to me viable without a combination of hypotheses two and three because the economic un-success or stagnation FROM THE EMBASSY IN WASHINGTON of Cuba will turn the Castroite movement unexportable ON/10/13/XI/62 it would aggravate the prospects of internal subversion in Cuba.
In conversation with a high official from the State themselves in power.
He added that these conditions seem Department about the prospects of the Cuban situation, he already to exist in Cuba.
The various military units Cuba a socialist regime, based on a well-structured commuwere highly mechanized and have become capable of rapid nist party and endowed with a repressive political machine, movement to liquidate subversive movements that can arise as a political base of propaganda and infiltration in Latin in any part of the island.
Finally, through the committees of America and to intensify Soviet technical and economic political vigilance in the villages, factories and cooperatives assistance in a manner to transform Cuba into a living demconstitute an efficient apparatus of espionage.
All of this will onstration of the efficacy of communism as an instrument of facilitate the indefinite maintenance of the repressive regime. economic development in Latin America.
The first hypothAs for the economic model of development, the Soviets will esis seemed to him impractical since it would demoralize all renounce this, …ing more in the eventual success the communist efforts in Latin America.
Likewise they will TELEGRAM not the conquest of power they will get perhaps RECEIVED the more moderate objective of pointing out the capitalist 13576 development.
As for the North American attitude in the present negotiations about dismantling the bases in Cuba, FROM THE EMBASSY IN HAVANA he indicates that, for internal political motives, it would ON/14/14/XI/62 be extremely difficult for the United States to abandon the demands of international control, since, the dissatisfaction CONFIDENTIAL—EXTREMELY URGENT of this requirement, would increase the political resistance, DNU/DEA/DAS/DAC/DOr/DAf/600. already enormous, to the commitment of non-invasion.
In Denuclearization of Latin America and Africa. any case, if the impossibility of the assembly of a system of international inspection is verified, by virtue of the resis384 – WEDNESDAY – 1215hs – Response to the telegram tance of Fidel Castro, the Russians agreeing however to the of Your Excellency no 179.
I said that Cuba does overflight by American or neutral planes of Cuban territory not give up, in this third amendment; I did not know until in order to document the non-reestablishment of aggressive this point this affirmation is valid; it can be one of equipment.
He criticized strongly the speech of Fidel Castro of 28 of October, SECRETARY OF STATE FOR EXTERNAL RELATIONS in which he rejected the international inspection, affirming that its result was to complicate the crisis, aggravating the TELEGRAM danger of war; 4 o) the conversations were extended to plan RECEIVED the general strategy, having Mikoyan invested against the 13610 declaration of Havana, which he considers suicidal politics FROM THE EMBASSY IN HAVANA that tend to deprive Cuba of the support of other Latin ON/14/14/XI/62 American countries.
The anti-American ideological line advocated in this document is prejudicial to the left on CONFIDENTIAL—URGENT the continent and in this respect various complaints have arrived to Moscow.
Havana, which was in frank disagreement with the doctrine Substitution of peaceful coexistence.
The Cubans began to assume a more concrete responsibility in relation to the complain that during the first weeks of the crisis they were created situation.
I transmit this information with due not consulted nor informed by the Soviet Government. reservations, although I believe sufficiently in its veracity.
I They pointed out, , it had been an error [to judge it usable to understand the Cuban position and the make?—word illegible] the Russian proposal to trade the antecedents of the joint Cuban-Soviet proposal presented, Cuban bases in Turkey, since, yesterday, to the Secretary General of the UN. in the first place, Cuba is a socialist country, that it could not be, however, an object of negotiations with the West.
LUIZ LEIVAS BASTIAN PINTO The Cuban leaders stressed that the referred position lessens the prestige of the Cuban revolution on the continent.
Cuban Government about the international inspection of this country; 3 o) Mikoyan retorted with identical violence, explaining that the Soviet Union worried itself with saving the peace, but also created conditions that guaranteed the integrity of Cuba.
From what it is possible to observe in FROM THE EMBASSY IN HAVANA Cuba, I agree entirely with the considerations and concluON/16/16/XI/1962 sions of Ambassador Vasco Tristão Leitão da Cunha.
Also, in his direct relations with Cuba, Khrushchev has shown an CONFIDENTIAL—EXTREMELY URGENT attitude pacificating and open to compromise.
It is each time more ostensible the Cuban here, in recent days, in the sense that Fidel is inclined to accept for with Mikoyan that, in the last days, which are some type of inspection that is not limited to Cuba, perhaps not mentioned in the newspapers; however his presence here, including Guantanamo or other territories; it coincides, also, for fifteen days, is evidently proof of Soviet goodwill.
But, faced with the continuing surprises that Fidel Castro contributed without doubt for making difficult the conciliaoffers, this observation should be taken with reserve. tory position of Khrushchev and, to what seems, is leading the Russians to admit, at least in part, the basic Cuban line LUIZ LEIVAS BASTIAN PINTO expressed in the program of Five Points.
Some foreign observers here judge, however, that the USSR will have in the near with this Havana—1962/1964,” , Ministry of External country.
In this isolation and before the surprising reiterations Relations Archives, Brasilia, Brazil.
Translated from Portuguese of the Cuban Government it is each time more difficult to by James G Hershberg.] make forecasts and even precise observations, but all of these observers are convinced that the United States will not yield its intention to overthrow Fidel Castro; it is also and is certainly influences his attitude.
I FEAR THAT THE CUBAN ABSTENTION WILL PROVOKE FROM THE DELEGATION OF BRAZIL AT THE XVII THE DEFECTION OF OTHER COUNTRIES OF LATIN GENERAL-ASSEMBLY OF THE UNITED NATIONS— AMERICA THAT CONSIDER THE COMMITMENT NEW YORK OF CUBA NECESSARY FOR THE SECURITY…FOR ON/16/16/XI/62 THIS REASON I YOUR EXCELLENCY THAT EXAMINE THE CONVENIENCE OF AN INSTANT AND FINAL JOINT “DEMARCHE” TO THE HAVANA CONFIDENTIAL GOVERNMENT, AT A HIGHER LEVEL, REQUESTING THAT IT SUSPEND THE PRESENTATION OF THE DNU/DAM/DAC/DAf/DOr/DEA/DAS/600.
LECHUGA, IN DNU/DAC/DAS/DEA/DAf/DOr/604 RESPONSE, DECLARED TO ME THAT HE WOULD Denuclearization of Latin America and Africa.
Aggravation SUPPORT THE IDEA OF THE DRAFT IN HIS of the Cuban situation.
As, principally, the proposal contemamendments to the denuclearization proposal, impossible plated, also, Africa and the continuation, even, in expectation to be accepted by the United States of America, already that of Cuban acceptance, the UN was the more appropriate reopen the problem of the bases and the denuclearization of forum, not having, however, hindered the participation of so-called dependent territories ; D) the OAS in the regulation of the implementation of the projthe position of Adenauer ect.
The Uruguayan Representative recalled the convenience favorable to the strong line in relation to Cuba.
Translated from Portuguese increase its development; III) abandon her to her by James G Hershberg.] own fate.
This evaluation would serve as a subsidy for the formation of Russian foreign policy with relation to Cuba, today the object of stiff criticism, whether by Stalinist elements of the Soviet Union, or by China, a controversy that may be reached in the Meeting of the Central Committee, on the 19th.
I SSE/DNU/DAS/DAC/DOr/DAf/604 responded, explaining, that the Brazilian proposal in the UN 600.
We insist, however, in that the same message of 27 October climate of conciliation, draft will come to be voted in the Commission and in the that the opportune Brazilian mediation still more favorable. plenary before the present period of sessions of the General Assembly is closed.
No revelation in the Soviet press about DOr/DAC/DAS/DEA/DNU/600. the Cuban problems.
I am led to believe that the Soviet readers are the instigators of the intransigent position of the Cuban ignore the problems or the rising divergences between this Government; furthermore, it is believed that the action of Government and Fidel Castro, above all, the rejection of Peking in Cuba is in line with broader plans, as tested in the Castro to permit the local verification.
In this case, the Government of Cuba has novembro a dezembre de 1.962//6223,” Ministry of External to agree to return to the Soviet Union the machines at issue.
Khrushchev, in view of the information received by the Embassy in Moscow.
Ambassador Leitão da Cunha commented on the immediate effects that the events in the Caribbean have had regarding SECRETARY OF STATE FOR EXTERNAL RELATIONS the line of foreign policy of Moscow.
It appears to have fixed on a new idea of “compromise,” in solution of international MEMORANDUM for Mr ADJUNCT SECRETARY disputes in which the Soviet Union is a direct party.
Premier having to overcome obstacles, in front of difficulPermit me Your Excellency to recapitulate, in a manner more ties and criticisms, above all on the part of its more radical succinct and focused, only, on aspects of the question that allies.
On the other hand, it has inspired that he larly to the three parties directly involved – United States of will be – certainly he is – in egotistical America, USSR and Cuba. motives and of the momentary strategy, the current attitude of Khrushchev has been conciliatory, pacific, and, evidently, all I – UNITED STATES OF AMERICA solutions should be searched that would not put them to lose ground already conquered or compromise future negotiations.
In that which concerns the United States of America, it appears to have fully attained the objective of its naval and III – CUBA aerial blockade, which was to impede the entry, to Cuba, of warlike material of an offensive nature.
Pressured by the Soviets, Fidel Castro has ready now conSoviet Union agreed to withdraw, or dismantle, sur place, formed in abdicating certain demands that he initially made – the armaments which had been installed on Cuban territory, under its control.
On the other hand, in the bilateral negotiawithdrawal of the Americans of the naval base of Guantanamo tions that have been between the United States of America – as conditions for agreeing with an international inspection and the USSR, the Washington government gave guarantees on his territory.
The most recent communications received of non-invasion of Cuba. from our Embassy in Havana permit one to deduce, , 3.
As for the first demand, conciliatory solution that he searches to reach.
In these conditions, and on a merely speculative basis – a in relation to inspection by an international commission, is time that, as is natural in case, there is not the DAS, up to date obvious, precedes the formalization of such a compromise or with the intentions of the Government, in that it respects its there will be a concomitant process. direct and future participation in the unrolling of the events in the Caribbean – permit me to recall to Your Excellency 14.
The initiative of the Brazilian Government on the above the possibility of Brazil suggesting the path of a conciliatory lines indicate that it would be perfectly coherent with its solution for the question of Cuba, in which would participate position toward the events in the Caribbean, and, more the Governments of the United States of America, the Soviet still, would present an opportunity for us to reaffirm certain Union and of Havana. principles that guide our foreign policy in the hemisphere; the self-determination of peoples; the opposition to armed methods ; and the rejection of infil9.
The idea would be to launch in an informal manner, for tration and imposition of political ideology to our example, in an interview granted by the Mr Minister of State democratic system. with a highly-regarded foreign correspondent.
It would not assume the form of an offer of good offices or of mediation Respectfully, on the part of Brazil, but an indication of a formula that all would be able to accept.
Another form of action in this sense would be of a gesture together or isolated on the part of Latin Chief of Division of America American Governments that maintain diplomatic relations with Fidel Castro.
Ministry of External Relations Archives, Brasilia, Brazil, copy courtesy of Roberto Baptista Junior (History Department, 10.
II – not to intervene, directly or indirectly, in the politics, of other countries of the continent. – TUESDAY – 930hs – My arrival here, in December of last year, coincided with the preparations for the meeting 13.
The suspension of the naval and aerial blockade of Cuba, of Punta del Este and it was constant, then, emphasis of the on the part of the United States, as well as agreement of the Cuban government to prod Brazil and obtain our support on Havana Government to withdraw the bomber aircraft and the international plane.
A Revolução Cubana e a América Latina coinciding with the beginning of a new phase in its relations . with the USSR, the Cuban attitude in relation to Brazil shift3 See esp. the transcript of the secretly-recorded 30 July ed.
Since then, the Cuban Government always manifested its 1962 White House conversation involving President Kennedy, his ambassador to Brazil Lincoln Gordon, and aide Richard Goodwin recognition to Brazil and its confidence in that we would not and other sources in Hershberg, “The United States, Brazil, and the alter our policy favorable to Cuban autonomy.
Interestingly, the Brazilians also sensed some Argentine Twice on 23 and 27 of October, the gravest reluctance to back its denuclearization plan, and behind that moments of the crisis, and, according to the instructions potential nuclear ambitions—piquant evidence of the traditional of Your Excellency, I requested this Government, in order South American rivalry.
My appeal was received reporting a discussion of the denuclearization proposal with his Latin with attention and deference, but with total refusal.
According to Wikipedia, “Cuba this special mission and, still more, that the Cuban censorship was the last country to sign and to ratify, in 1995 and on 23 October has cut, totally, the telegrams sent from here, in this respect, 2002, completing signature and ratification by all 33 nations of Latin by foreign correspondents.
Cuba ratified with a reservation that achieving a solution to the United States hostility to Cuba and the present circumstance, the Cuban government has not taken use of the Guantánamo Bay military base for United States nuclear weapons advantage of the opportunities Brazil offered to it and our was a precondition to Cuba’s continued adherence.” evident sincerity to help it on the path to a solution acceptable for Cuba.
I judge that I should bring to the knowledge 8 See, in particular, Brazilian UN ambassador Afonso Arinos’ of Your Excellency these observations, which I believe will be 6 November 1962 report of his conversation with U Thant after the useful.
In the following telegram I transmit some impressions UN leader returned from Havana. about the probable causes of this attitude.
In fact, as one Brazilian cable shows, international awareness of the Brazilian emissary’s mission was limited at the time by Cuban LUIZ LEITAS BASTIAN PINTO censorship, which suppressed mention of it in reporters’ dispatches.
At the same time, Goulart seemed to express strong support for JFK’s actions in his talks with United States ambassador Lincoln Gordon.
For translated West German records of his discussions with United States President Kennedy regarding Cuba, on 14 November 1962, see elsewhere in this issue of the CWIHP Bulletin.
In Brazil, the need to formulate an approach for State Minister – The reason for asking you the impending Punta del Este conference led Foreign Minister to meet here was to discuss the matter brought forward at the VIII consultative meeting.
As shown by position is and examine all implications brought forward by it, the translated record below, the plannot only with regard to the inter-American system but also the ning sessions offered an opportunity for candid discussion of the development of our bilateral relations with the United States. conflicting pressures on the issue, and the policy options available.
So far there is no indication that the United States is comAn official ally of Washington by virtue of the 1947 Rio Treaty, mitted to the bilateral relations maintained with our country, especially regarding financial help, to any kind of political Brazil clearly belonged to the United States sphere of influence, politically attitude adopted by us concerning the large hemispheric and economically, and formally opposed Soviet or communist problems, notably the Cuban problem.
Yet, within Brazilian domestic cannot discard such an hypothesis in just a simple manner. politics there was considerable leftist admiration and sympathy However, we should be able to admit it and make use of such for the Cuban revolution, and a widespread belief that the island an element for study purposes, inasmuch as it is undeniable should be left to determine its own destiny—without interference that the visit of President Kennedy to two of the or intervention from the United States or anyone else.
Moreover, major countries in South America is an event that cannot be left unnoted.
Moreover, we need to take into consideration Brazil’s diplomats represented a nation eager to show a more that, at present, one of them has severed relations with Cuba, independent posture to the world (it had recently even sent an putting itself into a position of an anti-Cuban policy center, observer to the first conference of the “nonaligned” movement in while the other has assumed the position of intermediary of Belgrade2), even as it had to safeguard its crucial relationship the State Department at the OAS. with Washington.
Ultimately, at Punta del Este, the Brazilians, led by the choice of a regime, especially if such a regime is a demoDantas, would resist and significantly water down the sanctions cratic one.
Based on our fears we started to develop a series of possible It can be said that such is the line inherited from the Jânio reasoning which con-substantiated, I believe, in the Meeting Quadros administration [January – September at Casa das Pedras.
However, I have been insisting that there is a slight At Casa das Pedras we worked out an idea based on a sugdifference between what we have been trying to do and what gestion of Ambassador Leitão da Cunha which started gaining characterizes Jânio Quadro’s line towards Cuba.
I will recapitulate the idea notwithstandline there seemed to be a slight trace of ideological sympathy ing the fact that is within the spirit of many of us.
First we tried and a systematic denial and sometimes a kind of evasive posito postpone the consultative meeting the utmost.
In consetion to hold an opinion of the democratic character of Fidel quence of said adjournment we tried a diplomatic move towards Castro’s government.
This point was considered a matter of the United States to obtain from their government a comfact.
Even Minister Afonso Arinos in one of his visits to the promise of a pledge for the non-use of violence against Cuba. parliament, categorically declared that he had not seen any At that time there were signs of a planned invasion of Cuba evidence that Fidel Castro’s regime was a communist one, launched by Nicaragua or Guatemala, or both countries altoleaving the impression that the fact of such proofs existing or gether.
There was a great number of trained Cuban volunteers not could be of great importance.
Moreover, attitudes such as in the United States army; works or preparation at ports and awarding Commander Guevara with a decoration [in airports in Guatemala that could be related to the new invasion August 1961] showed that his sympathy had nothing to do attempt.
There was also an extremely confidential information with self-determination, rendering to such an official attitude that a prestigious governor had attended a conference a rather more controversial characterization than what we have with President Kennedy insisting on the idea of an invasion. been trying to notice.
We were under the impression that Cuba feared such Ours was an opposite idea.
This, because it is very difficult to define whether a hand, because from the USSR’s economic point of view the regime is in fact a communist or a socialist one.
What really purchase of more than a million tons of sugar for a country mattered was to classify it as a non-democratic regime accordthat has an excess of such a product was too expensive; on the ing to the Santiago’s declaration pattern.
Thus, the problem other hand, because the Soviet Union never left any doubts in of ideological sympathy was eliminated.
All it could ernment is not in ideological sympathy with Fidel Castro’s offer would be a retaliation in a country close its boundaries regime.
Said Declaration plays a very important role whether the regime was a socialist or democratic one ceased because it is the sole document signed by Fidel Castro’s govto exert any influence on them. ernment in which the recognition of democratic principles is From this point on we begin to look for a solution due to clearly indicated.
We could ask Fidel Castro’s government, the increasing probability that the countries will be convoked strengthened by the non-violence pledge, to accept a gradual for a consultative meeting.
We were afraid of such a gathering evolution for its observing the Santiago Declaration. as it was set from the start by calling upon the Rio de Janeiro If such binomial non-violence vs.
The latter being the case, as per Resolution the establishment of a democratic state, and the break of their 93 of Caracas, it is marked as an amplification or addendum ties with the Soviet Union.
This was the idea resulting from to the Treaty of Rio de Janeiro, namely, a presumed aggression. the meeting at Casa das Pedras and which was the subject of The simple fact of being communist and being affiliated to the two good investigations.
There was no tion of Mexico that voted against and, in other words, left no written reaction of the State Department, but the ambassador doubt about its position contrary to the consultative meeting. conveyed a rather complete memorandum about the matter In the United States the reaction to this attitude is not insisting, as he still insists, on the convenience of a personal sympathetic.
Ambassador Gordon is an ambassador of excepunderstanding between the Secretary tional value, an intellectual, a man concerned in making a Rusk and myself.
The second one was with Cuba’s ambasgood-will diplomacy which has positive and negative aspects. sador who also highly praised the idea and informed the One of the negative ones is that he hides from us a little the Havana government accordingly. hostile reactions in the American environment with respect This third stage, however, ended with Fidel Castro’s to our attitudes.
Very kindly he insinuated that our consultaspeech with the well known statement of ideological affilitions reiterated with Argentina, Chile, and other American ation which turned any kind of understanding based on countries had been considered by the State Department as an Santiago’s Declaration as something he could ever return to. effort of our chancellery to sabotage the consultative meeting.
The importance In fact, up to now the North American reaction to our attiof that speech was not to reveal anything but to preclude tude consisted of two notes, both giving strong support to the a scheme of diplomatic action which was to make a return Colombian proposal and both duly retorted by us with other to free elections possible.
It occurred sometime before the notes in which we clearly demonstrated that the Colombian meeting of 4 December.
What we now have to do is and exerted upon abstention. to set a line of conduct and the impression is that we have Here I have to open some brackets to cover the quesfirst to set it under the form of an internal philosophy for the tion of the remaining South-American countries.
Secondly, under the form of trip to Buenos Aires our impression was that the position of tactical measures to be adopted at the consultative meeting.
It is about the aforementioned that I would like the Planning This because President Frondizi fully agrees Commission integrated by the Working Group organized for with it although if he encounters difficulties in sustaining the consultative meeting to meditate, by means of intensive same it is due the opinion among the military forces which is meetings so that we could altogether reach a very clear definimuch more divided among right and left than ourselves.
If we succeed such a definition would be taken to the fact of having had that agreement with us became a cause of Cabinet at one of its meetings, in a written form to be substrength in his hands.
Thereafter, although we keep being mitted to the President of the Republic, to the prime minister reticent with regard to the duration of the Argentine position, and finally submitted for the approval of the Cabinet.
The we lack concrete facts pointing in the direction of weakness. next step would be running the risks of its execution.
With regard to Chile, Ambassador Vale was present shortly The following is what I have been thinking about the after the Buenos Aires meeting in Chile and had a producsubject.
I think that the Meeting of Consultation comprises tive conversation with Chancellor Martinez Soto Mayor.
The first due to the fact that it was convoked shared the same tendency and Chilean attitudes have been based on the Rio de Janeiro Treaty which means, minimally, firmly in line with ours.
We have only had the opportunity to establish coinciAmerican countries having their relations with Cuba broken dence.
Uruguay’s vote in favor of the consultative meeting off and a great probability that Ecuador will be the 14th. was explained as voting against instructions received from the We already have a two-thirds majority necessary to make Chancellery.
It is evident that countries like Brazil, public opinion to support it.
Ecuador is the one I consider, Argentina, Chile as well as Mexico, cannot go to the meeting at this moment, the more dubious because the government just to be presented with an already taken decision and to be is extremely unstable, characterized by a line of opportunbound to a legal norm without having had any possibility to ism trying to take the support of Velasco Ibarra’s government re-discuss it.
Also, according to some information the present which already involves the value of the subject.
This is the Ecuadorian chancellor would have taken many initiatives with difference we have to make between obligation and aspiration the ex-president of the Republic in favor of a severance with within the American system.
It is an organizadevelopment of the regional international law that normally tion based on obligations and aspirations.
The obligations aspirations are the prior forms or else, a period of germinaare the ones that no country can fail to comply with.
The tion of future obligations and that the system develops while charter, in its Article 5 indicates the membership purposes, changing aspirations into obligations.
The principles of nonand thanks to it conditions of co-operation between OAS intervention and of self-determination are the field of obligacountries that are difficult to accept by countries that have tions and are not only of regional obligation as they belong different social and economical goals have been accepted.
On the other I do not believe that Resolution 93 might have changed hand, within the inter-American system it has been admitted that.
It is a resolution of difficult legal interpretation. that the most developed states should give more than what Santiago’s Declaration that came thereafter reaffirmed that they receive in the benefit of the strengthening of social and the principles it enunciated were mere aspirations and qualieconomic characteristics that belong to the system’s aim.
It cannot as well be condemned to diplomatic sion or danger of aggression it is within the scope of the Rio isolationism by means of its relations being severed.
We have to admit the possibility of a socialist about it as an example because we are not free from seeing country in America.
The idea that the emergence of a socialother American countries becoming socialists in the next ist country involves a military action or economic blockage years.
Conditions do not seem calm enough to prevent us to discard it is practically unsustainable due to the internal from witnessing similar movements in other countries.
We structure of all the other American countries’ public opinion. are taking Cuba as an experimental case.
The decision taken However, the idea of living in America with socialist will be for all. countries may involve another consequence that cannot be The first hypothesis would be that when a Latin country overlooked, namely, that any relation that such a country would become or declare itself communist, with risk to the might establish with the Soviet camp would cause a latent hemispheric democratic unity, the remedy would be to defeat military danger.
Thus, the presence of a socialist enclave in a the government by force.
If this were true there would be hemisphere of countries strongly linked by defensive alliances no difference between aspirations and obligations.
Here we have the Finland’s parallel, which was mentioned the loss of moral authority of the inter-American system, the during the first phase of our studies at Casa da Pedra. automatic conversion of the independent regional system into If in the socialist world a democratic enclave like Finland is a satellite system, the low capacity to think of seriously develaccepted at the price of neutralization, it does not seem out of oping the inter-American system.
Moreover, the severance of the question to admit that also in the democratic world may relations is not justified, at a time when Brazil re-establishes exist a socialist enclave protected by neutralization.
Such a relations with socialist countries as other countries do mainneutralization does not happen without a series of difficulties. tain relations.
From the Soviet point of view there seems to be no interest in At the moment the idea that seems worthy of a study maintaining a military commitment in Cuba.
From the Cuban point countries of this hemisphere are its members due, in the of view I think there will be no major difficulties, although first place, for reasons of geographical location.
Canada, FIO [not American point of view there remains the problem that a neufurther identified—ed.] are not members, for example.
For either hypothesis we must have at least When Ambassador Olivares paid us a an acceptable and flexible tactical solution. visit we were hoping to obtain some information or receive a Another point to check is about the suitability to proceed proposal, but the conversation only showed interest in finding with the consultations around these practical suggestions. out how the consultative meeting was going to be carried out.
Under-Secretary Renato Archer – It looks like the consultaFrom here he visited with President João Goulart and the tion should be preceded by a formal condemnation.
Should next morning had an appointment with Minister Tancredo Brazil, before declaring itself contrary, follow what others are Neves.
From both he obtained the same information, namely, doing might give the impression that we are willing to divide that Brazil was inflexible with respect to the non-intervention responsibilities. principle; that we would not turn our backs on defending the Minister Carlos Duarte – Would appreciate it if Deputy inter-American system.
Shall he speak As far as the method in which that attitude would be now or during the Meeting. converted into a diplomatic action was concerned, they would Under-Secretary Renato Archer – This would indicate a type have to obtain that information from the Ministry of Foreign of behavior that would reward Brazil.
Neither the President of the Republic nor the Prime Jânio Quadros statements took effect before any conMinister offered a single word about this.
These statements strengthened Brazil’s position Olivares showed sympathy with the idea of neutralization. which was firm and of its own regarding the involved subjects.
He can carry on his conversations on the basis of a position Although the ambassador was also favorably impressed by the he already has.
Trying to divide the responsibility with other idea he did not feel in a condition to discuss it any further countries will weaken our position. here.
He insists on the invitation he made to me in order to Ambassador Dias Carneiro – I would like to say a few words discuss it with Secretary Rusk in Washington.
Ambassador Goodwin State Minister – Sometimes the distinction is very easy, arrived two days ago.
It depends on the reason why the subtoday and it seems that he wishes to discuss the consultation. ject is formulated.
For example, in the case of the Santiago’s We now have the problem of the line to follow at the Declaration it clearly enunciates that it covers aspiration.
At this point I must say that there are already the Rio de Janeiro Treaty it is an obligation.
The OAS charter signs that the American point of view is not favorable to the presents some doubts.
Some subjects are explicit while others approval of the Colombian proposal.
Instead, there is an are dubious. interest in a document of sanctioning character which allows that after a period of time the conduct of the Cuban government be established with the help of a commission.
Also noteworthy is the fact that the idea of invasion by neighboring countries has been declining in recent weeks.
There are no signs of increased militarization and apparently what is expected is an internal revolution.
It is possible that MEETING OF THE PLANNING COMMISSION ON such a revolution may already have started at the time the SUBJECTS RELATED TO THE VIII CONSULTATION Consultation Meeting takes place and in that case it will have MEETING – 27 December 1961 to change all arguments conceived so far.
Minister Maury Valente – As I have a certain difficulty in expressing myself verbally, I am replying to your yesterday’s 1.
This is a negative “optimum” because the real government will obtain a good average. “optimum” is a solution for the Cuban problem.
If our efforts were towards forgetting the dazzling sensaState Minister – I think that rather than considering the tion we are feeling at present with these two problems of Cuban problem as a separate issue we would profit by includundeniable magnitude – the diplomatic situation in America ing it in the general picture of our position towards variand the public opinion about the impending menace to the ous other problems.
We have some problems with France, American system – I would ask why we should not use some Portuguese Africa, the Common Market and the Cuban sunglasses to protect ourselves from the two suns and go back problem should be dealt with by means of integrating same to a solution for the Cuban problem that might provide the into these problems.
It has more to do with the relation of the governbe affirmative but it would certainly be worth its try.
I would go as far as saying that in the present stage it would be a novelty.
I really think he offered country in America that was in fact looking for a solution of a good contribution to the committee’s concerns.
To conclude, that the matter required a maximum of discretion and a modI would propose that we tried to achieve or merge that second esty of any country’s action before making approaches to the phase into the first or else, get back to the first stage.
United States with a view of obtaining acceptance of the latter At the beginning, the Cuban problem was just bilateral regarding an understanding with Cuba.
It has always about that and we, in Brazil, when the question arose, tried been the American government that demonstrated an attitude to situate it as such because we considered it to probably be of intransigence in dealing with the problem.
Until the invathe best way for an approach, with a view to find a posision phase, even though the aggressive actions had started in tive and constructive solution for the problem.
States always reacted and tried to deal with the problem in a It looked to me that a country like Brazil could, on that continent-wide framework.
In fact, it became a continental occasion, have presented an idea to the United States with problem, not so much because of Cuba but by influence of regard to the problem that could have convinced some of the United States.
After the failure of the invasion attempt its interest to solve the problem in such terms.
For that the United States clearly understood that the only way to treat purpose it was necessary for Brazil to refrain from any kind the problem was in a continent-wide manner.
Thenceforth, of publicity (the reverse of “OPA” [Operation Pan-America, by a strange coincidence, they started to note a flexibility Brazilian President Juscelino Kubitschek’s late 1950’s proposal among various American countries vis-a-vis Cuba. for hemispheric economic development—trans.]) trying its From the moment on it became of continental interest it best to reach a solution for the problem.
This for a simple turned into a problem of diplomatic tactics for each country reason.
The State Department would never accept facing the other than the United States.
Today we are not in search of a public opinion with a confession that it had been lead by the solution for the Cuban problem, but a solution to the menBrazilian, Mexican, or Argentine diplomacy.
The idea had to aces in the form of the crisis of the inter-American system, have had its origin in the United States.
Around this point arose best, if we continue this line of reasoning we shall find a way the action of Ecuador, Mexico, and Argentina which damaged to save the system and, at the same time we, Brazilians, will the history a little bit.
Mexico did not accept much. developed from a flexure to the establishment of a communist Colombia was sympathetic.
The idea of details was that the United States presented a memorandum stating that in mind at that time.
We have just received from the Embassy of Bogota United States could materialize in regard with the exproprithe American proposal ordering that relations be severed ated domains, whether they would leave this for a system that within 30 days if the OAS Council, after the Resolution is would relapse into the Bogota Treaty. approved, does not state that it has returned to the system and I am not optimistic with regard to any success of a behavhas refrained from having relations of that sort with the Soviet ior within this line but it seems that we would not have much bloc, etc.
On the other side another proposal of various other to lose if we considered the possibility of a conversation on countries orders that relations be severed immediately.
It does not look like an idea to be discarded without some examination.
I am not too enthusiastic about Ambassador Araújo Castro – I will try to summarize my it, though. impressions.
We, at this stage, are no longer concerned with the State Minister – It is a little overtaken by the events because solution of the Cuban problem but with a solution for the at the stage when one thought that everything seemed to inter-American problem.
More specifically, making use of a turn around a possible matter of re-absorption, so as if the Brazilian diplomatic solution, not only with respect to what problems were of indemnity for expropriation of confiscatis of the latter’s interest but how we are to explain it to the ing nature or the absence of certain guarantees to private public opinion which, in this case, is split.
Now everything denotes that we are dealing with maximizing and in January the Cuban subject will become an extra-hemisphere problem besides how Fidel Castro’s the great issue of the Brazilian politics.
It is in fact impressive posture adjusted itself to such an American interpretation of to note the problem of the left wing’s pressure in Brazil.
The core of your idea encloses two points that gives the impression that they are mobilized about the Cuban impressed me.
Evasion I go under the impression that it may be a personal reacbecause we are no longer looking for a solution to the probtion although I would rather place the Cuban problem within lem as we think that the phase for a solution of the problem is the Brazilian diplomatic field in order to explain our position. too late.
Also in the sense that being the minority within the Evasion is unfeasible.
The present situation does not belong organization we are seeking for the less unfavorable position to the past.
There has been an invasion; there has been an for Brazil, in particular.
To conclude, in my opinion, all that American position which we all know will put an end to Fidel has happened in the last four months and culminating with Castro.
Fidel Castro’s speech excluded almost irreparably a solution of the problem.
United State Minister – I was told by Ambassador Goodwin that States-Cuba.
It is possible that such a position may not be he only believes in an internal revolution within the next six feasible anymore.
This is the way it placed itself towards the months. continental public opinion.
It is very difficult to convince people that the problem does not concern the United States Ambassador Araújo Castro – The public opinion was poialone, but the hemisphere.
If the United States succeeded in soned by the State Department itself.
The Department thinks obtaining an agreement term with Cuba there would be no to be a prisoner of pressure groups which he himself helped more problem in the hemisphere. to create.
On the other hand, we are well A statement trying to establish the Brazilian diplomatic acquainted with the importance of semantics in the American concept should be considered as well.
Intrinsically it does not seem the right time to ized himself as a Marxist-Leninist regime has a fundamental concentrate the Brazilian position in face of the problem.
However, shall we make any attempt of mediation consider the latter’s statement of the 3rd inst., as a desperate it will result in our impairment, in our hesitation until the attempt to qualify the Cuban problem as a cold war and an last moment and, thereafter, position ourselves so as to be hit East-West problem.
He thinks the American position heads toward invasion and not toward State Minister – The problem is the following.
I think that an unlimited confidence with regard to the efforts of Brazil, the moment we start taking a public attitude giving it all Mexico and Argentina, not only concerning its strength but determination and a clear-cut characterization there are two also its stability.
They think the problem should be situated or three matters on which we cannot fail to comments about. as a cold war instead.
Taking this smallest posOne of them concerns the existence of the socialist regime sibility into consideration we should reflect on the Brazilian clearly linked with the hemisphere.
Our that we are against the application of sanctions, severance of attitude should be firm and previously defined.
We should relations, in favor of the “status quo” maintenance is a position that no matter how much it may gain by its perseverance, arrive with a determined position.
I would not, at this point, by being clear and firm still opens a very large flank to inquitry a new attempt of approach with Cuba or United States. ries that cannot remain without an answer.
The Brazilian Not even sounding the matter out or trying a large diplomatic public opinion is completely convergent to the examination articulation against the project.
To what extent problem nor for the inter-American system in a case which besides the manifestation of being against do our explanations seems already lost.
I think this case will turn out badly for have to go. the Pan-American system.
The emphasis given was against the thought that the diplomatic Ambassador Araújo Castro – That is what I think.
It is not the fact that I do not consider Cuba as a lowed us without influencing to the point of a plot of conreal danger.
Thus the Brazilian diplomacy would remain dissociof an arbitrating action and about the excess of activities on ated from the Cuban one.
We would have no more contacts our part. with them inasmuch as at this point mediation seems almost impossible.
Furthermore, if we maintain coherence until the State Minister – Do you think that in our clear statement we date I think we will be in a position to face the storm with should also immediately say what we think of a communist the required serenity.
We would as a first attempt find a defense of another action. neutralization.
We should accept a socialist country within the continent and outside of the system.
Otherwise, we have Ambassador Valle – This is the first step to agree with a colan open flank. lective action.
Once the relations have been broken off the second step would be much easier.
By means of taking Ambassador Gibson – We shall reach a situation where confrom three to four positions, we should say who are the ones structive and affirmative elements must be assembled and it seems to me that this is one of them.
We shall reach a that shall throw the stones at us. moment when we will have to give full explanation of our position because the military intervention does not solve the Ministry Maury Valente – It would be favorable to Brazil to Cuban problem. guarantee a formula of declaring at once that Cuba is outside the inter-American system because it dissociated itself from State Minister – The military intervention works as a power the aspirations. of great destruction.
It will involve the overthrow of the Government, the defeat of a great number of party members.
Ambassador Henrique Valle – Even the consequences of A slaughter always breaks a path to something.
It would bring non-intervention lead us to admit it within the continent but forth new problems because to massacre Cubans, causing the outside the system. overthrow of the government by force, would create in other American countries totally incurable reactions of internal State Minister – One thing is Brazil going to a conference character.
Each country’s internal political fight will be excluready to comply with its deliberations.
From the communist point of view it is to a conference where there is no longer any deliberation to the splitting being brought up and the transformation of the be taken and where the proposal that has just been read is hemisphere political fight into an ideological fight. co-sponsored by 14 countries whereas our role is to offer our Ambassador Araújo Castro – The communism in Latin approval of the application to the system.
They are much Ambassador Gibson – I think I need to make a clarification. more interested in a gradual and methodic penetration than I did not intend to say that we should, for example, start an in penetrating into Cuba where they know that the problem offer of mediation to deal with the Cuban problem.
I have cannot last. no fancy optimistic ideas with regard to any success.
But it is my opinion that we moved from the constructive to the Ministry Maury Valente – The best would be that the internegative phase.
It was in this respect that I had requested your American system be prepared to accept an eventual existence attention.
I was not meant with a view of offering mediation or cannot back out, especially of our non-intervention and insinuating same but the statement must also be made to the self-determination with regard to Cuba.
This bears a character of seriousness to the impossible. – We must recognize that the Cuban danger exists. – We must give the Americans a pre-notice. – Brazilian politics and covers a certain field of repercussion of In our consultative meeting we must take an affirmative our attitude.
Moreover, because what will be resolved will not and a drastic position of our disapproval of the Colombian present any solution to the Cuban problem. proposal. – Total repudiation, which already exists, to the pre-fabricated position. – These are feasible positions before State Minister – Ambassador Gibson would like to clarify the Cuban revolution takes place and in case it gains a victory. that in case the proposal is approved, the very next day the In the case of a revolution the matter changes and maybe Cuban problem would still be the same.
The Rio Treaty only admits a twoUnited States, I go under the impression that what could thirds rule for the unchained or imminent aggression.
The most damage our relations would be the lack of such a presimple fact of coming with a resolution that within the next notice and taking them by surprise. days....proves that we are misusing the Treaty.
Ambassador Dias Carneiro – Also, the fact of not going to Ambassador Gibson – I do not say we should not comply but Washington and the lack of a pre-notice would be a hostile I preliminarily am of the opinion that we should not let our attitude. conversations with the United States demonstrate our conviction that we shall comply with what is approved.
We shall Ambassador Araújo Castro – A vivid diplomatic articulation leave the greatest doubt in this respect. some days preceding the Conference would ruin our relations.
State Minister – Anyway, we must keep in mind that we have Ambassador Gibson – We have already fallen under this line. to protect the position in the most dramatic manner.
Minister Carlos Duarte – I would like to make reference to Ambassador Araújo Castro – We are reaching the time the practical aspect of the subject as far as the facts we are facwhen we either internally or through our declaration at the ing are concerned.
To my knowledge there has been no open Chancellors Conference shall use rather hard words with Fidel dialogue so far with the North Americans and Colombians Castro.
I believe we can no longer ignore the communist in objective and practical terms.
We shall not forget that, regime characterization and, maybe this is the moment to whether we are willing to or not, we will have to face these undertake a position against violence as far as Cuba is conresolution drafts that will be voted at Punta del Este.
Thus I cerned. would ask whether it would not be a more tactical attitude, instead of ignoring it, that we try to talk with the Colombians Ambassador Leão Moura – I agree with the general consenand the American in objective terms, stating that we were sus about the position that Brazil shall adopt.
I was very conunable to give our approval for one or another reason. cerned with the pre-notice.
I consider it essential that they might not be taken State Minister – This will lead us to end up agreeing with by surprise.
Minister Maury Valente said with regard to the statement about external politics.
I do not say it should necessarily be Ambassador Henrique Valle – I would like to ask whether I can made by the Minister of Foreign Affairs.
It could eventually talk with Goodwin who is going to have lunch with me now be taken over by the President of the Cabinet.
A statement and inquire if he has knowledge of said memorandum. about this matter by the prime minister is also missing.
We have no interest in Ambassador Araújo Castro – We lack the courage of failure. having him make a statement that may possibly reduce the It is the government’s general intention by reason of internal cabinet’s political support basis.
This is our conduct in case political convenience to consider that certain politics was a relations will be re-established.
I do not consider it inopthat the criticism raised by the re-establishment of relations portune to state that we are concerned about it, that we have was divulged to the cabinet.
There no glimpse of a solution. was a proposal to take a censorship motion to the minister of foreign relations but at no time any one thought about State Ministry – Our victory will consist of gradually giving including the image of the prime minister and the cabinet up such a success towards the public opinion.
This makes sense at a time like the one we have Jânio Quadros government pattern which I feel was someto face.
On the other hand, the president of the Republic times impressing because once in a while this success correcannot make statements in that respect, going beyond his sponds to a wrong demeanor.
The great advantage for us was to have our statement myself. self-respect being flattered a little bit.
Ambassador Dias Carneiro In this respect you mentioned Ambassador Araújo Castro – It is not the purpose that is before that it is suitable to know from where we shall expect important but the means.
Ambassador Henrique Valle – The best would be a few stones State Minister – What we have to consider with respect to coming from the same direction. the consultative meeting is giving the impression of great determination.
We cannot hesitate about anything even State Minister – Ours is a critical situation.
In regard though such a resoluteness may cause us to face a decrease in with the Brazilian external politics our position is more popularity.
I have carried on conversations with General However, always aware that our position must bear a characSegadas Vianna, with the Minister of the Navy and with ter of determination. some Admirals and have also had some contacts with the Air Force through General Travassos and two or three Summarizing our conversation, the following ideas are worth other Generals.
We shall completely give up the idea of an elaboration Amidst the people the external policy is well accepted. through consultations.
We have to develop our own lines It is not very popular because the Quadros government and stipulate them with our particular moral and political was a more admired one.
Today the external policy lacks authority; an interpreter with the needed positive reputation in the Make sure that such a line be no surprise to either Cuba or country.
President João Goulart is not in charge of the the United States or even to Brazil.
Tancredo Neves has been very careless in be elaborated for presentation on a given date but must be the external policy.
And, as far as I am concerned, due to made apparent and face any and even a prior criticism impact the fact that the position of the minister of foreign affairs that it might arise. is rather limited and also because I am not much that type of a statesman.
I am known as a man with positions skills Minister Carlos Duarte – My intervening was just with the rather than one who formulates positions. purpose of pursuing a line of frankness.
Ministry Maury Valente – Would there be any interest for State Minister – Another point is that in that statement we taking a firm position with regard to characterizing the intershall preferably seek for a general solution.
Stating that the inter-American right is position ourselves with regard to Cuba.
We shall situate the incapable to face the situation would be a legal argumentation matter within the general picture of the Brazilian external that might penetrate well. politics and clearly show that one part suggests the other.
In fact, problems are more serious now than a year ago. means of a newspaper interview, there would be no need At that time we were in the stage of principles enunciation for a specific backing up of the enclosed draft because some while now everything deals with making use of such prinof these drafts are trusted to diplomatic means.
The Jânio Quadros Government did not really have definition of Brazil in Montevideo will maintain the principle an external politics problem except the matter of Santa Maria. of non-intervention.
Translated by Julio Francisco with Angelica of all that has been presented at the consultative meeting and Pimentel.] not the solution of the problem.
I think that such a thesis is too strong and, consequently, we cannot give our authority’s 1 This Punta del Este gathering followed a separate OAS support to a certain amount of measures which in itself do foreign ministers’ gathering at the Uruguayan resort, in the summer not hold any outcome as this runs the risk of only being a of 1961, at which Washington presented its plans for the Alliance for stage before something else comes up.
Brazil, towards giving the American politics a continental ideological the 1961 Belgrade Non-Aligned Conference, and the Limits of an theme which the communist propaganda failed to offer.
A reference to Kennedy aide Richard Goodwin, who visited Brazil in December 1961.
The Kennedy Administration’s Harmer from the Chilean foreign ministry archives secret use of Brazil to indirectly and circuitously send a in Santiago, the Chilean embassy in Rio de Janeiro proposition to Fidel Castro remained hidden until it emerged reported on a mysterious “mediation” effort undertaken by in declassified documents and was described by historians the Brazilian Government at the climax of the Cuban Missile decades later.
In particular, Brazil’s president, João Goulart, dispatched his top military aide, Gen.
Albino Silva, to Cuba on 29 October 1962, a day after Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev agreed under American pressure to withdraw the nuclear missiles deployed to the island.
Sharing the widespread puzzlement on what had prompted Goulart to attempt this REPUBLIC OF CHILE diplomatic intervention into a global crisis, Chile’s ambasMinistry of Foreign Relations. sador quoted newspaper editorials ridiculing the government for a pointless, futile, and misguided exercise, and clearly POLITICAL DEPARTMENT indicated his own skepticism toward the action.
As a legitimate cause “mediation” of Brazil in the Caribbean crisis, has had fleeting Cuba will be given non-intervention assurances for its territory. existence.
Archivo General Historico, Ministerio de Relaciones respect to Brazil, due to the coherence of its attitudes in the Exteriores, Santiago, Chile.
Obtained by Tanya Harmer and international organizations defending principles and not systranslated by Eduardo Baudet and Harmer.] tems, the reception of its action by Cuba and by the Secretary General of the UN was made a lot easier.
Moreover, as one can gather from the editorial from the Political Affairs “Estado de Sao Paulo,” one of the most prestigious journals Beginning and end of in Brazil, the fact that the intervention of General Albino did Brazil’s “mediation” in the Caribbean not achieve the impact that was expected is not being hidden.
Prime Minister in affronting the national conscience with expressions that run contrary to traditional beliefs **** of the country is not debated.
The place clashes with the sensibility of those who are made aware Head of the Military Office of the Presidency of such a lamentable path of events.
This is already a lot, but at reported on the conversations in that capital with the Head the same time it still falls short of explaining the enormity of the of the Cuban Government and with the Secretary General of ‘gaffe’ made by the Brazilian Government, taking initiative the United Nations.
Archivo General Histórico, Ministerio de Relaxiones in the efficient leveling of the terrain for the salvation of world Exteriores, Santiago, Chile.
This would only result from a consultaREPUBLIC OF CHILE tion with the people – similar to what the President of the Ministry of Foreign Relations.
Republic wants to do – as to whether it accepts or rejects POLITICAL DEPARTMENT Castro’s regime.
November 1962.297 Finding the Foreign Minister and concurrently Prime FIFTH.He ended by telling me that, should the effort Minister in Brazil, fulfillment be accomplished, very careful language would need to be of instructions in your telegram no.3, I met with employed, given Castro’s arrogant character.
Undersecretary Bernardes whom I made aware of all your arguments and observations.
The rest of the your telegram with points of view held permatext in principal did not merit observations for him.
I will nently by Brazil as well as with the current efforts of keep you informed.
RUIZ SOLAR Thant which, according to reports in his possession, is on its way to being accepted.
Archivo General Histórico, Ministerio de Relaxiones SECOND.According to the Undersecretary, Thant’s proExteriores, Santiago, Chile.
Obtained by Tanya Harmer, transposal mainly consists in establishing permanent inspection lated by Eduardo Baudet and Harmer.] in Cuba by representatives of neutral countries chosen by the Cuban Government.
Notes THIRD. He believes that Castro’s government has no other alternative other than accepting the aforementioned proposal.
In addition to Khrushchev Kremlin taping system, they are the best evidence protecting Cuba, our missiles would have equalized what the we have on Soviet deliberations during the Crisis.
For this West likes to call ‘the balance of power.’”6 special edition of the CWIHP Bulletin we have excerpted the The notes underscore that the missile gambit was, indeed, notes of Presidium discussions related to the Cuban missile Khrushchev’s idea and, also, that it was a hard sell.
Although the sole leader of the USSR, especially since he Khrushchev era and also of the small number survived a failed palace coup in 1957, Khrushchev still needed of stenographic accounts of Presidium meetings also held by formal approval of the Presidium before moving ahead.
Evidence that emerged and I are grateful to the Miller Center for its assistance with in the 1990s, largely unearthed by Aleksandr Fursenko in the putting together this collection of Malin notes on the Cuban Archive of the President of the Russian Federation , Missile Crisis.
Mark Kramer, Director of the Harvard strongly suggested that the missile decision in May 1962 had Project for Cold War Studies and a Senior Fellow of Harvard’s come at the end of a long reexamination of Soviet military Davis Center for Russian and Eurasian Studies, and I worked support for Cuba.
But, in March 1962, the Kremlin came back to the the Soviet Union had to exert pressure on the weak points of six-month-old Cuban request and decided to reconsider the the United States alliance system to restrain Washington.
In early April, the Soviets in February he approved the buzzing of Allied aircraft in concluded that the best way to secure the Castro regime the air corridors to West Berlin and in March he unleashed was to help the Cubans defend themselves.
The Presidium the Pathet Lao and the North Vietnamese, who had wanted approved additional military supplies, a medium-term trainto violate the ceasefire in Laos to allow the Pathet Lao to ing program for the Cuban military, and a symbolic Soviet approach closer to the Mekong river in northwestern Laos. detachment of 3,000 troops.
The only missiles the Kremlin By May, this approach—which Khrushchev likened to intended to send at that time were the non-nuclear SAMs creating a liquid meniscus by pouring enough wine in a and the Sopkas.
And, more the Royal Government of Laos, had resumed atmospheric importantly, why did the Kremlin, which seemed satisfied nuclear testing, and there were indications of a continuing with a non-nuclear approach to defending Cuba in April Kennedy interest in overthrowing Castro.
Meanwhile Soviet and the involvement of only 3,000 of its own men, approve production of intercontinental missiles had hit a snag.
They do, however, provide evidence that Malin’s notes for the 1 July meeting do Khrushchev understood in May that he was proposing a big provide some evidence that Khrushchev was thinking about shift in how the Kremlin dealt with the problem of securing more than Cuba that summer.
On 21 May, Khrushchev introduced the nuclear misfor sending the missiles to Cuba, Khrushchev led his colsile proposal by saying, “his will be an offensive policy.” leagues in a re-examination of the Soviet Union’s policy on According to Malin, the question before the Kremlin at the West Berlin.
He predicted that a “final fight on the issues of West what Malin recorded him as saying.
Khrushchev’s timing of the raising of the Berlin question reflects something use of the terms like “offensive” and “victorious” implied that other than a Soviet desire to use Berlin to distract John F. he knew that he was suggesting a radical and risky shift in Kennedy from the Cuban missile gambit.
From the notes, we dealing with a more powerful United States. see that in July Khrushchev associated the idea of bringing One has to look beyond the Malin notes, I believe, to see the Berlin question to the UN with “the path of creating tenwhat might be behind Khrushchev’s risktaking.
It seems likely that more than States in strategic power, Khrushchev recommended a policy coincidence was involved in the fact that Khrushchev chose of aggressive containment.
Not all decisions taken that day, Fursenko and I argued that though we don’t believe that the however, showed a desire to reduce risks.
The four diesel subBerlin question inspired Khrushchev’s risk-taking in sending marines, each of which carried one nuclear-tipped torpedo, nuclear missiles to Cuba, it seemed probable that as he gained were told to proceed. confidence that his ploy would succeed, he began to consider The Malin notes make clear that Kennedy’s crisis team, how the new balance of power would allow him to solve known as the ExComm, met more often as a group than did problems like Berlin.
The long session of 22 October continued politically but not militarily “offensive.” into 23 October.
At no time does it appear By 25 October, Malin noted in Protocol 61 that that Khrushchev or his colleagues considered threatening or Khrushchev was taking even bigger steps away from the attacking West Berlin—the main “sensitive” point Macmillan brink.
Perhaps after informally canvassing the opinions of was probably thinking of—to counter the military advantage his colleagues on 24 October, Khrushchev decided that the that the United States held in the Caribbean.
According to the notes, ships carrying the IRBM missiles on the high seas the Kremlin considered using force only twice during the crishould turn around and come home.
On 22 October, according to Protocol 60, as he would offer to dismantle the missiles already on the island the Soviets awaited Kennedy’s public announcement of what if Kennedy pledged not to invade he planned to do about the Soviet missiles found in Cuba, Cuba.
In laying out this proposal, Khrushchev partially Khrushchev and some of his colleagues briefly considered answered one of Macmillan’s 1969 questions.
The missile using tactical nuclear weapons in the event of a United States airborne ploy, he argued, had succeeded in scaring Kennedy and in assault.
But, at the suggestion of Soviet defense minister insuring that the world was focused on the plight of little Rodion Malinovsky, the Kremlin postponed its consideration Cuba.
As a result, he argued, the missiles already on the island of a nuclear response pending details of Kennedy’s speech. could be withdrawn if the price of their removal was a pubOn 28 October, according to Protocol 63, when Khrushchev lic pledge from the United States not to touch Cuba in the probably assumed that Kennedy’s patience was at an end and future.
Khrushchev may have had greater goals in mind when the crisis might either be resolved or spin out of control, the he proposed this “offensive policy” in May, but three days into Kremlin again considered how it might respond to a United States the crisis a non-invasion pledge had become an acceptable attack.
If anyone suggested a preemptive strike, or even a return on this investment. retaliatory strike, against a target outside of the Caribbean, Khrushchev did not wait long to make that offer to Malin did not note it for the official record.
The next day, 26 October, without having to The notes also underscore the wisdom of Kennedy’s reconvene the Presidium, he sent his famous “knot” letter to choice of the blockade option.
As the blockade’s advocates in Kennedy suggesting the trade of the missiles for a United States pledge Washington—namely, Attorney General Robert F Kennedy not to invade Cuba.
Something then happened, because when and Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara—had argued, Malin resumed his note-taking on 27 October, Khrushchev imposing a naval quarantine before possibly taking military clearly thought he could get Kennedy to pay a higher price for action gave Khrushchev time to think.
The notes do not explain why he changed Protocol 60 (when the Kremlin reconvened at 10m. on his mind.
Ever the gambler, perhaps Khrushchev had recal23 October) shows that once the Kremlin had seen a text of culated the odds of a United States invasion and thought he could risk Kennedy’s speech and knew for sure that Washington was not pushing Kennedy a little harder.
In any case, on 27 October about to launch a “blitzkrieg,” it wasted no time in taking he suggested to his colleagues that the USSR up the ante. steps to reduce the risks of confrontation.
Protocol 62 effectively Kennedy’s quarantine policy allowed the Soviet leader to puts that theory to rest.
It was Khrushchev who decided to come to grips with the need to withdraw the missiles.
It took raise the stakes and the notes indicate that he dictated the new the Kremlin only three days to devise the basic structure of letter to Kennedy.
What the notes do not indicate was when, an agreement and it appears that it was Khrushchev who or how, the Kremlin decided to narrow the new demand to suggested it.
With the possible exception of the resolution just getting the United States to agree to removing its “Jupiter” IRBMs of the question of tactical missiles on 22 October, there is from Turkey.
Khrushchev by the rest of the Presidium, And here one needs The acute crisis ended on 28 October, and the notes for to be careful.
Other sources, such as notes made by Anastas that day have already spawned some historical Mikoyan at some of these meetings, suggest much more give controversy.
This does structure of Malin’s notes suggests that there was a break in not mean that the Malin notes are an unreliable source for the meeting.
We already know that Malin’s recording proposed reacting positively to Kennedy’s response to his 27 technique smoothed over disputes.
Kennedy, in his response, had ignored the that the two-day session of 21/24 May 1962, for example, demand to remove United States IRBMs from Turkey and offered only involved a debate and none of that is in the notes that we a non-invasion pledge in return for Moscow dismantling the have.
The structure of the Malin notes for 28 October sugfinal decisions, however, Malin’s notes are powerful evidence gests that Khrushchev may have made this decision to end the that Khrushchev was the key player on the Soviet side during crisis before knowing that late on 27 October (Washington the missile crisis.
He caused the crisis in the first place and time; after midnight in Moscow), the President’s brother, once he got enough from Kennedy, he brought it to an end.
Attorney General Robert F Kennedy, had told the Soviet After the crisis ended, it was Khrushchev who was the ambassador in Washington, Anatoly F Dobrynin, that JFK chief spinner in defining its ramifications.
On 3 December was also prepared to order the removal of the Jupiter missiles , Khrushchev explained why he viewed the from Turkey.
The meeting recessed after Khrushchev reacted outcome of the crisis as a success.
Without more information, stressed his pleasure at seeing that the Soviet Union could the notes do not make clear whether Khrushchev received scare the United States “They themselves got frightened,” the message from Dobrynin only after the recess or that said Khrushchev adding that if the Kremlin had held out a Khrushchev, who already knew about Kennedy’s secret offer, little longer they might have been able to get Kennedy to pay recessed the meeting and excused some of the participants a higher price.
It was as if the missile crisis had redeemed his because he wanted to discuss Kennedy’s Turkish concession in beloved meniscus strategy.
The latter explanation is not wholly cesses of the missile gambit to his colleagues that December, satisfactory.
Although President Kennedy had requested Khrushchev said nothing about extracting the Turkish missile through his brother that Khrushchev keep this concession concession from JFK.15 secret, it is not clear why Khrushchev would have felt that The notes do, however, add new questions to those he could not mention it in front of Soviet foreign minister posed by Macmillan.
The pre-crisis notes from October Andrei Gromyko, who would have seen Dobrynin’s dispatch 1962 , which show an intense focus at some point any way, and his Minister of Defense, Rodion on the Sino-Indian confrontation, suggest that the Kremlin Malinovsky.
According to Malin, Gromyko and Malinovsky was completely taken by surprise by the crisis.
And it is not that the Kremlin did not ask questions does not settle this important question. about United States intelligence efforts regarding the missile ploy.
The notes also provide significant details on Malinovsky, Biryuzov. the effect that the missile crisis had on Soviet-Cuban relations.
How to help Cuba so that it much more about Khrushchev’s motives and his actions during can remain firm. the crisis, in part thanks to the Malin notes.
Huge gaps, however, remain in the Soviet record of the crisis, ensuring many Khrushchev more years of lively, interpretive debates and major discoveries.
Come to an agreement with F Castro, conclude a military treaty regarding joint defense.
Presidium Pertaining to the Installation This will be an offensive policy. of Soviet Nuclear Missiles in Cuba, MayDecember 1962 Cdes.
My warm thanks to James Hershberg for his extensive, very helpful comments on earlier drafts.
I have redone the translations for inclusion in this special issue of the CWIHP Bulletin.
Khrushchev, Kozlov, Brezhnev, Mikoyan, Suslov, Union Kuusinen, Kosygin, Polyansky, Voronov, Kirilenko, Shvernik, Gromyko, Malinovsky Presidium Endorse Cde.
Khrushchev, Malinovsky, and Gromyko with Union pursuing the negotiations.
Brezhnev, Kirilenko, Kozlov, Kosygin, Kuusinen, Continue : Suslov, Khrushchev, Rashidov, Grishin, Demichev, Ilichev, Western countries reduce their troops by half in W Berlin.
Ponomarev, Shelepin, Malinovsky, Grechko, Chuikov, The remaining half — stay under the UN flag for six years.
Rashidov’s informational report about the trip to in W Berlin for four years.
Malinovsky is to prepare a draft resolution. linked to an international control organ.
Kosygin and Ustinov are to examine the proposals from a practical standpoint.
The schedule of transfers up to 1 November 1962.20 Session of 1 July 1962 Regarding the flights buzzing our ships — say that this impedes shipping.
Suslov, Khrushchev, Demichev, Ilichev, Ponomarev, Shelepin, Grishin, Gromyko, Malin.
Presidium It is disgraceful — we provided tractors to the Cubans, we are not providing agric machinery.
Session of 6 July 1962 Include also other advisers, and those who were there — bring them back as the organizers.
Matters Concerning Cuba Perhaps send a hundred or two hundred of the best ships Cde.
Khrushchev, Brezhnev, Kozlov, Kosygin, Malinovsky, Presidium Kuznetsov On relations between the PRC and India.
Session of 12 July 1962 Join in, and for both of them prepare a nuanced document.
On the dispatch to Cuba of a group of advisers on It is hard for China to agree to this. economic matters.
Provide a group of economic advisers who would not be subordinate to the ambassador, take them from Cent.
I do not think that the USA right now could embark on blitzkrieg operations.
If an invasion of Cuba will be declared, The proposals are being readied by Cde.
Khrushchev this will be after another 24 hours has passed in order to get ready.
On instructions to the Soviet ambassador in India, Cde. missiles are placed on high alert.
Gromyko responded to Rusk for the most part from an But the circumstances have changed. ethical standpoint.
India’s demands for troop withdrawals spanning an The difficult thing is that we did not concentrate everything additional 20 km are humiliating for the PRC. that we wanted and did not publish the treaty.
This We are in favor of eliminating the conflict, it will not bring could escalate into a large-scale war. any benefit.
Presidium Give Pliev instructions — bring the troops up to combat readiness.
The USSR gov’t is appealing to the peoples of the USSR — and is informing them.
American imperialism has taken upon itself the right to dictate its will to others — we protest.
The USSR also possesses weapons, we protest the reckless Draft Security Council resolution. actions.
This is lawlessness and unprecedented treachery — demand Affirm. an account from the other gov’t.
On information to F Castro about our further steps in The peoples of all countries must raise their voices. events around Cuba.
Let the four submarines move ahead.a The Time will pass, and if needed, it will again be “Aleksandrov” is to head to the nearest port. sent.
We are raising the matter in the Security Council against US Regardless of the class of weaponry, it has been delivered. treachery, and Cuba should come to the Security Council.
It has been delivered with the aim of defending Cuba against aggression.
The ships that are moving in the Mediterranean Sea, return them to the Black Sea.
The armaments and military formations are not to be sent for now, return them from their voyage.
Keep the boats on their approaches.a On the measures for increasing combat readiness.
Through a gov’t decision, an order has been given to the minister of defense.
Brezhnev, Kozlov, Mikoyan, Polyansky, Suslov, Affirm the response to U Thant.
Khrushchev, Shvernik, Kosygin, Grishin, Demichev, Ilichev, Ponomarev, Shelepin, Gromyko, Kuznetsov.
Gromyko’s message about the delegation’s work at the UN’s XVII Session On the return of the ship carrying special cargo.
On the response of the Chairman of the USSR On the instructions to Cde.
Khrushchev to the letter resolution introduced by Ghana and the U A of United States President Kennedy R30 at the Security Council Cde.
Khrushchev says he decided to convene a session Gromyko, Mikoyan, Kozlov, of the Presidium in connection with the further events in Kuznetsov, Khrushchev, Cuba.
Brezhnev, Ponomarev, Polyansky, Ilichev The further course of events is proceeding in the following way.
This is resolution introduced by Ghana and the UAR, and instead not capitulation on our part.
Khrushchev goes on to say that we have now made Cuba a country that is the focus of the world’s attention.
Presidium We could pull out the R-12 missiles and leave the other missiles there.
We have to give the opponent a sense of calm and, in Session of 27 October 1962 return, receive assurances concerning Cuba.
Beyond that, it is not worth forcing the situation to the boiling point.
Now Cuba Suslov, Khrushchev, Shvernik, Grishin, Demichev, Ilichev, will not be what it was previously.
Ponomarev, Shelepin, Malinovsky, Gromyko, Grechko, Zakharov, Ivanov, Kuznetsov, Malin, Chernukha, Serov.
They, the Americans, are threatening an economic blockade, but the USA will not attack Cuba.
Malinovsky All the members of the Presidium and the Secretaries endorse The informational report indicates the complexity of the and support Cde.
Khrushchev proposes to think about information I About further steps concerning Cuba F Castro.
Khrushchev, Mikoyan, We must draft a document in which we say where we are Malinovsky, Gromyko, heading.
What Brezhnev, Kozlov, Ponomarev, we have right now is a positive moment.
The correspondence with U Thant can hardly be a restraining mechanism in conditions when negotiations have begun.
Time will pass, and if need be, the missiles can appear there They will not embark on an invasion, but it is impossible to again. make a guarantee.
Gromyko, Ponomarev, and Ilichev will think a I think they will not bring themselves to do it. bit about this document.
They are heaping all the blame on us, they had decided to Session of 28 October 1962 settle accounts with Cuba, but now, in my view, they have reassessed this decision.
Brezhnev, Kozlov, Kosygin, Mikoyan, Suslov, The steps we had undertaken until this were correct.
Ponomarev, Shelepin, Gromyko, Malinovsky, Grechko, We will not eliminate the conflict if we do not give Zakharov, S Ivanov, Malin. satisfaction to the Americans and do not tell them that our R-12 missiles are there.
I On the letter to United States President Kennedy All the comrades speak in support of Cde.
Continuation of the discussion concerning Cuba V On the letter to F Castro The letter to United States President Kennedy The text of the letter is being dictated by Cde.
Discussion of the text of the letter to United States President Kennedy.
Kozlov, Kosygin, Mikoyan, Polyansky, Suslov, Broadcast the letter on the radio at 5:00m. on 27.
X.62 Khrushchev, Brezhnev, Grishin, Demichev, Ilichev, and publish it in the press.
Reach out to the Red Cross (so that Red Cross Session of 3 December 1962 representatives look) during the voyage and on a neutral vessel.
Voronov, Kirilenko, Kosygin, Mikoyan, Polyansky, Letter to Castro so that he will give his consent to letting in Suslov, Khrushchev, Efremov, Demichev, Andropov, Ilichev, Red Cross representatives .37 Rudakov, Polyakov, Titov, Shelepin, Satyukov, Gromyko, Compose an informational letter to Kennedy.
Session of 16 November 1962 Whoever says that we retreated — this is malicious feebleness.
Brezhnev, Voronov, Kirilenko, Kozlov, Kosygin, We pulled out the missiles — that is correct.
We assembled a Kuusinen, Polyansky, Suslov, Khrushchev, Grishin, large-scale force.
On the message from United States President R Kennedy38 about If we had held out for a while longer, then perhaps nothing further steps concerning Cuba. would have come of it.
Khrushchev, Gromyko, Now he is backing away from this and glossing over it.
Brezhnev, Kosygin, Kozlov, A treaty with him is not needed, within a certain time we Ponomarev, Suslov39 should consider some sort of declaration.
About Castro’s position — unreasonable and screechy Let this be a lesson for us.
Either they will The Cubans are unreliable allies. cooperate or we will let our people go.
Cde Mikoyan’s letter requesting a conversation We should treat our obligations strictly and responsibly. with Castro.
Respond that we agreed to the withdrawal of the Il-28s Kennedy, I think, will keep his word. .40 Our tactics in relation to the C C P leadership — do not burn bridges.
Mikoyan brilliantly handled the CC’s mission and upheld the line and coped with42 He did it well.
Regarding plans for the withdrawal of troops from Cuba Presidium , do not consider it for a while yet.
The Inside Story of an American Adversary , Melvyn P Leffler, For the Soul of Mankind: The United States, the Soviet Union 1 Dr.
The notes were originally Committee of the National Security Council), on 16 held by the closed Archive of the President of the Russian Federation and 27 October 1962, were released earlier, in the mid-late 1980s, and were transferred to RGANI in 2001. but without audio files.
Ernest May and Philip Zelikow produced the first out a meeting over four days to get a proposal approved. collection of transcripts for the entire set of ExComm conversations 8 See Fursenko and Naftali, One Hell of A Gamble. in 1997.
Dobbs, One Minute to edition of the Kennedy Tapes that included the revised May/Zelikow Midnight, 402.
The timing of the Dobrynin message needs more transcripts The Norton edition of the Kennedy Tapes also included study because getting this right would alter the debate over whether transcripts of conversations related to the Cuban missile crisis Kennedy needed to make the Jupiter offer to end the crisis peacefully. that were not in the Harvard edition.
The Miller Center scholars 14 Fursenko and Naftali, Khrushchev’s Cold War, Chapter 19 transcribed these pre-October 1962 and non-ExComm October ; see also, Dobbs, One Minute to Midnight, conversations from scratch.
Controversy over the authoritativeness of Chapter 2. the May/Zelikow transcripts remain but the revised transcripts that 15 The explanation may be, as it might be for the strange appeared in 2001 and 2002 were a vast improvement over those that structure of the 28 October session, that Khrushchev considered the appeared in 1997.
The transcription process is extremely difficult December 3 meeting too large to hear about JFK’s secret promise. and the fact that excellent transcripts only emerge as the result of a The December 3 meeting included people who were neither full nor collaborative, evolutionary process is one of the key lessons of this candidate members of the Presidium. story.
President John F Kennedy, 1962, appointed chief of the Soviet General Staff.
United States Secretary of State Dean Rusk joined the crash near Belgrade in October 1964, just five days after Nikita president in Philadelphia and voiced similar themes in his own Khrushchev was removed from office in Moscow.
The McMahon Line covering the the end of May) by a high-level Soviet delegation, which included eastern sector of the Indo-Tibetan border was a demarcation line Biryuzov.
The delegation was ostensibly headed by Sharaf Rashidov drawn by the British government for the Treaty of Simla in 1914. , but Biryuzov was In later decades the Chinese government claimed that it had never the one who handled the crucial negotiations with Castro about the formally accepted the line.
The delegation returned to the Soviet Line served as the de facto border between India and eastern Tibet, Union on 8 June 1962. but official Chinese maps purported to show that some 65,000 sq.
This section is referring to Secretary km. of territory south of the McMahon Line were still of Defense Robert McNamara’s commencement address at the part of China.
Because of the 7-hour time difference declared that “basic military strategy in a possible general nuclear war between Moscow and Washington, DC (a difference that increased should be approached in much the same way that more conventional to 8 hours on 28 October when the United States moved its clocks military operations have been regarded in the past.
That address, broadcast over television an approach, McNamara argued, “we are giving a possible opponent and radio, started at 7m.
Much of the speech was intended to stress the need for According to Aleksei Serov’s notes of this Presidium session, the NATO’s nuclear deterrent to be based predominantly on United States nuclear deliberations began at 10m.
Moscow time on 22 October 1962, forces rather than on multiple small forces akin to the ones already some four hours before Kennedy delivered his address.
By that time, developed by Britain and France, but the targeting priorities laid out Soviet intelligence officials and diplomats had learned that President in the speech proved controversial in Moscow.
The first part of the CPSU Presidium meeting occurred transfers of weapons and logistical supplies to Cuba in support of the before Kennedy’s speech.
The schedules were frequently updated Kennedy’s address from the United States government roughly an hour before and revised.
A draft “Treaty between the Republic of session temporarily adjourned after the arrival of the text of Cuba and the Government of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics Kennedy’s speech, and it resumed at 10m. on 23 October, Moscow on the Stationing of the Soviet Armed Forces on the Territory of the time.
The first part of Vladimir Malin’s notes (through the statement Republic of Cuba” was initialed in Moscow in early July 1962 by by Defense Minister Rodion Malinovsky) covers the discussion that Cuban Defense Minister Raul Castro and Soviet Defense Minister occurred before the arrival of the text of Kennedy’s address.
The document underwent further minor revisions over remaining part of the notes is from the deliberations that began at the next several weeks, and a revised version was presented to Fidel 10m. on 23 October, Moscow time.
The surname of Igor Dem’yanovich which were incorporated into the final version.
Erinnerungen eines Armeegenerals and R-14 missile regiments on Cuba, is edition Q, 1992), esp. chs.-4. mistakenly rendered as Stetsenko in the notes.
Issa Aleksandrovich Pliev , 27 Translator’s Note: This is the last recorded comment prior a much-decorated Soviet commander in World War II, had been to the arrival of the text of Kennedy’s address.
The remaining part of elevated to the rank of Army General in 1962 shortly before he was the meeting occurred at the resumed session on the morning of 23 appointed commander of Soviet forces on Cuba.
In coming days, three of these submarines here for Aleksandr Ivanovich Alekseev , the Soviet were forced to surface by United States naval vessels. ambassador in Cuba at the time.
Valerian Aleksandrovich Zorin (1902October conveyed Fidel Castro’s proposal that the Soviet Union 1986) was the Soviet ambassador to the United Nations from 1952 announce that Soviet weaponry on Cuba was to 1953 and again from 1956 to 1965, when he also served as under exclusive Soviet control.
He was involved in the celebrated United States attempt to portray the confrontation as one solely between the confrontation with United States ambassador Adlai E Stevenson on 25 United States and Cuba.
The term “Trostnik” was the codename for Havana. the four Foxtrot-class submarines.
Here, once again, “Pavlov” is the 29 Translator’s Note: The Aleksandrovsk, a large, Swedishpseudonym used for Ambassador Alekseev.
The Soviet ambassador to the United and 44 14-kiloton warheads for Soviet tactical cruise missiles.
The States, Anatoly Fedorovich Dobrynin , had met with US Aleksandrovsk was originally supposed to dock in the Cuban port of Attorney General Robert F Kennedy Mariel, but the outbreak of the crisis caused the ship to be diverted on the evening of 27 October United States east coast time.
Four other Soviet that after all Soviet missile installations in Cuba were dismantled, the surface ships, including the Almat’evsk, which was escorting the United States would agree to eliminate United States Jupiter nuclear missile Aleksandrovsk, were also allowed to proceed to the nearby Cuban bases in Turkey, provided that the Soviet leaders kept this offer port.
But all Soviet surface ships that were further away, including strictly secret and unwritten.
Norton, essentially ceased to exist after the planned merger between Egypt 1969), and it was not acknowledged by any of President Kennedy’s and Syria broke down in 1961.
From then until 1972, the UAR and other advisers until many years later.
The three words in brackets were 31 Translator’s Note: The bracketed portion was crossed out crossed out in the notes.
Aleksei Kapitonovich Serov (1918of missile installations became a major point of contention between 1993) was the head of the first sector of the CPSU General Moscow and Havana — Fidel Castro vehemently rejected the idea Department from 1961 to 1963.
Andrei Andronovich Fomin (1918to 30 days for the removal of the Il-28 bombers from Cuba and 1983), the Soviet ambassador in Brazil, was conveying the Brazilian to lift the naval quarantine against Cuba even before the UN gave authorities’ ideas for a peaceful settlement of the crisis.
For a detailed, confirmation of the dismantling of the Soviet missiles.
Translations of these documents forces embarked on a full-scale invasion of Cuba.
Throughout Mikoyan’s visit, Fidel Castro made by Sergei Khrushchev at an international conference in clear his extreme displeasure with the Soviet Union’s handling of Moscow in January 1989 and was then recounted in print in 1990 in the crisis, including Moscow’s consent to the United States demand for the a supplementary English-language volume of previously unpublished withdrawal of Soviet Il-28 bombers.
Most theorizing at the top of the Cuba—first from his Kremlin associates, then from Fidel Kennedy Administration, at the Excomm and elsewhere, cenCastro—in the spring of 1962 following a visit to Bulgaria, tered on the idea that the Soviet premier had made the move and that one factor in that move was his fear of impendto recoup Moscow’s now evident inferiority in the nuclear ing United States military action against Cuba.
In their 1997 book, “One Hell some speculated); or some broader Cold War challenge to of a Gamble”—the most important secondary account of the the United States and its young president, who had endured missile crisis to appear since Graham T Allison’s Essence of a tough meeting with the wily, blustery Soviet communist a Decision —Aleksandr Fursenko and Timothy Naftali quarter-century his senior the previous year in Vienna.
During identified a specific trigger for Khrushchev’s belief that the and after the crisis, the only motive for placing missiles in Cuba United States, and John F Kennedy in particular, would not that Khrushchev would admit to, publicly and privately, was to long countenance the upstart Cuban revolutionaries running defend Cuba from the threat of United States aggression, already demthis traditional playground of the North Americans’ so near onstrated at the Bay of Pigs, by deterring a potential American to Florida.
CIA director Allen W Dulles’ failure to vanquish the Cubans Over the past two decades or so, especially as Cuban as efficiently as the Soviets had squelched the Hungarians (“in perspectives have more actively entered the debate and more just three days”), that the United States “should learn from” evidence has been declassified concerning United States covert actions, its Soviet rival.
Though Adzhubei was nominally a journalist, his interFirstly, what surprised American journalists and journalview with Kennedy was not for publication, and according ists of other Western nations accredited to Washington was to Fursenko and Naftali, he first reported the “explosive the heightened interest of American society in the very fact, bits” of JFK’s comments, including his comparison of Cuba as Lippmann expressed it, of the contact to Hungary, only orally to his father-in-law.
When himself,” they write, Khrushchev had Adzhubei expand I was in the United States this concerned M Kharlamov’s his report for wider circulation within the Kremlin and meeting with P Salinger.
Finally there was talk of the missile crisis, in a January 1963 letter to Fidel Castro, the president’s inviting me to breakfast.
Lippmann, [St. stronger measures to safeguard Cuba’s security, in the end, by Louis Post-Dispatch correspondent Marquis] Childs, [New sending nuclear missiles.
Much has hapnuclear aspirations in the context of ongoing tensions over Berlin, readers can help gauge the Kremlin’s mindset as pened to me in America, but I have never seen such agitated Khrushchev prepared to roll the nuclear dice in Cuba. anticipation for the improvement of relations between our countries as exists now.
Nikita Sergeyevich Khrushchev said that the hour has come—the American nation is beginning to wake up and Americans are ceasing to be lazy seals that warm themselves Adzhubei’s Account of His Visit to on warm shores.
In any Washington to the CC CPSU case, as the most experienced American journalists say frankly, in many respects they can’t figure Americans out.
Even now when I universities, because I Mexico, I had a few meetings with United States President John am familiar with Russia in a way, they don’t ask me about Kennedy, his brother, Robert Kennedy, and a few other figmy travels in other countries but what I think about comures from the President’s circle.
In Mexico I had a short conversation with lished a border in Berlin, put a gate there, and since you President Lopez Mateos.
However, Kennedy himself, his brother, ahead of events.” and those people closest to him until that time were extremely “No, it is you who have gotten ahead of events,” Lippmann alarmed that Kennedy had not won the election with a very remarked, “you understand everything wonderfully, and most large advantage over the Republicans.
Now they are making importantly, your premier understands this.” every effort to start a new election campaign and gain a firmer At this very moment a few other American journalists position from which to go to the polls against the Republicans approached us, including Childs and Reston.
I’ve already spoken about one of for a long time yet.” these, the Cult of Kennedy.
I asked. in this manner – Kennedy has gathered around himself the “Because it is very convenient to have a callus on the foot most intelligent Americans and that he organized a dynamic of your neighbor who you don’t particularly like.
America that Mister Khrushchev prepared a field to play golf Violating all norms of protocol, a few dozen American somewhere in Moscow.
If I were to summarize the conversahe wins or loses in America it concerns only us Americans in tion that occurred that night it would go something like this. the end.
Premier Khrushchev will surely lose to Eisenhower at Eisenhower became president of the USA at first because in golf in the Soviet Union, and along with this victory, the old the eyes of the American people he was considered to be a man will lose to Khrushchev in completely different terms.” hero of the Second World War.
But the second time, in this This was one extremely important thing for Kennedy and very capacity, Eisenhower came forward like a peacemaker in any other future American president.
His announcement that if elected he would United States must be able to speak, so they say, with Soviet succeed in achieving a Korean peace practically won him leaders.
With good reason, so they say, during agitation at advantages with regard to popularity.
The newspapers were full of various articles telling the story S Khrushchev in the kitchen of a typical American household of the ascent of John Kennedy.
Kennedy knows how to speak with on the occasion of his various appearances and speeches; there Premier Khrushchev.” was the story about the Kennedy family as being the The Kennedy administration has persistently influenced ideal American family.
One of the journalists even said to me the American people in the manner described above.
When Childs and I said goodbye to one anothIt goes without saying that Kennedy was often worried er (Childs and I have been acquainted for a long time.
We and was preoccupied with the idea that it would be difficult participated together in the New Year’s discussion in 1959 in for him to win the votes for a second term.
After all, we respect Finland. that I could not vouch for Kennedy but that as concerns the Even though Capitalist elements exist within it, the president Soviet government it is always prepared for serious conversaof a bourgeois government retains good relations with the tions regarding the resolution of differences.
He maintains approximately 125,000 “From a psychological point of view, it is very hard for reservists in the army.
This is 125,000 votes against him, plus the American people to agree with what is going on in Cuba. their wives, fiancés, mothers, and fathers, that is, around half After all it is only 90 miles from our coast.
In November 1962, elections will be held for repeated, and then added, “Cuba fell from within.” the House of Representatives and one-third of the seats in “It is necessary to become reconciled with a great many the Senate.
Although in the United States the president can things,” I remarked to the President.
In this fashion, the there are a great number of new things that the American peoNovember 1962 elections,” continued Childs, “will be a kind ple must get used to.
Only do not meddle in events in Cuba, of rehearsal before his re-election campaign, which Kennedy this is most important.
The day after my trip to Washington the president had me “We will not meddle with events in Cuba.” over for breakfast , at which his wife, “It’s a very big shame, Mister President,” I said to him, her sister and Bolshakov and his wife were in atten“that your words are not allowed to be published in the dance.
The content of the conversation has to invade Cuba, we don’t think that this is your right.” already been announced from Washington.
There your opinion regarding the landing in April 1961, that it was was a heightened sense of interest towards it.
When American conference. they had a tough situation in Hungary , they put an He was not asked one question in connection with this end to the conflict in just three days.
I ask you to report, and if possible, to do it tone, “I am not involved in the proorally, that the US, England, and France are opposed ceedings of that event.
And that prompted an explosion of laughter tion is unrealistic; however, I must speak about in the hall. unification.
Kennedy was troubled questions, it is completely possible that steps intended to by this question, and was feeling particularly clumsy because regulate our disputes will lead to an announcement of the of the presence of Soviet journalists.
Khrushchev appeared continuwill lead to some softening of the general world situation ously in American newspapers.
Americans with whom I have and permit, as he expressed it, a more composed perspective had the opportunity to speak ask this question if they are in from which to observe the state of affairs in the world.
In some way interested in political questions. connection with this he said that in Laos he will “tie Boun I would also like to point out one more fact in connecOum’s arms” if for our part we guarantee him the Pathet Lao’s tion with Kennedy’s press conference.
He was asked many equanimity. empty, overtly demagogic questions on third-rate problems.
Kennedy is clearly worried about the situation in Southeast This created the impression that this “waste of time” is a very Asia and particularly, of course, in South Vietnam.
He did not “American tradition” created by the imperial propaganda answer any questions about South Vietnam and the position machine for the befuddlement of the people. of the United States in South Korea and did not want to After the press conference, Kennedy asked about one more continue the conversation on this theme, uttering the general meeting, which as he expressed it would be of a strictly confiphrase that neither the USSR nor the USA had any major dential character.
This has already been reported to Moscow. interests in that region and we have to keep this in mind Mind you, the president has a fear of being simple and before all other things.
Through Bolshakov, Salinger viously addressed that the United States of America and the agreed that at 6:00 that evening he would send a car for me Soviet Union send many weapons there, but these weapons from the White House, in which I would ride around the and these complications can be used by a third power more city so that journalists would not discover the president’s new interested in a conflict between the USA and the USSR.13 meeting with a Soviet editor.
And sure enough, the car carried Then Kennedy long-windedly talked about how he emphaus down some long streets, and at last we arrived at the White sized with utmost urgency the Berlin problem.
The gate opened the previous conversation, he said that he would like a more quickly, we were asked for no documents, and the car went constructive and, as he stated it more precisely, a more perimmediately through the entrance. sonal dialogue between Minister Kennedy was waiting and walking around the corridor.
He Gromyko and immediately came into the room and in a nervous tone began Thompson insofar as they now only exchange general decthe conversation.
I know the strength and potential of your military a table, have in their hands the map of Germany and begin machine.
Khrushchev can, of course”—and Kennedy made a to look for possibilities for a settlement, which would be gesture with his hands—“can take West Berlin.
But then this equally agreeable to the Soviet Union and the United States of would possibly provoke a rupture of relations between the America.
In connection with my question, Why can’t it is my plan to find some beneficial solution to the question of a guarantee come from the United Nations or this problem, which does not encroach on the positions that the neutral nations, he said that this is also not possible, that you cannot give up, as well as those positions, from which we it would lead to the total collapse of the Western Bloc.
Kennedy was obviously calculating that this phrase on some Then Kennedy spoke about how they worked out with level would, if not frighten us per se, intimidate us.
Maybe this is a delicate question – I asked Kennedy whether (One can imagine how stunned Kennedy was when the United States was afraid of West Germany, or still more he heard about our plan to convene the Eighteen Nation whether England and France were afraid of West Germany.
This undoubt“It is possible to be afraid of the Germans,” Kennedy edly struck out Kennedy and Macmillan’s hopes to [have answered.
But with regard comes the contact which existed between Bolshakov and to a small contingent of soldiers, it would be possible to Robert Kennedy, insofar as it gives him the possibility to find a different name.
Now about the access,” Kennedy manage without the services of a translator from the State continued.
These observations show that surely in the presinternational control of the highway [between West Berlin ence of Akolovsky and even Salinger – a person closer to him and West Germany], it is senseless for us to insist on it.
The important thing is not who is affixing the I answered that his brother was quiet and said almost stamps.
Could you and I fantasize a bit (this is exactly what nothing about international problems.
State Department, who make it public that Robert “Let’s not talk about the past,” the president said.
So, if an American caravan of wanted him to meet with Chairman Khrushchev.
But when freight cars gets into a conflict on a highway, we cannot – and the American press created a scandal, we were forced to deny don’t not try forcing us to do —do it – beginning a dialogue it.
Clearly, here we need to arrange all these things more simwith Ulbricht.
Notes “Yes,” Kennedy confirmed, “Washington is certainly a capital without theaters.
As you know, we plan to build a large 1 In October 1961, United States deputy defense secretary Roswell cultural center in Washington, but this would require nearly Gilpatric had publicly asserted a substantial American advantage in 30 million dollars.
Right now my wife and I are occupied strategic striking power, thereby casting aside notions of a “missile with writing letters to various parties to give donations for the gap” favoring the Soviets. construction.
People don’t want to 2 For enumerations of Khrushchev’s motives in sending the part with the money.”14 missiles, see,g., Aleksandr Fursenko and Timothy Naftali, “One “But why wouldn’t you, Mr President,” I asked Kennedy, Hell of a Gamble”—Khrushchev, Castro, and Kennedy, 1958-1964 , chap.
Norton and Co., family is very rich, and if you made such a grand gesture you 2003), chap.
President Kennedy emphasized that the strong reaction in the or, if it was more convenient, asked me to see him.
I answered United States toward events in Cuba was due to the fact that over that it would be better if I dropped in on Mr Harriman. the past hundred and some odd years, the United States had had no The conversation with Harriman took 15 or 20 minutes hostile power close to its borders.
Harriman was concerned preached hostility toward the United States seized power in Cuba with Laos, and reiterated Kennedy’s idea a few times that it the reaction in the United States was bound to be very strong.
Then he asked me to United States was psychologically unprepared for such a change.
The President send Khrushchev a big hello and said that he remembered the pointed out that the USSR would have the same reaction if a hostile meeting with Nikita Sergeevich and was happy to welcome group arose in the vicinity of its borders.
Until now, however, it has not appeared in print. ending his usefulness.
His place was, in effect, taken by the Soviet 8 Khrushchev to Castro, 31 January 1963, quoted in Fursenko ambassador, Anatoly F Dobrynin, who met with RFK during the and Naftali, One Hell of a Gamble, 326.
Bolshakov, a Soviet military intelligence pact to neutralize Laos, which failed to end the simmering conflict officer at the Soviet Embassy in Washington, had established a there but for the most part removed it from the superpower agenda. cordial liaison to JFK through the president’s brother, Robert F 13 Ed. note: Amid signs of a Sino-Soviet schism, Kennedy is Kennedy.
A reference to what would become known as the to mislead the Kennedy Administration the secret deployment of Kennedy Center after its namesake’s assassination.
In one of his speeches, in mid-October 1964, many outside observers Khrushchev stated that if the United States touched Cuba, then we would connected his downfall at the hands of his Kremlin associates to deliver a strike against them.
He insisted that our missiles be what was widely viewed as his humiliating defeat in the Cuban sent to Cuba.
That led to the deepest of crises, and Missile Crisis exactly two years earlier, when under pressure from brought the world to the brink of a nuclear war; it also scared US President John F Kennedy he withdrew the nuclear missiles the organizer of that idea himself greatly.
Khrushchev had alienout, we were forced to accept all the demands and conditions ated many members of the Soviet party Presidium dictated by the US, including humiliating inspections of our with a variety of policies, actions, and behaviors, so his failed ships by the Americans.
The missiles, as well as most of our Cuban gambit was hardly solely responsible for his ouster. troops, were withdrawn from Cuba after the United States demand.
However, as Timothy Naftali and Aleksandr Fursenko comThis event also damaged the international prestige of our ment, it indeed left him “vulnerable” to attack.
The indictment country, our party, and our armed forces, while at the same prepared to condemn Khrushchev at the climactic 14 October time helping to strengthen United States prestige.
Castro and the Dmitri Polyanski, indeed included a scathing denunciation of Cuban people understood the withdrawal of the missiles as abanKhrushchev’s “adventurism” in sending the missiles to Cuba, causdoning Cuba to its fate.
Ridiculing Khrushchev’s claims of having achieved However, you know that Cde.
Khrushchev portrays his a successful “penetration” of Latin America, Polyanski dismissed defeat in the Caribbean Crisis as his victory.
Moreover, he his contention that the crisis had in fact ended with a Soviet victory.
The full text of Polyanski’s report is now available; here intends to proceed in the same manner,e. in a reckless manis the section on the missile crisis—or what Soviets knew as the ner.
Khrushchev stated them, let them scream.” that Stalin was not able to penetrate Latin America, but he succeeded.
Volkogonov Collection, United States Library of Congress, not our policy.
And secondly, only an adventurer could insist the Manuscript Division, Reel 18.
Translated by Svetlana that in the current situation our state could provide real miliSavranskaya, .] tary assistance to the countries of that continent.
Missiles will not work in such a case — they would 1 For a dramatic account of the culmination of the Kremlin only burn a country we want to help — that’s all.
Since then some most significant, for it bears on the circumstances surroundadditional contemporaneous documentary materials have ing Fidel Castro’s controversial 27 October letter (dated 26 become available in Moscow, including a special release of October, but clearly sent after midnight in the early mornmaterial from the Russian Presidential Archive . ing hours) to Khrushchev.
Malin, appears elsewhere in from his tape-recorded recollections after his ouster in 1964, this issue of the CWIHP Bulletin.
The three documents obtained from the Russian archives and Glasnost Tapes contained materials that were deemed (by his translated by the National Security Archive in connection associates and family) too sensitive to be published in the first with its role in co-organizing a conference in Havana in two volumes, Khrushchev Remembers and Khrushchev October 2002 to mark the 40th anniversary of the crisis.
Against the backdrop of Mikhail Gorbachev’s However, the documents were not widely circulated then, glasnost and an evident warming of US-Soviet ties, these and are printed below for the first time.
Kennedy announced in a televised address the discovery denied that he had urged Khrushchev to make a preemptive of Soviet nuclear missile sites in Cuba and the impending nuclear strike, and two months later the Cuban communist imposition of a blockade to block any further newspaper Granma published the full texts of the Castroshipments of arms.
Presented with the official Soviet stateKhrushchev correspondence from late October 1962.
In ments on the crisis, Castro reviews the situation and confithe actual letter, it emerged, Castro had indeed counseled dently vowed defiance to the United States “aggression” which he said Khrushchev to never allow circumstances to develop in which was doomed to failure.
United States pressure and Castro’s angry reaction to that step (i.e., his The second document, dispatched from the Soviet embas“Five Points” declaration rejecting UN inspections accepted sy in Havana early on the morning of Saturday, 27 October, by Khrushchev and demanding the Americans abandon alerts Moscow to the fact that Fidel Castro was at the embassy Guantanamo, among other things), there had been a spurt of and composing an important ”personal” message for Nikita disagreement-filled correspondence between the Soviet and Khrushchev.
Foreshadowing the contents of that controverCuban leaders over the resolution to the crisis.
But Mikoyan had not reached Cuba the populace there is universal enthusiasm and no sign of any yet , and in his cable sort of elements of panic.
In the mills and factories, meetings Alekseev provides considerable and candid background on are being held with regard to the implementation of mobilizaFidel Castro’s actions and attitudes at the peak of the crisis, tion.
The Soviet diplomat, aside from advising Moscow he fully approves of the Soviet government’s tactics, the tone on how to handle the angry Cuban leader, offers some analysis of the documents sent to him, and the aim to unmask the US of the emotions and moods of Fidel Castro and his closest leadership as an international gendarme before public opinion associates at that moment of acute tension—not only in the and to show the unlawfulness of their domineering actions.
Cold War as a whole, but in Soviet-Cuban relations and in Castro supposes that the USA is succeeding in persuading the history of the nuclear arms race.
Historians can only hope several Latin American governments to break diplomatic ties that authorities in Havana will also more fully contribute with Cuba, but this measure against the Cuban Republic does their side of the story, so we can better understand the mutual not reflect on the development of the Cuban revolution and perspectives during the Soviet-Cuban crisis of late October only arouses the intensification of the anti-imperialism move1962 and beyond. ment in the countries of Latin America.
At the same time I transferred to them what was Cuban public. received through TASS, a full text of the announcement of the In connection with these signals raised by our Cuban Soviet government and a report about the measures adopted friends with reference to this concern, our command has by the USSR Minister of Defense planned today to hold a general conference with the comregarding the combat readiness of the Soviet Army and manders who will be responsible for coming forward to R. the announcement of Castro regarding the questions of maintaining discipline.
Marshal Grechko to be the representative of the However, the result of the situation has forced the conference nations of the Warsaw Pact.
Castro thanked the Soviet govto be postponed. ernment for its assistance and expressed his complete assurThe command accepts the need to answer this question ance that the new plans of United States aggression were doomed to with every possible measure and considers this one of the fail.
He announced that the United States at the present time main problems at present. did not have sufficient strength for a sudden attack on Cuba.
Soviet government is taking and will take with regard to the defense of Cuba.
Obtained and translated by National Security Chinese comrades complicate the positions of the Cubans Archive for the October 2002 conference in Havana.] both internally and in its international plans.
He said we cannot approve of the PRC’s politics in this matter and are otherwise forced to consider these to be insults on the part of the Chinese, and that they are gradually hinting to us to hush up our press about this event.
As should have been expected, the Chinese have not Top Priority missed a chance to exploit the temporarily unfavorable for us situation.
Khrushchev that will immediately be China made pseudo-revolutionary statements, which started sent to him. appearing in the Cuban newspapers, which flattered the In F Castro’s opinion, the intervention is almost excited Cubans.
However, these cheap accusations against him and will be searching for an opportumethods of propaganda did not have much success, although nity for provocations. they strengthened the confusion of the Cubans even more.
In some of his remarks in his inner circle, he expressed One has to state the fact that this confusion affected the idea that the Cuban question had shifted from the internot only common people, but also a number of the Cuban national sphere to the local sphere, and that they should be leaders.
According to our information, members of the prepared for a local war, in other words, with their own forces. national leadership Guillermo Garcia , A Santamaria He believes that in the period of the highest peak of the revo, and partially Curbelo lutionary transformations one should not be cooling down and R Valdez voiced the Cuban people and imposing on them the illusions of reccriticism of our decisions at the last session of the ORI onciliation with imperialism.
Guevara and which has a double meaning or efforts of putting pressure on Aragones did not speak, and R Castro was not present at him, is perceived very painfully.
This is what happened with the session. the response to the letter from comrade Khrushchev that was Fidel Castro apparently has not drawn any conclusions, sent to you.
He “picked” on every detail and composed his and just let everybody, who wanted to speak out do so, while response in a very emotional state.
Here is the history of Fidel he himself did not take any definite position.
Apparently, they achieved an agreement to consider the On 27 October, at 2m.
Dorticos called me at my apartdecisions made by us the business of the Soviet government ment and informed me that Castro is coming over for an They also agreed not to interfere in our subsequent deciimportant meeting.
Castro stayed at my place until 7m. sions about the remaining troops and military equipment and trying to explain the critical nature of the moment, dictating not to present any requests regarding leaving them behind and re-dictating dozens of times the letter that was later sent . to you.
Castro took turns dictating and making some notes It was recommended that Fidel Castro should not subbefore he finally decided on the full text.
Khrushchev, he made two comments sion and stopped accusations against us.
The second item that offended him, and We were glad that you expressed your thoughts frankly as probably the main one, is that he does not believe that the it is appropriate for a Marxist-Leninist. telegram, which he had sent to us could be considered eviOnly on these conditions true friendship is possible.
We will not argue who of us is correct, history will judge that. dence that we had consulted him before making the decision.
We fully share your assessment of imperialism and this is He also expressed to me some friendly objections regardwhy we are doing everything in order to complicate its aggresing sending “worrisome telegrams about the situation” (in sive actions, not only directly, but also through the diplomatic reality I did not write such telegrams, but I did not tell Castro channels. about it) and regarding my information that among some You could always rely on us in your just struggle.
In reality, Castro had not written anything to Moscow I am convinced that a response along such lines would with the exception of the telegram from 27 October.
Had we be received by Castro with great satisfaction and that he will not corrected that mistake, one should have no doubts about repeatedly regret having written that letter. the directness of Castro’s reply that would have followed.
I start from the assumption that we would need one or two In the most recent days, I think, Castro has understood years of especially careful work with Castro until he acquires all the qualities of the Marxist Leninist party spirit.
However, that Cuba was really able to avoid the war and destruction currently he is the main force in Cuba and the living program and that the prospects of peace and independence emerged for the people, and therefore we should fight for him, educate now, and he began to reconsider his mistaken positions and him, and sometimes forgive him some of his mistakes. regained his spirit.
The potential danger, I believe, is hidden not in Castro’s Due to his character, he has not rejected the old opinion ideological confusions but in the qualities of his character. yet, but the crisis I think is over now, and in the future he If I am mistaken, I am asking you to correct me. would repeatedly express his gratitude to us for the wisdom of the decision that we took.
November 1962 Alekseev Knowing Castro’s sensitive nature, I believe that we should not hurry or push him, and especially we should not start any 50389 polemics with him yet.
Radchenko and James G Hershberg, elsewhere in this issue of the CWIHP Bulletin.
The telegram also spells out, in Khrushchev’s words, the son and personal assistant of the Soviet Deputy Prime of the reasons why the weapons were deployed to Cuba in Minister Anastas Mikoyan, who was number 2 in the Kremlin the first place. under Nikita Khrushchev.
Anastas Mikoyan was the Kremlin’s The second document is a memorandum of a key converemissary to all the “hot spots” in the socialist bloc, including sation between Mikoyan and Fidel Castro two days later, on China, Vietnam, Poland, Hungary, and others.
He 13 November, after the Cuban leader refused to see the Soviet was also the man who essentially discovered Cuba for the envoy for three days in a reaction to the new demand.
He signed conversation, Castro starts by declaring his disagreement with the first series of trade agreements with the Cuban revolutionthe decision to remove the IL-28s but then assures Mikoyan ary government and established friendly relations based on a that the revolutionary leadership discussed the issue and mutual personal sympathy with the Cuban leaders. agreed to the removal.
Mikoyan presents all his arguments In November 1962, after Khrushchev and Kennedy to show that the withdrawal of the planes would end the exchanged letters ending the visible part of the Cuban Missile crisis and make the United States non-invasion pledge more credible.
How to extricate the stay in Cuba so its security would be guaranteed without the weapons from the hands of a reluctant and bitter ally who had obsolete planes.
They also agree on the rules of verification of been barely consulted about the installation of the weapons the withdrawal.
Mikoyan saves the day once again, resolving and who had not been consulted about their removal.
The another crisis within the crisis. task of persuading the Cubans to relinquish the weapons, in The third document is a unique record of a 16 November such a way as to keep them as allies fell to Anastas Mikoyan, conversation between Mikoyan and Che Guevara on Sovietwhom Khrushchev dispatched to Cuba in November to molCuban economic and trade relations.
The conversation takes lify and explain Soviet policy to Fidel Castro and his associplace soon after the IL-28 crisis, which gives Mikoyan a ates.
Mikoyan had to go back to the island and use all his dipchance to patch up the relationship with bandaids of trade lomatic skills, patience, and the human capital that he built agreements and promises of future aid and industrial coopon his earlier trip to bring the Cubans back from the brink. eration.
Guevara points out sharply that the estimates of the When the Soviets agreed to remove the “offensive” weapcost for building a Soviet refinery are “approximately twice ons from Cuba, they told the Cubans that the rest of the as much” as the US-built plants in Cuba.
Mikoyan admits weaponry, equipment and personnel would stay in Cuba and problems with inflating the costs and promises to reduce would be gradually transferred to the Cuban army.
It was much better to end Near the end of the conversation, Guevara and Mikoyan the crisis by giving up planes that were already obsolete—to discuss the theory of revolutionary struggle.
The remaining planes, which we still have, exist as a Latin America must follow the line of simultaneous exploresult of United States actions and our response to these actions.
Hinting at further disagreement have had these planes and units supporting them; those planes ahead, he gently registers his disagreement with the Cuban would already have been removed from service. leader’s drive to ignite revolution in the hemisphere.
We can imagine how difficult it would be to impress such The three translations presented here are part of a far largan understanding on our friends.
After all, we could not agree with the US demand and remove the Il-28s.
November 1962 The insistent demand of the United States to remove the Il-28s can be explained first of all not because they are worried 11 November 1962 about their presence in Cuba, or because they want to remove them from Cuba, saying that they are offensive weapons.
We are passing them along to you The Americans, of course, are aware of all this. for your consideration and reflection.
First is that the We discussed these issues before the full quorum of our president mentioned the planes—the bombers—in his proccollective leadership and our military, and all those present lamation.
And before that, as you will see from the letter, in arrived at the unanimous conclusion that it would be reasonhis speech on 22 October, he spoke about the “jet bombers able to act as follows—to agree to the removal of all Il-28s capable of carrying nuclear arms,” and so on.
There are no particular However, the main issue, we think, is that currently criticism losses.
As a result, we would create such conditions for that we do not fulfill our obligations.
We have to tions as set forth in the president’s messages of 27 and 28 assess the situation as revolutionaries and as leaders, to weigh October.
And we believe that this is more important than a what is most important and what factor should be given prefshow of resolve in retaining the Il-28s in Cuba. erence in the interests of Cuba—to leave the bombers, and It is true, some people can say that the appetite grows consequently to undermine the fulfillment of the obligations at mealtime and that the United States would pose new that were given on condition of the removal of the missiles, demands and insist on their fulfillment.
But we will resist that but to keep the Il-28s in Cuba, or to remove the Il-28s as we in our negotiations. removed the missiles, but to have an agreement on noninvaWith respect to the question of our instructors’ staying in sion of Cuba both on the part of the United States and on the Cuba after the removal of the missiles and Il-28s, there would part of other Latin American countries surrounding Cuba. be no weapons that the Cubans could not master on their All this should be weighed.
Therefore, the question regarding the Soviet instructors and discussing these issues, all those present arrived at the in Cuba is not a problem, not for today. indisputable conclusion that these are not We shipped some weapons to Cuba that were required equivalent.
The Il-28s are no longer any good for offensive to protect the people operating the missiles; now that the action, as we have already explained, and the Americans missiles have been removed the need for this protection is no understand that.
As far as defense is concerned, Il-28 planes longer there. are not absolute weapons that would make the territory where But the weapons that were shipped to Cuba are already they are deployed impenetrable to the enemy.
Later, this very well, and we are able to estimate the situation, and when the situation is normalized, most likely it would be we think that this would be a persuasive argument for our expedient to transfer those weapons to the Cubans.
If our enemy, for example, had the weapons quite capable of mastering them (tanks, armored personnel Cuba has, including Il-28s, then for the Soviet state, assumcarriers, and other types of weapons) themselves.
A portion ing we have the weapons we do, it would not be an obstacle of the antiaircraft systems is already in Cuban hands.
In to aggressive actions by us because it would not be possible the future, a situation could emerge where, we think, there to resist the might that we possess.
With these weapons one would be no need to have our troops operating these antican exhibit heroism, but to achieve the main goal—to repel aircraft systems.
They are sufficient to speak, for the future.) for repelling aggression like that in 1961, and even aggression Now, about the Il-28s.
From the point of the view of by more powerful forces, but not all those forces in the posensuring Cuban security and using them for defensive pursession of the United States. poses, the fighters they already have are a better means than Through diplomatic channels we are aware that the United States the Il-28s.
But those are fighter planes; we are not talking representatives, while agreeing that Il-28 planes are indeed about them now.
The Americans, to the contrary, are sayobsolete weapons, and that they do not represent a great daning (Robert Kennedy in his conversation with Dobrynin on ger for the United States, justify their demand for the removal November 5), that they are not raising the issue about the of Il-28s from Cuba by saying that this weapon represents a recall of the fighters from Cuba, and by the way, the fighters great threat for Latin American countries.
They therefore state are more modern weapons. that there should be a guarantee that there would be no threat We are mentioning the fighters to you so that when you to countries in the Caribbean.
We live in a time when two worlds exist—the socialist world Moreover, they are more versatile because they can take part and the world of capitalist countries, as well as intermediate in aerial combat, of which the Il-28s are not capable. transitional states, which at decisive moments unfortunately Not now but later, depending on how events develop, if do not vote with us at the UN on the main issues. there is a need we may have to give reinforcements to the We must take all of this into consideration.
I think that Cubans, but not in the form of bombers, but in the form of our friends understand that if we now chose exacerbation of fighters, about which they should be informed. the situation in the Caribbean, and did not make comproWe believe that on the question of verifying fulfillment of mises and mutual concessions, that would be a movement the agreement on removing the Il-28s, we would be able to towards a dead end.
Apparently, our agree with Americans that this verification would be based on enemies—the imperialist camp—are being forced to accept the same conditions mutually agreed upon in relation to the the fact that if they do not exhibit understanding and restraint missiles—inspections on ships in neutral waters.
This order on their part, the matter could end in catastrophe. would not require inspections on Cuban territory.
Therefore, we believe that for our camp, precisely for our This is how we understand the issue of verification.
Of camp and not only for Cuba—but for Cuba primarily—the course, when we start concrete negotiations about this, obvielimination of the tensions that have been created in the ously the United States will exert some pressure on us, but Caribbean by means of an agreement based on conditions set this should be anticipated, and we think that the precedent forth in the exchange of letters between the United States and that we already have will be applied for this weapons system the Soviet Union would be a positive result.
It seems as if it is an acceptable Il-28s from Cuba. suggestion for the future, and it would not create difficulties A person who is free from a certain moral psychological either for Cuba or for us on the condition that the agreement factor, and who with his mind’s eye could get a wider view is reached on the same basis as was laid out in the letters, and of the situation that has emerged in connection with Cuba, if that agreement is followed. would understand the clear benefit of such an agreement for The psychological side of the issue is the most difficult us and for Cuba. one.
And each person’s psychology reveals itself in a special Let’s return to the Cuban statements to the effect that the way; you cannot prove it completely; the issues United States cannot be trusted.
In general this is correct, and are resolved in discussions about the possible and the imposthis is what we call vigilance.
When our Cuban friends say that they cannot trust the that the United States now, having entered into an agreement United States, this is true—one cannot disagree with this; we with us, would decide to invade Cuba after the removal of know it from our own experience.
To think like this means to not understand the far we have no alternatives other than to rely on these words importance of the Il-28s, to overestimate their capabilities as and the assurances we have received.
In fact, this is basis of a weapons system, and at the same time to underestimate the coexistence between two state systems with different sociopocapabilities of the enemy and the weapons they possess. litical structures.
The Americans cannot be trusted, no other alternatives. and if we remove the Il-28 planes after removing the missiles, If we start from the assumption: I do not believe, I do not that would create better conditions for aggression against tolerate—that would mean to deny the possibility of peaceful Cuba.
That would mean, so to speak, permanent war, if the United States had indeed intended to invade then the until one side emerges as the absolute victor.
To think otherwise However, we have our own understanding on this issue.
It would be not to comprehend the real state of affairs. is set forth in the decisions of the congresses of our party in Of course, the removal of the Il-28s is a concession on the Program of the CPSU, and it found its own expression our part.
And to exacerbate the situation to the become obsolete, and we retired it from service. extreme, to armed conflict, would do exactly that.
This is one We are telling you all this so that you yourself, so to speak, approach.
And there are some forces in America that would will comprehend it, and if something is unclear to you, you desire such a development of events. can ask us for additional explanation in order to help you But obviously the most important method that the prepare to conduct discussions, and to try to persuade our president of the United States and his circle have chosen for Cuban friends that this step we are suggesting is a step toward themselves is to strangle Cuba economically by isolating it the stabilization of the situation in Cuba. commercially.
And in general, of course, with the blockade living standards in Cuba to drop even lower than they were of Cuba, there is no possibility to send ships to Cuba under before the revolution, when Batista was in Cuba. protection in order to break through the blockade, because These stakes are not new for us.
Some time ago, similar the distance and geographical situation of Cuba—and our calculations were made in relation to Soviet Russia when they Cuban comrades should understand that themselves—are tried to strangle our revolution with the bony hand of hunvery unfavorable for us.
The imperialist interventionists, when they were thrown the continuation of the blockade because it needs uninterout of Soviet territory and lost the opportunity to crush the rupted communications with the external world, and most of revolution with armed force, also believed that their main all with the Soviet Union.
This is also a factor that the enemy approach would be to create conditions of economic disaster is taking into account, and it wants to exploit this factor— and undermine the socialist revolution in Russia by economic that is, to prolong the blockade, or, as the United States calls means.
The United States to Cuba. can maintain this situation for a long time, and maybe even If the Cuban comrades, our friends, correctly understand indefinitely.
But for Cuba—I don’t know how Cubans see us and trust our conclusions, if they agree with the steps that this—we think that it would be very hard to live through this. we are planning, then Cuba will live.
We know Cuba—we are Cuba’s brothers; we have said this publicly, and this ourselves; we have handled things for forty-five years we repeat it now.
We will do everything in our power so that already, and we were under a blockade—barefoot, hungry, Cuba will rise again—and it has the ability to do so.
Therefore, with sending military assistance, we also sent our technicians, such arguments for us are something we have already expeagricultural specialists, veterinarians, irrigation specialists, and rienced in the past.
We marched on and we died, and many scientists so that they could focus their efforts on strengthenmore of us died.
Those who went into battle sang which emerged as a result of the expulsion of the United States monopthat song, but the people sent their representatives to battle olies and the seizure of power by the people under the leaderin order to survive and to win.
And we have achieved that. ship of their chief, Fidel Castro, and his comrades in arms.
But in this struggle, Strictly speaking, this is how the question stands now in we must now rely not only on weapons or act too forceour understanding. fully.
No, we must show flexibility, taking the current situIf we look back to the history of our state, during Lenin’s ation—and first of all Cuba’s peculiarities and geographical period, Lenin was willing to undertake serious maneuvers, location—into account.
And this was cordefined the same way in relation to Korea or Vietnam—we rect and justified by history.
One cannot submit to a loud are not even talking about the European socialist countries— revolutionary phrase.
It flashes, illuminates the road, and disappears However, in the Western Hemisphere the imperialists, of immediately.
But when the barcourse, will do everything possible to achieve their goal.
But to say it at this moment and in coexistence necessarily carries with it mutual struggle because this connection, understanding us incorrectly, means to injure the social systems confronting each other are antagonistic us, to force us to suffer deeply. and it is impossible to reconcile them.
If cannons do not fire, then diplomacy carries we pursued any commercial aims, that we got any sort of ecoout the functions of the cannons.
No, that is incorgives us nothing, and this is known to everyone and is known rect.
We knew that if there was an invasion the blood of The law is on Cuba’s side.
Cuba wants to be an indepenboth the Cuban and Soviet peoples would be spilled.
We did dent sovereign state, and all the states of the world understand that.
Even the unbridled imperialists cannot openly trample also did it in our own interests.
But our interests here were upon this right and cannot deny such aspirations of the expressed as common revolutionary interests, the interests Cuban people.
It is precisely this that will create even greater of the revolution, the interests of the international worker’s problems for the imperialists when the independence and movement, and Marxist-Leninist teaching.
We did it only in sovereignty of Cuba are protected by an agreement affirmed the name of all that. through the United Nations.
And now that the situation we expected has developed— If one talks about whether to trust or not to trust the and we expected it when we took this step, almost all of us United States, then history teaches that there was the League foresaw this—this is how they see us [i.e., as caring only about of Nations, then it collapsed, and then there was a world war.
It could, and we are close Tell Fidel and our other friends that we could have to this.
When the crisis erupted and thing in order to preserve peace and ensure the independence a threat hung over Cuba, we could have passed a resolution, of their own states and the right of every people to develop in an address with the most abusive words against imperialism, a direction chosen by the people of each country. the United States, and world imperialism, and we could have This should be understood.
Therefore, the words “to written there that they were capable of every base act, that believe or not to believe” have meaning only at a rally, and a they were mean and ignoble and we could have broadcast it very transient one at that.
And in politics, we should rely on on every radio station in all the languages of the world.
And factors of a more constant character, acting over a longer term. we would have considered that our revolutionary duty toward This is the meaning of the agreement at this stage. heroic Cuba had been fulfilled.
As we impulsiveness, said that if the Cuban position (on the issue know, the imperialists don’t lose weight from our insults—we of inspections) jeopardizes peace throughout the world, then have cursed them for forty-five years.
And if our efforts had the Soviet side may consider itself free of its obligations.
We are very disappointed any measures for the real strengthening of the forces of socialby this understanding on the part of our friend, Fidel Castro, ism, the forces of revolution, then most likely we would have toward whom we feel limitless trust and respect, as to a real stopped cursing them long ago.
And when he said compelled us to shut up, as they are capable of doing.
They that, we think that he himself understood that we of course would have dealt with us as they have dealt with have such a right—to free ourselves from obligations, just as more than one revolution in more than one country.
Explain to Fidel that Revolution, when we did not have diplomatic relations with this is not our understanding of the situation.
And then we, so use them against the imperialist aggressor. to speak, would plaster the imperialists and capitalists of all In deciding to deploy the missiles in Cuba, upon our countries with curses in every language.
That was the extent agreement with our Cuban friends, we pursued the goal of of our diplomatic activity. rendering assistance to Cuba, of defending it in the face of the But we got through those times.
We understood that this would cause a ent kinds of relations with the outside world.
Now not only great shock among the American imperialists, and it did cause the Soviet Union but one-third of the world lives under the such a shock.
They drew a conclusion regarding non-invasion banner of Marxism-Leninism.
We have diplomatic relations guarantees to Cuba, which were expressed in Kennedy’s letwith most of the countries of the world.
We believe that the goals we pursued have been achieved resolution of issues depends not only on the correlation of and our action of deploying the missiles in Cuba has been forces, although the correlation of forces—economic and justified. military—is of course the main factor.
But when the cannons We received information from our military comrades are silent, diplomacy is assigned a sufficiently large role, and that at a ceremonial session that was arranged by our people it would be unreasonable for us to reject this instrument that on November 6, the head of the intelligence administration has been developed and tested for ages.
One has to have weapgeneral staff of Cuba, Pedro Luis, tried several times to raise a ons.
But weapons bring extermination, especially in our age. toast “to Fidel and Stalin” at his table.
We especially at this moment of tensions between the countries could have sent a lot of blood once the war had begun; but of socialism and the countries of imperialism.
This is to some this blood would have been mixed not with blood but with extent a violation of the relationship of trust between the Cuban soil.
And it is doubtful that it would have helped the Soviet Union and Cuba.
It was very unpleasant for us to read Cuban people. this report, and it was unpleasant for our people in Cuba to We have undertaken steps of a different character.
You upgraded the armed forces of the Soviet Union and our misshould talk to the comrades who were present; you should sile technology to combat readiness, and set in motion the talk to comrades Gribkov and Pavlov.) diplomatic machinery.
And we believe that we achieved We wanted to say everything to you candidly.
These are goals in the interests of Cuba, in the interests of the people of not the last difficulties that we will experience.
We demable to assess the situation today patiently and skillfully, and onstrated the aggressiveness of the United States of America; to look toward tomorrow, toward the future—and this future we showed the peace-loving nature of the socialist countries is good.
This will not and the Soviet Union, as the most powerful among the socialbe the final crisis because the imperialist camp will not leave ist states.
And that is not the least factor in the struggle for the us alone and will create crises in other places.
They not only did not value this, but even said respond to the interests of the socialist camp, the interests of words that hurt our noblest feelings and our noblest revolupeace and socialism. tionary outpourings of friendship to the Cuban people.
Cuba today finds Fidel Castro in a conversation with you expressed the idea itself in the epicenter of the struggle for these ideals. that the deployment of our missiles in Cuba was carried out in Therefore, we are doing everything in order to secure a posi337 tion such that Cuba would be following the path chosen by its almost inevitable, and that the alternative to this was to prepeople—it would be developing on a socialist basis. empt and to deliver a nuclear strike.
We agree that unilateral inspecWe understood that you wanted us to undertake measures tions are unacceptable for any country, including Cuba.
But that would preempt the enemy, and preclude the possibility U Thant’s proposal about “the UN presence” is beneficial of an air strike or an invasion of Cuba.
In general, this is beneficial for any small country could have been achieved by our delivering a nuclear strike on because in this case the United Nations—the world organizathe United States.
According to your information about the tion—to some extent becomes a guarantor against an invasion timing of attacks on Cuba, we did not have time for formal of the country that is threatened by invasion.
Of course, this consultations, which we wanted to conduct before doing what must be implemented on an equal basis so that UN observers we did. would be in Cuba, in some region of the United Therefore, we hope that you will understand that we acted States and also in other countries of the Caribbean.
Then in the interests of Cuba, in the interests of the Soviet people, sovereignty, equality, equal conditions, and equal guaranties and in the interest of the people of the entire world.
If the imperialists announce that Cuba is our opinion, we achieved those ends. planning an attack and therefore they want to have observers When you are prepared, choose a moment for conversathere, then in its turn Cuba, if someone is planning an attack tion.
As you can see from Kennedy’s confidential letter, we against it, can demand that observers be sent and observer need to give him an answer.
We have been delaying this posts be established in those countries from which such answer for some time, and we would like to receive your opinaggression is possible. ion, which would be passed to us after having already incorporated the reaction of our friends.
As early as 1955 to give Kennedy an answer that we would not have to change and then in 1958, we ourselves introduced proposals at the later—an answer that would ideally express a coordinated disarmament negotiations, which presupposed establishing position and would satisfy ours and Cuba’s mutual interests. observer posts at airports, at railway hubs, on highways, and We know that a hard task has befallen you.
Those proposals remain in decided, and the military for their part quite firmly said, force today.
Their purpose is to avert the danger of some that in the interests of normalizing the situation the Il-28s aggressive country preparing a sudden attack, concentrating should be removed from Cuba in order not to make the Il-28 forces, and carrying out an invasion of the other country. into some kind of fetish—either the Il-28s or nothing.
This Apparently, even if we eliminate the crisis we are currently would be foolish because this is not the kind of weapon for living through—and we think that we will eliminate it on the which it would be worth breaking off negotiations and thus basis of a mutual agreement—this question will take on an jeopardizing all the achievements we have reached in our corimportance beyond Cuba . respondence with the president.
We should not provide an This system then could be expanded to Europe and Asia, opportunity for the aggressive forces to undermine what was which would serve the cause of guaranteeing the security of all already achieved and place the responsibility for the breakup countries of the world and most of all of the two camps—of on us.
This would be unforgivable from our side; it would the countries of the socialist camp and the countries of the show a lack of understanding of simple things. imperialist camp that have joined NATO’s military bloc.
From the materials we have obtained (and we sent these to We believe that this is reasonable.
Therefore now we need you), you can see that among the responsible leading circles to enter diplomatic negotiations, which have already started. of the United States they allegedly allow for the possibility In order to create a basis for that, our country has to fulfill that in order not to create a crisis out of the dispute over the its obligations so that the other country can fulfill its obligaIl-28s, the Americans could even agree to leave the planes tion.
But it In our letter to Comrade Fidel Castro, we have already would not be completely correct to start from this assumption given an explanation to his statement that we in elaborating our steps.
Therefore, we should exhibit caution. allegedly have not consulted with him.
We have no other We are using this, but only in the course of bargaining.
On the contrary, the moral strengthening of the true face of the “free” Western world for you.
This attempt, it seems, was due to the to register it at the United Nations.
This act warrants the shortage of meat in Cuba. withdrawal, the removal of the Il-28s from Cuba.
At the time, he did not yet hold a post at the National Institute of Agrarian Reform.
Comrade Mikoyan, please, let’s talk about the issue raised in yesterday’s conversation.
Mikoyan agrees with Fidel Castro’s suggestion. donated to the National Security Archive.
We basically did not agree with the removal of Svetlana Savranskaya for the National Security Archive.] strategic missiles, just as we disagree with the removal of Il-28 bombers from Cuba.
They undermine our sovereign right to determine for ourselves what type of weapons we can have, and what agreements we can make.
We are aware of the Soviet government’s intention to Castro, Havana, 13 November 1962 withdraw the Il-28 bombers from Cuba as a basis for negotiations with the Americans.
The same thing happened with the November 13, 1962 missiles—first you made a commitment, then you started to remove them.
Mikoyan’s residence. the naval blockage and the cessation of the violation of Cuban After exchanging greetings, Mikoyan talked about his visit to airspace to the withdrawal of Il-28 bombers.
I believe that it trip by plane on the same day, together with Carlos Rafael is a minimal, but also our firm requirement.
We were become meaningless, and we consider them our guarantee. impressed with the work carried out by the revolutionary If the requirements I outlined—to lift the naval blockade government in developing animal husbandry.
The Santa and cease violating Cuba’s airspace—are met, then the Il-28 Gertrudis cattle breed can take a high place at any exhibition. bombers can be removed from Cuba.
Our minister of agriculture acquired a few that, despite the removal of offensive weapons from Cuban animals of this breed in the United States.
It is territory, the Americans continue to violate our airspace. a very promising breed.
Speaking about the cattle farm in We have taken a passive, permissive stance on violation Turiguano, Mikoyan expressed his admiration for the scope of Cuban airspace.
Judging by the scope and quality of the ongoing work, our military bases and units.
This is bad for the morale of one could say that this is not a socialist, but a Communist our people and makes them resentful.
The cattle farm in Turiguano is very point that now our enemy knows everything.
I would say that there few farms of this scale in the reconnaissance flights over Cuban territory led to the weakenworld.
We have similar types of farms in Uzbekistan and ing of our country’s defense.
Siberia, but I think the farm in Turiguano far exceeds them It is difficult to explain to our people this concession to in size. the enemy.
Have you read the article about the arrest of an to this state of affairs.
In effect, we are allowing the enemy to discussed, but it seems useful to note that after the strategic violate our airspace. missiles were discovered, they ceased to be a deterring force.
The Soviet Union, the socialist countries, or any other sovThey already served their purpose.
Such enabling they ceased to be a deterrent. on our part can be interpreted as a sign of cowardice, like we The Il-28 bomber is an old type of aircraft with a small forgot the principles of morality.
The tegic missiles are removed from Cuba, we can no longer allow fact that Cuba has weapons like high-speed fighter planes, this to go on.
We decided to write to the acting Secretary missile-carrier boats, anti-assault landing and antiaircraft General U Thant that all the planes making shaving flights means—this covers all the losses that might be caused by over Cuba will be shot down. the removal of the Il-28 bombers from Cuba.
I want to reiterate they are the property of the Soviet Union, we, despite the that very powerful defensive weapons remain in Cuba.
We statement I just made, will agree with the Soviet government’s will be able to transfer it to you when the Cuban military decision to remove them, just as we agreed with the decision officials become familiar with it.
This is not just my personal opinion. incomparably more powerful than any equipment Cuba curWe discussed the issue of Il-28 bombers at the secretariat of rently has.
These are the most advanced weapons Comrade the ORI national leadership and unanimously came to this Pavlov currently has.
The CC CPSU’s resolution is to transfer decision. these weapons to you over the course of time.
I would like to respond to this question in emphasize that we are taking these measures in Cuba’s interseveral parts.
First, I will talk about our position on the issue est, in order to ensure that the United States does not keep of violations of Cuba’s airspace.
We want to provide the best conditions for the necessary not to shoot down American planes.
Both perspection with Comrade Dorticós I informed the Soviet governtives I described have been carefully studied.
Our comrades ment of the Cuban position. have decided that the only correct way is to lift the blockade The day before yesterday, during a conversation with and withdraw the Il-28 bombers from Cuba.
Khrushchev wrote me with instructions agreement with your position regarding contacting U Thant to tell Fidel Castro and his comrades about our position and and demanding an end to these brazen flights.
He again noted that the Soviet could be motivated by the fact that the Soviet Union kept its Union will always support Cuba. promise, but the United States does not want to keep theirs.
We admire the courage of the Cuban people and their This kind of protest against the violation of Cuban airspace leader Fidel Castro and his comrades.
I want to emphasize would serve as a warning from the revolutionary government that we consider your difficulties to be our difficulties, and we of Cuba.
It would be a serious warning to the Americans. regard your victory as our victory.
We offer you all kinds of fraternal assistance—military, a certain point, not more. economic, and diplomatic.
We understand Comrade Mikoyan’s considerplanning to consider the possibility of providing additional ations. weapons to Cuba.
We believe that the withdrawal of the Il-28 do everything to protect Cuba.
We fully supported the five bombers has to be tied to the removal of the naval blockade. points put forward by Comrade Fidel Castro.
I received a It is to this end that we agreed to negotiate regarding the telegram from Comrade Kuznetsov, in which he writes about removal of Il-28s from Cuba.
All our actions are directed the steps taken by our diplomats to support the five points of toward achieving this goal—lifting the naval blockade.
This struggle will take place in practical we leave the bombers in Cuba.
You see that our position is terms in our negotiations with the Americans.
I do not want to come back to topics we already your UN representative should join this struggle.
Of course, from a military point of view, the ties to strangle the revolution with the bony hand of hunger.
The question of withdrawBut if there is no blockade, Cuba will have an opportunity ing the Il-28s can be used to make the Americans fulfill our to develop its economy.
We understand the negative psychological F Castro: I have a question related to the Il-28 bombers. effect of withdrawing this outdated bomber from Cuba.
We fulfill their promises and lift the blockade, then the bombhave to demand concessions from the Americans. ers, as you said, will remain here.
For now we are continuing to assert that countries. the Il-28 bomber is not an offensive weapon.
And if the Americans will not remove the argue that any bomber is an offensive weapon.
I already said that we cannot send warships Kennedy’s promises will be fulfilled, we agree to remove the to escort commercial ships in the Caribbean.
Consequently, we are talking about the correlation of forces in the Caribbean, the Americans could possibility to start negotiations.
We want to deprive them of the excuse not remove the Il-28s, the personnel and equipment until we they want to use.
In this case, we can work through the UN. reach an agreement with the Americans.
That would not help to resolve ous warning to the Americans. the current crisis.
The Il-28 bombers are material for negotiabombers in order to guarantee nonaggression.
Two tendencies are clearly emerging in the with you when we conduct negotiations with Americans United States.
The antiaircraft missiles will remain circles are trying to use the fact that the Il-28 bombers are still here.
The Americans do not dare talk about them, although they Kennedy would like to strangle Cuba by the blockade.
I read today in a review of the foreign press needs to save his prestige, too.
Kennedy is not any more posia report that said the MiG-21 fighter planes can be used as tive toward Cuba than any other American reactionaries.
Yes, they can be used like that. the prestige of the United States by a military attack on Cuba.
The designer of the aircraft created a wonderful the people of Cuba will overthrow the government.
It collapse economically. was used when strategic missiles were removed from Cuba.
Kennedy’s plan is better than the plan put forward by the There was also visual surveillance from ships at close distances.
Cuba has great potenAlthough there was one attempt to go aboard one of the Soviet tial for the development of its economy.
Our assistance will ships with weapons, but Soviet sailors thwarted the attempt and enable the growth of Cuba’s economy, culture, and science. did not allow the controllers aboard the ship.
They also put up As a result, Cuba will become a model for Latin America; it a protest regarding this attempt to breach the agreement.
After will be a center of attraction for the people of Latin America. all, we agreed only to allow controlling ships to come within a If the blockade continues, the Cuban people’s standard of small distance.
Therefore, when the captain of the control ship living will fall, and difficulties will increase. tried to get on board our ship, he was not allowed.
It should be We have to secure the removal of the blockade and guarnoted that for the entire time of the blockade, controllers did antees that the United States and other countries will not not go on board Soviet ships, they feared conflict. attack Cuba.
These guarantees have to be reflected in UN I emphasize once again that different forces are at play documents.
It is unlikely that this will be done in the form in the United States.
The of a protocol, but it is still necessary to achieve UN control American press is shouting that there is no certainty as to in the Caribbean. whether all missiles were removed or a part of them was hidComrade Kuznetsov has been insisting on this plan at the den.
This plan is good because it does not allow for the posprecisely in this form.
Kuznetsov was asked about the wheresibility of a surprise attack on Cuba. abouts of the warheads intended for the missiles that were Americans cling to the OAS [Organization of American removed.
He replied that warheads cannot function without States], trying to extend the activities of this organization to missiles.
They are opposed to the UN addressing issues of the sible to find the warheads.
With the withdrawal of the Il-28s threat of sudden attack. from Cuba we want to alleviate the conditions of the struggle.
However, if U Thant’s proposal on control is accepted, Of course, there is no guarantee that the Americans will accept then the UN will act in the Caribbean and the OAS will be all our demands, but we will fight hard to achieve our goals. on the sidelines.
Alekseyev was present at the conversation, all our requirements. which lasted an hour and a half.
We must pray to God that the Americans do not find out about our conversation.
Sergo A Mikoyan, Americans are tying the withdrawal of Il-28s to the inspecdonated to the National Security Archive.
From Svetlana Savranskaya for the National Security Archive.] a diplomatic point of view, they can find fault with the fact that in Comrade Khrushchev’s letter he mentions both the removal of offensive weapons and inspections on the ground.
If the Americans know that the blockade will not lead to nuclear war, they will keep the blockade.
I think they will not attack, but they very much want to maintain the blockade.
However, the Americans “Che” Guevara, Havana, 16 November 1962 themselves retreated on the question of inspections of strategic missiles.
We believe that since they confirmed the removal 16 November 1962 of these missiles through aerial photography, it will suffice.
Mikoyan and his Americans wanted to complicate the issue, they would say colleagues—deputy chairman of the State Committee of the that they have no information as to whether or not the misUSSR Council of Ministers for Foreign Economic Relations, siles were removed.
Comrade Alikhanov also During the time we spent in Cuba, Soviet experts and said that changing the previously established procedure for heads of Cuban organizations have reviewed the state of manufacturing steel structures will delay their production, affairs in the implementation of the Soviet-Cuban agreement and that a part of the metal has already been shipped from on economic and technical cooperation, and we visited a factories in the Soviet Union. number of construction sites and projects.
As for the possibility of manufacturing critical and nonstanConstruction has begun on a number of facilities provided dard equipment in the USSR, Comrade Alikhanov said that we by our agreements, including industrial objects.
Work has started (though still in its It was reported that the Soviet government approved a initial stages) on the reconstruction of a steel works plant. request from the Cuban side regarding the question of the Construction is also under way for training centers to prepare Soviet Union providing technical assistance in the organizaskilled industrial workers. tion of production of spare parts in Cuba.
For this purpose, Construction of the file-making plant is nearing comple140 specialists will be assigned to Cuba, including 30 this tion.
In the first quarter or 1963, the necessary equipment for Soviet Union and installation is almost complete.
The plant creating four laboratories (welding, metallographic, chemical, is scheduled to start manufacturing goods this December, that and controlling and measuring instruments) will be delivered. is, a year ahead of schedule.
I would like to ask a question regarding the Construction of the mechanical plant is proceeding well. construction of a refinery plant.
Cuban specialists recently The Cuban workers are promising to complete construction received the Soviet project for it.
A part of the equipment has they saw that the cost of the work outlined in the draft is already been delivered from the USSR, and considering that approximately twice as much as the construction costs of construction of this plant is proceeding ahead of schedule, we similar North American plants that are located in Cuba. will try to take action so the majority of the essential equipThe specialists are well aware of the costs of building North ment will be shipped in the first half of 1963.
American plants, since they participated in the construction Then Comrade Alikhanov spoke about the construction of and continue to work in these plants.
He informed Comrade Guevara that the main American monopolies tend to inflate the cost of construction lift crane equipment for the construction of the power plant in in underdeveloped countries, because it helps them to take Mariel will be shipped in December of this year, and equipment out large profits in the metropolis.
Therefore, the actual diffor the power plant in Renta will be shipped in the first quarter ference may be even greater. of 1963.
Right now, it is difficult to answer this ques50-ton crane for the installation of engineering structures, the tion.
We do not have the necessary data, but we will look into Cuban side promised to find a crane for this purpose in Cuba. this and let you know the answer.
The specialists who worked on this project construction of industrial facilities were reviewed with the will arrive here in a few days.
They will look into this matter deputy minister of industry comrades Borrega, Trueba, and together with the Cuban side.
I would like to tell you, Comrade Guevara Comrade Cienfuegos, and his deputies. that our design engineers often overstate the cost of the proj343 ects, and we have to be in an uncompromising struggle with opment.
Sometimes, we manage to reduce the initial cost by as American plants to our comrades. much as 20 to 30 percent.
Yes, I will give instructions to prepare the data. largest oil refinery in Belarus comes to mind.
Mikoyan a brief reference on the review and amendment we were able to reduce construction planned oil refinery. costs by 30 percent.
As far as can be seen from these data on the support structures are included into the project, and these composition of the future refinery, there is ample evidence support structures are not always necessary.
The design engithat the construction costs should be reduced instead of being neers usually place various buildings at a great distance from inflated.
I see that the new plant is tied to an existing plant each other, citing fire concerns.
This, in turn, lengthens the and therefore they will have a number of shared services.
However, despite this, was in Mexico, I noticed that the various service buildings of we should examine this question.
Comrade Goldin will help the oil companies were arranged very compactly.
He is a big specialist, he built the steel plant so, because it reduces the construction costs.
You should put him to work more He built a plant there for 1 million tons In addition, design engineers sometimes make mistakes in of steel.
And now it is already working at counting the cost of equipment, especially if it is a new model. full capacity.
The British and the West Germans also built a Different kinds of mistakes can happen, too.
But they are still working only at twoa case with an oil refinery that we were planning to build in thirds of their capacity.
This refinery was designed to power half a million there is some kind of misunderstanding here.
When the project was finished and the Ethiopians building an oil refinery, also for 2 million tons of oil.
The looked it over, they said that they did not like it because it cost question of excessive costs did not arise there.
I noticed that there are some paradoxes in as expenses to build a water purification plant, which was also the prices of Soviet industrial equipment.
Some equipment is designed to meet the utility needs of the city, and in addition sold far below world prices, other equipment is sold at world there were expenditures for construction of port facilities for prices, and yet other is considerably above world prices. receiving oil.
The cost of our industrial equipment at world market prices, or rather, our project no longer exceeded Western models.
Inside the country the price of industrial see, our engineers are far from commerce, and made plant machinery and equipment differ significantly from internaconstruction cost calculations based on our internal regulational prices.
I tion of trucks and tractors, but we produce passenger cars at a will give an order to organize a special expertise on this project loss.
For this purpose, we study reference manuals, us precise data on the construction costs of North American magazines, newsletters, and so on.
If our design data on certain equipment in reference materials, we give engineers really made a mistake, we will correct them.
Such instructions to one of our trade representatives to contact the a study would be useful to the Soviet Union as well.
If our Western enterprise in question, which manufactures analoplants are more expensive to make, we will have to catch up. gous products, and, acting as a potential buyer, to inquire Therefore, your criticism will be beneficial to us. about the prices for this product.
We do not need to be afraid of criticism. modity, the prices for which are readily available every day.
We agreed that this matter would be as a general rule that equipment produced in West Germany resolved later.
Therefore, we did not want to produce orders is cheaper than equipment produced in North America. for next year before we addressed the issue of balancing our British equipment is more expensive than West German, but trade relations.
The Japanese often sell their equipaware, and made us neglect this issue completely. ment even cheaper than West Germans.
It is wrong to wait for a settlement of the equipment sold abroad is a complicated matter. deficit and not prepare trade for the coming year.
Moreover, I am informing you that our government has working in Cuba told him that Cubans allocated large producdecided to register Cuba’s foreign trade debt as a trade credit. tion facilities for organization of enterprises that will produce I have not told this to your leadership yet.
This factory will be created on this now. the base of the former Amber Motors.
And besides, did anyone American cars at these production facilities as well.
I cannot paramount importance if we consider that there are 300,000 give a specific number, but we can agree on a trade credit for North American cars that are already well worn.
Soviet specialnext year, as well. ists proposed to invite an additional number of engineers from E Guevara offers the present company to smoke.
All the Soviet Union, so they could study the relevant parts and except Comrade Titov refuse on the grounds that they are make working drawings of them, because there are no such nonsmokers.
It could be arranged much faster if you send mated that out of six people who died of cancer, five smoked. the parts to the Soviet Union and the working drawings were In our CC CPSU Presidium, for example, almost nobody made there.
Only Comrade Brezhnev smokes sometimes, but which could quickly do this work.
Sending the specialists to even that is more for amusement than real smoking.
I have Cuba could take a long time. a pretty big family, around twenty people.
I wanted to bring to your attention another conditions are very predisposed to smoking—there is even a very important question, Comrade Guevara.
The uninterfree issue of tobacco for each soldier—and still they did not rupted supply of Soviet goods to Cuba’s industries in the acquire this habit.
But then doctors course of the next year depends on the resolution of this issue. told me I could not.
I started developing tuberculosis on the Our Ministry of Foreign Trade received an order for supply tops of my lungs, and I quit smoking. of goods in the nomenclature.
I also have tuberculosis, but I smoke. specifications that are necessary to place the orders in our Neomycin works for me. factories.
We have a receive the specification in the near future, the uninterrupted goal in our country to eliminate tuberculosis completely.
We continuity of our shipments will be compromised starting developed a special program to combat this disease.
I took an extreme measure and instructed Minister ular, we have now established a worldwide network of boardPatolichev to place orders from Cuba whenever possible withing schools for children, working on a system reminiscent of out specifications.
We with regard to machinery, equipment, ferrous metals and decided to put all children sick with tuberculosis into these certain other goods.
So I ask you to take the necessary steps boarding schools, taking them out of the family.
Tuberculosis to ensure that the required specifications are transferred to our can be cured within a year, using new methods of treatment.
When I was in Moscow and spoke with for the treatment of adult patients.
It seems to be due to the hard work and constant E Guevara agrees and makes a note in his notebook.
It is a terrible plague that we inherited from present company is served Daiquiris.
Mikoyan praises the drink and says that it is very tasty. in Cuba every five out of six people smoke.
Natural conE Guevara jokingly explains that the strength of the drink ditions in Cuba are extremely favorable for the production depends on who prepares it . of tobacco.
In our country, we pursue a policy of limiting United States used to buy a lot of it.
The capitalist bosses are the consumption of hard liquor and we are developing the proused to Havana cigars, and right now they have to do without duction of wines and beers.
The fight against alcoholism is very them. important, especially among the youth.
He comthis fact alone, it is worth fighting drunkenness. plained to me that he misses Cuban cigars.
The opposite is the case in Cuba; recently, the friendly advice to normalize trade relations with Cuba and tendency has been to increase the consumption of alcoholic thus solve the problem. beverages.
Our breweries are suffering from a lack of raw tobacco that costs 12,000 pesos per ton. materials.
In principle, we could buy tobacco from the Czechs, but they have a limited amount to sell us.
We produce enough expensame can be said about malt. sive grades of tobacco ourselves.
I will check back home in the Soviet Union around 80,000 to 90,000 tons per year.
Sometimes it goes up to see there is something we can do to help you in this regard. to 110,000 tons.
We make up the deficit by You should try to master the cultivation of hops in Cuba buying abroad.
But, I repeat, we are buying cheaper grades. and buy barley abroad and make malt out of it on site.
This For a while, China supplied us with large quantities of is much cheaper.
But in recent years, because of falling production, it can be arranged in a matter of six months.
The Czechs can regular supplier of tobacco; we buy 30,000 to 40,000 tons. probably do the same.
Then you will have no shortage of raw We buy tobacco from Greece and Turkey out of political considerations, but not in large quantities.
This year Bulgaria materials, and you will be able to further develop the brewing had a bad harvest of tobacco, and it supplied us with only industry.
And in general, that your country has too much money in circulation, we could always buy the tobacco that you do not sell to other increasing beer consumption would play a positive role. countries, provided that it is cheap-grade tobacco.
We process a large number our barley, and we will follow your instructions to send it to of tobacco products and, blended with other varieties of Czechoslovakia for processing and further transportation to tobacco, we might be able to use the black tobacco.
This work in two directions will help you to quickly we should instruct our trade associations to discuss this issue. increase production and meet demand.
At the time, we ended up with conduct various experiments on this land.
I will also give an assignment to study the cards at the low prewar prices, while prices in the commercial possibility of building our own malt production plant.
In 1947, the rationing present company is invited to proceed to the convention hall cards were canceled.
We also reinstated uniform prices for of the ministry, where dinner is served. goods.
In particular, exchanged cash up to 3,000 rubles, and money in bank savings it notes that the events in Cuba greatly influenced the mood up to 10,000 rubles.
This reform was welcomed by the majority of the American working class.
The awakened the working of the population, although, of course, a small portion of the class, forced it to think about political issues.
This there has been an influx of workers into the Communist reform improved the monetary circulation in the country.
If our task was to provide the population with not use the Cuban events to the fullest extent possible in its bread, then in Cuba, it is to provide the population with work.
It notes that the party should have been more vigorous meat, fats, etc. in defending the Cuban people.
If we talk about the plight of the masses as is of some interest to the Cuban leadership.
I received this a factor that causes revolutionary upheavals, then of all the letter because as a member of the Presidium of our Central countries in Latin America, Cuba was the least suitable counCommittee, I am informed about all our important matters, try for a socialist revolution.
The standard of living in Cuba for which a variety of materials are directed to me here from was is one of the highest in Latin America.
I think that dogmatic Marxism, the most suitable country for a socialist the Cuban leadership will be interested to know its contents, revolution was and is the United States, since the socialization of to have a better understand of the situation in the United States working production there is the highest among all the capitalist countries. class.
It is impossible to fight against United States imperialism without Russia during the Revolution was one of the most backknowing the sentiments of the American working class. ward countries in Europe, with strong vestiges of feudalism.
Guevara introwas our luck that the Russian bourgeoisie was weak and had duces Mikoyan to Guevara’s deputies—Orlando Borrego, a dumb political line.
It was unable to solve a single problem Juan Castineras, Tirso Saenz, Gomez Trueba, Mario Sorrilia, of the bourgeois-democratic revolution. and Santiago Riera—who join them for dinner.
The working class is an advanced class, but it should not During the dinner conversation, the question was raised be idealized.
Mikoyan Russian bourgeoisie had abolished the Tsarist government said that Cuba could build socialism with far fewer sacrifices and conducted at least some land reform, like the one the than did the Soviet Union.
We were alone. problems of the bourgeois-democratic revolution, the socialist Out of the forty-five years, we spent fifteen with food rationing, Bolshevik Revolution in Russia would have been delayed for when even supplying the population with bread was a difficult many years.
We had food rationing cards during the Civil War, during to understand the complex situation of the time and advanced the collectivization of agriculture, and during the last war, all the slogans that brought the vast majority of the population the way up to 1947.
During the war, we had bread rationing of to the side of the Communists.
Peace is for all people. employed in particularly heavy industries received the highest Land is for the peasants, that is, the majority of the popularations.
It Venezuelan comrades lost their people, who were either killed is not a paradox that at one point there were people who said in open battle, or captured. they were for the Bolsheviks but against communism.
The battleship Potemkin was a good lesson The Cuban Revolution also took place “against the rules.” to our revolutionaries.
The uprising in Puerto Cabello can The study of this revolution is of great theoretical interest.
The uprising must properly understand the issues of the socialist Revolution in be supported by the masses.
Individual acts, like the recent Cuba would be to make a major contribution to the developsabotage of American oil fields, are not very useful.
They do ment of Marxism-Leninism. not cause serious damage to American imperialism as such.
The great significance of the Cuban Revolution is that it They hurt a particular company, and even that damage is is the first socialist revolution in the Americas.
The Cuban Revolution lit the torch of sociallation, but these installations can be blown up again.
Speaking specifically about this case does ous explosions in all countries.
The countries of Latin a tendency in the world not to import refined petroleum.
America have their own national characteristics, which cannot Now it is more profitable to import crude oil and to develop be ignored.
Because of these features, the revolution cannot occur the petrochemical industry around refining it.
These revolutions can happen American companies can let go of their oil refineries in shortly one after another, but an overall explosion is unlikely.
Unless there is a simultaneous explosion, the people even more. revolutions in individual countries will be suppressed by the As for the theory of a simultaneous explosion, I would like reactionary forces in alliance with imperialism.
This is conto say that during the first years after the October Revolution, firmed, in particular, by the events in Venezuela and several we were also waiting for socialist revolutions in other counother countries. tries.
And in fact a socialist revolution takes place quickly and the rebels manage to seize revolution broke out in Hungary and Bavaria.
However, power throughout the country before the intervention begins, these revolutions were soon crushed by the reactionary forces. they can survive.
But if this is not achieved, and the country Some time passed, and we saw that the time for revolutionary has two governments, the imperialists will have a “legitimate” crises in capitalist countries had passed, and then we made excuse to provide armed support to the government the rebels an important decision and announced that capitalism had are trying to overthrow.
Otherwise, it is difficult to organize entered a period of partial stabilization, and we need to build intervention, because even imperialists are not always able to socialism on our own. flout law and public opinion, especially now that there are With this, the conversation ended and the Cuban compowerful forces in the socialist camp, standing guard over the rades present at the dinner warmly said goodbye to A I. revolutionary movement.
Mikoyan received Potemkin during the 1905 Revolution, when the rebellious the former president of Guatemala, Jacobo Árbenz, and the sailors were isolated from the people and defeated.
We told our Venezuelan comrades that they Manuel Forntuny, at their request. were using the wrong tactics.
Translation by Anna Melyakova for the army rebelled and the army surrendered.
With some in Havana considering relations Soviet leader’s emotional commitment to the new regime on the with Prague an “ice-breaker”2 for further ties to the communist distant island, foreshadowing more fateful actions in the years to camp (Soviet-Cuban diplomatic relations were not restored until come.
Evidently, the Cubans includes the somewhat sensitive issue of Prague’s attempting to succeeded in organizing such arrangements under the noses of grasp the relationship and balance of power within Havana’s Americans and of the Central Intelligence Agency in particular.
He stated that the partisan movement in Cuba, which began as an isolated action of armed petty bourgeois democrats, gradually changed into a mass movement of armed workers and peasants who form 90% of the revolutionary army.
A Enclosure I series of significant command posts were held and are held by communists.
The sending of a trade mission to Cuba with the goal of approach that testified to the petty bourgeois mentality of the preparing the road to normalizing diplomatic ties, uprising’s leaders.
To express agreement for eventual negotiations about appeal for a revolt was made to the soldiers in Batista’s army— supplying arms should the Czechoslovak delegation be together with a warning that in the event instructions would asked, not be followed, the leaders of the uprising would be shot.
Those political parties that compromised 26th Movement,” but also with its center.
In the realm of polithemselves by participating in the election farce of November tics the widest democratic front is working to neutralize the 1958 were dissolved.
People were replaced in the departments rightist elements in the “July 26th Movement.” of justice and the municipal boards, including the mayors.
Though the Cuban sabotage from the rightist wing of the “July 26th Movement,” bourgeois democratic revolution did not begin under the which is opposed to the consistent democratization of the leadership of the proletariat, the proletariat’s example did divisions and does not want to cooperate with the commuinfluence and continues to influence its course with progresnists.
The party supports shared land reform increasingly better conditions for fulfilling the anti-imperialist that was begun on the liberated partisan territory and gives and anti-feudal revolution.
Counter-revolutionary forces are landless peasants and petty farmers free currently disorganized and limited to individual groups of land up to an area of 26 hectares, and the option of leasing reactionary bourgeois that are isolated from the masses.
This process will reinitiate indiin the institutional law on land reform, which currently vidual counter-revolutionary fronts of the bourgeois, though requires payment for land in advance, and in cash.
Therefore, American imperialism canconfiscation of property belonging to landowners.
American not openly take up supporting the counterrevolutionaries firms, which own 66% of the agricultural land, fall into this who pretend to agree with the revolution and propagate the category.
Since then, the number of members has apparinto the staff of the American firm Tel. & ently increased considerably.
The Cuban revolution included a fact that after a time, should its planned economic boycott of combination of the people’s partisan struggle and the actions Cuba prove futile, the USA will proceed to provoke an armed of the working class in the cities, who came to support the struggle.
In this case the exceptional assistance of socialpeople’s armed uprising.
Of these, the Czechoslovak Socialist Republic has in Cuba particularly favorable condifrustrated the intentions of the USA to replace the inevitable tions to provide aid.
It In advance, Comrade Hendrych voiced his agreement would have a semi-official character and arrive without with the suggestions and requests of Comrade Aguirre, adding any publicity.
According to Comrade Aguirre, the Czechoslovak Socialist Republic can figure as “an ice-breaker of the socialist camp” in the Caribbean region.
Special technical supplies to Cuba A Swiss firm is interested in purchasing special technology 2.
With regards to the Cuban comrades’ request dating to the in the Czechoslovak Socialist Republic for the Cuban armed end of 1958 , forces.
On the basis of its resolution of 8 September 1959, a proposal However, in the event that the Cuban government for signing an authorized contract is being put forward.
The should request the sale of military technology, it would matter was discussed with the Ministries of Foreign Affairs be correct for the Czechoslovak side to oblige.
According and National Defense. to the Cuban comrades, such an act would have a very positive psychological effect not only on the masses, but Enclosure I also on the leadership of the “July 26th Movement,” for Proposed resolution which it was always difficult to secure arms.
From our side it It is necessary to return these materials to the Technical would be possible to provide five well-kept line presses Department of the Central Committee of the Communist that have been utilized until now.
In 1959 and 1960, [Czechoslovak Minister of Question of manufacturing munitions National Defense] Comrade B Lomský, together with Comrade F Krajčír, are to free from the army’s Comrade Jankovcová, Comrade Krajčír together with supplies, for the purpose stated in point II/2, a total Comrade David are to verify in the resolution that the arms of 50,000 9mm guns, type 23/25, and 80 million are really meant for the Cuban government.mm cartridges, all in a manner that would allow at least 15,000 pieces to be shipped at the beginning of Enclosure I December 1959.
He produced a document with are to ensure that before the contract is signed it is the credentials of Mr Philipp Friedlander who is authorized proven that the arms are designated for the Cuban by the Swiss to deal in arms and war supplies (license #1876 government, and a prospective inquiry with the Eidg.
Mr Friedlander would personally The Cuban locals have been interested in special technolcome to Czechoslovakia to sign the authorized contract, and ogy from Czechoslovakia since the end of 1958.
At the end of this on the condition that the price include transport to the December last year, on behalf of a purely Costa Rican firm, Czechoslovak border, as well as transport to a loading dock the Czechoslovak national in charge of trade and assigned to , and that the Mexico passed on a request for military technology to aid shipment overseas would be arranged by the buyer.
Back then, the possibility of supplying would be made in Swiss Francs on an irreversible line of credit trophies or older Czechoslovak arms was discussed with the that Schweizerische Bankgesellschaft, Zurich, would open Soviets.
On 7 January of this year, the Soviet State Committee at the Czechoslovak State Bank in Prague.
Mr Strub also of Ministers for Foreign Affairs voiced a positive stance said that the purchase would be financed by the American towards Czechoslovakia’s intention to aid the liberation strugreligious organization CARE, which is apparently as a part gle in Cuba.
CARE’s Vicegave the minister of international trade the task of President, Benjamin Winkler, is in Havana at this time and realizing the aforementioned supplies after a preliminary conawaiting news from Mr Friedlander.
Thus far, the Ministry of sultation with Soviet representatives, should the new Cuban International Trade knows nothing about the goals and intengovernment request them. tions of the CARE organization.
In the closing discussions the above named Cuban functionary affirmed interest in arms from the beforehand, and with a resolution passed on 8 September Czechoslovak Socialist Republic.
At the same time he voiced 1959 agreeing with this plan, the goods were the opinion of the head of the government, Dr.
Fidel Castro, handed over on 10 September of this year. that given the current tense situation the purchase of these The called-for 50,000 guns would be covered by the goods could only be made by way of a third country, othermain technical division of the Ministry of International wise direct supplies from Czechoslovakia could be politically Trade from its military supplies, allowing them to release manipulated by the United States, as in the case of Guatemala.,000 pieces this year, and the remaining 30,000 in 1960.
Therefore, the Ministry of International Trade assumes As far as cartridges are concerned, the Ministry of National that, taking into consideration the current viewpoint of the Defense is putting only 80 million pieces up for disposal, Cuban representatives, it would be useful to take advantage and of this about 1/4th this year and the rest next year.
The of suitable intermediaries, and possibly realize special technirequested number of cartridges is cal supplies of Czechoslovak types to Cuba.
This would be disproportionately high when compared with the number of done on the basis of a license or another official document requested guns.
Ministry of National Defense, the Ministry of International The recent visit of Mr W Strub to Prague seems to be Trade would try to import the goods from either Poland or in line with the stated conception of the Cuban locals, who Bulgaria, and possibly, together with the Ministry of General apparently found it suitable to locate an intermediary in neuEngineering they would try to find a means for the manufactral Switzerland.
Willy Strub said that the transaction would ture of these goods in the Czechoslovak Socialist Republic.
Considering Cuban Government, 16 May 1960, and the fact that arms of the 2nd catagory are involved—that is, CPCz Politburo Resolution, 17 May 1960 used arms—it would be necessary to undertake an inspection of these guns.
Supplies of special material to the Cuban revolutionary ment in international currency add to the fulfillment of tasks government. planned for the year 1959, this would be welcomed.
Enclosure I Next week the Minister of International Trade will inform Proposed resolution a representative from the Soviet State Committee of Ministers for International Trade of the discussions with the Swiss interEnclosure III mediary, and of the planned route for supplying the Cuban Report armed forces with the above noted guns and ammunition PLEASE RETURN IMMEDIATELY FOLLOWING from the Czechoslovak Socialist Republic.
Furthermore, it would be a useful way to utilize guns Enclosure II already put out of commission, and the Ministry of National Report Defense would gradually release a total of 160,000 pieces for On supplying special materials from Czechoslovakia to Cuba. export by the year 1964.
At the same time, old ammunition manufactured in the years 1946-1951 would be sold.
Neither have objections to this export of goods. further technical goods, and presented in Prague by a Therefore, the Ministry of International Trade recommends representative of the Cuban government, Captain Pina.
Obtained and translated for the National the Soviet Union a number of times, the most recent being Security Archive.] in March 1960.
All in Prague between the Soviet delegation led by Comrade of the specialized technology being considered for export to General Sidorovich, and the Czechoslovak side which was Cuba comes from a surplus of supplies at the Ministry of led by the director of the main Technical Department of the National Defense.
Ministry of International Trade, Comrade František Mareš.24 The question of the required amount of ammunition The consequences of the policy to supply specialized technowill apparently be one of the basic questions dealt with in logy and offer technical assistance to the Cuban revolutionary the negotiations with the Cuban side.
This means that the manufacture of such an amount of ammunition would be particularly unbeneficial planes L-60 in a joint version.
Kčs in the export cost, not to mention that foreign currency Of the entire value of requests presented by the Cuban expenses would not be covered in the settlement.
At the same time, from the Ministry of National Defense’s supplies at the current Czechoslovakia will save on the naval transportation costs, time, and which it would also be necessary to manufacture.
For the time being the Czechoslovak side would technical supplies are of a second category, which either cover the expenses of sending these specialists to Cuba, and means that they were in storage or are used.
Principles on which to close the agreement The possibility of also supplying spare parts in a 3-year On the basis of an agreement between representatives of joint venture along with most of the technical supplies is the communist parties of the Czechoslovak Republic and the also being considered.
Such a supply of spare parts could in a Soviet Union the supply of specialized materials to Cuba will rough outline satisfy the Cuban side’s requests until 1962 or be realized for only one-third of their CIF price.
Regarding materials of a civilian the Cuban side of this problem, adding that the Czechoslovak character, the Czechoslovak delegation will push for a maxiside will be able to judge the possibility of supplying spare mum 5-year credit at the full value of goods supplied, which parts on a case by case basis, and that the Cuban side will would make the Czechoslovak share of payments about 1.3 apparently be forced to acquire spare parts for repairs from a million Kčs.
The Czechoslovak delegation will request the part of the supplied special technology. same method of payment as with the special materials.
Closely tied to the question of spare parts is also the As far as the guarantee on the extended credit, a bank problem of undertaking repairs of the military technology guarantee will be requested from the National Bank of Cuba. supplied to Cuba.
Czechoslovakia will offer to supply mobile The credit will be granted at 2% annual interest. repair shops to secure normal repairs.
However, it will not be If it were necessary to accept payment in the form of possible to arrange for medium and general repairs in permaCuban goods, the Czechoslovak delegation will insist that nent repair shops in Cuba considering the fact that neither maximum advantages be provided during the purchase of the Czechoslovak side nor the Soviet side will be capable of Cuban goods, and that a suitable sortiment of Cuban goods securing the needed machines for such a factory.
As an alterbe presented. native in some cases, it would be possible to consider medium In relation to supplies of specialized materials Cuba and general repairs on the supplied special technology in will be given technical aid, both in the form of training Czechoslovak repair factories, and this based on the assumpspecialists in Czechoslovakia, and in sending Czechoslovak tion that the required spare parts will be available. specialists to Cuba.
The Czechoslovak delegation will also Considering the unique situation in Cuba, and at the press for the maximum technical assistance to be provided in request of the Soviet side, the first shipment of specialized Czechoslovakia, and only the essential bit in Cuba. materials will be sent prior to signing the contract between The Czechoslovak delegation should be authorized to Czechoslovakia and Cuba.
This shipment, valued at about provide a maximum 8-year credit for implementing the 50 million Kčs CIF, will include 10,000 Czechoslovak 9mm technical assistance in Czechoslovakia.
As part of arranging this When realizing the supplies the Czechoslovak side must shipment it is first necessary to send Czechoslovak specialists also arrange for the necessary technical documentation, and to Cuba to have them check upon the storage spaces, as well it will press the Cuban side to accept these in English because as secure the preservation and storage of the materials.
The Cuban side would arrange for translated into English and the documentation re-written the translation from English to Spanish on its own. in English.
The consequence is Soviet government, in which the responsibilities of the Soviet that the Czechoslovak delegation must ensure that in the Union to Czechoslovakia will be anchored—Czechoslovakia event the materials would be damaged during the transport being the carrier of all ties with the government of the Cuban to a larger extent than is covered under regular insurance, the republic, under conditions that will be negotiated between Cuban side will still be obliged to fulfill its responsibilities, the Czechoslovak and Cuban delegations. even without receiving the materials.
This the special materials which Czechoslovakia does not have on reimbursement would be paid through existing Czechoslovakhand for training be bought in the Soviet Union, while the Soviet accounts.
Czechoslovak delegation is of the opinion that the Soviet side The Czechoslovak and Soviet sides reached an agreement should lend these materials.
The Soviet delegation also agreed in that as part of its share, the Soviet side will carry all risks that if Czechoslovakia would provide technical aid under ensuing from the possible failure of the Cuban side to fulfill conditions of credit, it would adjust the payment conditions payments. of the Czechoslovak Socialist Republic for these same services.
Considering that practically all of the supplied materials are To this end, both sides will still discuss the details of technical of a second category, the Czechoslovak delegation will refuse assistance to be given by the Soviet Union. any requests to provide a guarantee on the supplied goods.
The Czechoslovak side will secure the technical documentation that must be sent to Cuba with the special During the discussions the Soviet side stated refusal materials, and do the same for the Soviet materials.
The with having a representative of the Soviet side join the Soviet delegation reasoned its position by saying that it Czechoslovak delegation for negotiations in Cuba and did does not have the opportunity to secure a translation of not recommend the Czechoslovak delegation to come into this documentation into the English language.
The Soviet time it emphasized that with the supply of special materials delegation also refused to have the needed Czechoslovak speto Egypt and Indonesia the same practice was utilized, with cialists be transported to Cuba with the first Soviet shipment the Czechoslovak organizations being given the required of special materials.
Thus there is a question of how to best documentation in Russian, and with the Soviet Union undertake the transport of the rather numerous Czechoslovak passing on only additions and changes to the documentadelegation.
The Soviet side binds itself to paying Czechoslovakia tion of the first shipment it will be necessary to have about all the expenses related to the translation and preparation 12 Czechoslovak military experts in Cuba beforehand, who of the documentation for the Cuban side.
As has already together with the members of the delegation will comprise been proven in earlier operations, securing this request a group of 25 people.
It is probable that such a number will presents a difficult and laborious task.
Therefore, it will be necesthe documentation available in Czechoslovakia and related sary to weigh the question of transportation so that the shipto the Soviet materials has to be looked over, corrections ments are conducted on a smaller scale and by way of various must be made according to the changes that have occurred, routes, or consider realizing the shipment with Czechoslovak additions must be made, all of these changes must be airplanes of the Ilyushin I1-18.
Included in the agreement will also be some materials RESOLUTION of a civilian character originating from Czechoslovakia and with a value of about 7. million Kčs, and from the 99th meeting of the Politburo of the Central Committee of the Soviet Union with a value of 32. million Kčs.
Agrees licensed documentation, technical aid connected with building the factory, and a 5-year line of credit at 2% 1.
With the government of the Czechoslovak Republic annual interest to be paid between 1961-1965, and to a being the negotiating party during the discussions about maximum of 20 million Kčs; supplying specialized as well as some civilian materials to the Cuban revolutionary government, including these 5.
With the granting of a loan to a maximum of 30 supplies from the USSR; million Kčs for the supply of civilian planes and sporting weapons of Czechoslovak origin.
That due to the unique situation of Cuba, the first five installments during the years 1961-1965, at a 2% shipment of specialized technology should proceed interest rate; the same conditions apply to shipments of without a contract with the Cuban side; some Soviet materials of a civilian character; 3.
With the establishment of an appointed expert 2% interest for the training of Cuban specialists in the official for technical matters as part of the economic Czechoslovak Socialist Republic.
The maximum amount section of the Czechoslovak embassy in Cuba; would be 50 million Kčs, to be paid between 1960 and 1967, and as with the realization of technical assistance 7.
Comrade A Novotný, employee of the Technical Department, b) In discussions with the USSR, have them agree that Ministry of International Trade. the Soviet Union will transport the specialized materials Comrade Colonel Srovnal V., employee of the Ministry of originating in Czechoslovakia from the Czechoslovak National Defense. border to the Cuban port at its own expense.
Comrade B Lomský empowered with signing the documents presented in points II and III of this resolution, and with adding to the agreement a) To satisfy the Ministry of International Trade’s with Comrade B Lomský and Comrade K Poláček by requests regarding the first shipment so that this shipment assigning other experts to the negotiations in Cuba. is at the station Čierná n/T. at the latest by 21 May 1960.
Comrade V Široký of International Trade, technical assistance both in the Comrade O Šimůnek Czechoslovak Socialist Republic and in Cuba.
Comrade J Ďuriš a) To undertake, together with Comrade F Krajčír and Comrade O Šimůnek the necessary confirmations, should any arise from this resolution.
At Prague that, Luis Martino emphasized it was not right because Marx and Lenin were not of the working-class origin either and yet I was accompanying the Cuban delegation led by Defense they were Marxists.
The delegation visited the CF Polepy They also said that Fidel Castro makes many mistakes, and wine cellars in Zernoseky, in the Litomerice district.
He stated agree with the opinions of Polish communists after the XX that if the American imperialists attack Cuba, Cubans would Congress, and that they hold our communist party in high fight to the last man. esteem.
The whole delegation was in a good mood when we were Dear Comrade Secretary, I considered it necessary to returning from Litomerice.
I was in a car with Raul Castro inform about these opinions before you receive the Cuban and Luis Martino.
During the ride, we exchanged opinions delegation. on some international and party issues.
It also followed from the conversation that both of them lean towards the Chinese opinions on international issues.
Stalin’s work because he was a great the Cuban Minister of the Revolutionary fighter against imperialism.
Armed Forces, July 1960 Khrushchev or our party never said that imperialism would be any different than before, or that it was not necessary to fight in Brozik salon on the 1st floor on 13 July 1960 at 10:00 am. against it.
I emphasized that we fully support the position of the CPSU and the Moscow Declaration.
When Raul Castro Brief information about the current stay of Raúl Castro in the arrived in the CSR, some American agencies wrote that he was CSSR . removed from the function of the defense minister and that Fidel Castro took over that function.
Revolutionary Armed Forces Raul Castro, arrived on a As for the USSR, Luis Martino said he talked with Soviet special plane.
Castro then invited the Korean youth was already on a visit in the CSSR as guests of Minister [of delegation to attend the congress of Latin American youth, Foreign Trade Frantisek] Krajcir.
When the Chinese delegation in the first few days was thus identical in some titulary accepted R Castro at his residence shortly after, he points with that of the Jimenez mission. stressed that the Cuban revolution was fully supported by On 27th June, the delegations of the both Cuban all Chinese people.
In conclusion of the conversation, Raul representatives were accepted by the Minister of International Castro said that the visit of his delegation in Czechoslovakia Affairs David.
In the course of a friendly and open was very fruitful because it showed where the Cuban people conversation, minister David especially emphasized the have real friends. international impact of the Cuban revolution and added On 30 June, National Defense Minister cde. that it is undoubtedly an attractive example for other Latin Lomsky accepted R Castro.
During the conversation, the Cuban of the origin and development of the guerilla movement in representatives compared the revolutionary movement in Cuba, strategy and tactics of guerilla warfare, as well as the Cuba with the coup in Guatemala in 1954 and pointed out current condition of the Cuban revolutionary army.
The issue the mistakes that the Cuban revolution avoided, unlike the of establishing a regular army in Cuba was also discussed in movement in Guatemala.
This conversation was very friendly, just as the unison highly praised the aid to Cuba from the socialist camp, preceeding meetings. and said that the CSSR was one of the top countries in this On 30 June in the afternoon, R Castro and his entourage respect. visited Lidice where he laid a wreath at the memorial to the After the conversation, cde.
From 1 to 3 July, the Cuban and N Jimenez for a dinner, which he arranged in their delegation was watching the Spartakiade (where R Castro was honor.
A friendly and sincere atmosphere from the previous the most impressed by the army routine), visiting a collective conversation continued at the dinner.
R Castro and his farm (CF Polepy and Zernoseky in North Bohemia entourage spent the rest of 27th June sightseeing Prague. region), and meeting with already mentioned Korean and On 28th June, Raul Castro visited Orlik to see the dam.
During the tour of the dam, an improvised meeting took From 4 to 6 July, R Castro went for a three-day trip to place of R Castro with deputy ministers of defense of the Karlovy Vary , Marianske Lazne and Plzen.
Besides PRC and the DPRK, which turned into a very friendly and touring factories and various facilities in these cities, R Castro cordial conversation among the three representatives.
Two more meetings of Raul Castro and the Chinese military training shown to a Cuban delegation; the first one and Korean deputies of national defense took place in the took place on 29 July in Caslav). following days.
Another meeting was on 3 July in the Castro, visits of these diplomatic representatives are currently residence of the Korean titulary, and soon after that also in the taking place in the residence of the Cuban delegation.
In all these meetings, 7 July, R Castro accepted in his villa the Ambassador of the common platform of anti-imperialist fight of the Cuban, the People’s Republic of Bulgaria.
The Bulgarian titulary Korean and Chinese people was especially emphasized, and suggested to R Castro a visit to the PRB, which Castro at that the need to mutually share and use the experience from this time declined with regard to the current situation in Cuba fight was signified.
At this occasion, first the deputy Defense and his prolonged absence from the country.
During R Castro’s visit at On 7 July, R Castro was also accepted by minister of the residence of the Korean titulary, the talk was specifically international trade cde.
On Friday 8 July, R Castro accepted the Ambassador Raul Castro has strong influence with his brother who of the Democratic Republic of Vietnam in Prague.
He has a gentle demeanor and likes showed genuine interest in past battles of the Vietnamese to act directly, without any formalities.
He has a very friendly attitude mutual diplomatic ties in the near future. towards the CSR, which he visited for the first time in 1953 Saturday 9 and Sunday 10 of July were resting days for with a delegation of Cuban youth. the Cuban delegation.
On Saturday afternoon, the whole delegation saw a performance of Laterna Magica and then in the evening, it split into several groups to spend the Saturday evening and Sunday.
The Cuban delegation is expected The list of members of the Cuban delegation to stay in the CSR till 22 July when Raul Castro with his entourage is to fly to the UAR for celebration of the 1) Raul Castro Ruz, minister of Cuban Revolutionary anniversary of nationalization of the Suez Canal.
He is the brother 10) Marcellino Sanchez Diaz of the Prime Minister Fidel Castro and one of the most out11) Juan Bautista Perez standing Cuban revolutionaries.
He joined the Fidel Castro’s 12) Manolo Fernandez movement in 1953 when on 26 July, they led opposition 13) Luis Mas Martin – personal secretary of Raul Castro groups into an attack against the Moncada barracks and 14) Mariano E Seijo Torres the administrative building of the Batista organization in Santiago de Cuba.
This historic date gave name to the whole revolutionary movement in Cuba.
Afterwards he lived briefly in exile in the On orders from Raul Castro, a four-member group from the USA and Mexico. delegation in the CSR left for Cuba on 6 July.
Felix Lugones Ramirez, Marcellino Fidel to Cuba where they started to organize intensively a Sanchez Diaz, Juan Bautista Perez, and Mariano E Seijo Torres. guerilla war in the Sierra Maestra against the Another four-member group is to depart for the USSR Batista dictatorship.
Efigenio Almejeivas Delgado, Guillermo an underground operator under the code name Deborah.
Ever since the revolutionary government seized power, he has held many top functions.
On 4 July, the state deputy, accompanied by the ambasThe president of Cuban National Bank Ernesto Che sador, visited Foreign Minister Raul Roa, with whom he Guevara, who is actually one of the most influential perengaged in lengthy exchanges of opinions on the current sonalities in the Cuban economy, is expected to visit the situation in Cuba, the next approaches of the revolutionary Czechoslovak Socialist Republic on 23rd October 1960.
He is government, its current position among Latin American de facto in the function of a Deputy Chairman of the Cuban countries, and certain international questions. government, and as for importance, he ranks the third after Around noon, the state deputy, accompanied by the Fidel Castro.
He is originally an Argentinean; he acquired ambassador, paid a courtesy visit to the President of the Cuban citizenship only recently.
O Dorticos, with whom he had become He actively fought against the Peron dictatorship in acquainted in Argentina.
Roa organized a dinner in honor of the since 1955, together with Fidel Castro against the Batista dicstate deputy, which was attended by all prominent officials of the Cuban foreign ministry, the designated Cuban ambassador tatorship.
In 1956, he was among the 82 of Castro’s comrades to Prague, and employees at the Czechoslovak embassy.
Later who in the beginning of December landed in Cuba and out that night, the state deputy and the ambassador visited the of whom only 12 were left by the end of 1956.
Guevara, the most capable commander of the revolutionary army, and with whom they held very lengthy and interesting political successfully led one of the key strikes against the Batista army. conversations on the present international standing of Cuba, We can assume that during his stay in the CSSR, he will possible ways to thwart United States aggression, and the namely want to discus construction of a car factory in Cuba, support Cuba looks forward to receiving from other Latin granting of further credit of about $50 million, and maybe, American countries.
It is interesting that, at this time, Guevara the question of possible cooperation within the Council for was convinced of planned American aggression.
It is worth Mutual Economic Assistance . mentioning that this conversation was one of the best political He is scheduled to leave the Czechoslovak Socialist conversations during the state deputy’s visit to Havana.
Archive of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Prague, Czech construction of an oil refinery, and for geological exploration.
Mr Guevara supposedly wants to negotiate in the USSR Translated by Francis Raska.] possible participation in the Council for Mutual Economic Assistance to some extent.
Simunek on behalf of the Cuban revolutionary government, in which letter he asks for sending an 1.
Jimenez, visited the Czechoslovak Socialist Republic ting ready to send him). in June of 1960 and consulted with the National Planning The National Planning Commission thinks it is right to Commission’s Chairman cde.
Simunek and his first deputy grant the request of the Cuban side, and confirmed in writing Pucek on the issues of planned development and control of its approval of sending an experienced expert.
It is recomeconomy, and showed a genuine interest in Czechoslovak mended to promise Mr Guevara that an expert would be know-how, experience and experts. sent in shortest possible time.
The Commission also thinks it At the end of discussions, Mr Jimenez presented the would be constructive to recommend to Mr Guevara that a Deputy Prime Minister and Chairman of the National 5 or 6 member group of experts from the National Planning Planning Commission cde.
If key sectors of the national economy; it is approved, it is recommended to propose to Mr Guevara To review possibilities of further development of mutual that the agreement be signed on behalf of both governments economic ties , either in Havana or Prague.
A meeting could follow of reprenamely a rapid increase of mutual shipments of goods sentatives of the planning authorities in Havana or Prague in according to the needs of both countries, in order order to work out details of the signed agreement. to expedite import and distribution of those Cuban products that were traditionally made for the USA and 2.
It will be possible, though, to deterfor Cuban economic authorities, and on the main mine to what extent the sulfides can be added to production problems of long and short term cooperation. process only when the necessary experiments are done.
Possible import of non-ferrous ore from Cuba and plant, an important prerequisite would be securing shipments cooperation in this sector of sulfur for the necessary production of sulfuric acid, which would be available from the plant Moa in capacity of 1,300 Based on consultations with experts from the Ministry of tons a day.
Americans were shipping sulfur for this production Metallurgy and Ore Mining who returned from Cuba at the in a molten state directly from the mainland. end of September, there are several problems with ore mining Besides that, a technology is being developed in the CSSR and metal production whose solution by joint efforts would for separating nickel from cobalt, which is different than that be beneficial to both sides.
We hope that within 3 months exchange of goods, which can be resolved in short time, and from obtaining a required sample from Cuba, the feasibility questions of a long-term nature, which will require scientific of our method could be assessed for use with Cuban nickel and economic cooperation. and cobalt sulfides.
It will be necessary to consult for production of 50 thousand tons of nickel.
The Cuban with the USSR on the many questions associated with progovernment nationalized one of them Moa with capacity duction restart in Moa and how best to help Cuba. of 25 thousand tons of nickel contained in the feedstock, Obviously, even if all goes well, resumption of nickel before all aggregates could be made fully operational and production will take a long time.
The plant, equipped quarries whose capacity is estimated from 1. to 2 built to the highest technical level and for new technologies, million tons of ore a year, could partially help Cuba in this was soon afterwards shut down.
Composition of this ore is similar to that of the ore 3 – 4 thousand people.
Restarting the production will be from the People’s Republic of Albania, the difference being a very complicated matter because Cubans in the plant are that the Cuban ore contains 1. to 1. % nickel compared to only in positions of middle technical level and know only 1 % for the Albanian ore.
Problems stemming from a unique technology plant during the third 5-year plan , and and very complicated equipment are exacerbated by the fact to build up reserves for the considered increase of the plant’s that only part of the plant is located in Cuba, which does capacity.
Given this situation, we cannot expect, even with the help The second nickel producing plant is Nicaro with capacof socialist camp countries, namely the USSR, that Cuba ity about 25 thousand tons.
It uses a technology that would be able to produce nickel in a closed cycle with the Czechoslovak metallurgists know fairly well.
The Nicaro can assume that by collecting knowledge of and information plant is still in the hands of a capitalist company with preabout the first part of the process located in Cuba, and by dominantly American capital, which closed it in the first days trial runs of the technological guidelines, conditions could of October 1960 under the pretense that they have to pay be created relatively soon for production support of this Cuba high taxes.
Shutting first part of the plant, which would be producing nickel and down production in this plant is undoubtedly to be a represcobalt sulfides.
Even though the socialist camp countries do sive measure from the USA because the Cuban government not have the technology yet for processing this feedstock, the declared it would nationalize the plant at a convenient time.
With short interruptions, Nicaro is producing since into conditions, under which this could be secured. 1943 and it has a well-trained workforce knowledgeable Similar possibilities exist in chromium ores that, true, about the production technology, as well as many middle contain only 33% of chromium oxide but they have management Cuban cadres.
The CSSR could also contribute suitable composition as for other components.
Since it is to ensuring proper operation of the plant by sending a group difficult to obtain these ores from countries of the socialist of up to 10 technologists and shop managers who are workcamp, we should explore the possibilities of importing Cuban ing with a large semi-production installation for nickel prochromium ores. duction in Vitkovice Steelworks.
The USSR could possibly Significant aid to Cuba would be making order in their provide this kind of specialists as well.
We should point out, geological survey, mine organization, and keeping good however, that due to the change in ownership relationship of documentation in the mines.
The current situation is rather this plant, securing the delivery of about 7 thousand tons of dismal.
Many nationalized plants work with a minimum of ammonia a year is required, as well as a large quantity of coke confirmed reserves, exploration is not organized into projects, for production of producer gas.
Deliveries of these materials, there is practically no mining/geological and survey docuand many other questions will have to be discussed namely mentation, etc.
Aid could be organized by sending a group of with the USSR and some other socialist camp countries. geologists, mining engineers and surveyors who would at the plants ensure smooth operation and also help with training Cuba was getting a certain part of the Nicaro production the Cuban cadres.
The USSR is planning similar aid. in the form of sinter containing about 91% of nickel.
Following the nationalization of Nicaro, it may be possible to secure a considerable part of nickel deliveries for Nickel the Czechoslovak economy in the form of sinter.
The Moa plant – to reach an agreement with the USSR By rough calculations of finishing capabilities, our experts about close cooperation and aid in bringing the Cuban estimated that Cuba is currently producing over 30,000 plant to production, and about the most efficient approach to utilization and processing of nickel and tons of rich copper concentrates containing about 10,000 cobalt sulfides. tons of copper.
The Nicaro plant – to consult with the USSR on the resources of copper.
The mined ore contains 2 to 7% copper. question of Czechoslovak specialists helping to ensure The concentrates were exported to the USA; the export was an uninterrupted production of the plant, preparing the halted after the nationalization.
Cuba is interested in buildnecessary documentation for securing delivery of spare ing a plant for production of black copper, which would be parts, and also the question of Czechoslovak participation exported.
Building such a plant with capacity of 15 or even in supporting the plant’s production with materials and more thousand tons can be considered useful and advantaauxiliary materials . geous for Cuba.
Until the plan; plant is built, we should look for delivery and processing of In connection with the results of the upcoming copper concentrates partially domestically and (depending on negotiations with the APR about an increase the quantity obtained) in cooperation with other countries of in shipments of ferro-nickel ores, to explore the socialist camp. possibilities of supporting an increase in capacity of Cuba also has considerable reserves of good quality the nickel plant in Sered by long-term shipments of manganese ores.
As mined, they contain 37% of manganese ores from Cuba. and after processing from 48 to 49% of Mn.
Import of nickel sinter about 10 thousand tons of these processed ores is wareSecure within trade relations shipments of nickel sinter housed.
Considering the difficult situation in supplying the up to the maximum the Czechoslovak economy can Czechoslovak metallurgy with rich manganese ores, it makes utilise.
Explore possibilities of processing the copper concentrate is 244% of the original export plan for shipments of engiin the CSSR and in friendly countries. neering goods.
Jimenez, Director of INRA , Chromium ore was to clarify and expedite shipments of some small engineerExplore usability and suitability of imports of chromium ores ing units, and to negotiate crucial measures in the area of for the Czechoslovak economy. economic cooperation.
Mr Maldonado, representative of the Bank of International Trade, which so far is the only author4.
Exchange of goods between the Czechoslovak Socialist ity of the foreign trade monopoly, visited the CSSR in August Republic and the Republic of Cuba and presented the Czechoslovak side with a list of goods that Cuba wants to import from countries of the socialist camp Trade between Cuba and Czechoslovakia has been in greater quantities in case of economic boycott of Cuba by characterized by heavy Cs. trade surplus in recent years.
The Cuban side was to specify quantities and values value of Czechoslovak export, almost exclusively consumer in this list in September.
Based on this list, Czechoslovak goods, was between 16 and 19 million CZK from 1954 to foreign trade enterprises prepared preliminary reports of 1958.
There was practically no import to the CSSR except delivery possibilities; since the Cuban lists have not been for packaged tobacco worth small amounts of money.
This amended and specified, these reports along with some offers situation resulted in a protest from the Cuban side and from foreign trade enterprises were sent to the Czechoslovak therefore, the Czechoslovak side started to buy sugar for reTrade Department to be available to the Cuban side.
Exchange of goods was temporarily the Cuban side presented the Czechoslovak Trade Mission a suspended due to introduction of licensing proceedings. list of about 2,500 items of goods with requested quantities By negotiating long-term trade, payment, and credit of import.
The Czechoslovak delivery capabilities will be agreements, and a protocol on scientific and technological promptly reviewed and coordinated with other socialist camp cooperation, conditions were created for exchange of goods countries, to which a similar list was also given. on a substantially larger scale, and for the necessary changes Czechoslovak imports are hampered by considerable in the structure of Czechoslovak export.
For instance, a Several Czechoslovak trade and technological missions vistrial shipment of iron ore did not happen because the ore was ited Cuba, namely a special mission of the foreign trade enternot available for shipment despite our ships being sent to a prise Technoexport, and the already mentioned technological Cuban port twice upon Cuban invitation; promised shipment mission of the foreign trade enterprise Motokov.
Negotiations of copper concentrates did not materialize either for similar of Motokov representatives resulted in closing contracts for reasons.
Only smaller shipments of sugar, hides, coffee and 14 small engineering units (for instance production of locks, coco were carried out, and negotiations are pending namely bolts, refrigerators, small gasoline motors, etc.) in total value about shipments of iron, manganese and chromium ores and about 35 million CZK; most of the shipments will be made concentrates of nickel and copper; possibilities of importing in 1961.
Negotiation of other representatives of Czechoslovak silk cord, sisal, etc. are being reviewed. foreign trade enterprises resulted in unification of especially The current status of mutual exchange of goods indicates contracts for engineering goods.
For increase in imports from technological aid for construction of an automobile plant in Cuba, it will be necessary to develop those Cuban producCuba.
According to Cuban officials, it would be a plant with tion sectors that can create for the Cz. side interesting import capacity of 15 thousand passenger cars, 5 thousand trucks, opportunities; this applies namely to ore mining and to some 3 thousand tractors, motorcycles, diesel motors, etc.
Cuba kinds of agricultural production, for instance corn, palm already talked with representatives of Renault about building core, and coco.
Czechoslovak experts can help in this area. this plant, as well as granting credit.
Having compared the Importing sugar either for domestic consumption or for proposal of Cz. experts with that of Renault representatives, direct or indirect re-exports can also facilitate decreasing the Chairman of the Cuban government Fidel Castro informed trade surplus or for direct or indirect re-exports, the pertinent the Cz. delegation that he preferred the Cz. proposal.
According to projections of convey to him the Cz. opinion on the development of mutual the Cuban government, the plant should be built from 1961 goods exchange and to point out especially the necessity of until 1965.
A clause was incorporated into the Soviet-Cuban and Considering that the Cuban side hasn’t practically tapped into Czechoslovak-Cuban trade agreements, which allow transfer the provided credit of $20 million, Cuban representatives of assets to third country accounts, provided all parties agree. would request additional credit of $50 million.
Transfer of the Soviet side’s surplus b) The automobile industry is considered in Latinremainders in interesting clearing accounts will be requested.
American countries as one of the important signs of In connection with issues of barter and economic cooperaindustrialization; tion with the Republic of Cuba, correctness of the current c) The Cuban government wants to utilize the halls system of territorial division of the foreign trade plan will that Americans built. be assessed.
Their export can be facilitated with funds of the Ministry of Foreign Trade who expects decrease of exports of 1.
Emphasize that based facilities for production of passenger cars could be organized on this accepted Statute of the CMEA, only European after 1965.
This approach would lower investment costs for countries may become members of the Council, and that building the intended plant from $70 million to $40 million other countries can participate in the work of the Council for the time period until 1965.
In such a case, credit of $20 for Mutual Economic Assistance on selected issues. million would be required in addition to the $20 million c) Inform Mr Guevara about the main objectives of already granted.
The additional credit could be created, as a the CMEA, namely coordination of plans for the next preliminary thought, by transferring about $10 million from 20 years. credit reserves for less developed capitalist countries, and $10 million from reserves for socialist countries.
Balaban monitoring of this issue in that this solution will be acceptable to Mr Guevara because he the USSR and passing on immediately any information himself does not support building the automobile industry in he obtains. the foreseeable future, and prefers production of tractors and trucks.
Providing technological aid to the Cuban republic of funding reserved for the 5-year plan.
Based on this framework document, the FTE Polytechna sent in September d) As for assembly of passenger cars in Cuba from Cs. parts 1960 its representatives to discuss concrete forms and until their production is introduced, it will require negligible general conditions of technological cooperation with the construction , which could Cuban Republic.
An agreement “General Conditions for be drawn from the already provided credit.
Nacional de la Reforma Agraria), and b) Central Planning Council (Junta Central de 2.
Regarding this, Fidel Castro supposedly said that less developed countries.
It is, Providing leading experts in the main areas of industry therefore, safe to assume that during his visit in Czechoslovakia, and agriculture who could solve the organizational Mr Guevara will discuss this issue with our representatives. questions, organize the administration, and solve the According to preliminary information from the CSSR envoy problems of short-term production planning and its to Moscow cde.
IV. Mines and mining industry, metallurgy, geological and ore exploration, liquid fuels, energy and planning.
The Cuban government and its economic officials still Also, Mr Guevara, who is the highest instance for economic lack experience in actual management of the economy issues in Cuba, directly asked that sending these experts be as a whole and of individual sectors, and thus are not coordinated between the USSR and the other countries of always able to objectively assess their capabilities and to the socialist camp. formulate their requests accordingly; On their own initiative, representatives of the FTE 2.
The Cuban economy is furnished exclusively with Polytechna have initiated talks with the pertinent USSR American machinery and equipment.
In the short term, authorities for the purpose of joint coordination of scientific and technological aid to the Republic of Cuba.
Considering this, we would recommend to Mr Guevara has been partially agreed upon.
It wishes to purchase 5-6 fighter planes government, and to offer help of Czechoslovak experts equipped with radiolocation mechanisms.
At the same time, with preparation of the above-mentioned plan. the Government expects Czechoslovakia to provide technical assistance and send a small group of specialists in order to V. organize anti-aircraft defenses and train 4-5 pilots to fly the supplied planes.
Krajcir conduct the talks with technology, it will also be necessary to train Cuban specialists Mr Guevara, with the 1st Deputy of the Chairman of the State to maintain and repair the supplied planes.
Vlna participating. return from Czechoslovakia, maintenance and repairs would We further recommend that Mr Guevara be accepted be the responsibility of Czechoslovak specialists.
Furthermore, by the President of the Republic and the 1st Secretary of the it will be necessary to train Cuban specialists to use the radioCPCZ CC cde.
Siroky, location equipment. with participation of Simunek, Krajcir and Vlna, and by On the same occasion, the Prime Minister requested that Simunek with participation of Krajcir, Vlna, Smok, and radio stations be supplied in order to ensure the command Duris. effectiveness of the armed forces as In agreement with the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, we well as other radio stations to secure communication between recommend to award Mr Guevara the Order of White Lion provincial commanders.
Among his other requests, it is necesof the first degree in recognition of his efforts in developing sary to mention the previous request to be supplied with 50 contacts between Cuba and the CSSR. million 7.92 millimeter bullets and 400,000 magazines for 52čs automatic rifles.
The commander of the Revolutionary Army’s tactical Obtained by James Hershberg, translated for CWIHP by Adolf forces, Commandante Guillermo Garcia, communicated a Kotlik.] wish through the prime minister for the supply of two mobile artillery batteries for divisions and machine equipment for the development of a permanent army repair facility for artillery Report to Czechoslovak Communist materials.
The issue of equipment At the end of last year, the leading Cuban representafor the army repair facility is in the process of being clarified. tives, President Dorticos and Prime Minister Fidel In recognition of the fact that the urgent Cuban Castro, expressed on various occasions their interest in being demands have not been fully satisfied, supply possibilities supplied with additional special technology and investment have been explored in the Soviet Union and the Bulgarian mechanisms, including appropriate technical assistance.
A reply ter this threat by developing a radiolocation network and from Comrade Zimyanin was received by Deputy Prime by organizing anti-aircraft defenses.
The interest of the Cuban Revolutionary request of the Government of the Cuban Republic and, in Government in being supplied with additional special addition to anti-aircraft defense, would provide resources technology. for coastal defense.
Considering the fact that Soviet arms shipments to Cuba are no longer a secret, the Soviet Leading representatives of the Cuban Revolutionary Government believes that it would be useful if further Government have submitted via the Czechoslovak Embassy supplies to Cuba take place without the participation of in Havana new requests for supplies of special technology and Czechoslovak organs.
By the same token, Soviet specialists investment mechanisms. will be sent directly to Cuba.
The Soviet Ambassador further informed that the The requests have been dealt with by the State Planning Soviet Government, in harmony with the opinions of the Commission, the Defense Ministry, the Ministry of Industry, Czechoslovak side, believes that it would be useful if specialand the Finance Ministry. ists from the Czechoslovak Socialist Republic were sent to Cuba as soon as possible in order to assist in the organization of anti-aircraft defense for the country using the already supEnclosure I plied materials.
As a significant portion of the resources for anti-aircraft defense have been and will be supplied by the Suggested resolution Soviet Union, the Soviet side considers it appropriate to send its own group of specialists to Cuba who, in cooperation with the Czechoslovak specialists, would solve all problems surEnclosure III rounding anti-aircraft defense in Cuba.
It is clear from the above-mentioned facts that it will be Report possible to satisfy fully the new Cuban requests, including the sending of a small group of Czechoslovak specialists who, together with Soviet specialists, will formulate a plan Enclosure IV for the organization of anti-aircraft defense in Cuba.
It takes into account the report on the interest of the Cuban Revolutionary Government in being supplied with additional special technology and investment mechanisms.
Czechoslovak crowns, will be paid for in hard currency rifle model 52 Cz. by deadlines agreed upon with in 1961.
The remaining 21. million Czechoslovak the Ministry of Foreign Trade. crowns will be paid off in five annual payments based 2.
To formulate quickly along with the Ministry of on Czechoslovak-Cuban clearing accounts at 2% interest Foreign Trade a beginning in 1962. final offer to build an army repair station keeping in b) To supply 2 mobile artillery batteries from the stockpiles mind Cuba’s need to secure its ability to repair of the Ministry of Defense at one-third of their value, supplied weapons. namely for 423,000 Czechoslovak crowns on the basis of 3.
To provide technical assistance in conjunction with the reserve sum of the Czechoslovak-Cuban Agreement the Defense of 11 June 1960.
Ministry technical assistance by sending Czechoslovak c) To supply 400,000 magazines for 7.62 mm automatic experts to Cuba or by training Cubans in rifles vz.čs at a value of around 10. million Czechoslovak industries.
Czechoslovak crowns on a cash, hard currency basis or through Czechoslovak-Cuban clearing.
Comrade J Ďuriš with the task of providing loans in d) The construction of a permanent army weapon repair accordance with the station and with the provision of any necessary technical provisions according to Points II a and II c of this resolution. assistance in order for it to be operational.
Empowers Comrade V Široký to decide on approaches to of technical equipment.
The rest would be covered on the any new issues that maz develop in future negotiations with basis of a 12 million crown loan, which would be repaid Cuban representatives so long as they shall fall outside the in five successive annual payments.
The holder of the documents allegedly worked until Comrade V Široký recently at a consulate in Havana.
Involved are microfilms Comrade O Šimůnek containing detailed information about the organizers and Comrade L Jankovcová place of action.
He requests 28 thousand German marks Comrade V David for the materials.
In negotiations over recent days on the Comrade B Kőhler conditions of the handover, Felske stated that, among other Comrade A Dubček things, an assassination attempt is being prepared during a Comrade V Koucký big public celebration and that a large amount of explosives have been transported to Havana by individuals whose families live there.
Toriente believes that a possible assassination attempt could occur during celebrations marking 1 May.
His Czechoslovak Intelligence Reports go-between held discussions in Essen on 29. in the evening Correspondence with Czechoslovak and requested evidence that the films on offer truly contain Embassy, Havana, Regarding Purported the mentioned information.
He will receive a report by ten Assassination Plot against Fidel o’clock.
He is carrying an important report, 30.4.61 which Gramatges should immediately hand over to Pleskot.
Allegedly HAVANA involved is a big sabotage on 1 May based on information Pavlíček provided by Fernandel.
Similar measures are n. [apparently between 22 and 28 being carried out at all regional and district committees of October 1962] Svazarm.
Increased watchfulness is being implemented at all Svazarm airfields, and measures are being carried out to Report for Comrade Novnotný fulfill the designated tasks.
The secure storage of weapons, ammunition, and radio equipment is being reinspected to During the course of today no significant changes occurred prevent their misuse.
The troops of the majority of Svazarm have been instructed to ask for schooling from the NATO countries are on combat alert.
However, no increased state organs in explaining the current situation and in training activity has been observed of strategic air forces or rocket units the population in II level national preparations, which are in Europe. proceeding intensively at present.
In the Federal Republic of Germany border zone with the At its meeting the presidium of the Svazarm Central CSSR, increased observation of our territory continues.
This is Committee has adopted a resolution condemning the accompanied by air reconnaissance flights. aggressive acts of the government of the USA, and supporting In the Cs.
The resolution was published in and political personnel are focused on securing the fulfillment of combat readiness tasks.
Thorough checks of their fulfillment the Svazarm magazine Obránce vlasti. are being carried out.
So far the results of these checks show Likewise at the Ministry of Justice and the General good readiness on the part of the armed forces, and only defects Procurator’s Office, the measures assigned by the politburo of a minor extent are being found.
Readiness in case of severe insufficiencies in the material outfitting of soldiers were extraordinary events has been verified, and telecommunicadiscovered; care for the soldiers had been neglected.
Control tions links and readiness at all equipment have been verified. organs have adopted remedial measures.
It has been ordered to increase watchfulness and wakefulness Political organs in nearly all units and sub-units agree in at all workplaces, and move consistently and in a timely mantheir reports that the current measures taken by our armed ner against those who would misuse the situation. forces have led to a marked strengthening of ties between the Staff is on duty round-the-clock in all sectors. different class years of basic-service soldiers and reservists.
Comrades are helping one another to unify the level of their Signature readiness as much as possible.
Central State Archive, Archive of the CC CPCZ training of 1st-year soldiers.
Obtained by 2nd-year soldiers have committed themselves to help work Oldřich Tůma and translated by Linda Mastalir.] their 1st-year comrades into their functions.
Similar cases of helpfulness and conscientious fulfillment of tasks are being reported in all the armies.
Besides these positive expressions of understanding of Cable no. from the Czechoslovak the current international situation, isolated incorrect opinions Embassy in Havana , and attitudes continue to exist.
Appropriate attention is being 24 October 1962 paid to these issues on the part of the political organs.
Within a few hours their battle preparedness and are now at maximum readiinitial contacts between the USSR’s ships and the American ness.
They evacuated some hospitals where the cases of the battleships should take place; according to Alekseev’s informaill allowed, and increased security measures.
They arrested a tion, the American battleships do not yet have instructions to number of counterrevolutionary elements and all institutions, stop the ships.
Despite this, the Soviet friends are anticipating factories, and important objects are constantly under guard. dangerous provocations.
On Judging from the situation in Havana as well as in the provthe morning of 23.10. two of the USSR’s ships inces, the country is calm, although understandably nervous. arrived without difficulty.
The Cubans have cancelled all PanPeople are not buying up goods, there is no panic—on the American flights and all domestic connections.
As a ČSA and Soviet TU should result of the increased danger, the industrial manufacturing depart normally.
In the event of internal unrest, certain ficient supplies of raw materials and in some places, insufchanges can be expected.
The labor unions, women, and pronouncement of the Soviet government, as well as with youth are all helping the KRV the situation in the country, which is calm.
Battle preparedness has no traces of sabotage or organized internal opposition that been strengthened in all sectors.
There was an even greater solidarplane crashed into a minefield in Guantanamo, causing a ity after Fidel ’s speech.
He had the same questions as Kříž [military attaché by the blockade, and an attack on Guantanamo.
The oneat the Czecoslovak embassy] about borrowing several pistols sided support of Latin American countries for [US President for the defense of the embassy.
On the other hand, can suitably decline since the Cubans ensure the defense of determination prevails, as does the need to oppose the USA the embassy and the residence. or the mercenaries.
Now a request has been submitted to main headquarters, Central Council of Labor Unions but a decision has not yet been made.
The Secretariat of the ÚRO discussed the ÚRO Czechoslovak Union of Youth statement on the Cuban question and measures to implement extraordinary measures.
A proclamation by the Central Committee of the ČSM was discussed and approved, and was published today in The statement of the ÚRO was submitted to the Czech Mladá fronta only.
Similar The CC ČSM cancelled a number of planned meetings, measures were enacted in the labor union building on Gorký so that functionaries of the ČSM can be utilized form active Square.
A list has been made of personnel and their methods work among youth. of instruction.
The readiness of the vehicle park has also been It also came to agreement with the municipal council of secured.
In Prague and Bratislava foreign students, especially from Duty hours of the leading functionaries of the ÚRO are Cuba, exhibited a tendency to go into the streets, and some from 18:00 to 06:00 in the morning.
Precise orders have been of the ČSM agreed with the foreign students that they will drawn up for duty service. take part in joint gatherings with the ČSM in the schools.
Orders were prepared for duty service and methods of posMeasures for archive materials sible mobilization of CC ČSM personnel.
The Central Archive has already been deposited at a specified place outside the ÚRO building.
An emergency materials M measures plan was put into effect in accordance with orders from the CC CPCz.
So far means of possible evacuation have not been set. who drew up a list of comrades into two ranks, which is being From the Ministry of Transportation they have the order to go speedily verified. by train.
The question of archive materials from the CC ČSM, the International Students’ Union, Mladá fronta, and the Unresolved issues ČSM Central School has thus far not been resolved.
Here they refuse also, saying that it has not been approved by the Secretariat or the leading comrades of the CC Top Secret CPCz.
Report for Comrade Novotný The economic archive has also not been dealt with, because the CC ČSM has no place to put it, and no means.
During the night there was no significant change in the The same for the archive of the ČSM Central School. military-political situation.
Also unresolved is the question of relocating the archive According to information from the Ministry of the to a selected place in Slovakia.
No site or money has been Interior, Kennedy offered [British approved with which the archive could be relocated.
Prime Minister Harold] Macmillan to arrange for mutual telephone contact for the purpose of exchanging opinions 3.
The biggest problems are with the International during the course of the next few days.
The position of Students’ Union, which has not been considered up until now.
So far there is no site or means to relocate the personnel of In military circles in Great Britain indignation is being this organization.
There is the possibility of relocating them if expressed that the government of the USA did not discuss needed to the recreation facility in Pec, but there are no means its actions in the Caribbean area with its allies in NATO, of getting them there.
It has been confirmed that the what to do with it is an unresolved question. armed forces of Great Britain are not participating through any measures in the current military-political situation.
They don’t The government of the USA is interested in not raising know what to do with the archive.
It is an open question the slightest doubt about its determination to attain its goal. what to do in the event of extraordinary measures with the In the Security Council it presented the aerial photos publishing house, and especially with the daily newspaper of 4 missile bases and one airfield for jet airplanes in Cuba.
In commenting on the submitted photos, an American army colonel had to admit that so far no atomic weapons had been 5.
Stevenson expressed the idea that he would go with a will request in case of need from the CC ČSM buses and Cuban representative to Cuba to carry out an inspection of delivery trucks with civilian and girl drivers.
The CC ČSM the bases. does not have civilian and women drivers, and all the Svazarm President Kennedy has supposedly decided to call a special courses are full.
This task has not been fulfilled. session of Congress to discuss the situation in Cuba in regard to alleged continued construction of missile bases.
Military circles continue to be fed reports of a possible invasion, preparations for which are linked to the continuing concentration of forces in the Caribbean area.
USA, the situation among diplomatic circles in the UN on the evening of 26.10 was described as deteriorating.
He advised the Austrian government to avoid statements American citizen, was apprehended while photographing that might endanger their neutrality. the area.
He was identified, and his photo apparatus was The Presidium of the West German Social Democratic confiscated.
For November a restoking of the Berlin crisis can be expected. example in the Přerov district, participation in training has The situation in the Cs. armed forces is risen from 40% to 90%. unchanged.
Troops are undergoing intensive training accordA number of cases have occurred of reserve soldiers and ing to adjusted plans.
Staffs are verifying the accomplishment officers requesting recall to active duty.
Military district offiof assigned measures, and are implementing steps to increase cials report increased registration discipline. coordination.
The political authorities of the 2nd army district warn that Evidence has been discovered of a deliberate impairment in the areas of Bruntál, Šumperk, Hlučina, and Odry, memof the combat readiness of a MIG-15 plane that members of bers of the German ethnicity are becoming active. the headquarters of the 7th Army use for training.
A scrap of paper had been inserted into the gun sight, preventing effective fire from the on-board weapons.
Obtained by majority of members of the army and Interior Ministry Oldřich Tůma and translated by Linda Mastalir.] troops to more active and responsible activity in the accomplishment of duties.
Commitments to more rapid training of recruits and reservists are being adopted.
Cases are spreading of non-party army members requesting acceptance as candidate members of the CPCz.
Inquiries on the possibilities of recruiting volunteers to go to Cuba are increasing.
Cable no. from the Czechoslovak Measures for supply of the population are being positively Embassy in Havana , 27 October received, and it is reported that the wave of panic buying in 1962 stores has subsided in most instances.
The search for both of these deserters is being carried out by Public Security.
On 26.10.1962 , 15 soldiers at a technical vocational school (where the officer corps is trained to That sent by you via Washington, and a discussion serve anti-aircraft rockets) were found listening to a broadcast between Vrána and Pinner 26.10. passed on this of Radio Free Europe in the Hungarian language, which was conviction of Fidel ’s about the danger of an invasion translated by one of the listeners.
Ambassador Aleksandr] Alexejev confirms this Similarly, in the 2nd company of the Cheb brigade of the information during the night hours, we will give the order Border Guards, several members listened to West Berlin stato burn all classified materials except for the enciphered data, tion Rias on a transistor receiver. which we will destroy last.
At the same time I will order the A private of the 151st engineer regiment was found taking emergency measures for informing and organizing our citi200 grenades off base.
During the night continuing preparations were discovered to destroy routes of communications in the area of Ludwigsthal.
Civil defense exercises were held in the area of the eastern Schönsee at 22.30 The situation in the Cs. armed forces is unchanged.
Report to CPCz General Secretary Antonin Troops continue to train for increased combat readiness.
Novotný, 28 October 1962 Repairs to equipment are being rapidly completed.
The commander of the 4th Army has relieved the comInformation for Comrade Novotný mander of the 4th Antiaircraft Detachment, Lt.
Colonel Havider, for irresponsible attitude and failure to fulfill combat During 28 October no significant changes occurred in the readiness tasks.
In the same army, during a relocation of the military-political situation.th Mechanized Infantry regiment, there were motor breakIn spite of the White House statement in which there are downs of some automobiles – the fault of recruit drivers. indications of willingness on the part of the USA to negotiThe state of political morale in the armed forces continues ate a resolution to the current crisis, aggressive preparations to be good.
Khrushchev to President Kennedy has become the focus the reinforcement and concentration of American ground and of attention.
People’s Army and air forces in Florida and on the base in Key West, where Hawk the troops of the Interior Ministry, mass radio listening has anti-aircraft missile batteries are also deployed.
The American been arranged for, and reports and meetings have been held. government has officially proclaimed that the intensity of The response of all members has been very positive.
During air force reconnaissance over Cuba will be increased, while these political events interest was shown on other questions; American planes will destroy anti-aircraft facilities that especially anticipated is what position will be adopted on the attempt to defend Cuban airspace.
It has been learned that a light armored regiment from the Political activity continues to be pursued among the units, strategic corps at Fort Meade, Maryland is at combat readiexhibiting results in the exemplary fulfillment of tasks and the ness and is prepared to move from the base.
Combat readiness is maintained Defense Ministry has called 24 transport planes of the Air National Guard to active duty. at a high level.
Preparations for the swearing-in ceremony of According to information from General Headquarters 1st year recruits were taken advantage of to explain the curof the Ministry of National Defense, on 27.10.1962 [27 rent international situation and the necessity for high combat October 1962] at 16:00 h our time a Cuban anti-aircraft batreadiness.
In several units the ceremony has already taken tery shot down an American U-2 reconnaissance plane about place; in others it will take place today.
At 16:17 h a group of American meaning and sense of the oath has a very positive effect on the planes penetrated to above Pinar del Rio province, and were soldiers at this time.
An equally positive impact is had by the repelled by anti-aircraft artillery. speeches of representatives of local government organs, sponIn Nicaragua, Panama, Guatemala, and other countries, sor factories, and the participation of parents.
Increased readito quality and timely fulfillment of tasks are adopted then ness has been observed at the Canadian Defense Ministry, and there at the assembly under the impression created by the where 50% of officers were at their stations during the night. oath-taking.
From the ceremonial assemblies and meetings, Preparations for other measures toward heightened combat greetings are sent to the district conferences of the CPCz in readiness has been observed in Italy.
On 27.10. which soldiers assure the delegates that they will fulfill their police were put on alert in Rome, and instructed that possible assigned tasks. internal unrest should be expected, especially in the event of Among the troops of the Interior Ministry – in the mobilization.
The mood among the ranks of the Italian police Internal Guard since the last report, 30 new collective and and army is strongly anti-American. individual commitments have been adopted relating to Among troops deployed on the Central European theater, guard duty, heightening of combat readiness, attainment of no further extraordinary measures have been observed.
In the Blansko RMZ there was a The night of 26.10 to 27.10 gross breach of discipline by two officers, Major Koš, a former passed by in relative calm, although in absolute readiness and member of the government troops, and 1st Lieutenant Kriš, understandable nervousness.
In the morning hours of 27.10 , a U-2 the head of the Regional Military Authority and the RMA rocket in Oriente along with gunfire shot down Political Department. and fended off an attack by a group of United States jet bombers, likely In the 4th Tank Division, listening to Radio Free Europe on a mission to examine the missile bases in Pinar del Rio. was discovered in the political education office.
The comCaught a Pentagon announcement that if the Cubans do not mander of the army and the chief of political administration leave a free zone for United States flight inspections of Cuba and if an have taken the appropriate measures. immediate dismantling of missile bases does not begin, there A drop has occurred in the increased buying within the will be further action, including armed forces.
Buying continues near bus and train stathat announced by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, that [US tions, where citizens from the country do their shopping.
Kennedy refused Much buying has been observed on the Malá Strana as Khrushchev’s offer to negotiate, the bases will not be dismanwell, and diplomatic personnel are especially involved in tled.
The increased purchasing tendencies continue within measures on 27.10 and during the night of 28.10. the Prague 5 district as well.
It is being said there that salt is a good protection against Oldřich Tůma and translated by Linda Mastalir.] exposure to radiation.
Despite a certain drop, increased purchasing is being reported in other regions of the republic as well.
Cuba is news has not been published as of Saturday noon, although not breaching international law—in contrast, it suffered the known since Friday.
It will be explained as a peaceful measure aggressive actions of the USA, such as the naval blockade by the Soviet Union with the goal of forcing the USA to and a series of others, by which the rights of Cuba were negotiate, and at the same time unmasking them because [US trampled upon.
Kennedy will not allow the Turkish bases weigh every proposal and if he regards it as a positive step to be closed. towards peace, he invites U Thant as the Secretary General of News sent by Štrafelda and Vavruš. the UN to Havana for talks about the current crisis, with the goal of preventing a dangerous war.
In the evening Oldřich Tůma and translated by Linda Mastalir.] hours U Thant answered with a preliminary acceptance of the invitation to Havana; upon instructions from Fidel, [Cuban Foreign Minister Raúl] Roa will immediately fly to meet the Security Council.
Please pass along the briefly worded message from Fidel, as per the wishes of Minister Raúl Roa Cable no. from the Czechoslovak Kouro.
Kennedy which was replied to in a significantly different in their posts; they are regularly informed of the situation by tone in the afternoon hours, as well as the exchange of messages the embassy and are given directions in emergency situations. between U Thant and Fidel It is an unforgivable mistake to send more groups of tourists which promises that U Thant will travel to Havana.
Here we cannot factor can certainly be the fact that during the morning hours understand that such groups are still being sent off under such of 27 October the USA “tried,” with embarrassing results, [to dramatic circumstances; they certainly add to the embassy’s penetrate] the defenses of Cuba and thus a U-2 [reconnaissance problems.
If resorts are fulfilling the necessary quotas or and friends, after gunfire and a quick attack, a United States bomber unit rather we are dealing with paid trips without regard for a danfrom Pinar del Rio was also lost.
The kind of panic these events gerous situation, this stance deserves criticism and should be caused can easily be imagined by the fact that the plane did stopped.
Regardless, the embassy is arranging contact with all not return to its base and could be regarded as lost, while [US and providing information about the situation.
Secretary of Defense Robert] McNamara did not admit that it had been shot down until the late hours of the night.
Cuba’s defenses and probably to try to blackmail the USSR into backing down.
The entire country lives in a state of preparedness, awaiting a United States attack [For the Czech record of the 30 October 1962 conversation which would for them end in catastrophe.
Provocateurs appear in Moscow between CPCz first secretary Antoniń Novotný only sporadically, their work having an immediately guaranteed and Nikita Khrushchev (i.e., excerpt containing Khrushchev’s effect.
There is no sign of the USA’s wish for an organized comments on the missile crisis), see the section below.] internal opposition.
All tasks of civil defense, medical services, and others are fulfilled in accordance with Cuban possibilities and organizational capabilities.
Battle plans with the Soviet friends are being fulfilled faithfully under very unfavorable conditions--strong winds and continual heavy rains and cool weather.
Khrushchev’s suggestions are understood and received well, with explanations and commentaries in the press, radio, Cable no. from the Czechoslovak and television.
Among the Roa and Alekseev it became current press clippings, pay special attention to Revolucion clear that Fidel and the KRV, who are clear about from 29.10 , to the proportions and placement Khrushchev’s orders to dismantle of the message’s titles, etc., which already resulted in protests , are nevertheless concerned that the general by the revolutionaries and supported an undesirable discuspopulation and the army will not understand this step, and sion.
Thus far the press and radio are comdo not discount a focus unfavorable to the USSR’s prestige.
I menting on the matter insufficiently and clarifying for send more details by messenger.
Vavruš [Czech Press Agency the people all the measures and suggestions on the part of reporter in Havana] has an opportunity to visit with military the Soviet Union.
Thus, according to Alekseev, Fidel will personnel and he is consulting his steps with the embassy. evidently speak on television and clarify the entire situation.
This evening a special messenger, Goulart, will arrive with a message regarding Brazil’s position.
In Venezuela, there was a huge act of sabotage affecting Cable no. from the Czechoslovak oil equipment, which forced Betancourt Embassy in Havana , 30 October to mobilize and protect the equipment.
After Fidel ’s 5 Points for guarantees were made public, the Cubans unfortunately did not at all understand the historic steps by Khrushchev and instead believe that the USSR backed away from the USA, and that Cuban defenses have been weakened.
Cable no. from the Czechoslovak They focused all attention on the fulfillment of Fidel’s requests Embassy in Havana , 30 October and think that this is decisive for the future course of events.
According to the unconfirmed information of friends, including Alekseev, As we already indicated, the press continues to inadeit seems that varying opinions were also expressed within the quately explain the situation and the importance of individual government.
Today’s party press hardly information from conversations with friends and some higher publishes anything about the USSR, and instead speaks of and middle functioning staff, because those highest around the indestructible nature of Fidel-ism in a prominent editoAlekseev are not within reach.
Fidel will speak on Thursday, probably after his talks Carlos and Rodriguez are in Havana, Raúl in the with U Thant end.
Unfortunately, sions with Alekseev I learned of the Soviet friends’ concerns neither ORI nor regarding the losses in the USSR’s position.
Questions are any of the information services are clarifying the steps being being raised about whether Fidel was informed of the USSR’s taken by the Soviet Union.
Things are evaluated on the surposition and the dismantling beforehand, and about the fact face level, in keeping with Cuban temperaments, and there that an agreement was reached on supervision by the UN is no lack of comment about another Congo, abandonment, -an agreement that Fidel then rejected in reaction to [US the defense of Cuba, etc.
Together we are very uneasy about the of Fidel’s 5 Points, and thus the tense waiting for the meetcurrent state of affairs; we are trying to provide explanations ing with U Thant.
Central State Archive, Archive of the CC CPCz, explain much to the Cubans.
Obtained by tion has not undergone a change with regard to resoluteness, Oldřich Tůma and translated by Linda Mastalir.] preparedness, and security, apart from the above-mentioned confused discussions.
The latest information indicates that the situation is beginning to improve.
On the other hand, supplies of food and fuel are decreasing and could be seriously Cable no. from the Czechoslovak threatened during prolonged negotiations.
The total supply of Embassy in Havana , 31 October vital products is estimated as being enough for only 3 weeks.
The predominant opinion is that despite favorable commentaries and prosThe mood of the general population continues to be in pects about the negotiations, it is not possible to expect any a state of considerable confusion regarding the problem of improvement in relations between the USA and Cuba; in the dismantling.
The situation is worsened by the difference event of a “guarantee,” the dangerous situation will be postof opinion among the mid-level staff, which echoes in the poned, not resolved. masses.
Therefore they are focusing their efforts on having Fidel’s 5 Points fulfilled.
Explanations that Cuba was As I informed earlier, confusion and disappointment are not abandoned are spreading in an explosive fashion amongst noticeably reflected in the mood of the population as a result the population.
Rodriguez confirmed that [Soviet Ambassador of the Soviet Union’s actions, which were not led by anyone, Aleksandr] Alekseev learned of the order to dismantle from my not even a government official.
The press, radio, and televitelephone conversation, based on news from Prensa Latina. sion with its explicit focus on Fidel ’s 5 Points only A crushing mood also prevails amongst the Soviet friends. worsened the situation.
In this respect there was an excepAfter receiving the order, the Soviet personnel absolutely did tional cooling amongst a segment of the intelligentsia and not understand and cried.
Some experts and technicians the middle classes, while this was much less the case amongst refused to work further and there were many instances of the others.
There has also been a significant rise in nationaldrunkenness in old Havana.
Only today is the press and radio preparing the ground awaiting the arrival of for Fidel’s appearance tomorrow, on 1 November, from the Mikoyan.
Despite this, he said that the actions of the Soviet viewpoint of resolving the situation not only from a Cuban Union will have a catastrophic effect for the USSR’s position, perspective, but a world-wide one for the preservation of as well as that of the entire socialist camp and Latin America. peace.
According to our information, Fidel visited the uniHe sees only a partial salvation of the situation in the form versity where he expressed the hope that the negotiations will of perfect guarantees, in which he does not believe anyhow. be successful and that he believes that Cuba’s security will be The internal situation will depend much on Fidel’s speech of secured with the help of the Soviet Union and all countries of 1 November.
Up until this point, information from [UN discussions are not yet known.
The concrete negotiations Secretary-General] U Thant’s talks indicate that the Cubans should take place on 31 October.
Brazil should send some of continue to insist upon Fidel’s 5 Points being fulfilled, and its suggestions, which Goulart will voice they are opposed to UN inspections. straight away.
The position of our experts and technicians amongst the Cuban colleagues is difficult.
On the basis of preliminary information, the UN Security Council should be called together on 7 November and Roa will attend.
Since the Cubans refused to budge on Cable no. from the Czechoslovak the issue of an international inspection, U Thant’s entire group Embassy in Havana , 1 including Lechuga departed November 1962 together.
Roa reported that Chile, Bolivia, and Uruguay refused to submit to the USA’s pressure and break relations with Cuba.
He second point will be news about the results of negotiations qualified his manner as proper, with considerable with U Thant, the requests and guarantees granted Cuba. sympathy and understanding for Cuba.
Today, on 31 October, Roa openly admitted that while the government and Fidel are U Thant met only with the Cubans, without translators and absolutely clear on the fact that the actions of the Soviet Union other members of the delegation, among whom an Indian and in the interest of preserving peace and preventing a nuclear an Arab were not pleasant.
U Thant discussed the question war were correct, they cannot understand and accept the of the Cubans’ requests with them and acknowledged their manner in which they were carried out -the very harsh right to submit the issues for consideration.
The Cuban political mistake, revealed also in requests are based on discontinuing the blockade, fulfilling Khrushchev’s documents, of presenting Cuba with a decision Fidel ’s 5 Points, and not supporting an international without preliminary talks or communications.
The firmness of the Cuban government and the Mikoyan’s explanations, which will revolutionary enthusiasm of the people made an impression on U Thant.
They have a real desire to quickly bring to a halt Alekseev, the Brazilians, and and paralyze the anti-Soviet campaign which was unleashed by a Yugoslav.
He asked Alekseev about the dismantling of the counter-revolutionary elements and reactionaries, and caused rockets and the manner in which they would be transported much confusion.
Alekseev said that he does not of Alekseev and the Soviet soldiers living in Cuba, and believes know anything about the bases and referred U Thant to the that the situation will improve after Fidel’s speech, although it military experts.
According to Roa, the Brazilians offered its will be difficult to completely erase the incident from memory. good offices and were eager to present suggestions for the Alekseev was present for the entire discussion and admitted removal of Soviet bases on Cuba, but also for those of the big mistakes, expressing the hope that Mikoyan will clarify USA in the entire Caribbean.
In cooperation with the Brazilians, the Yugoslav Mikoyan’s visit and sees it as an important political gesture also offered its good offices, wanting to gain support for the given the current situation.
Alekseev and Roa agreed that Cuban requests from Asian and African countries, especially Guevara and Roa will be present for the arrival ceremony, those that signed the Belgrade Declaration.
Furthermore, Roa without an invitation from the diplomatic office dealing informed us that during the night hours of 30 October he with sensitive visits.
Despite this, we are going to the airport received a message from the Canadian government offering with friends from countries of the socialist camp.
Journalists are very disoriented informing Fidel —there was a harsh exchange of and embarrassed; some circles are even supporting anti-Soviet opinion in the government; we do not know the contents of moods and anti-communism, although these tendencies are the debate, but can for example deduce the views of the hithnot determined.
The press makes no mention of China’s erto unbalanced socialist thoughts of members like [Minister heightened position given its proclamation supporting the 5 of Education Armando] Hart, [economic advisor Raúl Points and Cuba, nor of the Chinese-Indian conflict.
We can Cepero] Bonilla, Machado, expect the press to take some direction after Fidel’s speech.
Also Guevara, reporter] is consulting important steps with the embassy and but he only learned of the dismantling in the evening hours of cannot make note of certain negative realities included in our Sunday, was crushed and could not believe that the defensive other, already sent messages.
Mory Jansov’s commentary for reactions to the Czechoslovak government’s gift—results was also interesting, in line with [Cuban Foreign Minister are good and there were positive evaluations from our partners Raúl] Roa’s viewpoint about which I write separately.
Details and analysis prevented the danger of further divisions with the publication of individual tendencies in the press and the like will be sent of his 5 Points and the request that unity be maintained at all by messenger.
We recommend an increase of photos and costs in the government, as well as his personal explanation to materials about the situation via Prel and also the embassy. the people about the USSR’s actions meant to prevent a loss of prestige and block the anti-Soviet campaign.
Central State Archive, Archive of the CC CPCz, and cause internal wavering.
To comrade Petrov of the Bulgarian embassy domestically and abroad and shows his significant and quick in Prague, Roca said that of the socialist countries he likes political growth.
His speech related the strength and unity of Poland and Bulgaria the most.
While he did not comment the Cuban revolutionary government to not allow an agreefurther on Poland, the comment regarding Bulgaria came in ment under undignified terms, nor to allow the rights of the connection with the fact that he knew Dimitrov well Cuban people to be trampled upon.
I conclude that given the of theirs talks are in line with what he told us.
However, with present situation where the UN is still discussing the matter the Soviet comrades he did not speak with such sharpness and Mikoyan has not yet and openness. arrived to clarify some open questions, he did a very good job On Sunday at 10:00 am, therefore 4 hours before his of evaluating and explaining the situation regarding relations scheduled flight to Cuba, Roca received a phone call at the with the Soviet Union, and its views.
Thus far the Great Britain, New Zealand, Korea, and Indonesia—express reaction to Fidel’s speech means an absolute calming of the the opinion that a council of representatives of communist situation and a clear orientation for the Cubans in the curparties should be elected for the purpose of discussing certain rent situation. problems of the international communist movement.
According to comrade Havlíček’s information, a few days ago a Xinhua writer vis391 ited the editorial offices of the magazine Questions of Peace much talk about the compromise proposal to “Finlandize” and Socialism in Prague, and asked a representative of the Cuba, a proposal which should be presented by Brazil.
There was a considerable calmness inside questions). the country after Fidel’s speech.
However, many Cubans still retain considerable reservations about the USSR’s actions, 6.11.1962 and they await Mikoyan’s clarification.
Roy Inchaustegui was harshly criticized Mikoyan’s talks with the Cubans has been complicated by by Fidel for the fact that instead the unexpected death of comrade Mrs.
Mikoyan which has of discussing Cuba’s right to defense at the Security struck Mikoyan deeply.
The first meeting did not take place Council, he discussed the question of the authenticity of until 4 November.
The was replaced as Cuba’a UN ambassador by Carlos Lechuga on results are not yet known.
Roa, to whom I passed on news from Ghana, indicated that according to Lechuga 2.
We are asked about the Czechoslovak Socialist Republic’s there reigns a great deal of confusion at the UN regarding stance towards Fidel’s 5 points.
We are replying positively, in the next developments, for there is no one or coordinated connection with Mikoyan’s set of views.
Yet I am still requesting an official postponing a meeting of the Security Council.
The Cubans remain any news regarding peaceful coexistence nor about the solidaradamant about refusing inspections, even on the open ocean, ity of whomever with the Soviet Union, especially about the and they are absolutely against UN inspections.
If possible, focused on Fidel ’s 5 Points which they persistently do not mention Khrushchev.
Limitations placed on Revolution of ] October carried the same spirit, as he markedly underlined the 5 Points and strongly glorified foreign correspondents and writers are also emphasized—they 26 July.
Vavruš is thus far without Khrushchev were reacted to very coolly by some greater difficulties.
Thus far unconfirmed information states government officials ( Dorticos, [Minister that Pen, a former administrator and Revuelta’s successor, has of Construction Osmany] Cienfuegos, [Commandante Jose been sentenced to death in connection with allowing a US Ramon] Fernandez, Aragones), without applause. reconnaissance plan to unfold—a government plan to estabYesterday’s reception at the Soviet embassy drew huge numlish a section for a secret agency within the offices of Prensa bers and the complete governmental delegation was marked Latina, the goals of which are not yet known.
Revuelta’s by warm feelings and openness, but discussions still revealed appeal is perhaps connected to the problems already menthe remains of doubtful tones regarding the USSR’s approach. tioned, but he is not accused.
Inspections and improvements Sinhu is making a spein reporting are already underway—for example, the front cial effort to feed those feelings with his blatant nonsensical page of Pravda let go of the question of preventing a world information in a bulletin that the local press willingly accepts. war, and support for Fidel Castro’s 5 Points remains, with a There was even a comment about a new Munich.
We are counting on the fact We are watching and consulting the entire question with that Mikoyan will inform us of the results at the conclusion the Soviet friends and will inform further. of the talks.
Given the one-sided approach and unfavorCable no. from the Czechoslovak able conditions for Cuba, U Thant is currently considering Embassy in Havana , 21 creating a permanent watch unit at the Security Council November 1962 which would undertake similar inspections if required.
In the end he evaluated U Thant’s role solidly, saying that he proved to NEWSFLASH be very objective.
Mikoyan highly praised the honesty, solid nature and determination of Fidel and the Cubans, expressing Mikoyan and [Soviet the wish that there be more of such people and countries.
He Ambassador Aleksandr] Alekseev invited all the friendly said that the Soviet Union still had inconsistent views some embassy leaders, except for the Albanians.
Mikoyan provided years after the revolution, never mind that all Cubans should information about the talks with the Cubans, though probnot have them too and instead understand everything at once. ably in a reserved fashion given the presence of the Chinese.
In conclusion, Alekseev told Thus we did not consider it appropriate to ask deeper quesme that he will give me more information.
Mikoyan said that it is necessary to look towards the that Mikoyan did not go into great detail about his discussion future optimistically, although there will still be difficulties. with the Cubans in the presence of the Chinese, and that he The actions of the Soviet Union prevented a nuclear war and will inform Alekseev of these details.
I will send further information after my USA caused the situation and presented the danger of a nucleconversation with Alekseev. ar war.
Nothing about the Cuban revolution will change, it will be stronger and more resistant.
The OAS agreements Tůma and translated by Linda Mastalir.] also suffered a heavy shake-up.
The Soviet Union, together with Cuba, agreed to a joint measure regarding the USA, and this will be negotiated after a discussion with them and [UN Secretary-General] U Thant at the Security Council.
Where inspections are concerned, Mikoyan said that U Thant formerly had three alternatives IMMEDIATELY prepared.
Despite we can still see reservations about the approach of the Soviet this, together with our friends in favor of honesty and diliUnion and often disappointment, as reflected in talks with gence amongst the leaders of the revolution, we believe in a and speeches of government officials, as well as in the mood return to a better understanding, though not without a long of the general population.
Obtained by politically risky and harmful to the socialist camp the position Oldřich Tůma and translated by Linda Mastalir.] of the People’s Republic of China, and the speeches of the Albanians.
They claim that in contrast to the earlier limitless confidence in the Soviet Union, not long ago supported by Dorticos at the UN and by Fidel, there is a markedly noticeable decrease in the country’s prestige and a loss of trust.
About three views of strong doubts are taking shape which also match the observations of the Soviet Cable no. from the Czechoslovak Embassy in Havana , 28 friends and correspond to difficulties during their explanaNovember 1962 tions.
The Cubans refuse to believe any United States The partner critically needs practice ammunition. guarantees.
The second is the categorical and unchangeable According to the announcement he has no other option but view of Cubans regarding any kind of inspections on Cuba. to accept a delay in the terms of delivery.
Lopez [not furThey say that Cuba did nothing wrong and inspections indither identified] is not willing to negotiate directly with the cate a humiliation and an attempt by the USA, the aggressor, Bulgarian People’s Republic, nor with their new representative to further provoke and insult Cuba.
Send word on whether the difference has not already this point only the Soviet Union and Cuba have fulfilled the been sent off in one of the prepared transports.
I ask for a concessions while the USA continues its arrogant provocative return reply.
They fully understand the Soviet steps taken to secure peace and avert a nuclear war, though Pavlíček 388. they fear for the Cuban revolution because of the absolutely insufficient guarantees.
Kennedy Comrade A Novotny and Rusk argued that the USSR had not made good on its obligations to allow spot checks and to introduce controls 18 December 1962 against the redeployment of offensive weapons in Cuba, and that therefore the USA could not give formal guarantees.
Mikoyan at the dinner in the reached an agreement with Kennedy, could understandably Soviet Embassy, 29 November 1962 commit himself only in so far as it concerned Soviet property namely, missiles and IL-28 aircraft and not in the matter of Comrade Mikoyan discussed his stay in Cuba and his inspection on Cuban territory, where the Cuban government talks with United States President J Kennedy in Washington, on 29 has jurisdiction and does not want to permit inspection.
The November 1962, in which Ambassador Dobrynin also particUSSR therefore offered inspection carried out on the open ipated.
During the conversation President Kennedy brought seas, without allowing inspectors on Soviet territory, that up the idea of a certain division of spheres, in the sense that is to say, on deck, and that had been agreed to even before the Western hemisphere should be considered the area of Mikoyan’s departure for Cuba.
Kennedy and Rusk, nevertheAmerican influence and that the USSR should not interfere in less, stuck to their position, which they further argued by the Western hemisphere.
Comrade Mikoyan The question of the violation of Cuban airspace by overrefuted this view and argued, using the example of Castro, in flights of American aircraft and the question of bases on forthe sense that, after all, the USA had its representation abroad eign territory were also discussed.
Mikoyan protested against in Cuba, a monopoly of its affiliations, and many possibilicontinuing over-flights over Cuban territory by American airties to influence the situation, and none of that helped.
Fidel craft, and stated, among other things, that these over-flights Castro had started out as a large estate owner, but developed were not necessary even for technical reasons, because coninto a socialist, not because of the support of the USSR but sidering the small width of the island of Cuba, the zone conbecause of the development of socialist relations in Cuba.
At taining the whole territory of Cuba could be photographed this point Kennedy and Rusk disagreed, arguing that Castro from positions above the open seas.
Kennedy argued that the American intervention became Mikoyan brushed off this argument with a joke, saying that necessary after weapons had been brought to the island, and articles like that were intended for idiots.
Even international problems, for example Berlin, Germany, and the in carrying out her policies in Tibet, the People’s Republic of like, were not discussed.
China had made a lot of blunders, mainly in assuming that Concerning the experiences from his stay in Cuba, it was enough to have an agreement with the leading figures Mikoyan reported that the orders from the Central Committee of the Lama system; ultimately the shortcomings had become of the CPSU were along the lines that no pressure was to be evident, which the Chinese did not want to admit.
Considering the Cubans complained that Mikoyan compared the behavior of the Chinese during the Mikoyan had not sufficiently defended their interests in New Cuban crisis with the behavior of the ultra-­left during the York , Mikoyan made a Peace of Brest-Litovsk in World War I, when Lenin had to statement to the press before leaving for Havana, in which defend a sober approach to the situation against the clichéhe supported the five Cuban points.
The USSR explained to the People’s Republic of very much, especially because it was done back in the USA China that it would be better if India received arms from and not after arriving in Cuba.
From the beginning Castro rejected talks with the USA and the efforts to obtain guarsocialist countries, and it would, in fact, thus be possible to antees against invasion, arguing that weapons were a better influence her in the event of international difficulties, rather guarantee for them and that it was impossible to set great than from capitalist countries.
He insisted on the five-point understand that, and it was now coming about that [former program, and did not even want to go to welcome Mikoyan Indian Defense Minister] Krishna Menon’s position has at the airport.
At the same time, which is, anyway, within protocol, because it was unnecessary Mikoyan stated that the delivery of Soviet MIG­-21 aircraft to for the head of state to be at the airport.
During his departure, India, which was being written about a great deal in the press, both Castro and Dorticos were at the airport. depended on the concrete situation at the time they were to After the withdrawal of the missiles the Cubans are left with be delivered, in December 1962. three kinds of MIG—namely, the MIG 17, 19, and 21—as The Cubans value in particular the attitude of Brazil and well as defensive missiles.
According to Comrade Mikoyan, the of President Goulart personally, who sent his own American U-2 aircraft piloted by Major Anderson envoy to explain the position of Brazil.
There had also been other placed under pressure by the USA, and they submitted to operations against American aircraft. that pressure.
Another country with a positive approach to The population of Cuba behaved very well, and everything Cuba was Chile.
Mikoyan further reported that the American was flawless in the area of military measures.
Economically communiqué that had been noted in the press after his conthere are many problems, but the harvest will be better. versation with Kennedy had been prepared by the USA at Intensive activity had been undertaken by the Chinese; they Mikoyan’s request; he had asked Kennedy for them to prepare had organized blood donations, sent resolutions, etc.
This a communiqué in view of the fact that they were more familactivity, however, has had no influence on the leadership of iar with the American press.
Before his departure, Khrushchev was told by Castro that Cuba was with the USSR and would continue to be During the conversation Kennedy, using the same domeswith it.
In this connection Mikoyan reiterated some of the tic-political reasons, explained his reluctance to issue a formal arguments that he had used in discussions with Cuban represtatement against the invasion of Cuba.
In this, he reiterated sentatives, concerning the pseudo-revolutionary `positions’ of his earlier statements that the USA had not intended to attack the Chinese.
The Chinese are very active in the use of revoCuba and that they had been concerned only with offensive lutionary clichés, but have done virtually nothing useful for weapons.
Soviet garrisons were in Cuba, and if it came to a fight, statement at the press conference of 20 November 1962 they would give their lives, and not just give blood in a clinic. had been discussed beforehand in correspondence between Instead of attacking Macao or Hong Kong and thus compliKhrushchev and Kennedy.
Obtained by time of the Bay of Pigs, see the selection of translated Cuban reports Oldřich Tůma and translated by Linda Mastalir.] from January-May 1961 published elsewhere in this issue of the CWIHP Bulletin.
A few 19 František Krajčír was the Czechoslovak Minister of months after this conversation, in March 1960, the Eisenhower International Trade.
Administration would secretly approve Operation Zapata, the plan 20 The first page of this report consists of a page with these that would a year later, after modification by the incoming Kennedy hand-written notes.
More murky than the military relationship, 23 The main Technical Department of the Ministry of the Czech documents from 1961 printed herein also point to International Trade is de facto Omnipol.
Apart from the export of intelligence cooperation between Prague and Havana—a couple of so-called “special materials” under the company Omnipol, which cryptic cables refer to assassination plotting against Fidel Castro.
Of concerns itself with foreign trade, the employees of the Technical course, since the Church Committee investigation of the mid-1970s, Department were directly responsible for acquiring goods under there has been a voluminous literature concerning CIA involvement embargo by the West.
His arrival ended a series of scandals (the incapability of the former Director, Antonín Podzimka, conflicts with the general staff of the Ministry of National Defense, with Minister of the Interior Rudolf Barák, the leak of information regarding a contract with Egypt, and especially the detainment of the Czechoslovak vessel Lidice that contained arms for Algerian rebel mutineers) that had accompanied the Technical Department’s work.
After a certain time František Mareš was succeeded by František Langer, another long-time boss of the Technical Department.
In the days after agreeing to withdraw Soviet In many respects, this short record is one of the sensational missiles from Cuba, Nikita Khrushchev welcomed a documents to emerge from the communist world’s archives series of high-ranking communist visitors to Moscow for on Cold War history since the collapse of the Soviet bloc, the annual commemorations of the 1917 Bolshevik Revolution. and then the Soviet Union, a little more than two decades One such guest was the General Secretary of the Czechoslovak ago.
Here, contemporaneously and attained their objective—safeguarding the survival of the Cuban vividly, we can hear Khrushchev’s inimitable voice, strongly revolution.
This document was found by Oldrich Tuma in the United States should it attack Cuba, even though this would CPCz Central Committee records in Prague and circulated lead promptly to a global incineration.
Explaining why he had to participants at the October 2002 conference (principally to “act quickly”—Castro and the Cubans were already grumbling organized by the National Security Archive) in Havana to about his failure to consult or even notify them prior to agreeing mark the 40th anniversary of the missile crisis, but has never to Kennedy’s demands on 28 October—Khrushchev admitted before been published.—J.H. feeling “completely aghast” at Castro’s approach.
Cuba That is why we issued the statement that we would dismantle the missiles if the USA declared it swore not Concerning the problem of Cuba, Comrade Khrushchev to attack Cuba.
The Americans may have flown ones on the ground can be destroyed by a blast of air.
The Americans said that one of In a letter, Fidel Castro proposed that we ourselves should their planes had probably crashed into the sea (but it crashed be the first to start an atomic war.
We recommended to the Americans that they should not fly We were completely aghast.
Castro clearly has no idea about over Cuba, and they stopped. what thermonuclear war is.
We knew that the primarily be Cuba that would vanish from the face of the Americans wanted to attack Cuba.
At the same time, it is clear that with a first strike one versation with Gromyko cannot today knock the opponent out of the fight.
There can President Kennedy was very reserved and always be a counter-strike, which can be devastating.
Both we and are, after all, missiles in the earth, which intelligence does not the Americans talked about Berlin—both sides with the know about; there are missiles on submarines, which cannot same aim, namely, to draw attention away from Cuba; the be knocked out of the fight right away, and so on.
After all, miluneasy and postpone attacking Cuba. lions of people would die, in our country too.
Only a person who has no idea what nuclear “Ortsac,” which is Castro backwards.
The maneuvers were suddenly Castro, by revolutionary passion, can talk like that.
We did called off, allegedly after a storm at sea, but that was folnot, of course, take up that proposal, especially because we lowed by the president’s speech , hysteria was had a chance to avert war.
What the Americans feared most, unleashed in the USA, and a blockade was announced. by the way, was that the missiles were in the hands of the We believe that shortly before the beginning of the Cubans and that the Cubans would start a war.
That is why maneuvers, their intelligence discovered that our missiles were in our letter to the president we stressed also that the missiles in Cuba, and the Americans became furious.
Another poswere in the hands of our officers, who would not fire before sibility is that receiving orders from the Soviet government.
From our intelthe presence of our missiles in Cuba was discovered by West ligence reports we knew that the Americans were afraid of war.
German intelligence and then communicated to the USA.3 Through certain persons, who they knew were in contact with Naturally we wanted the presence of our missiles with us, they made it clear they would be grateful if we helped them atomic warheads to remain secret.
The missiles were meant to protect Cuba from attack; they We now know the subsequent course of events.
We had helped us to wrench out of the imperialists the statement that to act very quickly.
That is also why we even used radio to they would not attack Cuba, and they thus served their main contact the president, because the other means might have purpose.
This time we really were on the verge of war. we do not need missiles in Cuba for that.
On the contrary, We received a letter from Castro in which he told their deployment on our territory is safer for us and our techus that the USA would attack Cuba within twenty-four nical personnel who look after them. hours.
We could not be cerConcerning Turkey, in our second letter to the president tain that they would not do so.
Following that logic, a child in a socialist country ation in the Caribbean and Cuba, that Kennedy could not would have to pounce on the imperialists almost as soon answer them because he would have also to consult with other as it was born.
Today, however, it will be harder for the members of NATO, and the situation was too serious for us imperialists to attack Cuba in front of the whole world.
We to postpone its solution. cannot, after all, permit a war just because the imperialists cannot be trusted.
One of the important consequences of the whole must start from the final aims we set ourselves.
To attack Cuba and get rid of the Cuban now sees us as the ones who saved peace.
That is why we sent missiles to have nothing in common with him, except that we both Cuba.
We achieved our objective – we wrenched the promise want peace. out of the Americans that they would not attack Cuba and Such, on the whole, are the results of these six tense days. that other countries on the American continent would also (In the presence of Comrade Novotný and other members refrain from attacking Cuba.
That would not have happened of our delegation, the Presidium of the Central Committee without our missiles in Cuba.
The USA would have attacked of the CPSU debated also the letter to Comrade Castro, in Cuba.
The proximity of our missiles made them understand, which the position of the Soviet Union in the whole conflict perhaps for the first time, that we have weapons that are at is explained, and the reason the USSR was unable to agree to least as strong as theirs.
Among other leaders who came to Moscow at the end of This clash demOctober and in early November were Poland’s Władysław Gomułka, onstrated that war today is not inevitably destined by fate, East Germany’s Walter Ulbricht, and, a few days later, Hungary’s Janos Kadar.
For Kadar’s report on his talks in Moscow, given to that it can be avoided.
Imperialism, as can be seen, is elsewhere in this issue of the CWIHP Bulletin. no paper tiger; it is a tiger that can give you a nice bite in 2 For Castro’s 26 October 1962 letter to the backside.
At the Khrushchev and other correspondence between them in late October same time, however, it is not a tiger that determines whether 1962, see James G Blight, Bruce J Allyn, and David A Welch, Cuba or not there will be war.
It is not clear where Khrushchev obtained this idea; tion of peaceful coexistence, which is nothing other than no evidence has emerged to suggest that West German intelligence continuous struggle, a sequence of conflicts, one concession alerted the United States government to the installation of Soviet nuclear missiles in Cuba.
Only in such a struggle is it possible today to Federal Republic of Germany during the crisis, see keep the peace and to win one position after another from the collection of translated FRG documents published elsewhere in the imperialists. this issue of the CWIHP Bulletin.
In fact, in his letter, dated October 26 but the USA can break its promise.
It takes compelled to explain the fact that that a basically positive view of the development of relations, the Chinese embassy in Havana was allowed to continue reflecting increased optimism for closer Soviet-Cuban (and spreading anti-Soviet propaganda.
On two other sensitive therefore Czechoslovak-Cuban) ties following the lengthy topics in which there was disagreement between Moscow visit to the Soviet Union by Cuban leader Fidel Castro from and Havana, Rodriguez also discussed Cuba’s promotion of 27 April to 3 June.
On returning to Havana, Castro and the Soviet bloc (and between Cuba and Czechoslovakia, made such positive comments regarding the Soviet Union its most active partner within the Warsaw Pact3) at a delicate that observers viewed Cuba as having moved closer to the moment in their relationship, and in the communist moveSoviets and, therefore, further from Beijing in the emergment as a whole.
Castro, candidly acknowledged some ongoing problems and 499/top secret 1963. “misunderstandings” in Czech-Cuban relations, though he Prague, 25 June 1963. tried to minimize them.
Tourism played an imporWritten in three copies tant role in the country’s economic life.
Despite Since the victory of the Cuban revolution, relations the present difficult economic situation, the Czechoslovak between Czechoslovakia and Cuba have been developing at comrades think that some economic consolidation will start, the highest level.
Czechoslovakia has provided the young even if only slowly, with the help of the Soviet Union and the Latin American republic with both political and economic socialist countries.
In the field of politics [the relationuct in world markets, will contribute to this, too.
Production ship developed] in such a form that Cuba has been visited by is getting systematic compared with the past and we can see different government delegations at ministerial level /the visits the outlines of the prospects of the development of economic of the minister of foreign trade, the minister of educational life.
The assessment of needs has more and more come to the and cultural affairs, and the foreign minister, etc./ and from foreground when deciding about industrial and commercial Cuba have arrived similar level delegations in Czechoslovakia tasks and in the field of distribution, too.
One cannot ignore besides the President of the Republic Dorticos. such problems as,g., that the existing Cuban industry Czechoslovakia has sent lecturers to Cuban universities and is equipped mainly with American machines, the further colleges, and a large number of various experts.
So the mere functioning of factories is a great burden schools, and factories from Cuba.
Until recently, it has also been a tions between the two countries covered almost all spheres of problem that, since the victory of the revolution, few changes party, state, social, scientific and arts life. have been made in the organizational structure of industry A direct air service has been set up between Cuba and and trade, basically, they have preserved it as it was inherited Czechoslovakia, being the first among socialist countries, and from the earlier system.
As a consequence, while it was the they have also provided help to equip industry that determined the need of new and old factories the Cuban army.
In the field of economy, based on trade agreefor machines to be bought, the distribution of purchased ments signed between them, they have provided loans of difmachines fell within the sphere of authority of the ministry ferent size and length for the Cuban government.
Recently, the of internal trade. problems coming up in the economy on both sides have made In the field of agriculture there have been long discussions the talks last for a long time.
Some suggested that they should prolongation of loans, and, mainly, the demands concerning give up mono-cultural production and start manifold producarticles of consumption have an influence on the talks to some tion in the growing of plants.
As a consequence, the terriextent because of our difficulties, but, as a result of the mutual tory of sugar cane plantations has decreased almost by half. efforts of both parties, they will end with success.
According to the present position, on the remaining territory During the talks both parties are looking for the best crops must be increased by the reconstruction of sugar plantasolutions.
According to Stross’s information, the signed agreetions and the development of cultivation technology and, on ments are precisely carried out on both sides. the other territory under cultivation, they should grow mainly Cuba’s present economic situation is very difficult.
The greatest guarare objective and subjective causes of the difficulties.
Before antee of development is that the leaders now know the place Cuba’s liberation, she played the role of a complementary, and importance of economic problems in the life of the state mainly agricultural base for the United States.
Her producand so, the solution of the problems of economic life is more tion was of mono-cultural character, her and more moved to the foreground.
Castro’s trip to the Soviet Union meant a decisive Simultaneously with the understanding of economic probturn in this field too. lems, they started to realize a lot of other things.
In the Cuban As the Czechoslovakian comrades also see it, Castro’s trip foreign policy, mainly toward the Latin-American countries, has had a decisive impact on Cuba’s further development. one could see the signs of dogmatism, avaturism [sic; adventurThe visit and the joint declaration published afterwards clariism] and subjectivism.
As a could be best seen in the guerilla fights in Guatemala and result of the visit, he considers unjustified certain dogmatic Venezuela, in the support of Juliao’s Brazilian poliand avanturist views in the Cuban political life, cy.
The leaders of the Cuban political life and their enumerated and the Cubans themselves are beginning to pay more attenallies did not understand properly the importance of winning tion to the solution of economic problems, which they have over the national bourgeoisie in the interest of the revolution only talked about so far.
Castro still has a completely firm and they overestimated the role of peasantry as the leading position and dominant influence in the sphere of ideology. force of revolution.
They wanted to make Cuba a center of His views are of decisive importance from the aspect of Cuba’s revolutions on the American continent, which resulted in the general development.
After his trip to the Soviet Union, he mechanical application of the experiences of the Cuban revowill completely clarify the role of the party as well, the party’s lution to other countries, where the fight against imperialism organization will be accelerated. and for national liberation had to be carried out in a different Finally, Stross remarked that the relations between international situation and amid other internal political events, Czechoslovakia and Cuba did not change during the under different conditions.
Caribbean crisis and the time following it, even amid the bigThey ignored that in every country every party had to gest hardships, and they are not changing in the future either. work out their revolutionary tactic and strategy based on their They treat their embassy accordingly, in the practice of which own special situation.
As a consequence of these realizations, the problems of party and state relations are dealt with in the e.g. they do not support the extremists any more in Brazil, but correct way as a result of the development.
Ambassador Organization is also hindered by the lack of cadres, mainly middle cadres.
Simultaneously with the organization of the party, we can observe the problems of ideological consolidation, the enforcement of the Leninist norms in the work within the party.
In the period of the Caribbean crisis and directly after it, the Cuban leaders generally did not understand the Soviet Union’s position.
It shows particularly in this case that some comrades Prague, 12 December 1963 do not understand the conditions of the Cuban revolution.
If a communist party took power in Cuba, there would have been a different situation.
For instance, a CZPO (ČTK ) correspondent sent C Rodriguez said, just like in his first conversation with information, in which he directly said that Cuba’s political c.
Simunek in the evening line had changed; Rodriguez accepts with satisfaction that of the 11th of December 1963, that according to the opinion the material was not published in Czechoslovakia.
At that, of China, Rodriguez stressed that Cuba cannot take the the Cuban leadership think that these misunderstandings same approach as the CSSR, and leading Cuban officials ask do not involve the leading comrades.
To Koucky’s remark for understanding. that misunderstandings can happen in various discussions Another issue, which caused misunderstanding, is the posiand talks but these are no fundamental differences, and that tion of the Cuban revolutionary government on the Moscow misunderstandings can often be caused by certain nervousness agreement about a partial ban on nuclear testing.
The whole because there are problems in every party and every country, issue was widely debated in the higher circles of Cuba.
Rodriquez said that according to his opinion, it is not just discussions, Fidel Castro still hoped a possibility would arise occasional nervousness but that some political, diplomatic that Cuba could become a party to the treaty.
The same pointed out that after his return from Moscow, Fidel Castro in applies to the Soviet embassy where Ambassador [Aleksandr his speech explained extensively the Cuban government’s stance Alekseyev] Alexeiev has very good contacts with leading on issues of peace, peaceful coexistence, etc.
At the same time, comrades, and understands the situation in Cuba very well he suggested in his speech the possibility of negotiations with while the other diplomats are not as advanced.
Castro, have very close personal contacts with especially these However, when negotiations about the Moscow treaty two embassies. began, Cuba has become the object of a broad new wave of C Rodriguez continued with the fact that one of the attacks from the United States.
This of course created for things that in the opinion of Cuban comrades caused some the Cuban Revolutionary Government a new situation, in confusion, is promotion of Chinese publications, articles, and which they had no other choice, given the state of mutual materials in Cuba.
He said that the Cuban comrades could relations with the United States, than not to sign the Moscow not agree with this Chinese activity and after consultation treaty.
It would be a great mistake to believe that the Cuban with Alekseyev, the Soviet ambassador to Cuba, Revolutionary Government takes the Chinese positions.
At number of According to the leading Cuban comrades, the Cuban meetings and gatherings, members of our party ask about line with regard to Latin America causes uncertainties as well.
Cuba’s position on such issues as, for instance, not signing the They decided in principle to patiently continue to develop Moscow Agreement; from our side, the position of the Cuban relations with those countries that have until now maintained Revolutionary Government and leading Cuban comrades is diplomatic relations with Cuba,e.
Uruguay, Chile, Brazil, explained in accordance with the way Cuban comrades forand Mexico.
On the other hand, it is not possible to view the mulate their policy and how they justify it.
For example, they are surprised by some opinions the Chinese CP in its literature grossly distorts the line of the at the Cs.
Ministry of Foreign Affairs regarding an assessment international communist movement and attacks leading comof actions of the Argentine President Illia. rades of the CPSU and other communist and workers parties.
It seems to them that some comrades too much overrate his He also emphasized that our party throughout its history has progressivism in comparison with what was in Argentina always assumed that it was necessary to adapt and possibly before his election.
Even though the People’s Revolutionary even to subordinate some of its own particular interests to the Government of Cuba does not want to underestimate certain collective interests of the socialist camp and the international possibilities that are emerging in Argentina, it knows very revolutionary movement. well that the current regime in Argentina is aimed against Comrade Rodriguez then continued that the Cuban govthe People’s Cuba.
In this context, Rodriguez mentioned ernment and Cuban revolutionary comrades face a number of the complaint of the Cuban Ambassador to Czechoslovakia issues that must be addressed.
They all realize that new probabout the reserved attitude of some staff from the Ministry of lems may always arise.
From this point of view, Rodriguez Foreign Affairs towards him. praises highly an article that was published in Pravda, in Another issue about which C Rodriguez spoke concerns which some opinions on the development of the Algerian Cuba’s stance on the notorious proposal of some Latin Revolution are newly formulated, and where the need is recAmerican countries to create a nuclear-free zone in Latin ognized for a broader understanding of issues related to buildAmerica.
C Rodriquez said that the Cuban position on this ing up socialism under various conditions (recognizes the need issue has already been formulated in the past year in conto take into account that religion, particularly Islam, will play nection with the Caribbean crisis.
Its a role in Algiers, which is deciding to go the socialist route). position on this issue stems from the fact that the Cuban Cuban comrades, says Rodriguez further, realize that world Revolutionary Government sees no advantage in creating a peace is a question of paramount concern for Czechoslovak nuclear-free zone in Latin America in a situation, when in comrades.
In contrast, the question of world peace does not many Latin American countries, there are United States bases, and the have such a decisive influence on the masses in Cuba.
They United States refuses to declare explicitly that it will not keep believe that cadres of the fraternal parties nuclear weapons at these bases.
A speech by a Cuban delegate should understand the situation in Cuba better.
Yet some to the UN on this matter was very carefully worded in order misunderstandings appear in specific contacts between Cs. for the Cuban position not to challenge the co-authors of the and Cuban officials.
Many comrades push their own opinresolution on the nuclear-free zone in Latin America, namely ions, and try to do separate analyses without consideration Mexico and Brazil.
In this context, Rodriguez rejected the of the overall development of the revolution in Cuba.
The alleged argument of some comrades, who compared the threat worst is that some political uncertainties and differences are to Cuba from the United States to the threat posed by West then reflected in economic relations.
On the other hand, she recent development of economic negotiations as unsatisfacis aware of the danger of local wars in the Caribbean.
Although they are aware that it is impossible to avoid her own complicated issues, Cuba is trying to see things from problems, they still believe it is necessary to look above of all a broader perspective. for what unites us and not what divides us.
S Koucky responded to this part of Rodriguez’s reasoning He stressed that we must never forget about the enemy’s in the sense that our party understands the overall situaactivity when considering all these issues.
Further, as for the technological that he himself believes as well that this appointment should level of many products and equipment that are shipped to be abandoned.
C Koucky replied that Pavlicek is to be Cuba, there are shortcomings and Cuban comrades have to replaced within 2 months and that a new Cs. ambassador will overcome in many aspects opinions of their own cadres who be sent to Cuba. were used to the often perfect American technology.
Czech National Archives, Prague, CPCz CC collection, second half of 1964), Rodriguez again emphasized that it Kuba folders.
Obtained for CWIHP by James Hershberg and was necessary to understand the special political situation that translated for CWIHP by Adolf Kotlik.] existed in Cuba.
He explained that there were many anticommunists in Cuba, who, at the moment, especially under Notes the guise of combating sectarian tendencies , are actually trying to fight against communism.
It is necessary 1 On Hungarian perceptions of the aftermath of Castro’s to do everything possible to avoid creating suitable opporspring 1963 visit to the Soviet Union, see translated documents in tunities for their dark intentions.
Cuban leaders have many the collection of Hungarian materials elsewhere in this issue of the concerns with the problem of youth in Cuba.
For example, CWIHP Bulletin. the entire leadership of youth organizations had to be replaced 2 For more on Sino-Cuban relations during this period, see the recently, because it did not follow the correct policy. collection of translated Chinese documents and analysis by Sergey Radchenko and James G Hershberg elsewhere in this issue of the CWIHP Bulletin.
This was seen as reflecting In a conversation with Koucky, the question of replacelingering tensions between Castro’s “26th of July Movement” ment of our ambassador to Cuba, and the case of our guerrillas and the old, urban, pro-Moscow communist party—ed.
Soviet nuclear missiles in Cuba, bringing the world Khrushchev hoped that if the installation of the missiles could the closest it came to a direct superpower clash during the be kept secret, the American leadership would have to accept Cold War era.
The calculation however, did not work, as the US never occurred to the Soviet leadership, yet ​​it still arose, in an intelligence discovered the missile sites under construction in indigenous way, thanks to the victory of the revolution led by Cuba in mid-October 1962.
Kennedy, after considering all Fidel Castro. the possible responses, announced in his 22 October speech In Cuba the fighting guerillas under Castro’s leadership that he ordered a sea blockade around Cuba, overthrew the pro-American Batista regime at the beginning of effective two days later, to prevent further shipment of mis1959.
By 1960 the new left-wing system was rapidly expandsiles to the island.
The Soviet and Eastern-European cargo ing political and economic relations with the Soviet Union ships which were on their way were approaching the island on and other socialist countries, and it became increasingly likely 24 October, therefore undeniably there was a risk for an outthat Cuba would soon become a member of the Soviet alliance break of a direct Soviet–American armed conflict.
The Eisenhower Administration initially implementin the end, the conflict did not escalate into a military clash ed a wait-and-see policy, and hoped that with financial means since Khrushchev called back the ships in time. it could topple the revolutionary regime.
Later, however, United States Kennedy also demanded the removal of the missiles which officials considered more urgent and extreme political and were already in Cuba, and indicated that otherwise the United States was military solutions.
In January 1961, shortly before John F ready to make a preventive strike on the country.
Intensive Kennedy became president, Washington broke off diplomatic communications commenced between the parties, using varirelations with Cuba, and a few months later, in April, CIAous channels, the most important being the backchannel trained armed Cuban emigrants landed at the Bay of Pigs. between the president’s brother, Attorney General Robert Even though this military action failed, it became clear to the Kennedy, and Soviet ambassador Anatoly F Dobrynin.
Cuban leadership that on their own they could not guarantee We now know that during the crisis management both their country’s security against the United States.
Therefore, parties showed great flexibility and an ability for working in July 1961, they signed a military agreement with the Soviet out a compromise solution, although at the time this could Union under which Soviet mediumand intermediate-range be publicly perceivable only on the Soviet side.
It appears that egorical American response Khrushchev quickly retreated, as this momentous and provocative Soviet decision had double soon as it became apparent for him that otherwise there was a aims.
On the one hand the missiles were to defend Cuba serious danger of a direct superpower clash.
In his message on against a possible American attack, for in such a case the USA 28 October Khrushchev promised to withdraw the missiles, would have had to risk nuclear retaliation as well as a direct and this did happen relatively soon (at least the mediummilitary conflict with the Soviet Union.
On the other hand range and intermediate-range missiles, as opposed to the with this step Khrushchev made an attempt to establish a tactical nuclear weapons, still essentially undetected), in early global strategic balance at a time when the United States was November.
Then the Soviet leadership consulted continuously and 4-5 months, of American Jupiter missiles from Turkey.
This frequently with the Warsaw Pact member states, and with meant nothing less than that the American administration the German Democratic Republic , the coordination made a secret pact with the Soviets behind the back of their was downright intensive.
It is no wonder, that in exchange Kennedy asked response was prepared in the utmost secrecy, moreover durthat there be no written traces of this deal on the American ing the resolution of the crisis they did not inform even the side.
This is why news after hesitation, eventually was willing to withdraw the Soviet of the evolution of the crisis—of which they heard from the letter, which contained the American promise. media—caught the countries of Eastern Europe totally by So the peaceful solution of the crisis was at the same time surprise and unprepared. a victory and a fiasco for both superpowers.
The United States In Budapest it was not only the danger of a direct Eastsuccessfully barred the construction of a Soviet nuclear strikWest military conflict, and the fear of a new world war that ing force on the American continent, but they had to give up caused acute worries.
At 10m. on 23 October, the Hungarian minister the most dangerous ones of the Cold War from the aspect of of defense received the following telegram via military chanworld peace, the threat of starting a Third World War was nels from Marshal Andrei Grechko, Commander in chief in reality not as immense as world public opinion thought of the Supreme Command of the Unified Armed Forces of at the time.
To introduce increased combat readiness for all troops of tion, must be avoided at all costs, primarily through enhanced the services of the armed forces subordinated to the Supreme cooperation between Washington and Moscow.
Arguably, Command . the peaceful solution of the Berlin and Cuban crises became further successful test cases of the mechanism of compelled 2.
Please, report on the arrangements made by you on 24 cooperation between the superpowers.
All this significantly October.” contributed to both creating new, more effective, institutionalized forms of superpower cooperation and to the success of The “proposal” was put in effect on the same day and in the evolution of a new wave of the détente process unfoldHungary mostly the air force and air defense units were put ing from the early 1960s.
Thus it is very probable that the understanding were the establishment of the hot line between Hungarian army was actually mobilized directly by Moscow, the White House and the Kremlin and the conclusion of the without the prior knowledge of the local party leadership. partial nuclear test ban treaty in the summer of 1963.
During the following days, most probably this ad ad hoc group of top leaders under the direction of HSWP hoc crisis managing body handled the problems resulting First Secretary and Premier János Kádár and including the from the crisis, although no documents of any kind have deputy prime ministers and the foreign minister, worded a been found pertaining to its activity.
The official organs of short declaration on behalf of the Hungarian government the Hungarian party did not deal with the situation conin which it condemned the aggressive moves of the United nected to the Cuban crisis, according to the minutes of the States, threatening the independence of Cuba.
The governPolitical Committee and the Secretariat meetings held on 2 ment itself, however, was convened only two days later, on 25 November.
Prior to that, on 25 October the Secretariat had October , when the cabinet members had decided by instant voting to send an MTI (Hungarian News to retroactively approve the announcement.
This also suggests that the leadmust have been considerable hesitation in the leadership— ership already ruled out the possibility of a superpower clash perhaps they were hoping to get more information from at that stage.
It seems the idea of convening an extraordinary Moscow via diplomatic or party channels—so the declaration session of the Central Committee, that would have been a was not published the next day, on 24 October, but only a day logical move in such a grave situation, had also not arisen; at later, on the 25th in the HSWP’s daily, Népszabadság.
In the given situation meeting of the Council of Ministers on 25 October, Kádár, the Hungarian leadership could not do much, because they who since September 1961 held both the position of Prime could have no impact of any kind on the course of events, Minister and the first secretary of the HSWP, enlightened although the potential result of the crisis, if disadvantageous, the cabinet members about the Cuban situation probably would have crucially affected Hungary’s fate as well.
His report, however, as we now know, was very deficient. state and party authorities tried to strengthen the populaKádár said, after reviewing the American moves, that comtion’s empathy for Cuba, and organized solidarity meetings in bat readiness was ordered in the Soviet Union, but reserves factories and plants. were not called in.
A significant number of new Soviet forces The most spectacular and largest mass rally was held in were transported to the territory of the GDR, while Poland the Sports Hall in Budapest on 26 October where the main made troop reinforcements on the Oder–Neisse border, and speakers were deputy prime minister Gyula Kállai and Cuban Bulgaria did the same at its borders with Turkey and Greece. ambassador Quintin Pino Machado.
At the rally a message Besides these measures, in every member-state of the Warsaw was adopted to be sent to UN acting Secretary General Pact the militaries were put onto combat readiness.
In told the government that at the “request” of Marshal Grechko another important gesture of solidarity, János Kádár received the Hungarian military leadership had also introduced the the Cuban ambassador along with two journalists of the “necessary measures” and he now asked the Council of Cuban paper Revolution and their conversation was published Ministers to retroactively approve that move as well. on the front page of Népszabadság next to the Hungarian Although the Hungarian leadership obviously did not posgovernment declaration on 25 October.
Nevertheless, it is sess adequate information about the situation, Kádár rightly striking that when on 31 October Kádár addressed the party evaluated the crisis as the gravest international conflict since conference in Budapest, in preparation for the 8th congress the Second World War.
While he evidently had no first-hand of the HSWP held in late November, his speech contained information from Moscow, as a pragmatist and one who not one word about Cuba or any other international issue. knew Khrushchev’s thinking rather well, he concluded that According to the confidential reports on the mood of the now the conflict would very likely be solved peacefully.
All of this is quite plausible, especially as the leadership Union announced that Moscow was ready to participate in a did everything it could to make the people understand as little summit meeting.
On the grounds of this standpoint, he that Kádár would immediately travel to Moscow.
In the requested the Americans not to set Romania as a target for a last days of October and the first days of November several nuclear strike.
On 2 The Polish leadership was equally indignant at the events, November, a British citizen, Greville Wynne, was arrested on furthermore, they considered, that the Soviet leaders did not charges of espionage in Budapest, while visiting the Budapest understand the significance of the affair and the Kremlin International Fair.
On the 14th he was transferred to the would continue to regard preliminary consultations with the Soviet authorities with the explanation that most of his crimes allies as unimportant.
Among other things, the Polish leaders were committed against the Soviet Union.
Indeed, Wynne objected to Moscow’s lack of consultation with Warsaw Pact was a British diplomat in Moscow acting as an intermediary member-states concerning the nuclear test ban treaty, espefor the famous Soviet spy Oleg Penkovsky, who was selling cially since they had to sign it as well after the treaty had been military secrets to British intelligence.
During his negotiations in Budapest in November for spying to eight years in prison in May 1963.
He was 1963 , Gomułka stated that Cuba intendreleased in exchange for the Soviet spy Gordon Lonsdale, ed to join the Warsaw Pact, which would pose a significant serving a fifteen year prison term in Great Britain, in 1964. threat to the security of the eastern bloc as well as world We know nothing of any similar case, neither from previous peace.
Therefore he firmly stated that should the request be nor from later times, so it is not impossible, that this imporofficially submitted, Poland would veto Cuba’s admission.
A tant international issue was at least one of the main reasons similarly negative Polish stand prevented another Soviet Bloc for Kádár’s hastily-arranged visit to the Soviet capital on 7-10 ally, Mongolia, from joining the Warsaw Pact during the same November.
Union reached its goal, for basically it had managed to acquire The Polish position, nevertheless was based on the legal arguan American guarantee that the Cuban communist regime ment that the Warsaw Pact was a European defense alliance, would survive21 . therefore extending it to Asia would be a violation of the organization’s statute.
It was cautious in criticizing the Soviet behavior than the Poles, it especially hard for them to understand, that if the Soviet basically agreed with the Polish views pertaining to the nature leaders had considered the Berlin crisis, which had generated of future co-operation within the Warsaw Pact.
Nor had they known that, contrary to the necessity for consultation and information provision as well claims of Khrushchev’s propaganda, it was not the Soviet as to enforce the multilateral nature of the decision-making Union, but the United States that had a significant superiorprocess.
I thought minister, requesting utmost secrecy, informed his American of a preliminary consultation.
After the crisis, feeling betrayed by Moscow because of the withdrawal of the Soviet missiles, the differences of The Hungarian documents published here shed light on the opinion with the Soviets were made much more explicit prehistory, the history, and the aftermath of the crisis.
Most of by the Cuban leadership than before, especially during the them are reports of the Hungarian Embassy in Cuba, which period between November 1962—when the tensions surfaced opened in December 1961.
They give detailed accounts on during Kremlin emissary Anastas Mikoyan’s visit to Cuba the position and the views of the Cuban leadership on many to mollify Havana—and the spring of 1963, when Castro issues.
During these years Fidel Castro and his comrades visited Moscow and held extensive talks with Khrushchev. were working hard to make Cuba a solid member of the Several reports of the Hungarian Embassy in Havana are Soviet bloc, enjoying the same privileges as the “old” Eastern dedicated to documenting the anti-Soviet sentiments and European allies of Moscow, including extending the Soviet the emerging divergences in the Soviet-Cuban relationship “nuclear umbrella” to their island.
However, they thought February 1962, was unacceptable not only for the CPSU and all this was compatible with their having a special approach East European communist parties but also for several Latin to the issue of peaceful coexistence, the prospects of the revoAmerican communist parties.
They “were convinced Castro, who during the missile crisis urged Khrushchev that the Soviet Union was only maneuvering and being tactito start a nuclear war against the United States if it attacked Cuba, cal, she used the Caribbean crisis and its solution and Cuba had raised a comparable idea ten months earlier, during his only as instruments in the political game with the United talks with Mód in January.
He fact that the Kremlin was indeed unwilling to give an explicit suggested he did not know “whether the advantage would or iron-clad guarantee for Cuba’s security.
As reported by remain, increase or, quite the contrary, decrease or totally Hungary’s ambassador, Carlos Rafael Rodriguez told him disappear in the future.
The secret documents of the State Department of the Minister Vasily V Kuznetsov’s talks in Havana in January United States.
Kuzenetsov had a hard time explaining that 1961].36 The documents were passed to the Cuban govern“there were several ways of making agreements between states ment by “friendly hands” in a way not specified further.
One and governments, one form of talks and agreement wasg. of the documents is addressed to the United States’ ambaswhat had been realized by the published correspondence” sador to Venezuela, in which the of Khrushchev and Kennedy.
In such a mood it is not so members of the United States State Department present the principles surprising that at their first casual meeting in a theatre Castro concerning Venezuelan economic policy.
Budapest’s embassies in both Havana and Moscow also point Both documents are extremely valuable.
In days, and it is not likely to be his private opinion, that for their reply to the note, the Cuban government explained it in Cuba among the possible presidents at present Kennedy detail that the publication of the document took place just in is the best”34 the interest of Venezuela and other Latin-American peoples.
I do not wish to make any special comment on the documents themselves, they speak for themselves.
DOCUMENTS I suggest that their exact Hungarian translations should be sent to all our embassies to Latin-America or maybe to all our embassies to capitalist countries.
Latin-America and Washington should study the documents thoroughly by all means.
I request you to inform our Embassy Hungarian Embassy in Havana, Report on Secret United States also about the opinions concerning this.
Magyar Országos Levéltár [Hungarian National Archives], Budapest, Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Top Havana, 22 August 1961.
Thanks to their activity, the tactics of the United States Hungarian Embassy in Havana , Report on Deputy have ended in failure and the damages caused by them are Foreign Minister Péter Mód’s talks with political leaders in insignificant.
Deputy Foreign Minister Péter Mód’s political people in general with a revolutionary conviction who signed meetings in Cuba up on a voluntary basis.
There were a lot of women, housewives and old people among them since young people and Comrade Mód visited Cuba between 28 December those who were willing to take a greater sacrifice were doing 1961 and 6 January 1962.
Their task is to his arrival, defend the revolution at their workplace or at home against 2.
They do not have an office, a and the chief editor of its central paper, on 3 January budget, a uniform or any equipment of their own.
The United States made separately indicate what Comrade Mód said and what I said every effort in the OAS—in vain—to maintain or get unaniand I will not specify which answers refer to his or to my mous support for the resolution regarding Cuba.
However, questions. there has been a qualitative change in Latin America.
Although the Cuban revolutionary government declared itself to be Marxist-Leninist and the revolution to be a socialist Foreign Minister Raul Roa explained that in his view the movement, the OAS is no longer an obedient executive body United States was preparing for another invasion against that remains loyal to the USA to the very end.
There are several sign of this attempt, and the Cuban tries, among them some of the most important ones, object to party also has some confidential information on these prepathe invasion plans of the United States.
Actually, one should say that the invasion has already of state , Dr Carlos Olivares, begun, not only in the form of political preparations and is just visiting the Latin American countries and—as far as actions but also in a military sense.
The United States has sent it can be seen in the short telegraphs—he was given definite various agents, diversionary troops and saboteurs to Cuba promises for the support of Cuba in several places (Brazil, through various illegal channels; weapons, ammunition, Ecuador, Chile and Mexico), or at least for not adopting the explosives, various types of bombs, transmitter-receiver units American proposal that appears in the guise of a Columbian and various other equipments are constantly being smuggled motion.
The agents and saboteurs arriving in Cuba were seems that Frondizi decided to ordered to kill, explode and destroy wherever they can.
A unanimous resolution is simply out of the this can be seen as the initial phase of the invasion.
When he heard ting apart or possibly being totally disintegrated as a result of that although we did not wish to criticize the PCF’s policy the opposition of the Latin American countries.
This does not or pass a judgment on it, we could not help mentioning the mean that it will not make every effort to obtain a two-thirds fact that we had some doubts whether their policy was right, majority in accordance with the regulation, that is, 14 votes; he explained his own opinion.
He believes that it is not veto; there is no point politically in trying to put military right to have only legal options in sight and consider only sanctions to a vote under such circumstances, with Brazil, parliamentarian methods.
Next the Prime Minister the military sanctions adopted as retaliation will come into explained at length how concerned he was regarding this force immediately and in this case the only thing the charter antagonism, saying that in his view this was one of the major requires is to inform the UN, there is a clear danger of selfproblems in the present situation, and with Albania the entire aggression [i.e.—a US-organized provocation that could be problem further intensified.
The coordinated international action against Cuban counter-revolutionists that can be used for such a the imperialists is threatened by serious dangers.
It should not go on like this can explain the USA’s efforts in the OAS. and become even more serious, or else various international Then the foreign minister stressed that the situation was consultations, congresses and actions will meet with failure extremely tense and we were having hard times.
He was and the imperialists will benefit from arguments made public convinced that the USA would take serious action, perhaps and from deepening antagonism.
At the moment it seems that including a second invasion at around the meeting of the as soon as a discussion is started at an international forum, foreign ministers of the OAS states scheduled for 22 January the disputed issues between the Soviet and the Chinese par.
As if thinking aloud, he examined right before, during or right after the meeting, depending its impact on the international political situation, especially on the course of preparations for it.
Right before this visit, or after it, obviously based on the internal Chinese situation, the local he will accept our invitation and visit Hungary too. conditions and working methods, etc.
However, as we have not been to China, we don’t know the Chinese conditions.
Should it occur, Fidel Castro returned again to analyzing the extremely a serious reaction with unpredictable consequences can be harmful consequences that may follow from breaking up expected first of all in Venezuela.
These opportunities are not being utilized worst time for a debate or antagonism to emerge within the although their utilization could easily result in the accelerasocialist camp during the fight against imperialism.
However, tion and completion of the process that would, on the one Hungary and the history of the Hungarian counter-revoluhand, mean the total liberation of Latin America and on tion demonstrate, among other things, that the issues raised at the other, a fatal blow to the American imperialism that the 20th and the 22nd congresses of the CPSU [Communist would lose all of its strength.
It is using complications than the confusion that has been caused by huge economic pressure to achieve that.
For example, there raising the issue. are serious economic problems in Brazil and if the situation Fidel Castro first explained in detail that the personaldoesn’t change significantly, in two years a serious revolutionity cult, everything that this term covers, should not be the ary situation may develop in that country.
A personality cult is indefensible, and anyUSA is in a dead-end street.
Instead of supporting highly reacbody who supports a personality cult is unable to conduct tionary layers of society, it should promote a land reform that a political debate.
He gradually returned to presenting the would help the emergence of conservative land owners who joint fight of the socialist camp against imperialism, stressing are loyal to capitalism.
By refusing to give loans and money that coordinated action was not only possible but also necesit can only increase bitter feelings and create a revolutionary sary, despite any differences and specific features.
We, he said, are talkof the Latin American governments still appear to be unable ing about something in a way that the Soviet Union should to recognize and make the best of this.
The differences in poor functioning—CSB] of the Alliance for Progress by terms of actions and statements, he added, are only apparent Kennedy is a short-sighted policy.
Chile’s approach—which among the rest of us; in reality they are coordinated.
For now it has not been made widely known but the Soviet Union in these efforts by significantly increasing the public wouldn’t understand it anyway.
In order to characterize the USA’s difnations that are engaged in a difficult, perhaps armed fight ficult situation he mentioned the rapidly growing economic see things differently from those that are already enjoying the strength of the Soviet Union which is gradually becoming an results of the fight they have already fought. important factor in dependent countries and in states being Here is where this part of the conversation ended.
All this is taking place in a situawe were saying goodbye before leaving, Fidel Castro noted tion when on the one hand the imperialist powers are coming he was not sure why he had raised these issues to us since he up against one another in different parts of the world (e.g. in hadn’t discussed anything like this with any of the delegations Congo) and on the other hand, they are afraid to attack the he had received before.
Fidel Castro suggested he didn’t know whether noted that when the Soviet Union recalled its ambassador the advantage would remain, increase or, quite the contrary, and the entire embassy from Albania , decrease or totally disappear in the future.
Therefore, as long several of the new people thought it was exactly what the as the Soviet Union has this advantage, we need to make use United State did to Cuba.
Chinese ambassador and discuss the issue of reducing the volume of Chinese trade.
After discussing the trade-related At the time of the preparations for the Moscow questions the ambassador started talking about Enver Hoxha’s conference held in 1960, “when there was no collective leadarticle, so the conversation ended in a rather unpleasant atmoership in the revolution yet” in Cuba, the Cuban position sphere with Comrade Rodriguez pointing out the position of was worked out by a group made up of Fidel Castro, Raul the party.
Castro, and Ernesto Guevara as well as several other Carlos Rafael Rodriguez was afraid that it would not be old communist leaders (Blas Roca, Anibal Escalante, Carlos possible to prevent this debate from becoming public until Rafael Rodriguez), which was then represented by Anibal the end of time, which will raise serious problems.
Escalante who participated in the preparation of the Moscow Later, when talking about economic matters, Comrade conference.
They prepared a balanced budget for 1962, and essentially it will certainly 3.
According to leaders whose relationship is perhaps the best with Fidel current plans for the future, the actual industrialization of the Castro, about Fidel Castro’s statements on the relationcountry will begin at around 1970; by that time they will have ship between the Soviet and the Chinese parties.
The Soviet–Chinese relationship is causing problems goods are concerned, he noted that their results were satisfactory. in Cuba too.
Fidel Castro and who have just joined the communists but have been raised Soviet ambassador Kudryavtsev met on 2 January. in a different way.
Fidel Castro’s careful and expedient work Comrade Kudryavtsev requested the meeting because he had and caution are required to ensure unity and development received a long telegraph from Moscow and he wanted to for everybody.
There had been a long debate in the leaderprovide Fidel Castro with some information on international ship and it was difficult to achieve a unanimous decision on affairs, especially regarding Latin America.
After three years [sic; Kudryavtsev average national ratio of colored people (which is roughly was actually appointed in July 1960, roughly one-and-a-half 30%) in the city itself and along the coastal region of the years earlier—ed.], it was perhaps the first time that the Soviet county, while it is below the national average in other parts of ambassador was able to send home a reassuring telegraph the county, with a county average below the national average. after the speech.
Fidel Castro had never delivered such a sucMembers of the working class have a relative majority among cessful speech before from the point of view of international the party members; the number of peasants is also significant, political relations.
Raul Castro. just arrived in the country, and the ambassador’s deputy of Credit should be given not only to the revolutionary Ecuador rushed to Castro still on the stand and very warmly nature of the county but also to the special form of organizacongratulated him. tion in the highlands and the work of the ORI for the fact The foreign ministers’ meeting of the OAS states will be that there have been no counter-revolutionary gangs active held on 22 January.
The so-called Second Havana Statement in the territory of the county for a long time and for about will be issued on the same day.
Fidel Castro has already prea year, there hasn’t been a single perpetrator of diversionary pared the draft, whose tone is very aggressive.
This will be disattempts or sabotage acts that has been able to flee punishcussed by the leadership later.
Nobody has After Comrade Mód’s departure I contacted Soviet ambasthe right to intervene in it under any title.
Worded in the sador Kudryavtsev and informed him about the meeting with necessary form, the Statement should also include that the Fidel Castro, especially about the discussion regarding the independent Latin American countries have the right, at their Soviet–Chinese debate.
I added that both Comrade Mód and own discretion, to be faithful to a different social order.
I had the impression that Fidel Castro might have received more information from one of the parties than from the 4.
After returning from when Comrade Mód visited Oriente County, so he only had Moscow, Blas Roca gave a detailed account, which was fola chance to meet with the ORI’s secretary.
The conversation lowed by a three-day long debate in the leadership of the was about the situation of the party in the county.
The number of party staff at the Soviet embassy, although the Soviet Union has a members is a bit over 8 thousand, about half of which came huge volume of trade with Cuba, there are a large number of to the ORI from the 26th of July Movement.
The creation of specialists working in the country, and the Soviets provide a party branch organizations, so-called nuclei is nearly lot of aid for Cuba, while China is not doing anything like complete, and their number currently amounts to 1200. that.
Under such circumstances, the main task of the Chinese The average number of members in a branch organization is embassy can only be propaganda—this may be the reason for between 6 and 7.
There is a branch organization in every state the Cuban sympathy with China.
He wonders what Castro farm, in the majority of cooperative farms and sugar factories may have meant when he talked about the border and a tribe, as well as in the major industrial plants, transportation and unless he was referring to the Mongolian People’s Republic. commercial companies, etc.
In addition, there are branch True, the Chinese are not happy about the existence of organizations set up by residential districts as well as special Mongolia, although they have never raised this issue.
With its excessively left-wing ideology and fake with 20 to 30 year-olds slightly exceeding the number of 30 revolutionary slogans that assist the reactionary forces in the to 40 year-olds.
At the great Cuban national events, at the receptions held to commemorate national holidays, etc. the ambassador of the FRG is present regularly and asks the protocol chief every time, pointing at the ambassador of the GDR, who this man is and what he is doing here.
The West-German ambassador Federal Republic of Germany and Cuba, 16 March 1962 is usually satisfied with the answer and it has happened several times that the protocol chief or other foreign affairs staff asked The Embassy of the Hungarian People’s Republic him whether he wanted to protest about it or something like To Comrade János Péter, Foreign Minister that and he answered no and said he only wanted to point out Budapest and state the fact.
The Federal Republic of Germany and Cuba. for the worse and on the other hand, it would make its now intensive penetration into the new African countries more There are normal diplomatic relations between the Federal difficult.
West Germany tries to act differently from other Republic of Germany and Cuba.
The FRG is represented in imperialist countries in Latin American and African countries Havana by an ambassador, who has a staff of seven diplomats and she wants to penetrate into them with her great economic and numerous administrative and assistant staff. power as deeply as possible.
Her anti-Cuban attitude or even As I have already reported, the Cuban Republic did not her break off with Cuba would meet with recognize the GDR [German Democratic Republic; East antipathy in some of these countries in the leading circles Germany] officially because the GDR considers it more themselves and everywhere in the various progressive or even valuable than formal recognition that the so-called Political patriotic petit bourgeois and other circles—and this would Commission headed by the ambassador may demonstrate in prevent her penetration.
The Cuban side is aware of all this, reality in Cuba, that is, in Latin-America, day after day the but at present it is also in the interest of Cuba to maintain existence of the two self-governing and independent German diplomatic relations with as many countries as possible, it states.
Formal recognition would probably have meant the would be particularly disadvantageous to heedlessly provoke FRG breaking off diplomatic relations with Cuba correspondbreaking off diplomatic relations with one of the NATO ing to the Hallstein doctrine. countries.
The number of the staff of the Embassy of the FRG, considered very large among Havana conditions, can by no János Beck means be justified by the diplomatic, economic, or other relations between the FRG and Cuba.
The political relations ambassador between the two countries are well known and need no comments.
Magyar Országos Levéltár [Hungarian compared with other great Western countries.
Union whose all-embracing help has made the preservation and development of the Cuban revolution possible.
The second Havana declaration was written by Fidel The Embassy of the Hungarian People’s Republic Castro alone—and he knows it from a reliable source—he to Comrade Foreign Minister János Péter had not discussed it with any Cuban leading politicians.
He Budapest discussed the declaration only with one person, a Uruguayan professor, who is something like his counselor.
Conversation with Yugoslavian ambassador to of the unity of the ORI, that is the leading layer of the Cuban Havana, Boško Vidaković revolution.
Vidaković has just returned from his trip to Latin America lasting for a few days, during which he had the I had a long meeting with Yugoslavian ambassador to opportunity to see that the communist parties generally did Havana Boško Vidaković on 17 March.
Prestes threatened the Cuban party with public action if they In some parts of the Cuban public, mainly among the did not give up propagating views in Brazil that were contrary petit-bourgeois and intellectual supporters of Fidel Castro, to the position of the Brazilian party.
He considers it a typical who are not Marxists though, but who have been the supfact concerning the declaration that the Western members of porters of the revolution for a shorter or longer time, he can the Havana diplomatic corps all consider the declaration to be feel a turning point in their attitude toward Yugoslavia and “the work of the communists,” although the old communists the Yugoslav embassy.
The Cuban economic situation, nor Foreign Minister Roa agreed with the appointed the difficulties in provision, organizational problems and the line, but they could do nothing but stick to it.
This resulted political problems within the leadership, the interrelationship in the isolation of the Cuban delegation, in that they refused among the three political organizations united in the ORI. or avoided meeting several Latin American statesmen and 2.
If the Yugoslavian diplomats had not helped, they relationship among the three political organizations united would not even have known what was happening around in the ORI. them.
What he said reflected this position on the one hand—I the Havana reports), because he continued in public the fight do not know yet whether this is a position represented only by between the different groups going on behind the scenes in him and only toward myself—and the opinion of his circle of such a way that he gave no freedom of choice to the other associates on the other hand.
According to Vidaković, Fidel Castro attacks the people some things that give food for reflection.
Concerning all this of the Directory of 13 March on the one hand, and he makes I am going to talk to other people and come back to the it possible that the communists could be blamed for the individual problems. consequences of the mistakes on the other hand, although it is just the communists who will make up for the damage caused János Beck Ambassador by the egocentric and megalomaniac Fidel Castro.
Magyar Országos Levéltár [Hungarian thinks that Cuba is in a catastrophic economic situation.
Translated by Attila change in the opinion of the peasantry (the first signs of this Kolontári and Zsófia Zelnik.] can already be seen), which would mean the beginning of the fall of the system.
To prevent this, during 1962 and in the first months of 1963 the socialist countries must give a new loan—mainly in the form of transportation of food and articles of consumption.
Vidaković also said that the official Cuban side’s attitude Hungarian Embassy in Havana , Report on Talk with toward Yugoslavia had changed.
Now their economic relaCuban President Osvaldo Dorticos, 15 June 1962 tions are better.
Deputy Minister Szarka But she would not like if in Cuba there was something like Deputy Head of Department Szűcsné a cold war going on in connection with Yugoslavia.
A visit to President of the Republic Dorticos on 15 the mutually advantageous trade.
She has provided political June 1962 help already before (e.g., she achieved that Cuba was able to participate at the Belgrade conference [of the Non-Aligned I was received by President of the Republic Dorticos on Movement, or NAM, in September 1961—ed.] against all 15 June and we had a conversation lasting one hour and 45 the resistance) and will do so in the future too.
I requested the hearing explaining the fact that I ous interest of Cuba to maintain good political and economic was going on my usual annual holiday and before it I would relations with Yugoslavia, as the USA’s policy—Cuba’s ecolike him to discuss with me all the problems he wanted the nomic isolation—is going to have its results gradually and it Hungarian government to be informed about.
Both the Poles and the Soviet Union are sending the ships with crews Agriculture and the crews are going to fish together with the Cubans for at least half a year to teach them the industrial fishing methods.
As well, as the planned 3000 caballerias could not be sown in a result of the serious measures of the government and the spring, so only a part can be harvested in 1963.
They are INRA, they achieved at last—said the president—that they going to sow in the dry period as well, differently were on firm ground concerning agriculture.
The results can from the usual practice, but it will be harvested only in 1964. be observed gradually, but the early results will be felt in the The prospects of next year’s sugar production are worse than public supply itself only next year.
Even if all preconditions are fulfilled, that is, all try and pork is increasing.
There is also an planned tasks are carried out according to the plans, next increase in the production of various roots (batata and other year there will be a maximum of 4.5—4. million tons of roots that are considered primary goods of general provisionsugar, that is, less than this year, which is further ing in Cuba). aggravated by the circumstance that next year will be started The stock of cattle is about five and a half million heads, without any reserve of sugar contrary to this year.
Next year in but they are economical with them to ensure the possibility the harvest already 1,000 harvesting machines will take part of multiplication.
Maybe the number of slaughters could and harvest about 30% of sugarcanes.
But there will still be a shortage of manpower, which, similarly to this year, but to a be raised, and the quantity of beef for consumption could much smaller extent, will be made up for by unpaid or volunbe increased, but they are waiting, among other tary permanent work.
Mechanization will be of the size to do because it will be inevitable to raise the consumer price of away with the shortage of labor force only by 1964 or 1965. meat as well.
For the rise in prices they must wait for the best As far as the harvesting of coffee is concerned, there still moment politically and also prepare for it. remains the great shortage of manpower, so harvesting will be The present shortage of food cannot be done away with solved with voluntary work andg. by deploying students in some months anyway, it will last until the next winter and who receive grants in this work during harvest time.
As in the even until the next year. past years a lot of people have left agriculture andg. started In the long run the food situation will be substantially to work in public projects, they are going to take measures to improved by fishing.
Before the revolution fishing was carredirect the labor force to agriculture. ried out by quite primitive devices and the quantity that was To increase agricultural production in prospect and to caught played an irrelevant role in provisioning. eliminate the serious damage caused by the dry weather, There have been taken serious measures already to increase one of the most important devices will be the creation of a fishing, but only a few days ago did they start to eliminate water economy system at high technical level.
The highest radically those mistakes that hindered the development of level Soviet expert delegation has been to Cuba, and after the fishing.
First of all, we must mention that the fishermen got departure of their leaders the remaining experts started work so little money for the fish and the fishermen were paid so low right away.
There is a possibility to reach an immediate result wages in the cooperatives, which were formed a long time ago or one that can be seen in, let us say, two years by a smaller and which have acquired a dominant role in fishing (besides investment, but they will start to make long-run plans as well egalitarianism), that it was not worth fishing and they tried to to be able to begin the bigger jobs as well to the best of their sell the few fish they caught on the black market.
In Cuba earlier there was no water economy, they already bought and will receive bigger fishing vessels from the could not make a step without Soviet help.
This help means Poles, and some bigger trawlers from the Soviet Union, which expert help from the highest level to the simplest skilled workwill make it possible not to fish only in the near coast shallow er and the manufacturing and delivery of material equipment.
The saboteurs and counter-revolutionary organizers arriving from abroad, After they started tackling the crucial problems of industry, who organize and direct the internal counter-revolutionary prospects have become better and normal progress seems forces, in contrast with the last year or the past situation, now guaranteed.
These problems were mainly problems of norm receive not only superficial training and are not only poorly and wages.
They are far from being solved, that is, the armed and supplied with financial means but are people at planned solution from having been carried out, but they have a higher level from all aspects and work in a new way.
It is strange and technical equipment, she provides them with a great sum astonishing, but they have not been able to make a plan.
For example, recently such next year plan of 1963 is being prepared, it will be ready soon, a group of seven people has been caught in the Eastern part but the president stressed that it would be a plan with a lot of of Cuba just after landing, who, apart from the modern and unreliable and inexact details.
Concerning the long-run plan, many arms, had serious technical equipment and not false but he emphasized even more that he personally could not trust real Cuban money to the value of several ten thousand dollars even the main numbers.
In contrast with the agriculout any network of agents, through Western embassies on the ture and industry, where the Cuban leaders believe, even if black dollar market on the other hand. only in recent times, that they have reached firm ground after The Cuban situation may be generally characterized— the swamp, concerning planning and organization, they do continued the president—by greatly increasing class struggle. not know where they stand.
As the president expressed himAfter the elimination of old groups of bandits, now, partly in self, they have not managed to create the spirit of planning Las Villas and mainly in Matanzas county there appear newly and organization and he cannot report on any long-run idea organized and functioning groups of bandits.
They do not even know at this moment which line to external direction, they partly lean on the richer peasants take to change the situation radically.
The cadres working in with a counter-revolutionary spirit, and partly on the middle central planning are quite weak, often much weaker than in and poor peasants, who can be easily deceived because of the subordinated organs, that is, the comrades working in the sectarian and other mistakes committed by the Cuban the ministries and elsewhere.
But it is worth thinking over leadership, and also they win their base in areas with scattered whether they should be moved higher to do central planning populations by terrorist intimidation.
They carry out sabotage jobs, because they may fail in the central work and then the actions, which consist of setting places on fire, explosions and smaller detail planning jobs that are carried out tolerably in other actions, and they also kill people.
In Matanzas county some places may become worse too. in most recent times the situation has become so much worse (Here I wish to interject that, according to the news spread in Havana, there have been talks going on for a long that they approached the highways as well, and raided vehicles time whether Minister of Industry Ernesto Guevara or Carlos or people.
Even if for others, but the highest leaderdo farmers, clerical people, and people under their influence ship of the Planning Bureau will be obviously substituted.) and the ex-members of the armed forces and power-enforcement organizations of the old system or their relations and the smaller part is made up of the petit-bourgeoisie of towns.
The counter-revolution The Cuban leadership cannot allow the spread of this movement, not even its existence in such size in a county The plan of the United States and the preparation for it is neighboring Havana.
Therefore they have started the execution of few days later in the town of Cardenas, President Dorticos the necessary measures both in the political and military lines. held a mass meeting and observed a military parade.
After the For this the experiences in Matanzas gave good grounds. parade some parts of the army together with the other organs As an interjection, here I would like to report on the and a part of the population began the all-embracing great events in Matanzas, the details of which I have heard from military action against the groups of bandits in the county.
These groups have been more and more active and in the past days they have During the conversation President Dorticos emphasized that managed to incite the population to a counter-revolutionary one of the main difficulties in eliminating economic problems demonstration in a small village near the small town of and faulty political methods was that in Cuba there was not a Cardenas of Matanzas county.
The organization of the party has started only just now revolutionary success is not to be found in the skillfulness of in the truest sense of the word and the counter-revolutionaries and their leaders in the USA, but it is going on very thoroughly and carefully, but slowly.
They the faulty policy led by the Cuban leadership and organs for a try not to make any new mistakes and strive to build a strong, long time.
Vice-Premier and Minister of Defense Raul Castro uniform and firm Marxist-Leninist party.
He also said that they did not only need counselrorizing methods, as similar to the defeated authorities of the ors, experts undertaking technical or other help in central and Batista-regime.
The peasants often turned to the commanders national work, but also at much lower levels for the solution of the individual units, not only with their problems, but with of a small detail, to manage a smaller enterprise or institution, their complaints about the procedures of the ORI leadership and sometimes for the solution of a particular task within a and secretaries too.
The organizers and leaders of the counterfirm or institution requiring new technical or organizational revolutionary demonstration, the members of one of these skill, similarly to the Soviet Union, who lends us not only groups of armed bandits were caught by the authorities right high and middle level experts but also skilled workers to away and four were immediately sentenced to death through organizeg. the water economy and fishing. a summary procedure and shot dead.
In the population the He also stressed that in all cases when we thought that summary sentence met with protest against the renewal of their Ministry of Foreign Trade or some organ or official death sentences and executions familiar from the time of the within it wished to purchase something or in such quantity Batista regime.
Magyar Országos Levéltár [Hungarian of friends of the counter-revolutionary cafe-owner, etc.
In this National Archives], Budapest, Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Top village the counter-revolution will have no base any more.
Embassy of the Hungarian People’s Republic He considered the return order to have been given at random To Comrade Foreign Minister János Péter and without responsibility.
All the chiefs of mission, including the papal All the chiefs of mission of the diplomatic corps were preslegate, were present.
So was Prime Minister Fidel Castro. ent without exception at Dorticos’ and Roa’s departure.
It was At the mass rally following the arrival, on the balcony of conspicuous that Fidel Castro was not present. the presidential palace, however, I could see only the chiefs of As we learned from the press the day after, half-an-hour mission of friendly and neutral countries. after take-off, the plane carrying the president of the republic, The general assembly made an unforgettable impression the foreign minister, and their entourage turned back so that on me.
The square in front of the presidential palace, and some technical defects could be repaired, and the defect in the the side-streets leading there, were black with the immense, engine was fixed at the Havana airport.
Prime Minister Fidel unbelievably enthusiastic crowd, which fêted their returning Castro arrived in the meantime and he had a long conversapresident.
Prime Minister Ben Bella replied to the welcome speech, also translated into French, in Spanish, for which he received special applause.
October 1962 Ben Bella underlined that by the victory of the Algerian The Embassy of the Hungarian People’s Republic people, the exploitation of man by man would cease and to Comrade Foreign Minister János Péter never return to his country.
The Cuban one copy to Archives of Embassy deputy protocol chief—who was standing near us—said that the priest was one of the ministers of Ben Bella’s government.
The visit of Algerian Prime I will report on the further events of the visit and its evaluation Minister Ben Bella to Cuba. in my next report.
At midday on the day of courier dispatch, 16 October, Erzsébet Görög Algerian Prime Minister Ben Bella arrived in Havana on the plane of the revolutionary Cuban government sent for him. chargé d’affaires ad interim After returning from the airport, I wish to report briefly on Ben Bella’s reception, which was grandiose.
Translated by Attila of the Algerian and the Cuban people for national indepenKolontári and Zsófia Zelnik.] dence.
Tonyo-Gráf Soviet Marshal Andrei Grechko, Commander of the Nyomdai és Grafikai Stúdió, 2006), 106.
Warsaw Pact member states stationed in Moscow and there was no reference to his telegram to the defense ministers.
Comrade Köteles lieutenant-general, Comrade Affairs, Tóth major general, and Comrade Szűcs major general, on 23 Comrade Imre Kovács, Minister of Food Administration, October 1962 at 6.50 pm.
Comrade Jenő Köteles, First Deputy Minister of Defense, The Government approvingly acknowledged the measures Comrade György Lázár, Vice-President of the National that had been taken.
Central Planning Office, Comrade Béla Sulyok, First Deputy Minister of Finance, Comrade János Kádár proposes the Government to authorize the Prime Minister to take, together with the Deputy Prime Representing the ministers in absentia Ministers, the Foreign Minister, and the Defense Minister, any pressing measures that may become necessary in this Comrade Sándor Rónai, Speaker of the Parliament, tensed situation on behalf of the Government.
Comrade János Brutyó, Secretary-General of the National Council of Trade Unions, The Government granted the requested authorization.
Comrade Attila Borka, First Deputy-Chairman of the Central Dated as above.
People’s Supervisory Committee, Comrade György Péter, Chairman of the Central Statistics Office, /János Kádár/ Comrade Géza Szénási, Attorney General, /Dr.
Tivadar Gál/ Comrade József Veres, President of the Executive Committee Prime Minister of the City Council of Budapest, Head of the Secretariat, Comrade Dr Tivadar Gál, Head of the Secretariat of the Hungarian Revolutionary Council of Ministers, Hungarian Revolutionary Comrade Géza Neményi, Head of the Information Office of Worker’s and Peasant’s Government the Council of Ministers, Worker’s and Peasant’s Government as permanent invited participants of the government meetings.
Comrade János Kádár: I welcome all the comrades and hereby open the session of the Council of Ministers.
We have convened the Council of Ministers to provide The Government acknowledged the announcement. information on the Cuban situation.
The current tension is due to the statement made by United States President Kennedy on 22 October and the 1.
Comrade János Kádár the statement, so I will cite only the main points.
The first measure was the announcement of a blockade around Cuba, Comrade János Kádár informs the members of the which means a blockade both in the air and on the sea.
They Government on the international situation that has arisen as are monitoring the situation in Cuba and will deem any a result of the aggressive steps taken by the USA against Cuba attack coming from Cuba as an attack by the Soviet Union. and on the measures taken by the Hungarian Government.
The United States’ troops were put approve the government statement41 drafted on 23 October on high alert, the granting of leave was discontinued, military by the Prime Minister, the Deputy service at the naval forces was extended by one year, and other Prime Ministers, and the Minister of Foreign Affairs as well as measures were taken to complement these steps.
It withdraw their arms from Cuba as they had been informed was necessary to make a political statement.
We drafted the that the Soviet Union has mid-range missiles in place in statement of the Hungarian government on the basis of the Cuba.
The statement concludes by saying that he Cuban peoproposal made by the Foreign Minister and, ple are oppressed and calls upon them to rise in revolt.
This given the urgency of the matter, we had it approved by the statement was complemented by another statement issued by deputy prime ministers and had it published. the United States government in which it was published that The commander-in-chief of the Warsaw Treaty [Marshal the blockade would begin on 24 October at 3m.
Central Andrei Grechko] is maintaining proper contact with and European Time. has informed the commanders of the Hungarian People’s The Soviet and the Cuban governments gave an adequate Army that are under the command of the Warsaw Treaty. response to this decision of the United States government.
The commander-in-chief requested us to take measures and They evaluated the American steps, basically stating that inform him about them.
Comrade Köteles43 the blockade and the additional steps breach a wide range of and other competent comrades worked out the proposal, international laws and violate Cuba’s sovereignty, while the which we approved and informed the commander-in-chief of obstacle to free navigation also violates the sovereign rights the Warsaw Treaty about them.
The statements made it clear that the steps involved putting some troops of our army on alert, primarily taken by the United States were warlike and unlawful, which in the air force and the air defense force.
In other units we the statements rejected by saying that the Soviet Union and discontinued granting leave without ordering all those already Cuba would take the necessary measures to prevent the USA on leave to return to service and without calling up reservists. from realizing these steps.
Currently, the various commanders stay closely together and It is worth noting a few things about the various steps that are in union.
In addition, we made preparations internally to the United States has taken.
We also Two naval command headquarters were set up, as is usual informed Marshall Grechko of our measures.
The USA put commander-in-chief in the present situation. its forces stationed in Europe on high alert, and here the most In my view, this is the most serious international conflict important thing is that the number of patrol aircraft equipped that has emerged since the Second World War.
The numsteps taken by the United States government, it should be known that ber of these aircraft—which have been constantly in the air there was no negotiation with the allies in advance, and that’s for years—is usually 4, 5 or 6, but now it was raised to 42 in what the reaction to them by some of the NATO member the Mediterranean region and Europe. states reflects.
Essentially, the NATO member states officially As far as the NATO High Command is concerned, no endorse the United States steps but their informal statements make it special military measure that would be binding for the NATO very clear that they are offended and feel that they should not countries was taken.
If I remember well, the only thing that take part in any such military action.
This is what the French happened was that Italy’s air force and air defense were put on and the English positions seem to suggest. alert, and so was the Greek army.
The American capitalists the army of the German Democratic Republic on alert. made incredible amounts of money during the First World As far as the member states of the Warsaw Treaty are War.
The USA rarely got involved in dangerous or risky situconcerned, the Polish People’s Republic mobilized significant ations in the Second World War.
They made a lot of profit troops along the Odera border section, and so did Bulgaria during the Cold War period too, ousting their allies from along the Turkish­–Greek border.
All the member states of the different places whenever the occasion arose,g.
They even undertook to support the Algerian free431 dom fighters to some extent just to soften up the French in there was some positive concern in his county.
The Ministry another respect. of the Interior complained that it could hardly dissuade a We must understand the USA’s motives very well because youth group from going out to protest.
There is a healthy we need to consider the situation on the bases of these sense of sympathy with Cuba among the public. motives.
They keep bragging, suggesting that they can make This had been the situation until last night.
Of course, it in every situation, they are very strong, and nobody can face there had been various developments on both sides in terms up to them.
The Americans are characterized by the politics of both military and political action.
As far as the political of bluffing; they find pleasure in scaring others.
The position of them expressing the view that some kind of negotiation is of the USA has become weaker in connection with most of required.
This claim provided some basis for the work of the the key international issues.
The Common Market raises a Security Council, which was complemented by several other lot of problems, which hit the American capitalists hard too. things.
The different governments issued a wide range of Their position regarding the issue of West Berlin is very bad. resolutions, including the governments of the socialist In Laos they were happy to be able to get out of the situacountries.
In addition, a group of 40 non-allied states within tion, and they don’t have much to expect in Vietnam either. the UN also discussed the situation and took action.
Apart I could continue this list on and on as far as mentioning the from a group of African countries, three neutral European fact that the UN is gradually slipping out of their hands too. states, Finland, Austria and Switzerland, also participated in There is an obvious deterioration in their general position. this action.
They also worked out their own position, urging It is also important to know that there are very effective negotiations and for every party to make an effort to prevent weapons in Cuba. a military clash.
The UN Secretary-General spoke It is also worth considering that the position of the curin this spirit at the session of the Security Council held durrent United States government is not rosy at home either.
It looks like ing the night, suggesting that the United States should lift the the Kennedy cabinet had a lot of progressive votes during the blockade and the Soviet Union should stop supplying Cuba presidential elections; the trade unions supported them and for two weeks.
Neither the USA’s, nor the Soviet Union’s, cherished great hopes in a positive sense, but nothing has response to this suggestion is known at this point. really been fulfilled.
These supporters are already dissatisfied, Other viewpoints on the situation cannot be disregarded and so are many of the aggressive monopolist circles.
Peace movements have also made their force tangible. the kind of situation in which they decided to take this step.
Russell has also emerged, They deserve to be called a country playing with fire in a hazand what actually happened was that Khrushchev, Kennedy, ardous manner, and anything can come out of it. and Russell began exchanging messages, some of which gave In addition to the measures mentioned before, we have rise to hopes that it might be possible to prevent the further decided on launching a certain political campaign too.
We intensification of the conflict, and some of the positions can mobilize the Hungarian public in the correct manner appear to support the truth of our position politically.
There are ad-hoc political meetings in worth noting that the statement of the Soviet government46 the factories.
Ten days ago I was asked to give an interview issued the day before yesterday was regarded even by the to Cuban journalists, and it seemed right to make use of English and several others as very moderate and as calm as this opportunity.
We also have some ideas how to proceed. was possible in a situation like this.
The Soviet government’s We will continue with the campaign and we are planning to statement has made a very good impression.
This meettelegraph sent to Khrushchev he asked the Soviet party to ing will be held this afternoon in the Sports Hall. try its best to avoid being provoked.
Making the best of this opportunity, Khrushchev now, the Hungarian people have taken the developments of gave a very good response, pointing out several important this situation soberly.
Some comrades kept calling us during political aspects and unveiling the dangerous nature of the the night asking what the latest news was.
The response makes it clear that there As far as the supply of goods is concerned, I believe we is room for negotiation and it also demonstrates that the should continue with our correct policy of not imposing any Soviet Union is ready to participate in a summit meeting restrictions.
This approach made a good impression on the entire more than what we can gain by them.
Should any local probAmerican public. lems arise, we will try to localize them.
Yesterday there was a critical point in the afternoon when the blockade and the ships should have clashed.
Obviously, we should pay attention to this, the tension has eased a little bit since then, as there to all sorts of phenomena; however, we should make sure is no news on any clash yet.
So far there has been no clash that our reassuring measures do not drive people to believe between the ships that keep up the blockade and the ships that there should be chaos.
I don’t know the reporting service that are bound for Cuba with supplies.
It seems now that the of domestic trade but it must be a huge organization.
If any most critical danger is over and diplomacy has come to the extraordinary tasks are given to the reporting service there, fore.
I need to add though that the danger is certainly not maybe one hundred thousand people will get the order and over yet. the same number of people will begin to wonder why there is I request the Government to acknowledge the governno panic when there should be panic.
Comrade Tausz should ment statement that has been issued and the measures not order the reporting service to carry out any extraordinary that have been taken to increase defense preparedness.
The tasks; our domestic trade organization is socialist enough Government should give authorization to take any other already to report to the competent authorities should any necessary action in case of an emergency in consultation with signs of a hoarding craze break out.
Instead we should approve the deputy prime ministers and the ministers of defense and of the normal procedure with respect to our reserves; that foreign affairs.
The situation changes from hour to hour, so is, the reserves should be filled up.
This point of time is not prompt action is crucial at such times. bad with respect to hoarding; it would have been a lot more As a general task we suggest that the level of readiness that inconvenient at the beginning of June. applies to us should be maintained but otherwise we should continue to work as usual.
Not underestimating the dangers inherent our fair standpoint and request the support of the Hungarian in the United States steps, it occurred to me whether these steps and people.
We should make it clear that this support requires disthe election campaign that is cipline, composure, and, especially, hard work.
It’s unlikely that the two are related but the issue the Soviet people, expressing the view that in the current situshould be viewed in accordance with its significance.
The ation the Soviet government is sure that the Soviet people will weakening of the position of the Kennedy cabinet is not temwork even harder and will do everything they can to increase porary, it has been obvious for some years now, and it is not the defense capabilities of the country and accomplish any characteristic of the current period only.
We should not assume that statement but it should be taken into consideration when the they commit such a stupid and use a short-term bluff tasks are being carried out. like this because it would result in complete political destruction.
Certainly, this situation emerged, we have been monitoring the sales of the internal political situation has a role in it too. goods more intensively, as is usually the case at times when Now I would like to inform the comrades about some people are likely to hoard goods.
There are signs of hoarding of the diplomatic steps that the United States government has taken here and there but they are quite sporadic, not general at all, recently.
The United States chargé d’affairs to Budapest [Horace G. so there is no cause for concern in view of the situation we Torbert, Jr.] contacted the Ministry of Foreign Affairs yestersaw in the morning.
I understand that our task is to bear in day at around 10m. and requested to be urgently received mind that the requirement to be prepared also applies to us in by a senior official of the ministry.
We were busy working on the sense that we should run our reporting service with even the government statement, so we put it off a bit, and eventumore vigilance. ally the audience took place in the afternoon at around 4m.
I am aware of the legal position and ous the situation really was. the most important thing here is the joint statement issued Last Saturday our chargé d’affaires in by the Cuban and the Soviet governments in September Washington was summoned by the State which declared that the Soviet Union is supplying Cuba with Department and was given a piece of paper.
The of trying to figure out the Hungarian position through latest Soviet government statement says that the United States step is diplomatic channels that has been going on since the sumillegal, and then there is Khrushchev’s letter, which puts it in mer.
This time it was a specific proposal submitted by the a popular language, saying that you should not give a robber American party to the Hungarian government.
I don’t know anything more specific regarding ment was to declare, of its own free will, that nobody was in the other things, I could only present assumptions but there’s prison due to the 1956 events, the American cabinet would no point in doing so. be willing to do a number of things.
In such a case the United States I don’t know what each of the two parties is doing on the would be ready to take action in the UN and state that there sea.
The sea is huge, it’s dark at night, but there has been no have been changes in Hungary and the United States no longer believes clash so far.
The United States wants to kill Cuba and the socialist world that the Hungarian issue should be put on the agenda.
All the relevant international be negotiated, the Mindszenty issue47 could be discussed, laws say that our position is right and the USA’s aggression is ambassadors could be exchanged, etc.
It could be called a real directed not only at the socialist countries but it also affects peace proposal.
It appears that the USA’s position is not very the fundamental norms of international life. good regarding this issue either; therefore, they are seeking a Cuba has taken adequate measures and ordered mobilizaway out. tion.
The Cuban people are resolute and obviously count on We ordered Comrade Radványi to say, if the parties the support of the socialist world. concerned happen to meet, that he has sent this proposal to Budapest where it will be studied carefully.
Hungarian National Archives , Budapest, the votes on the Hungarian issue at the UN General Assembly Council of Ministers, XIX-A-83-a-245. jkv.—1962.
Translated is seen even by Western observers as a defeat for the United States govfor CWIHP by András Bocz.] ernment, which does not seem to be too promising for them going forward.
The United States is also in a bad position as far as the issue of mandates is concerned.
Comrade Szirmai, Comrade Orbán, Comrades decision, I was in Moscow, I met with the Darvasi, and Endre Molnár are involved, who assist in data Soviet comrades, and if you allow me, before I move on to collection and wording.
Then this draft was put on the the actual agenda, I would like to mention certain details agenda of and discussed in the Political Committee, then the concerning this trip.
Political Committee’s comments—this again relates to my The first and perhaps the most important is, that neither trip—were included in the text by the committee in question. fom our side, nor from the Soviet comrades’ side, did arise Currently, this is how the case stands. any kind of burning question, what would have pressed this Regarding the future,—I will tell you this soon—if the meeting.
But as it turned out, last Sunday Central Committee will have discussed the text which is to the Soviet comrades and we independently from each other become the basis of the report and if the main directives are thought that a meeting would not be wrong in this situation. accepted, all we have to do is to finish it in two days and then, As you know, on different issues though, but discussions were I think, I have to work on it to make the language smooth— going on with most of the sister parties from the member and this will become the report.
The work countries of the Warsaw Pact during the previous days and itself has requirements that around Thursday morning or week.
Currently, these are the conwe contacted Comrade Khrushchev via phone ditions of the work.
This additional work, of course, cannot and we mentioned this, and we agreed that such a meeting differ from the approved principles. never does harm.
I would like to mention, that in certain international At the discussion we naturally dealt with various issues of issues one must take sides clearly and precisely.
Now, briefly I the international situation and with several current economic wish to say a few words concerning these international issues. problems in the Hungarian-Soviet relationship.
Entirely new issues raises great international tension, is the victorious people’s revwere not brought up or raised, we only clarified the situation olution in Cuba that evolved further into a socialist revolution on a few known issues and realized that we share the same which has been constantly undermined by the United States opinion in all of the relevant issues.
And it is splendid. imperialist circles from the beginning in hope of crushing, On the 8th I spent almost the whole day with the Soviet overrunning, terminating the Cuban revolution.
The company was more than just the members the issue—most likely justly—the United States sees a great, lethal danmentioned in the communiqué, there were other comger against the country.
Especially since the Cuban revolution rades from the Central Committee, and their relatives were shook all of Latin America under the American imperialists’ involved too.
Since these South American and Latin American counwould have been just amongst themselves. tries are colonies of the United States and the situation differs I was urged by Comrade Khrushchev, Kozlov, entirely from what the official reports declare in the United Brezhnev, Malinovsky, and all comrades States.
Furthermore, the domestic situation in these Latin one by one and also together to forward their best wishes American countries, the citizen’s spirits, views, ambitions, and greetings.
I told them that a Central Committee meethopes, fights are not the same as the American diplomats’ ing would be held on Monday.
Also in the name of the views and positions talking there on behalf of them.
This is there is a certain minor disagreement between the Pentagon, the reason why the only goal was—through the economic the interest groups associated with weapons, and another embargo, through diplomatic tools, and through aggression group represented by Kennedy.
There is a slight difference if necessary—to annihilate the Cuban revolution.
This is the between these views and interests, however only minor, not root of the tension concerning Cuba.
In relation to this, the American elections were carried into effect consecutively in the United States.
Also, they attempted invading the fact communists were leading the United States.
Apparently inefficiently. the situation became as it was what triggered the events on the The fact, that the United States was not able to achieve its 22nd of October on the United States government’s side. goals by any means—that have been previously mentioned— They announced the Cuban blockade, and were simuldepended solely on the determination and endurance of the taneously prepared for amphibious landings and for a direct Cuban people furthermore on the brotherly help that American invasion of Cuba.
Both were already decided plans the Cuban people enjoy on behalf of the entire socialist world on 22 October. and other progressive international partners.
I do not think it We have to see this as a reckless game, when a certain is necessary to point out, that in this fight, for Cuba the biggroup does not think of future consequences and puts all its gest and primary help has been granted by the Soviet Union. eggs in one basket.
This happened on 22 October and actually Due to constant American threatening and different prevailed throughout this tense period.
The Americans were attempts the situation evolved into an actual threat.
In the determined to start another World War, rather than giving past few months it became evident, that the Unites States up on the termination of the Cuban revolution.
At that time, the ring of naval ships was agreement has been reached between the Soviet government publicly acknowledged that was set around Cuba.
The most modernly equipped divisions, marine divisions, etc., execution itself has been in effect ever since.
Evidently, this namely made up of 7-8 divisions that would have served for could not have been kept in secret from the United States the invasion of Cuba. forever—though this has not been the intention at all—since The third force alignment of the United States’ governin early September the two governments published the agreement occurred in the European region, where mostly reactive ment in front of the whole world.
The comrades are familiar with these an agreement exists, according to which the Soviet Union planes, that carry around nuclear weapons, that have been grants weapons to Cuba.
The number of these planes were raised by distress in the United States especially within government and five times the usual number, then war ships in the navy and imperialist circles.
The first being the Sicily and without mobilizing the entire army were combat aggressive circles of the Unites States Department of Defense ready that the comrades that is naturally backed up by the entire weapons industry of the United States, the monopolies that pursue a politics know very well from the news.
This is what the government of war and aggression, circles that believe in arms race, of the United States has done.
Something was also done by circles that suffer from self-delusion and are puffing, bluffing the NATO organization, however not as much as the United constantly by nature.
These were the two factors American States —this was the ally who they referred that motivated the American government.
The United States did not cross-check these actions with that both were visible in the government’s actions.
But they cannot was present in the forces of NATO powers as well, but withgo anywhere.
It can be said that an enormous responsibility out any particular mobilization.
Thus, this was the situation rests on the Soviet comrades, when socialism, the socialist on the 23rd of October. revolution, the cause of progress, the case of peace should be In the meantime on our side the following event took protected.
Cuba ordered a general mobilization, that the Cuban because the blockade is the blockade, that had to be there in people managed effectively.
The main issue was not the the same happened with the rest of the armies of the Warsaw blockade, between the United States warships and the Soviet ships since Treaty.
Not the entire army [was mobithere was a certain manoeuvring in order to delay the clash. lized], but at certain divisions from air defense, air reconnaisThe joined forces of the United States began the landing and sance, and also at certain land forces preparedness was ordered the invasion of Cuba.
This defense should be available. aircraft is also significant, because in such an impulsive situaIn connection with this, I would like to mention a fact that tion it happened for the first time—and I would say, from our is certainly well known by the comrades, that in this critical side—that a weapon was used.
Two anti-missile projectiles situation and also in the context of these measures our army were launched—the two together means a 100% effectiveboth in the senior leadership, and in the entire personnel of ness—and the aircraft was shot down indeed.
Such a situation the army, the behavior and the attitude was commendable. occurred.
What could be done if the options seemed like the There was serenity, determination, and solidarity.
Similarly, Americans would manage the landing in Cuba or would arrive the population’s behavior is well known by the comrades.
A strike should be launched at the all know perfectly, that comparing to the last year’s tension United States.
This is inevitable, it is not possible to fight in it can only be said that our population stood any other way.
Furthermore, if they land in Cuba, they shall one’s ground calmly and politically well.
It can be said, that testimony of high skill cult to figure it out—would have meant, that the main goal in of political maturity, consciousness, correct political behavior this particular issue is the rescue of Cuba, or otherwise Cuba were shown by the Hungarian masses, the toilers, and this will be destroyed.
That was the Third World War’s seat of the discipline obviously demonstrates a general and fundamental fire, and in that case, that would not leave anything behind. trust towards the Soviet political system, towards the policy The other was that the fight begins. of our party and government.
People knew that the situation The Soviet comrades were thinking in that situation, and was serious, but they did not have knowledge of the details, they came to the decision that is known to us.
Here I mean the affair in the afternoon of the 23rd [of Government therefore decided to pull-out these offensive October], when the ships were due to meet. weapons.
Only the United States shall declare, that Cuba will When I gave a toast on the 8th in Moscow not be attacked.
I also mentioned that in a situation like this I would like to That is what essentially happened. be anybody but Nikita Sergeyevich Khrushchev.
Because neither the Soviet, nor the Cuban at a push or if we cannot find a solution in an issue we can government’s plan was to deploy any weapons there and then always go somewhere, we go to Moscow, and one will surely attack the United States, but to deter the enemy and protect be smarter from it.
It is certain, that the conditions for this are days, these people realized too, that they have not achieved much better than previously.
The United States with her steps the same thing as they wanted, and started to rampage and resulting from aggression and panic exposed herself completebegan to attack their own government anew.
Because, so far—since the victory of the revolution For us the situation is the same as it was previously, we adopt in Cuba—they always pronounced that they would destroy the same policy, but at the same time vigilance is necessary, it and now they had to declare that they shall respect Cuba. a certain level of readiness is necessary and the previous fight This was a truly responsible, correct, and revolutionary goes on.
For example, the Soviet government’s and the Cuban United States is in diplomatic hot water and the wrestling is government’s views are not exactly the same in certain issues. going on with the usual devices of politics.
The United States The situation is that not everything could be reconciled in Government invented that there are some kind of bombers those critical hours.
It was not like the First World War in , and those shall be pulled out, too.
The reply 1914, when there were six months for the parties to mobilize for this was that those are basically not offensive, and this is the forces to begin a serious clash, here it was about half-hours the point where the usual political and diplomatic wrestling and fifteen minutes.
The Cuban government has starts, which means, that the issue is not completely solved some views that are not identical with the Soviet government’s yet.
All in all, this not a world disaster, because at the same in the afternoon on the 23rd of October, when the world time, on the main questions there is consensus, but still, it and mankind was on the eve of the Third World War.
We are left a small gap, wherein immediately joined our Chinese far from that now.
The issue has not been solved completely comrades, and with their usual revolutionary behavior they yet, the usual political and diplomatic struggle is still going are hitting the tambourine.
Why retreat, etc. … on—of course, the Soviet government made it clear for the They interpret the measures of the Soviet government as US government that they may keep on complaining about concessions.
For us, this is the inconvenient aspect of the situthese bombers if they want, but they should think it over too, ation, but we hope that the correct opinions will fully prevail. because the original situation can be set back.
And it is not the communists’ task to set the world remain and the Cuban revolution will remain, too.
This is the same as the principle of peaceful coexistwo countries will continue to be neighbors.
Eventually, the irreconcilable that is impossible, then the other possibility has to be applied antagonism will remain. and then the Soviet Union has to start the war.
If there is no Anyway, probably we will return to our original posichance of resolving the conflict peacefully …This is why the tion and will continue the old fight.
The Soviet government Chinese comrades’ logic cannot be accepted, besides, it is not promised to the United States, that after the elections have Marxist, it is not realistic, it does not reflect reality. finished in the US, the Berlin issue will be brought up.
And Regarding our Congress, the topic on the agenda means… this promise will be kept by them.
The wrestling will continue I ask for the compliance of the Central Committee, so we may in this question as well.
Similarly, the negotiations on the clearly and unmistakably express that we absolutely agree— termination of nuclear-weapon tests, and the conclusion of not only generally with the behavior and the decisions of the an agreement will be put on the agenda, which is a realistic Soviet government but—also with the questions concerning option.
It is possible that Cuba and that we feel absolute solidarity towards those decisuch an agreement will be concluded.
Hungarian National Archives , Budapest, government of the United States.
I have been informed by the Polish ambassador [Bolesław Jeleń] that there was an exact plan between the Soviet Union and Cuba concerning what they would do in case of an expectable and calculable reaction from the United States.
Consequently, such steps had to be taken by the Soviet Union and in such Hungarian Embassy in Havana , Report on Sovietform that had not been calculated.
Neither the Polish ambasCuban Divergence, 29 November 1962 sador nor I could check the correctness of this information.
Neither I, nor the socialist ambassadors to Havana, have Embassy of the Hungarian People’s Republic been able to form a clear picture of what happened from the To Comrade Foreign Minister János Péter morning of 27 to the morning of 28 October 1962.
A quarter One to Embassy Archives of an hour later a U-2. type plane flew in over West-Cuba at a great height and it was shot with a missile.
The appearance of incursions until Sunday dawn no air activity could be expea divergence of opinions rienced from the American side over Cuba.
Moreover, the between Cuba and the radar devices in Cuba showed that in Florida all air activity Soviet Union. ceased after these two incursions.
On Saturday afternoon we could hear the ultimatum-like demand of American President I still do not know what agreement between Cuba and the Kennedy, which was followed by Comrade Khrushchev’s Soviet Union was the basis for sending the so-called “strategic letter on Saturday night [sic; actually Sunday morning, arms” to Cuba in October.
As a consequence, I have also no Washington and Havana time—ed.], in which as a reply to idea about what consequences the Soviet and Cuban sides Kennedy’s promise to guarantee non-aggression toward Cuba, reckoned with concerning the transportation of strategic arms he announced the disarmament of missiles and their removal to Cuba.
At least it is not included in the he said, there could be talks about reducing the Cuban army’s text the Cuban organs, the Cuban press, and I have received armament to the defense weapons described in the wellhere in Cuba.
Several that is the letter of 27 October, in which he offset the removal people protested that they talked about Turkey and not the of American weapons from Turkey against the removal of Guantanamo American base.
These voices and remarks were missiles, and the letter of 28 , in which he acknowlnot limited to passers-by or minor officials of different offices, edged Kennedy’s promise and promised to dismantle and I had the opportunity to witness that in the Cuban governremove the missiles at once, had the effect of cold water on ment itself, within the national leadership of the Cuban party the Cuban masses.
Ernesto Guevara, the minister of and turned against the Soviet Union more or less. industry, one of the most important Cuban leaders, was stayFrom government members and the members of the ing in Pinar del Rio county on Saturday 27 October and was party’s national leadership and, of course, from lower-ranking reviewing the military units on the parade.
In the meantime people we could hear such disappointed remarks as the Soviet he received the news that the radio tower was transmitting Union, with this step, undermined Cuba’s international presComrade Khrushchev’s letter in which he undertook the tige once and for all, she made it impossible to continue the removal of missiles if the USA withdrew her similar weapons American policy, moreover, hindered the possibility of the from Turkey.
Enraged, he dashed his cap to earth and repeated victory of Latin American revolutions for a long time. furiously that this was perjury as he, himself, had had talks in The feeling of disappointment in the Soviet Union had Moscow and they had talked about a different thing.
I also a demoralizing effect on the one hand, and demobilized the consider credible the other information according to which Cuban masses on the other hand.
These days the Cuban press Prime Minister Fidel Castro reacted more or less the same way and radio reflected this mood of the masses, and as this mass too.
He, completely broken, told President of the Republic feeling was present among the leaders as well, they could not Dorticos to take over the conduct of affairs for stand up against it, but by taking no position, by publishing some time because he needed at least one month to recover not well-selected news and information, by keeping imporfrom this great blow.
He wanted to be a private individual tant news a secret, they contributed to causing a chaos and an for that time. anti-Soviet nationalist mood.
I share the opinion with others that maybe nowhere in Fidel Castro, seeing this more and more sharp atmosphere, the world did the wide masses have such love and enthusidecided to stand up against it in a radio and television speech. astic respect for the Soviet Union and Comrade Khrushchev So the speech of 1 November took place.
As far as this speech himself as could be experienced here in Cuba right until the is concerned, I think that it was necessary, and the form Fidel 27 of last October.
But from the 27th to the 28th, that is, in Castro told it was correct and had due influence.
But I do 24 hours, the mood of the masses changed from one extreme not want to say that I agree with what happened during the to the other.
Out of the mass of phenomena I would like to preceding days, that is, what made the speech necessary in mention only a few typical ones. this form, nor what happened after the speech from the Prime In some of the military units they expressed their opinion Minister’s side.
It is all the same who comes, whether selves, but most of all the foreigners doubt whether it was the Americans or Russians come, we will fire, we will defend necessary and right that in his speech Fidel Castro announced ourselves even if all of us die.
Many people turned to the to the whole world that there was a divergence of opinions Soviet Embassy on the phone and in letters and asked what between the Soviet Union and Cuba.
I think this announcewould come now, whether the Soviet Union would leave ment was necessary, because the mood of the masses was such them alone, whether they would be defenseless against the that denying these divergences of opinion would not have Americans and so on.
The people in the streets, on the buses, done away with this mood but would have intensified it.
On the officials in the various ministries we talked to all expressed 1 November, Fidel Castro could not say more and in a warmtheir feelings of despair, abandonment, and disappointment. er voice about the Soviet Union and the Soviet people than We could hear all kinds of anti-Soviet positions, such as the he did say, because at that moment, the people would not Soviet Union is only a super power just like the USA and she have accepted any more and anything warmer.
But we should leads power politics, or she used Cuba only as a means of add that we who watched Fidel Castro on television had the solving her conflict with the United States, and so on.
We had the feeling that he was not completely not notified at all, the Czech, Polish, GDR, Romanian and convinced about it.
This could be specially noticed in his case, Bulgarian ambassadors and I decided together to meet him at because he was used to saying on the radio, on television, and the airport in spite of the lack of any invitation.
The original in the different conversations and speeches what he thought, idea of the Cuban side was that Comrade Mikoyan would even if it was not always political and tactical. be met only by Foreign Minister Roa and Minister of Industry Ernesto Guevara.
Fidel Castro decided to János Beck come to the airport at the last moment.
He was really present Ambassador together with his brother Raul Castro and some other leading functionaries.
Hungarian National Archives , Budapesst, to the usual receptions in Cuba.
The original idea concerning 7 November was that the Translated by Attila Kolontári and Zsófia Zelnik.] center of trade unions would organize the ceremony.
But this year the ambassadors of socialist countries Hungarian Embassy in Havana , Report on Cuban– were not invited.
To Comrade Foreign Minister János Péter Then we were really present at the celebration, where we were Budapest seated in the first rows.
Cuban leaders were seated, the president of the republic and Comrade Mikoyan in the middle.
But Prime Minister Fidel 440/1962/ top secret Castro, Raul Castro, and Ernesto Guevara were not present.
Written in four copies As I learnt later, Fidel Castro, his brother, and the minister of industry arrived at the entrance of the theater, but then Three copies to Center changed their minds and did not come in to the ceremony.
At the celebration, Carlos Rafael Rodriguez gave a speech apart One copy to Emb.
The perceivable signs of the Cuban-Soviet ing the Fidel Castro speech of 1 November, said that they Divergence of opinions. trusted the government of the Soviet Union and the party of the Soviet Union, President of the Republic Dorticos did not The Cuban leaders personally and the Cuban Ministry applaud.
We must say that the television that transmitted the of Foreign Affairs have shown it to the outside world several speech was clever enough not to show him at this point and times that there is a divergence of opinions with the Soviet all other parts when the president of the republic or other Union, the relations with the Soviet Union are different from leaders behaved coolly or demonstratively, but we could see earlier relations.
I can see in “Népszabadság”, Soviet Divergence, 1 December 1962 which has arrived since then, that our party’s paper reported Embassy of the Hungarian People’s Republic on the dinner in a more conspicuous place, in more detail.
Archives his statements in Denmark he agreed with the position of the Soviet Union.
This was also published in one of the papers Havana, 1 December 1962 in Copenhagen.
According to sadors of the friendly countries, including Czechoslovakia, my information, Blas Roca did not make such statement in have managed to contact any Cuban leaders.
This was published in Cuba to counterbalance Czechoslovakian ambassador , being the Comrade Blas Roca’s standpoint.
Besides, he was called up first representative of socialist countries to Havana, he used and, as I hear, lectured and ordered back to Cuba at once. to meet first of all Foreign Minister Roa several times Although, according to the plans, he would have had to a day and often the other leaders as well.
Foreign Minister represent the Cuban party in Moscow at the 7 November Roa first of all because in the United States Cuban interests celebrations.
As a result of the ordering home, according to are represented by Czechoslovakia, between the Czechoslovak my information, there was no one as a delegation in Moscow embassy to Washington and the Havana embassy there is a from the Cuban side.
When Comrade Blas Roca was waiting special direct code connection and courier service.
In this for an airplane in Prague to return to Cuba, he received the period he has not been able to get in to Cuban leaders and instruction not to return but to go to Sofia and represent the Foreign Minister Roa, who had the closest and most confiCuban party there.
And in Sofia to inform him and discuss dential relationship with him, has behaved toward him coolly, the political questions with him, one of the functionaries of or even if this coolness has become relaxed in the past days, he the party center at home was sent there. has not been willing to say anything important to him.
I have had the closest relationship with Czechoslovakian ambassador Pavlicek since the beginning of my stay in Havana.
We have often exchanged our information, we have always discussed the different problems.
I have had almost such experienced any great events shocking the whole Cuban socia close relationship with the Romanian and Polish ambassadors ety like a war, revolution, or natural catastrophe.
It is a characteristic parisons concerning the crucial issues. of the great Cuban masses and, I must repeat, particularly of I consider three factors important and I would like to the leaders, the different ranks of leading layers what can be deal with them one after the other.
Here can be mentioned the Cuban leaders, I think of three people, Prime Minister Fidel lack of knowledge and under-estimation of economic buildCastro, his brother Vice-Premier Raul Castro, and Minister ing work, of doing small jobs for a long time every day and of Industry Ernesto Guevara.
As during the crisis it imagining all solutions by great, heroic, revolutionary deeds. has turned out that no other than these three people have a The third and most important feature, which is, however, serious and important say in the government, the party secrelated to the first two, is political.
In the political ideas of retariat, and most of all in the party’s central committee, as Cuban leaders the idea that there have been three great a matter of fact, the opinion of these three people in crucial revolutions in the world plays an important role.
So President of the Republic Dorticos or Carlos is, however, limited to Europe.
The second is the Chinese, Rafael Rodriguez, the director of the national land reform which concerns Asian people mainly.
And finally, the latest, institute, could not have a significant influence on the events. the third is the Cuban, which is crucially important to Latin The fact that Cuba became a country independent of America.
Taking such an idea as a starting point, the Cuban the United States, the greatest imperialist power, unaided, leaders often judge the events of world importance not from through the movement led by Fidel Castro, that Cuba could the aspect of the world-wide victory of socialism, or from the develop the fight for independence and the democratic aspect of the international world movement, but from the sorevolution into a socialist revolution on her own, made the called Latin American aspect. people especially jealous and sensitive concerning everything This point of view is not Marxist.
But when Latin America related to the independence, self-government, and freedom is concerned, their conception, opinion diverges from or is of the country.
This can be understood, as it is a relatively contrary to the Marxist-Leninist conception several times. small country enjoying the benefits of modern technology The “Second Havana Declaration” could be a good exambut lacking industry, a mono-culture country with colonial ple, which judges the origin, course, and victory of Latin conditions, which was liberated after several centuries of coloAmerican revolutions differently from the Marxist way in nial or half-colonial oppression.
The Cuban leaders under-estimate the role of the Leninism, in a different way from all other countries.
This is party in Cuba herself, which is proved by the extremely slow also coupled with the individual ambitions of leaders, which organization of the party.
According to my information, the is partly the consequence of the fact that they have been official number of the members of the party does not reach appointed to lead a historic movement and victorious revolufour thousand.
The reorganization is going on very slowly and tion and such a country that is in the center of world politics since the Escalante case about two thousand earlier at the moment. party members were excluded.
We have not had a chance to meet with Comrade accept the solution suggested by the Soviet Union for weeks Mikoyan either since his arrival, except for the meant they did not disagree with the method only, but to reception at the airport, which obviously did not give us an some extent with the aim of the Soviet Union too, probopportunity to speak with him.
The first time we were able to ably they always had in mind their idea about their Latin meet with him was right before his departure.
On 20 November, before Comrade Mikoyan’s departure, Finally I would like to present Comrade we were invited by phone to attend a cocktail party at the Mikoyan’s opinion concerning the Cuban leaders, which I Soviet embassy together with our spouses.
Soviet embassy hosted by the ambassador was attended by The Cuban leaders are young, honest people, they are true Comrade Mikoyan, the delegation led by him as well as severto the revolution, the people; in a difficult situation in their al officials of the embassy and their spouses.
The ambassadors country they were able to ensure a greater unity and had less who were invited to and attended the event included, apart chaos than other nations would have had, for this they deserve from myself, the Czech, the Polish, the Romanian, the GDR, respect and appreciation, and there is every reason to trust the Korean and the Vietnamese ambassadors them and the impending progress in the future. as well as the Chinese, the Bulgarian, and the Mongolian ambassador’s deputies.
At the same time, I comand Zsófia Zelnik.] plained to him that for several weeks we had been unable to meet either the Cuban or the Soviet leaders and we had not received any information from them.
I added that several colleagues, at least the Czech, the Romanian, and the Polish ambassadors had expressed the same complaints.
Byelous said he would try to convince Comrade Mikoyan that he should receive and inform all of us.
This is how the cocktail Hungarian Embassy in Havana , Report on Anastas party took place.
Mikoyan’s meeting with socialist ambassadors, 3 We spent at least one-and-a-half hours with Comrade December 1962 Mikoyan.
However, the inforImre Hollai mation did not really cover more than what was published that day or in a few days later.
I need to note that the Cuban leaders had not pubambassadors. licly given any sign, either on that day or since then, whether they agreed with this view.
Drawing on his own experiences, Comrade During the entire conversation Comrade Mikoyan took Mikoyan told us in detail about the unprecedented confusion every opportunity to give hints to and make remarks for the among the people, in the communist party, and the Central Chinese ambassador’s deputy present regarding cooperation Committee at the time of the Brest-Litovsk within the socialist camp, the coordination of actions, and real, Peace Treaty in the young Soviet Republic, when for a time comradely collaboration.
So, for example, when he was talking Lenin was in a minority and managed to get his position about his experiences in Hungary before the counter-revolution through only by threatening to resign from all of his funcand then about his stay in Hungary during the counter-revotions in the party and the government.
At that time Comrade lution, he stressed how strong the contact had been between Mikoyan was working in Baku as a party secretary.
He said them and the Chinese comrades, mutually informing and there was an awful lot of confusion in this party organization directly cooperating with each other.
The Chinese diplomat too, where most members of the party committee took the did not say a single word during the cocktail party, and when wrong position.
He also mentioned that for a reason he could Comrade Mikoyan was talking with the guests surrounding not recall now, he took the correct position and published him about the period of personality cults and his own experian article on it in the local paper.
At this point I took the ences in the Soviet Union, as well as about Poland, Bulgaria, opportunity to repeat my question in another way, and asked or Hungary, he retired further back and didn’t even ask the him when a similar article was going to be published in Cuba. interpreter to translate some of the conversation.
However, Comrade Mikoyan pretended that he had not heard Although apart from some details Comrade Mikoyan the question and went on explaining the Soviet–Russian didn’t give us actual information, the way he talked about the situation during the time of the Brest-Litovsk Treaty.
He conalready known facts and the way he evaluated the Cuban situcluded by saying that the government and the party in Cuba ation did help both me and the other socialist ambassadors to were headed by excellent revolutionaries that were loyal to the get a better picture of the situation. people and were able to create and maintain a unity in this extremely complex situation which would certainly have been János Beck impossible in any other place.
However big the confusion Ambassador may have appeared to us, it was much smaller than it would have been among other leaders in another country.
Hungarian National Archives, Foreign Ministry, Top convinced that Cuba was going to see healthy development.
Translated for CWIHP by The first envoy of the Soviet embassy, Comrade Byelous, András Bocz.] told Comrade Mikoyan that I had spent years in prison during the time of the personality cult in Hungary, which gave Comrade Mikoyan an opportunity to talk about personality cults in general, explaining his views and impressions on Mátyás Rákosi51 and several former or present leaders of the European socialist countries.
Comrade Mikoyan’s visit to Washington Kennedy as open, honest, and objective.
The main issue of Comrade Mikoyan’s four-day visit (from 29 November to the discussion was Cuba; the issue of disarmament was merely 3 December) was made possible and necessary by the events touched upon.
Kennedy agreement, the American party should provide The visit had aroused considerable interest, and the formal guarantees for not attacking Cuba.
In his answer comments and news on it were treated by the press as a President Kennedy gave two arguments.
Before the visit, the comrades announced durhe referred to Comrade Khrushchev’s letter of 28 October in ing talks conducted at the State Department that Comrade which Comrade Khrushchev promised to implement internaMikoyan would be staying in Washington for a few days as tional monitoring on the territory of Cuba.
Dobrynin’s guest and during this time he would be glad the Senate), he was not able to give formal guarantees without to meet with American officials.
Kennedy, the State Department answered that they were In his answer Comrade Mikoyan called Kennedy’s attenpleased with Comrade Mikoyan’s visit to Washington and tion to Comrade Khrushchev’s letter of 26 November in added that the American government officials were also ready which the Soviet leader expressly stated that the Soviet Union to meet with him.
They also raised the possibility of receivwas ready to enable the international monitoring of dismaning Comrade Mikoyan as an official state guest.
Comrade tling the Soviet missiles provided that the Cuban government Mikoyan politely evaded this opportunity. also agreed to it.
As an explanation, Comrade Mikoyan noted Then the program was worked out under which Comrade that although the missiles were in the ownership of the Soviet Mikoyan met with President Kennedy in the White House, state, jurisdiction over the Cuban territory was obviously State Secretary Rusk at a lunch and Interior Secretary exercised by the Cuban government.
He also met with [Attorney Kennedy gave voice to the counterarguments provided by General] Robert Kennedy at this dinner.
Although needed guarantees that Cuba would not receive new midthe Soviet comrades announced that the meeting would take range missiles either from the Soviet Union or, in a few year’s place, they did not reveal any details about it. time, from China.
As an interesting piece of detail, Comrade as a permanent attendant during Comrade Mikoyan’s visit Mikoyan mentioned at this point that on his way to Havana to Washington.
Then Kennedy said that certain embassy as well as the ambassadors of the Socialist counAmerican newspapers, relying on information from Cuban tries to Washington, and on behalf of the American party émigré sources, were writing about Soviet missiles still being by Ambassador Thomson and chief of protocol Thonesk. kept secretly in the territory of Cuba.
Comrade Mikoyan Naturally, the representatives of the press were also present. called this allegation ridiculous; he said that to his knowledge Comrade Mikoyan had a one-and-a-half-hour unofficial the air and ground reconnaissance of the United States had meeting with them on the night before his departure. already covered every square mile of Cuba.
The president On 29 November, Comrade Dobrynin invited the ambasadmitted that too and noted that he had given orders to the sadors of the Socialist countries to a dinner on the occasion of Pentagon not to violate, if possible, the Cuban air space and Comrade Mikoyan’s visit to Washington.
During this dinner, take photos only by flying in international air space.
Answering in the same tone, Comrade Mikoyan know that during his presidency the Soviet Union should not said Castro had been a Communist for about one-and-a-half be concerned about any invasion of Cuba by the United States. years, adding that this course of development might be danAt this point Kennedy asked Comrade Mikoyan what gerous to Kennedy too.
Kennedy evaded this by saying that he position the Soviet Union would take if, for example, the was immune to these kinds of dangers, although in his family United States decided to set up missile bases in Finland.
They also agreed that in addition to the missile bases deployed in Europe had changed a lot.
The Cuban issue Comrade Mikoyan would negotiate with Rusk United States and the Soviet Union both have intercontinenon several major international issues and there would also tal missiles that can reach each other’s territory.
At the same be a confidential meeting between Comrade Mikoyan and time, the Polaris-type submarines make the bases in England, Robert Kennedy.
The American party had already worked out a plan, he said, to eliminate these bases.
During the conversation Comrade Mikoyan said that he had already given orders to the Pentagon in this regard. had left for Cuba52 with the task of not pushing Castro at any When Comrade Mikoyan told the ambassadors of the cost regarding the international monitoring. friendly countries about it, he also added that to his knowlOn the basis of the information received it was clear, he edge these missiles were outdated, and even if they were to be said, that the main difficulty in the first few days would be to or had already been dismantled, they were still there. convince Castro.
The Turkish bases had impossible to negotiate with the Americans on the evacuation Jupiter-type missiles which were also outdated. of Guantanamo.
I would like to note here that according to the inforCastro, who originally did not wish to come to the airport, mation received from the Czechoslovakian ambassador to eventually came to meet Comrade Mikoyan after the comWashington , one of the main reasons for replacmuniqué mentioned above.
During the first meeting Castro ing NATO commander-in-chief Norstadt was that he and Che Guevara stated openly to Comrade Mikoyan that objected to Kennedy’s plan to eliminate the missile bases in they did not need the American guarantees.
Another piece of relevant information that belongs have any confidence in such guarantees, so the Soviets should here is what military attaché Varga obtained during a converjust leave the missiles where they were and the Cubans would sation from colonel Roberts, the newly appointed military air defend themselves. attaché to Budapest.
The colonel said that the complete disIt took long discussion for Comrade Mikoyan to convince mantling of the missile bases in Europe—because they were Castro and his companions that in the present situation outdated—could be expected in the near future.
By the way, Kennedy and Comrade Mikoyan had a lengthy conversaCastro and his companions received the Brazilian, Chilean, tion on the issue of the Cuban revolution.
Kennedy kept on and Mexican rapprochement very well; especially [Brazilian saying that Castro was the enemy of the United States and President João] Goulart’s special envoy therefore, his presence in the Caribbean region represented a whose action was seen by the Soviet Union positively from the danger to them. point of view that it could end Cuba’s isolation.
Contrary to this, Comrade Mikoyan insisted that Castro Comrade Mikoyan characterized Brazilian president had been made an enemy by the United States and the best Goulart as a clever, smart and realistic politician who did not course of action would be to make an agreement with him execute the American orders at one hundred percent, thereby on the basis of the principle of peaceful coexistence.
Kennedy getting ahead of Argentina and achieving a leading role in the did not accept this view and then asked Comrade Mikoyan South American region.
Essentially, the parties confined themselves to leaders were honest and pure people but they had very little repeating their already known position.
They often comComrade Mikoyan noted that the Soviet Union was ready to bined revolutionary enthusiasm with romantic elements.
Some of the land had removed from the country by an international monitoring been collectivized and state farms had been set up on them; committee to be set up later. and there were plans to accelerate this process.
Comrade As far as disarmament was concerned, the issues discussed Mikoyan advised the Cuban comrades that they should act included the Brazilian proposal submitted to the UN on makcautiously and slowly as far as the about 50% of land still in ing Latin America a nuclear-free region and the measures to private ownership was concerned. be taken in order to prevent an unexpected attack, which had As an example of the bellicose nature of the Cubans, already been discussed in Geneva.
Comrade Mikoyan mentioned that after the Americans As for the Berlin issue, Comrade Mikoyan raised the repeatedly flew in the Cuban air space, Castro and his leaders, need for the withdrawal of troops stationed in West Berlin. in accord with the Soviet comrades, set their air defense sysReferring to their NATO obligations, Rusk said that it was tem in action.
Comrade Mikoyan noted at this point that anybody possibility of conducting further negotiations by representawho stated that the U-2 reconnaissance aircraft had been shot tives of the two parties on the issues mentioned above.
Comrade Mikoyan spoke very negatively about China’s ing these issues. activity in Cuba.
He said that with their ultra-left-wing views the Chinese confused some of the leaders, especially mid-level leaders, but they practically failed to help upset János Radványi the enemy.
For instance, they could have occupied Quemoy and Matsu or Macao without any real risk.
Finally, Comrade Mikoyan openly said to the Cuban leaders that the Chinese position regarding Cuba was totally wrong.
As an example, Comrade Mikoyan mentioned Hungarian Embassy in Havana , Report on Sovietthe Tibetan and the Hungarian issues.
He pointed out that Cuban Conflicts, 24 January 1963 the Chinese, in alliance with the top-level aristocracy, created a situation in Tibet that led to an uprising and they failed to Embassy of the Hungarian People’s Republic draw the necessary conclusions from it.
The Cuban issue was only briefly touched upon during 36/1963/Top Secret the meeting between Comrade Mikoyan and Rusk.
The essence of In Soviet-Cuban relations Cuba’s security and the Cuban Cuban–Soviet conflicts ideas about it also play an important role.
Comrade been reported on the one hand, and to draw new conclusions Kuznetsov told us that on the other hand. during the conversation, without explaining his ideas and The Cuban position concerning the place and role wishes, Fidel Castro had made three or four unmistakable of the Cuban revolution and the origin and course of Latin hints, sayingg. that Cuba’s situation was singular because American revolutions is well-known.
It was defined by the the European socialist countries are guaranteed by the Warsaw Second Havana Declaration, it has been completed and comTreaty, the member-states of the Warsaw treaty looked upon mented on by numerous speeches of the Cuban leaders and a this or that so, but they…etc. series of editorials and lectures.
It is not only the Soviet party This repeated hint could have served as an answer to and with them the European communist parties that cannot Comrade Kuznetsov to some extent, who, during his report approve this position, but also numerous Latin American paron his talks concerning the Caribbean crisis, confirmed to ties.
Ambassador Alekseyev said that, in the sumFidel Castro that the Soviet Union considered Cuba a memmer of 1962, when Raul Castro visited Moscow, Comrade ber of the socialist camp, that is, Cuba was guaranteed by the Khrushchev had a long conversation with him.
He explained socialist camp. to Raul Castro that the Soviet party or himself, Khrushchev, The idea occurs that the Cuban position concerning the could not interfere in the affairs of other parties and did solution of the crisis is not only a result of non-understandnot want to either, he could not give his opinion about the ing, but, to some extent, also of extortion toward the Soviet Havana Declaration, for example, but he thought that the Union.
During the crisis and its solution it was proved that, instead of them.
Caribbean crisis and its solution and Cuba only as instruments in the political game with the United States.
In a way shocking the majority, Vilma Espin and Carlos Rafael Rodriguez continued the theoretical part her associates delayed the telegram to be sent to Comrade of Cuban-Soviet economic talks in Moscow.
During his Khrushchev about the solution of the Caribbean crisis, stay in Moscow, he carried on talks with the Soviet Union’s which had also been voted on according to the rules, and highest leaders and with Comrade Khrushchev himself, he forced its rewording. participated at the Supreme Soviet session, where he had a Instead of listing similar events, I would like to add that, seat in the presidium together with Comrades Khrushchev at the various celebrations and meetings, they prevented the and Brezhnev and the Yugoslavian President Tito.
The Soviet masses from singing the International as usual by transmitting Information Bureau gave only one photo to the Cuban press g. the march of the 26th of July Movement on the loudof the session of the Supreme Council, so in the Cuban papers speakers.
On the whole, his trip was little In his speech of 1 November last year, Fidel Castro said that discussed in the papers. he relied on the leadership of the Soviet Union.
Since then the Comrade Kuznetsov Cuban leadership has taken a step backwards practically. came to Cuba formally at the invitation of the regular Cuban The press does not publish anything either from abroad UN-representative, Carlos Lechuga.
No official welcoming or from inside that does not completely support the leaders’ ceremony was organized at the airport.
Members of the government: INRA President Carlos Rafael Rodriguez, Minister of Communal work Osmani János Beck Cienfuegos and JUCEPLAN President Reginaldo Boti, From ambassador the ORI leadership: Juan Ordoqui, the doyen of the to Comrade Foreign Minister János Péter late communist party.
Comrade Kuznetsov, who had never met Fidel Castro before, was surprised at this reception.
By the 17th, however, Fidel Castro had calmed down and Hungarian Embassy in Havana , Report on Soviet proved a completely different person during his conversaDeputy Foreign Ministry Vasily Kuznetsov, 28 January tion with Comrade Kuznetsov.
The conversation, which was 1963 interpreted by the Soviet ambassador, consisted of two parts.
At the beginning, for about 40 minutes Comrade Kuznetsov Embassy of the Hungarian People’s Republic reported on the talks between the Soviet Union and the USA To Comrade Foreign Minister János Péter on the Caribbean crisis, then a lot more briefly and not menBudapest tioning some of the important details he had mentioned to us, he outlined the talks concerning other problems.
But he criticized some things concerning Havana, 28 January 1963 forms.
Comrade Kuznetsov’s Report At first Fidel Castro contradicted the evaluation according to which the USA president formally obliged himself not On the evening of January 17 in the apartment of to attack Cuba or allow any other American states to do so. the Soviet ambassador , Comrade Comrade Kuznetsov had to explain it for a long time that Kuznetsov gave a report to the Polish, Czechoslovakian, there were numerous ways of making agreements between Romanian and Bulgarian ambassadors and me.
After long explanathe Soviet Union and the USA concerning the Caribbean tions, Fidel Castro understood it finally. crisis, about the talks on disarmament, the ban on nuclear Comrade Kuznetsov did not mention any other important experiments and Berlin.
And about his meetings with Kennedy he informed that Fidel Castro and the Cubans seemed to be forced by the the socialist missions already in the USA. situation to follow the correct policy.
Comrade Kuznetsov had no pre-determined program During the conversation started following Comrade for his stay in Cuba.
He had his most important, single Kuznetsov’s report, I told what I had heard from Blas Roca conversation with Fidel Castro on the 17th.
It lasted about about the “details of form” Fidel Castro was criticizing.
Kuznetsov participated at the special closing sitting of the Instead of Comrade Kuznetsov, but with his approval, Latin American women’s congress together with the Soviet Ambassador Alekseyev gave a reply and repeated very emphatambassador, where Fidel Castro gave a speech (I will report ically that Blas Roca’s statements were not true basically.
Here, in the theater, he was introduced to Cuban leaders had received the right explanation both from Fidel Castro before the beginning of the special sitting, who him and Comrade Mikoyan, when he was here.
It was so in the case of the delegates of different ranks visiting Cuba.
Cuban leaders also the acquaintance with foreign opinions and examples, the lessons that could be learnt from them, etc.
Hungarian Embassy in Havana , Report on Since the crisis Cuban leaders at all levels have avoided us “Relations between Cuba and the socialist countries since and the delegations arriving from the socialist countries.
If the crisis,” 28 January 1963 there is a conversation, it is far from being as rich in information as before, conversations are formal and empty.
The leaders are aware of Typed by Elemérné Vajda three to Center this and, even if in a wavy line, they are leading the country one to Embassy in the direction to become a real and organic part of the socialist camp.
The elimination of nationalist and petitsince the crisis. bourgeois phenomena, however, will be achieved only by a long development.
Since the Caribbean crisis a by-stander has not been able So basically there has not been, nor can be expected, any to see any change in the relations between Cuba and the change in the relationship of Cuba and the socialist camp. socialist countries.
The Cuban leadership /the party and János Beck government/ was on the right track to form such a relationambassador ship with the Soviet Union and the other countries as was to Comrade Foreign Minister János Péter between us and the Soviet Union for example.
It has turned out that within the layer of Cuban Translated by Attila Kolontári and Zsófia Zelnik.] leaders the number and, most of all, the influence of those who may be really called Marxists and communists is smaller than we believed.
Erzsébet Görög three to Center Cuban state and party functionaries usually—evaded taking a Typed by: Vajdáné one to Embassy position, he only answered that the dispute was unfortunate, and he asked back whether she knew if there would be an Havana, 12 March 1963 inter-party meeting between the communist parties of the Subject: The opinion of the head of the SU and China.
Political Department of Otherwise, the dinner took place in a really friendly the Cuban Ministry of Foreign atmosphere, and even if it did not provide any genuine inforAffairs /Socialist countries/ mation, it served as a good starting-point for the creation of about the Cuban-Hungarian the possibility of further exchanges of opinion between the relations and the Sovietdiplomats of the embassy and the competent officials of the Chinese dispute.
On 6 March, Comrades Görög and Sütő invited to a János Beck dinner the head of the Third Political Department of the ambassador Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Ambassador Fuxa and the official in charge of Hungarian matters, Siomara Sánchez. to Comrade Foreign Minister János Péter Comrade Görög asked Ambassador Fuxa if they were satisBudapest fied with the Cuban-Hungarian relations.
Hungarian Embassy in Havana , Report on US– He considered that the good relations between our Cuban Talks, 31 March 1963 countries were characterized by the friendly atmosphere in which the cultural talks had been carried out, by the useful Embassy of the Hungarian People’s Republic exchanges of delegations of recent times, etc.
To Comrade Foreign Minister János Péter He mentioned that they were going to invite opera-singer Budapest András Varga, whose invitation was urged by Ambassador Quintin Pino Machado.
All I would like to add to this is that the Cuban press and Cuban leaders have recently been It is well known that from the American side, “lawyer” making distinctions—at last!—in connection with the USA, Donovan participated in the talks concerning the they do not put everything and everybody in the same caterelease for compensation of the mercenaries taken captive at gory.
Raul Castro has side, Fidel Castro himself has had talks with Donovan at the mentioned to the Romanian ambassador in the past days, and level of theory and politics, only the technicalities were disit is not likely to be his private opinion, that for Cuba among cussed with Donovan at a lower level. the possible presidents at present Kennedy is the best.
In connection with Donovan’s frequent trips to Havana, the Western diplomats had the opinion that through him Fidel Castro carried on talks with the USA government and Kennedy himself, moreover behind the Soviet Union’s back, without informing the Soviet Union.
Seeing the Cuban reality, he acknowledged a lot of things, the USA would lead a different Cuban Prime Minister Fidel Castro’s television report on his [27 policy if it were he who directed politics or had a decisive April-3 June 1963]. trip to the SU was presented briefly in the say in it.
During his talks with Donovan, he—that is, Fidel press review of 5 June, and since then the Center has probably Castro—provided an opportunity for the United States government, received it in its whole length too. that is, Kennedy, twice to take relevant steps to normalize I would like to complete the speech with a few things, relations with Cuba, but Kennedy did not use these opporhowever, that were not shown in the press review and cannot tunities.
Never mind, says Fidel Castro, if Kennedy does not even be felt when reading the complete text. consider the situation right for it.
Translated by Fidel Castro’s listeners during his speeches apart from his Attila Kolontári and Zsófia Zelnik.] unheard of oratorical skills are his basic honesty, frankness and sincerity.
Fidel Castro is a passionate, excellent orator, but I had Hungarian Embassy in Moscow , Report on never heard him speak with such deep and sincere emotion.
Soviet-Cuban Relations, 21 June 1963 When he was talking about the Soviet nation, the Soviet Embassy of the Hungarian People’s Republic people, he was almost disturbed by the journalists’ questions.
Probably he was hinting at Juan Arcocha’s disgust001254/1/top secret/1963 ing reports always ranking him with Lenin, which I already reported on in the previous mail.
Pál Mányik The keynote of the whole report was given by Fidel Written: in three copies Castro’s human modesty.
There have been a lot of arguments Two copies to Center about whether there is a personal cult in Cuba, what is meant by the special Cuban “cult of hero,” whether what surrounds One copy to Embassy Fidel Castro here can be called a personal cult.
Independently of the fact that the essence of a personal cult cannot be seen Since the victory of the Cuban revolution Soviet-Cuban in the externals but in the lack of collective leadership and relations have been characterized by continuous development. in unlawful acts, I would like to stress that it was not out of This is also a result of the anti-imperialist, socialist character affected modesty on his part but out of sincere conviction that of the Cuban revolution and the consistent, internationalist Fidel Castro, who attributes a great importance to the reacpolitics of the Soviet Union.
The appearance and consolidation of the masses, shifted the great celebration he received tion of the first socialist state on the American continent is in the SU to the Cuban revolution and stressed that it had due to the existence and never-ceasing continuous support of concerned rather the future than the achieved results.
And in socialist countries, mainly the Soviet Union. his report he rejected even more firmly the effusions addressed It is well-known that the Soviet Union has provided all to his person and he raised his voice only when he was talking help to defend the independence and restore the economy about the mistakes. of the revolutionary country from the beginning.
From the Fidel Castro’s television interview has also shown what beginning the Soviet Union has fought for the rights of the turn the Soviet experiences and talks will mean in Cuba’s ecoCuban people in the UN and at other international forums. nomic, internal, and foreign political life and first of all, in the The Soviet Union has sent her representatives and specialists question of party building and the role of the party. to Cuba to assess on the spot what the Cuban people needed.
Parallel to the Cuban progress, personal connections between Erzsébet Görög the two countries are increasing.
Economic and cultural delchargé d’affaires ad interim egations have visited each other’s countries.
The mentioned The visit of the Cuban government delegation headed opinions, however, reflect Cuba’s present economic difficulby Raoul Castro to the Soviet Union last fall [sic; ties as well.
But the country’s leaders can see well that these summer] and the agreement signed as a consequence was of difficulties can be counterbalanced only by persistent and prehistoric importance too.
The declaration published about the planned work, by the complete mobilization of the people for talks pointed out unambiguously and clearly that the Soviet work.
The party being formed now will play a crucial role in Union undertook the responsibility to defend Cuba’s indeproviding foundations for this development. pendence by all means—including the most modern military Cuba’s international position has become consolidated due technology as well—if the imperialists should attack Cuba.
According to is well-known that during the Caribbean the head of the Latin American Department of the crisis the Soviet Union carried out this duty by providing the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Cuban leaders have undercountry with appropriate military technology, then, replying stood that they should achieve a firm position.
They have to the aggression of the imperialists, making definite and flexunderstood that they belong to the American continent, the ible political steps, she ensured Cuba’s sanctity and, by this, neighborhood of American imperialism, which requires a peace in the whole world. determined but, at the same time, flexible policy.
In recent In the days of the crisis and afterwards, as a result of the times, we have seen that the Cuban leaders have reacted in a complicated international situation, we could observe the reserved and moderate manner to the USA’s policy and there signs of hesitation in the statements of some Cuban leaders, has been a decrease in the sharpness of the declarations against which the imperialist press and the opponents of the policy American policy in general.
The Cuban leaders can see that of peaceful co-existence tried to exploit.
At the same time, the Americans cannot ravage around freely in the Caribbean Comrade Fidel Castro and other leaders have always stressed and the Soviet Union can defend the country’s sanctity. definitely the extremely important help received from the They can also witness that Kennedy has given up aggressive Soviet Union and the inviolable friendship with the Soviet experiments for a time and has taken measures to control Union.
The head of the American Department of the leaders of the Cuban revolution from an international the MID has considered political aspect too.
Since then the events following it have proved numerous times the rightness of the Soviet politics. recently that, although the Cuban crisis cannot still be looked The Cuban leaders have seen this politics justified in connecupon as being solved, the tension has decreased considerably tion with the situation of their own country as well.
It is well-known important any more for Kennedy to maintain the tension in that Comrade Fidel Castro’s declarations unambiguously and Cuba and American politics is paying attention mainly to definitely pointed out their full agreement with the foreign other international issues.
Union always stands up for Cuba and Cuba has not become The news published about the talks and agreements of isolated.
Fidel Castro’s visit to the Soviet Union warned even Fidel Castro and his delegation in the Soviet Union show the American leading circles to take a more sober position. that the relations between the two countries will develop at Comrade Bazikin has said that they are not an even greater pace in the future and are based completely sending a high level Soviet delegation this year to Cuba’s on the principles of Lenin concerning cooperation between national holiday on 26 July, because Comrade Khrushchev is the socialist countries.
The agreements signed here determine expected to visit Cuba in the near future.
This will probably the direction of relations between the two countries for a take place in August.
It is difficult to understand why the Cuban comrades cooperation. considered this necessary.
In exchange Cuba supplies According to the cultural and scientific work plan, a group of 25 Soviet artists, the ballet of the Great Theater the Soviet Union with sugar, alcohol, articles containing and, at the request of Comrade Fidel Castro, probably the nickel, tobacco, cigars and other articles.
In the The Soviet government provides Cuba with a long-term Soviet Union the Cuban popular dance ensemble and popular loan under the best conditions to counterbalance their advanorchestra will appear as guest-artists.
They will organize the tage concerning the balance of foreign trade. week of Cuban and Soviet films respectively to show the latest At present, the Soviet Union is on the first place in Cuba’s films of the other countries.
The Soviet Union will send an foreign trade, about half of it concerns the Soviet Union.
Such exhibition of books, graphics, and posters to Cuba and will important needs of the people’s economy as, for example, receive an exhibition of theatrical scenery.
Besides the above, a crude oil and oil-products, mineral artificial fertilizers, sulgreat many directors choreographers will travel on study fur, asbestos, cotton, sawn timber, trucks and special cars, trips to the Soviet Union.
The work plan prescribes the regumachine-tools and a lot of other important needs are satisfied lar exchange of publications between the central libraries; too. completely from Soviet imports.
Similarly, it is the Soviet The societies of artists (writers, composers, journalists, Union that provides Cuba’s population with bread and wheat architects, theatrical and fine art artists, etc.) will exchange flour completely. delegations according to the work plan.
The Alliance of Soviet Besides this, the Soviet Union also provides technicalFine Art Artists will send an industrial art exhibition to Cuba scientific help to Cuba.
Concerning the geological research and will present a considerable part of the material to the work, the reconstruction of metallurgy works, power Cuban comrades. plants, oil-processing factories, car service stations; and There is remarkable progress in health and sports relaconcerning the building of educational institutions, the tions between the two countries as well.
At the request of the development of nickel and chemical industry, irrigation Cuban comrades, several expert physicians travel to Cuba, in work and hospital equipment, Cuba receives considerable the field of sports, apart from the various tournaments; the help from the Soviet Union. work plan includes sending Soviet trainers to Cuba.
A direct maritime and air connection has been established According to the work plan, there will be a regular between the Soviet Union and Cuba.
There is also a direct exchange of programs between the Soviet and Cuban radios phone and telegraph connection between the two countries. and televisions.
In the Soviet Union there are a great many Cuban students, The Soviet-Cuban scientific cooperation will become a lot and a lot of Cuban workers attend professional re-training wider through the agreement on scientific cooperation signed courses in the Soviet Union. in Moscow recently.
The Soviet comrades will provide help in In 1960 an agreement was signed on Soviet-Cuban culturthe solution of various scientific problems and organizational al and scientific cooperation.
Since then they have laid down help in the organization of a science academy in Cuba. in cultural work plans the specific actions of cooperation From the above it is clear that, in the present stage of every year.
In the past three years the volume of cultural and Soviet-Cuban cultural and scientific cooperation, the most scientific exchange has almost trebled.
The work plan of 1963 important factor is the help of Soviet comrades in training signed in March reflects specialists in the various fields of science, education and culthe Soviet comrades’ intention to help in all of its points.
The Soviet Union provides I request you to send a summary report on the developCuba with help in all spheres of culture and science, mainly ment and present situation of Hungarian-Cuban relations so in the training of specialists and in the organization of new that the Soviet organs could be informed about them.
Generally the grandiose reception has calmed down the agitation of Cuban national dignity of last October.
June 1963 But the majority of writers and artists were indifferent to the visit.
The reactions in The western diplomats accredited to Cuba stress mainly Cuba to Fidel Castro’s trip to the Soviet Union the following: Khrushchev managed to win Fidel over to his Supplement: one side in the Soviet-Chinese dispute.
This opinion is shared by the French, English, and Egyptian counselors, the We still cannot assess the consequences of Fidel Castro’s Indian charge d’affaires, who recorded the fact with satistrip to the Soviet Union, little time has passed since his return. faction.
The new Israeli charge d’affaires, who was on a first visit What we have to emphasize first of all are the progress in to me on 21 June, said that the normalization of Northsocialist competition and the definite increase in efforts made American relations—despite the fact that Fidel Castro offered in the field of production.
The Cuban . daily press and magazines deal with the details of the visit The visit stirred the Cuban anti-Communist emigration continuously, they always publish pictures of the visit and too.
According to unverifiable news , in the past two they deal a lot more with the SU than before.
It is true, howor three weeks there have been several attempts of landing ever, that the Cuban press—including the party paper, HOY and infiltration by small groups of 8 to 10 people without also—published the 25 points of the Chinese party central direction.
Out of the photos of Fidel Castro’s trip, the party’s agitaThe aim of the anti-Castro Cuban inroads is probably to tion propaganda committee has organized an exhibiprovoke “Soviet interference” and to make it possible to turn tion, where the masses go as on a pilgrimage. to the United States government with such an accusation.
There are smaller active counterongoing détente process unfavorably within the international revolutionary groups, but the Cuban army and militia are political community. eliminating them one after the other.
The United States would consider this action as if the Erzsébet Görög Soviet Union has stationed missiles in Cuba, it would crechargé d’affaires ad interim ate a war scare and would turn international public opinion against us. to Comrade Foreign Minister Péter János Cuba is so far away geographically that Budapest when thinking realistically we should know that we cannot support or defend the country immediately.
Our decision on Cuba’s entry would be benTranslated by Attila Kolontári and Zsófia Zelnik.] eficial for Kennedy, since by this he would feel justified and relieved from his publicly announced responsibilities concerning Cuba.
Warsaw Treaty, armed forces, Soviet armed forces, thus nuclear weapons could and should be shipped to Cuba.
Kennedy then could make the world believe that the Warsaw Treaty does not serve the purpose of defense against the Federal Republic of Germany but rather the purpose of attacking the United States.
On behalf of Cuba, Comrade Fidel Castro has suggested that Since the United States would feel that her Cuba should join the Warsaw Treaty.
We believe that this territories are threatened, they would surely attack Cuba more suggestion is of great importance if it were to be put forward severely, with diversion, boycott, stopping ships, etc.
All this officially . would influence also international trade unfavorably.
Last but not least this would strengthen unity within We believe that by realizing this it would meet with total NATO. disapproval in the capitalist world.
Now, the emphasis Diversions of the United States are carried out by conin the Warsaw Treaty is on defense against the FRG’s [Federal ventional weapons, as it is close geographically, alas, there is Republic of Germany’s] militarist demands and imperialist no need for nuclear weapons.
The treaty does not deal with the entire world, but any support by traditional means, only by nuclear weapons. rather primarily with West Germany.
In case of the However, in principle we only apply nuclear arms for defenentry, the nature and fundamental principles of the treaty sive purposes, surely not for attacking.
We will never initiate would have to be changed, and it should be expanded to the an attack, while in case of a diversion in Cuba we wouldn’t entire world.
In our opinion, at present this would not be a even realize who the aggressor really was.
However, in case we correct move and this would not be the opportune action even and the United States would intervene, it would surely result against the United States. in a war.
If Cuba formally requests to join member-states of the 2) The accession of Cuba would not mean the increase Warsaw Treaty, we will decline.
Unfortunately Fidel’s suggesof her security; on the contrary, Cuba would likely provoke tion is not new and he continues to force this idea onwards grater threats against the country. determinedly which is the reason why this issue is so serious.
On the other speech, United States deputy defense secretary Roswell Gilpatric made clear hand, on certain issues they do not support the position of that in fact the reverse was the case.
It turned out that in 1962 the United States had four times more ICBMs than the Soviet Union.
Concerning the Warsaw Treaty, if Cuba were to continued to grow until 1967, and finally only in 1969 the Soviet take action, they will surely apply pressure, the Soviet Union Union managed to exceed the number of the United States’ will find herself in a hard situation, declining the proposition intercontinental missiles. will surely be difficult.
These issues were discussed between 5 Due to Khrushchev’s demand Kennedy secretly agreed to comrade Rapacki and dismantle the American Jupiter missiles which were installed in comrade Gromyko who fully Turkey.
Since this formally required the approval of NATO, it did shared our opinion. not happen until the following spring.
About this secret Soviet– We have been informed about that comrade Khrushchev American deal only very few officials—including the President, his intends to return Castro’s visit [to Moscow in the Spring of brother, Robert Kennedy, and Secretary of State Dean Rusk—knew in the United States administration. 1963] and travel to Cuba.
Notes on Władysław Gomułka’s views on the issues of Hungarian Revolution,” in Klaus Larres and Kenneth Osgood, eds., international politics.
Politikai egyeztetési mechanizmus a Varsói Szerződésben, 1954–1967” [“From secret crisis management Notes to political coordination.
Political coordinating mechanism in the Warsaw Pact, 1954–1967”], in János M Rainer, ed., Múlt 1 Csaba Békés, Ph.D. is founding director of the Cold War századi hétköznapok.
Tanulmányok a Kádár rendszer kialakulásának History Research Center and Senior Research időszakáról.
His main field of research is Cold War history, the history in Hungary on 22 November 1962.
The tendency which started of East-West relations, Hungarian foreign policy after World War II in the Spring of 1961 continued, therefore the defense expenditure and the role of the East Central European states in the Cold War. was increased again in this period.
Report of Lajos Fehér to the Political research, will be published in 2013.
Dagajev, Colonel General was head of the 10th group 21 János Kádár’s account on his Moscow visit at the session of at the Soviet general staff.
At the time this organ was in charge the HSWP CC, 12 November 1962, MOL, M-KS-288.
On Poland, see also Wanda Jarzabek, in the HSWP’s daily, Népszabadság, on 25 October.
See Baráth Magdolna, 43 Jenő Köteles, lieutenantgeneral—First deputy “Magyarország a szovjet diplomáciai iratokban 1957–1964,” in Múlt minister of defence who was acting minister while Minister századi hétköznapok, 79.
Committee in January, 1956 in Prague, but no action followed that decision.
His claim that the present on 25 October—CB and MK. leaders know nothing of “the participation of large masses in 45 A detailed account on the mass meeting, including the revolutionary fight” clearly indicates that he regarded the the speeches of deputy prime minister Gyula Kállai and Cuban Revolution led by Fidel Castro as more a coup d’état Cuban ambassador Quintin Pino Machado, was published than a genuine popular uprising—CB and MK. in Népszabadság on 26 October.
Moreover, the Polish communist leadership, despite their Shortly thereafter, further cables from Warsaw’s embassy fealty to the Kremlin, was not given advance notice of the in Havana document a June 1962 visit to Cuba by Polish secret Soviet missile deployment, and had only strictly limited Foreign Minister Adam Rapacki, who met with Castro and enthusiasm for the notion of risking World War III for the sought to overcome what the Cuban leader complained sake of defending Cuba.
A year after the missile crisis, Polish was a “certain cooling in our mutual relations”—and by leader Władysław Gomułka, in private consultations with extension with the broader Soviet bloc in the wake of the Warsaw Pact comrades, disdained the idea of allowing Cuba Escalante affair.
Rapacki’s controversial visit also caused fricto join the alliance. tion with Washington, arousing criticism from anti-Castro For the most part, Polish diplomats left policy determinaactivists that complicated the Kennedy Administration’s tion to the higher political (and ideological,e., communist efforts to convince Congress to ease restrictions on trade party) level, and focused on reporting information to their with Poland.
Rapacki also sought to mediate tensions between Moscow And here the documents printed below offer a fresh source of and Havana, or Washington and Havana, or both—but no hard information on a multitude of topics, including interevidence has emerged that he made any progress if indeed communist interactions, often tightly cloaked at the time, not he tried.) only on Polish-Cuban relations but Soviet-Cuban ties and on In September 1962, several Jeleń cables report contacts Soviet-Polish coordination regarding Cuba.
Although efforts to Archiwum Ministerwstwa Spraw Zagranicznich [Archive of the obtain records of Gomulka’s consultations in Moscow with Ministry of Foreign Affairs] and translated for CWIHP by Khrushchev in late October/early November were unfortuMargaret K Gnoinska . nately unsuccessful—the Polish leader, like other Warsaw Those preceding the outbreak of the missile crisis Pact notables, came to mark the annual celebrations of the in mid-October 1962 cover several important events in Bolshevik Revolutions—a cable from Warsaw’s envoy to the that eventful year.
The cables from Poland’s ambassador in Kremlin does record a noteworthy conversation with Aleksei Havana, Bolesław Jeleń, in January-February concern Cuba’s Kosygin, who would become the Soviet premier after helping perspective on the gathering of the Organization of American to oust Khrushchev two years hence.
KRAJEWSKI8 maneuvering in Cuban-Soviet relations as Anastas Mikoyan, From: JELEŃ9 Khrushchev’s closest associate in the Kremlin and now his … emissary to inform and, if possible, mollify Fidel Castro, flew 5) There is an opinion among a small group of the heads of to Cuba and spent several weeks in talks with the Cubans.
Latin American diplomatic posts that the United States would push The Pole’s reports of his talks with colleagues, including through the sanctions against Cuba, except for the military of course the Soviet ambassador, Aleksandr Alekseyev, but ones, as far as possible.
The English and French also others, both communists and non-communist, signifiare implying that they are, once again, afraid that the United States would cantly enrich the record of the “secret” Soviet-Cuban crisis of make a mistake in their assessment of the internal mood in November 1962 that followed the far better known US-Soviet Cuba.
During the group discussions with Western diplomats, crisis during the “thirteen days” the previous month.
And, the USSR ambassador emphasizes that the danger exists of given the continued reluctance of Cuban authorities to release expanding the conflict if a direct United States intervention [in Cuba more than a limited number of internal records regarding the were to take place]. in a personal conversation international aspects of the crisis and its aftermath—includwith me, he expressed some doubt as to the possibility of a ing its political and diplomatic contacts with the Soviets—the direct United States intervention given the current situation.
Szyfrogramy from Hawana 1962, 6/77 w-82 t-1264, interpretations took hold , Warsaw.
KRAJEWSKI,10 Urgent the latter, compared with the version of those exchanges From: JELEŃ11 that emerges from internal Soviet records.
Calling on Cuba to break its relations with the communist DOCUMENTS bloc.
The obligation not to receive military bases of socialist inter-American , according to the principle countries by the American nations. of self-determination, Cuba has the right to adopt such a system.
Appointing a permanent inter-American commission for of Cuba as a separate neutral status.
In practice, such a commission would have the of ] sanctions and open up a possibility for authority to limit the sovereignty of the members of conducting negotiations; the actual state of Cuba’s the OAS; especially strong resistance is being international relations is neutralism. expected as far as the formation of such a commission.
This approach opens up opportunities for point 6 mentioned above in this cable.
Sanctions adopted according to the Rio Treaty vivendi under the conditions of Cuba’s neutrality, and , after all, apply to that one should create such conditions which would all of the members. mold the Cuban system once Cuba is faced with reality.
Szyfrogramy from Hawana 1962, 6/77 w-82 t-1264, 6) It is expected that the following are Brazilian resolutions: Polish Foreign Ministry Archive , Warsaw.
We have noted disappointment [Regarding the Eighth Meeting of Consultation of here caused by the position assumed by Mexico, which Foreign Ministers of the Organization of American States at] has been far removed from the one they have assumed Punta del Este until now.
In Roca’s article , one 1) There is no complete picture in the Cuban press regarding can sense the allusion to Mexico’s new position. the resolutions adopted at and how Olivares, with whom I had talked today, sees this change each country voted on specific resolutions.
Prohibition of supplying weapons and strategic 2) materials to Cuba by the members of the OAS conversation with Adzhubei19 and [Soviet ; Ambassador to Cuba Sergei Mikhailovich] Kudryavtsev on the 24th of this month.
Adzhubei pointed out that “Solidarity towards progress;” in his conversation with , Fidel decisively rejected the concept of “Finlandization”20 of Cuba.
Concrete steps to On his part, Kudryavtsev emphasized that the Cuban defend the Hemisphere. delegation left with a clear directive of exploiting the Brazilian concept in order to obtain a It is still not known what other resolutions had been adopted. negotiating opportunity.
A and K Also, the lack of the complete response to the adopted think that neutralism of a Finnish type, although with resolutions makes it all difficult to provide you with a fuller some reservations, is an acceptable option.
Given that the OAS charter does not allow for the exclusion of a nation , they the current Polish Foreign Ministry Archive , Warsaw.
Among other things, there is speculation that exclusion unless the charter is revised, a task that Cuba will appeal to the UN on the basis of the fact belongs to the pan-American conference.
Szyfrogramy from Hawana 1962, 6/77 w-82 t-1264, authority to exclude Cuba from the Defense Polish Foreign Ministry Archive , Warsaw.
Obtained Committee which is an autonomous organ by James G Hershberg and associated with the OAS, but which is not subject translated by Margaret K Gnoinska .] to its authority.
KRAJEWSKI26 from the treaty being used against it, since the From: JELEŃ27 sanctions included in Article 8 of the treaty24 are foreseen to be used not only towards the countries 7) The following conclusions can be derived from the which are associated with it.
The United States was not able to obtain the The result of such voting is unprecedented.
In the case sanctions to the extent initially proposed by of the anti-communist declaration in Colombia.
Even though the United States has not achieved Caracas in 1954, only Mexico and Argentina abstained the maximum, it achieved quite a bit, including from voting and only Guatemala voted against it. obtaining new tools which could be exploited in their future anti-Cuban actions.
All of the resolutions (see the enumeration the Security Council according to our claris 27) were adopted of the UN in case of a dispute between Cuba and unanimously with Cuba voting against them.
The the members of the OAS (see Article 20 of the OAS unanimous vote pertained also to the political part Charter)25 is no longer valid. of resolution IV28 (only its legal and executive part in points 3 and 4)29; as a result the entire resolution 5) There is a general opinion that the United States will was adopted by a majority vote of 14 countries. exploit the decisions made at Punta [del Este conference] in order to further undertake anti-Cuban 3.
They asked that we relay this information to the central committees of parties.
The Security Commission was initially thought out as one comprising of the 1.
On the 22nd of this month, the national leadership members who were designated by the Interof the ORI made a decision to exclude Anibal American Defense Committee.
A. a formula of selecting its members through the E remains a member of the ORI, but he’s been process defined in point 2-a of Resolution II30 removed from all the leadership positions. seems to tone down the original resolution.
At the same time, points 1 and 2-c31 of this resolution 2. motives [for the removal of may give the Committee far reaching powers.
Resolution VIII, point 2,32 opens up the possibility methods of management, as well as intrigues aimed of further reaching economic sanctions than the at concentrating control in his hands over the party suspension of non-existing arms trade. and national apparatus.
He used these methods towards other comrades regardless of their previous 8) The members of the Cuban delegation state that only Brazil showed a commendable position.
He managed to control of a series of ministries, among others, 9) The first opinions within the diplomatic corps regarding the Ministry of Internal Affairs; he undertook the the Second Havana Declaration proclaimed on 4 steps in order to control the military cadres.
A E.’s February, express fears that it can further exacerbate the arbitrary behavior could be already be detected in already worsening relations between the government of the 1940s, when he served in the leadership of the Latin America and Cuba in the future.
Szyfrogramy from Hawana 1962, 6/77 w-82 t-1264, circumstances did not allow for putting an end to Polish Foreign Ministry Archive , Warsaw.
The discussion related to the activities of A E. began in February of this year under the older leadership.
The discussion focused only on [issues such as Dispatched from Havana on 03.24.1962 at 18:00 and Escalante’s] work methods and organizational received at 03.25.1962 at 14:53 matters, and not on the ideological issues.
Korean sent his secretary activities were predominant in workplaces, especially even though he attended a party soon before the meeting.
After the formation of the ORI, he congress will take place no earlier than at the end served as the organizational secretary.
He joined the new of the year. leadership of the ORI that was approved on the 8th of this month.
Szyfrogramy from Hawana 1962, 6/77 w-82 t-1264, six provinces overall ). are Polish Foreign Ministry Archive , Warsaw.
Obtained not connected with the activities of A E., and they by James G Hershberg and are a result of the weaknesses some of translated by Margaret K Gnoinska .] the current secretaries.
In order to streamline some departments, there will be some changes in the leadership.
KRAJEWSKI,42 EYES ONLY of the head of the Security Department in the From: JELEŃ43 Ministry of Internal Affairs.
In our Claris 67, we have already reported that the that the issue was broached to the leadership circles by members of the “26th of July Movement”39 are numerically Fidel as a result of complaints predominant in the secretariat and the commission.
Also, the local organizations and ), and L institutions of the ORI [Organizaciones Revolucionarias Pena holds a position in the syndical commission.
There are some In practice, E adopted the line of limiting the authority changes, which are expected as far as some positions in of the state administration and the CTC [Confederacion de Trabajadores de Cuba – The the party apparatus.
There was no division within the leadership between the members of the former PSP and the “26th of July Movement” regarding the E affair. , the methods adopted by E were unanimously condemned.
Szyfrogramy from Hawana 1962, 6/77 w-82 t-1264, However, Fidel accused the former leadership of the Polish Foreign Ministry Archive , Warsaw.
Obtained PSP for their inability to control the work by James G Hershberg and E. and tolerating his methods, even though E.’s methods had translated by Margaret K Gnoinska .] been known before.
Today, some of the members of the former PSP think that E.’s activities not only caused a great damage in the building of the state and party apparatus, but also influenced the emergence of anti-communist moods in Cuba.
Based on more information out with the permission of the state leadership.
The issue, however, boiled down to the positions of the first secretaries were appointed from the principles of the party life as well as the among the combatants of the “26th of July Movement,” methods of work adopted by E himself.
Old communists but those who were also former sympathizers of the ORI. from the current leadership think that E had dogmatic (As far as Havana, Domenech, who was Fidel’s former tendencies.
K informed me that he was recalled [back to their underestimation of the actual role of the “26th of Moscow] to work at the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
The July Movement” in the revolutionary process and the Cuban government had already granted an agreement qualities of the new generation of communists.
The reorganization of three Presidium [and First Secretary of the Uzbek Communist provincial committees has already taken place.
On the one hand, the sudden departure of K., and the Within the overall changes that have taken place until selection of a new ambassador on the other, point to the now, there are no signs of removing communists; fact that this change is not normal.
At the same time, it is however, there is an overall trend of rejuvenating the noteworthy that after the changes within the leadership party cadres in order to increase the work effectiveness. of ORI [Organizaciones Revolucionarias Integradas took The process of personnel changes has not yet ended. place] at the end of March, there were many Soviet measures which meant to show support for Castro’s policy and strengthening of their economic aid.
Szyfrogramy from Hawana 1962, 6/77 w-82 t-1264, Polish Foreign Ministry Archive , Warsaw.
K informed me that he had a talk with the by James G Hershberg and president regarding deliveries of coke, emphasizing translated by Margaret K Gnoinska .] the gravity of the situation in this area and its political significance.
He insisted that the matters be taken care of with our involvement, that is, that 35 thousand tons of coal be delivered to Poland to be turned into 22 thousand tons of coke.
Szyfrogramy from Waszyngton 1962, 6/77 w-86 t-1312, Polish Foreign Ministry Archive , Warsaw.
The communiqué will be Eyes Only announced sometime between 1 and 4 June.
The conversation should be of an unofficial nature and it should be aimed at getting to know views on the current attitude and intentions of the United States towards 2) The recall of K coincides with the nomination of Cuba.
During the course of the conversation, while Olivares to the position of the ambassador showing that the hitherto American policy has made it to Moscow.
The Of course, you need to understand that we are far from most surprising is the selection of K successor – this is interested in heating up our discussion with the United rather unprecedented.
Alekseyev as the embassy States over Cuba at the moment. employee did not belong to the influential group and he always continued to maintain very close relations with Escalante.
Please send me your response past few weeks; and attempts to move Cuban regarding this matter (The new deputy foreign minister refugees to different parts of the United States instead of who replaced Olivares is Professor concentrating all of them in Miami.
When it comes to a next meeting [between the Americans and the Soviets], they will wait for a Soviet initiative.
DROŻNIAK54 by James G Hershberg and translated by Margaret K Gnoinska .] your cable no.43 [based on the information we received] from Bohlen/55 1) Cuba has been currently removed from the list of priorities of United States foreign policy.
They are counting on the fact that many Dispatched from Havana on 06.13.1962 at 9:30 and received kinds of difficulties, especially the economic ones, will at 06.13.1962 at 17:00 force Cuba into making further changes in their hitherto Came to the Decoding Department at 06.13.1962 at 17:10 policies and will eventually lead to Castro’s fall.
He was interested in the details of our policy toward the regarding equipping the FRG church. in atomic weapons.
Report immediately how it is looking, because would change the whole concept 4.
Dispatched from Havana on 06.13.1962 at 22:20 and received at 06.14 at 04:53 7.
In the manner of warmhearted honesty, Castro The pacification of the peasantry [is taking place complained about a certain cooling in our in Cuba]. mutual relations.
He expressed his They are publicly emphasizing the rapprochement warmest wishes to strengthen contacts.
I thanked with our party as the most palatable [lit. him for his honesty and said that indeed we also sensed “digestable”], especially in Latin America. their cool attitude towards us.
I agreed that corrections to their text, which was, after all, treated as our relations should be strengthened so we can get to “unilateral” information for the press.
He broached the general issues of coordinating sugar I am sending my proposition via PAP . trade and very extensive plans to expand the fishing industry.
It did , 15 June 1962 not seem from our conversation that he had received this information from Perez.
The response received] to the strengthening of the campaign of our visit, nations bring up the issue of the threat to Cuba at the towards the end, will be really beneficial to us all general debate by emphasizing that a path to solving the over the world.
In my contentious issues should be resolved through bilateral opinion, it is good.
Their delegation has instructions to remain us regarding the German issue], which was after all declared in close contact with the delegations of the socialist on several occasions, will not brighten things up for us and countries.
They were informed that the United Arab it can only make things more difficult for them.
They have turned to countries of Latin Polish Foreign Ministry Archive , Warsaw.
R expressed his view that the Soviet declaration [made on 11 September 1962]67 removes, for now, the threat of a more serious military action against Cuba.
From the same sources it seems that the Cuban Alekseyev assesses the internal situation leadership thinks that, following the Soviet declaration, with great optimism.
He is rather minimizing the there is currently a possibility that a series of attempts by extent of internal difficulties.
He is promising a isolated and heavy marine landings, aimed serious increase in the Soviet economic aid and large at unleashing a series of internal hotspots of the armed deliveries of food, which are to achieve the last year’s struggle . level of food supply.
Western diplomats generally take into account the by James G Hershberg and possibility of a strengthened subversive action.
They translated by Margaret K Gnoinska .] are expressing concern about the anti-Cuban history in the United States.
They assess that the Cuban question received the level of significance equal to other problems that decide the future of world peace.
The reaction of society to the Soviet declaration is being mainly expressed in organized Dispatched from Havana on 09.22.1962 at 14:00 and received assemblies and demonstrations.
KRAJEWSKI,68 EYES ONLY permanent state which is living on a powder keg.
At shortages and thus far lack of direct impact on the market the same time, he takes into account the possibility brought about by the economic aid.
The activities of the of the attempts of staging subversive landings, as PRC embassy have recently been very limited. well as the possibility of activities by Cuban emigrant pirates against the ships.
Szyfrogramy from Hawana 1962, 6/77 w-82 t-1264, to Alekseyev, the declaration was made because of Polish Foreign Ministry Archive , Warsaw.
Obtained the information presented by James G Hershberg and by Cuba, indicating concrete facts that preparations translated by Margaret K Gnoinska .] were being made a serious military action against Cuba.
As far as this aspect, they are positively assessing the pronouncements of Dispatched from Havana on 09.28.1962 at 19:00 and received Brazil, Chile, and Uruguay, even though it was only Brazil at 09.29.1962 at 14:30 which mentioned Cuba.
Cuba did not make any special Came to the Decoding Department at 09.29.1962 at 16:30 efforts, however, that their name be mentioned.
Cuba is supporting these tendencies on Wednesday for the UN Session in order to make and it will aspire to achieve wider support among Afroa statement during the general debate.
R will assist Asian nations, especially among the participants of the him.
The communiqué, which is to announce the participation of Dorticós in the Session, will be 3.
The government is currently discussing the draft of the published on 1 October.
R asked that we relay this information published on the 30th of this month. to Comrade Rapacki.
They are assessed that currently there was no danger of also predicting that a meeting with the chairman of the military aggression against Cuba.
While taking this whom I had a lengthy talk today, assessed the situation opportunity, R also remarked that their relations with in a similar manner.
Szyfrogramy from Hawana 1962, 6/77 w-82 t-1264, October, 1962]72 is making the whole process easier and Polish Foreign Ministry Archive , Warsaw.
The departure of Dorticós is justified by the hitherto Dispatched from Washington, D.C., on 10.18.1962 at 15:00 process of the general debate in which, thanks to [Soviet and received on 10.19.1962 at 2:00 Foreign Minister Andrei] Gromyko’s pronouncement, Came to the Decoding Department on 10.19.1962 at 2:30 the Cuban question has gained much attention.
The level Rusk focused on of Cuban economy is twenty-five percent lower than prior the history of Soviet-American relations over the past years… to the period when Castro came to power.
Cuba is They are not going to cause bloodshed currently much more dependent economically on the USSR in Cuba.
Undertaking a invasion against Cuba, than it was previously dependent on the United States.
They without an open act of aggression on the Cuban side, would are not expecting a quick collapse of Castro . mean that the United States could find itself isolated among The situation in Cuba, in light of Castro’s open declaration of its allies…When asked about the rumors regarding the possiCuba’s dependence on Moscow, is a big blow to communism bility of the alleged mediation between the United States and in Latin America.
The United States is going to continue to Cuba [to be carried out by the Algerian revolutionary leader fully isolate Cuba, among other things, by exerting further Ahmed] Ben Bella, he stated that it was not an option.
Cuba cannot be bargained for either for in Cuba could cause a military action in Berlin.
They are Berlin or for the bases in Turkey. not going to recognize a government-in-exile either.
They are counting on an emergence of the opposition governgovernmentPolish Foreign Ministry Archive , Warsaw.
Obtained in-exile, they would lose their rights to their bases by James G Hershberg and in Guantanamo.
There are about two hundred Cuban immitranslated by Margaret K Gnoinska .] gration groups which are all different and at odds with one another.
To: MILNIKIEL,80 They are well-informed, especially about EYES ONLY the military situation in Cuba.
The administration believes that the USSR does not Our 786. want a war over Cuba, or even begin … such a war in Cuba.
They are foreseeing that in the near [This information has been compiled based on my future all of the bombers will be fully eliminated.
They are getting ready to use tactical nuclear weapons in case of the conflicts in Asia.
This will not be as dangerous as using 1) Bartlett thinks that Kennedy was shocked by intelligence such weapons in Europe.
They are not planning a information, which reached the Republican senators invasion of Cuba, this would require a much greater already on the 14th of this month, that is, a week before effort than last year. they reached him.
Thompson:83 Stalin was a cynic. received only surface-to-air missiles with a range of 30 Khrushchev is “a flexible believer miles.
During the last year of Thompson’s stay in the Soviet Union the 2) According to Bartlett, the climate of trust, which has pace of change, which began since the death of Stalin [in been emerging between Kennedy and Khrushchev, was 1953], has clearly accelerated.
The Cuban ambassador in Moscow was The steps [to address the crisis,g., the “quarantine” much more interested in Beijing and wanted to be transferred of Cuba], which Kennedy announced [on there.
It is easier for the USSR to provide military than Monday, 22 October], will be implemented in the economic aid to Cuba, because they possess a lot of outdated atmosphere of a great pressure from the military equipment.
He realizes that there is not much time left for him 3) The kind of missile bases [which have been installed by the to carry out the goals he set out for himself.
Castro received many more modern missiles than [the Soviet] allies in the Warsaw Pact.
Szyfrogramy from Waszyngton 1962, 6/77 w-86 t-1312, by James G Hershberg and Polish Foreign Ministry Archive , Warsaw.
He sees a possibility of counteraction, Came into the Deciphering Department on 24.10.1962 at among other places, in Berlin.
He also sees opening 20:00 some kind of a way out for the United States.
WIERNA, URGENT, EYES ONLY He thinks that Cuba’s defensive capabilities are From: PASZKOWSKI currently sufficient.
He assumes that the Soviet ships, if they are forced to do so, will have to submit to inspection in order 1.
These inspections, however, will have heated consultations in Washington, the a negative political effect for the United States (he comrades believed that this was a typical pre-election bluff.
Therefore, when Kennedy made the statement it states that this is only his personal opinion). was both a surprise and a wake-up call.
All of the interlocutors generally agree that even if the after the presidential conflict were to take place based on individual encounters elections in the United States. then one could isolate it.
This subtext will be included in the materials prepared for publication in He is not hiding his dissatisfaction with the Sinothe press for tomorrow.
They think that the Americans Indian developments. will not shoot, but instead “block the road” and impose arrests.
The Soviet ships were given orders to continue moving tensions of the elections in the United States. towards Cuba.
It takes 2-3 days to get to Cuba and therefore tonight it will be the first time for the Soviet 3) various Cubans.
The mobilization ships to “come in contact with Kennedy’s orders carried continues in a normal manner.
They are receiving information from all over the country 4) My impressions.
There’s a relative run on the stores, about the calm and disciplined attitudes but without any signs of panic and fears of the threat of of the Soviet people.
They are expecting that the Chinese will exacerbate by James G Hershberg and tensions.
However, there are various and missiles would be discovered relatively quickly.
This numerous rumors, as well as the information as getting], which are all hard to verify.
It was also claimed here that Khrushchev, was allegedly in favor of an immediate invasion , regardless of the abovementioned motive, intended to while Taylor was against secure the additional bargaining advantage for the talks it.
The President chose to act by taking with Kennedy at the end of November.
We do not know, however, whether his his decisions, Kennedy took a serious risk by counting decision does not a preliminary step towards the on the fact that he could surprise the USSR and cause it invasion , which could take place as a result of some to react nervously in other parts of the globe.
The ambasKennedy hoped that such Soviet actions could then] sador of Argentina does not believe in either the possibility of justify his future invasion of Cuba or cause the USSR to an invasion or even the fact that preparations are being made back down once faced with a prestigious for such an invasion. many people are confrontation. , the reaction of the USSR, pointing to the fact that the concentration of military which has been generally considered as a “responsible” forces and landing equipment continue to be one, thwarted these plans.
In any case, they will not give up the blockade leading journalists, Rusk allegedly unless some other form of inspection is established.
The issue of the liquidation of the bases on a foreign which oppose Kennedy’s policy.
However, the majority territory can be discussed later only within the framework of society has shown its support for of discussions on the question of the general disarmament.
Szyfrogramy from Waszyngton 1962, 6/77 w-86 t-1312, preparations for an invasion continue to take place in Polish Foreign Ministry Archive , Warsaw.
There is also an opinion that the stand of the by James G Hershberg and USSR is impeding Kennedy’s further adventurousness, translated by Margaret K Gnoinska .] as well as it is making him seek a way out through negotiations.
Dispatched from Washington, D.C., on 10.26.1962 at 23:00 Kuznetsov assessed the resolution of Ghana and the and received on 10.27.1962 at 7:25 United Arab Republic as kind of a band-aid, but one Came to the Decoding Department on 10.27.1962 at 7:30 that nevertheless is significant.
He also thinks that the atmosphere in the UN does seriously, the possibility of the bombings of military not favor the United States.
Some of our colleagues from the socialist nations on the United States is strong.
If the consultations countries (I did not see [Soviet Ambassador to Cuba do not bring any results, then U Aleksandr] Alekseyev) think so, too.
They also think that Thant is prepared to move the issue regarding the the point of the Chinese proposition was to demand the crisis to the General Assembly and to bring about a vote on guarantees of recognizing the actual status of Cuba in the resolution by the United Arab Republic.
Thant is convinced that many will vote in favor of the resoluThe overall opinion, however, is that the decision [on tion, maybe even the majority.
According to Kuznetsov, U how to solve the crisis] is currently beyond that of Cuba Thant’s intentions are bringing about some results.
The tone and therefore there is much anticipation as to the Cuban of Stevenson’s has reaction related to this issue. changed somewhat.
One should not exclude the possibility, however, that Kennedy could move 2.
The significant development is today’s communique towards making more provocations under the pressure of about “unidentified” planes that entered the Cuban the most reactionary circles.
The United States is looking for airspace but which were “chased out” by the Cuban air strong and convincing reasons that would allow it to directly force.
At this time, however, it is not not been verified about an alleged shooting down of a that easy to find such reasons.
Rodriguez on the 24th in which Polish Foreign Ministry Archive , Warsaw.
Obtained Rodriguez expressed the position of a possible acceptance by James G Hershberg and of UN inspections and disassembling some of the translated by Margaret K Gnoinska .] military installations under the condition of obtaining a guarantee for Cuba provided by both the United States and the Soviet Union.
This would result in actual recognition of the change in the status Dispatched from Washington, D.C., on 10.27.1962 at 20:50 quo of the deployment of strategic weapons.
We don’t and received on 10.28.1962 at 17:10 have the Cuban reaction as of yet.
There are signs of Came to the Decoding Department on 10.28.1962 at 17:15 much confusion and anxiety.
The opinion prevails in the White House, the Pentagon, [Source: Szyfrogramy from Waszyngton 1962, 6/77 w-86 t-1312, and the CIA that the operation of installing the missile bases Polish Foreign Ministry Archive , Warsaw.
Obtained in Cuba was carried out in order to change the strategic balby James G Hershberg and ance of power to the advantage of the USSR before further translated by Margaret K Gnoinska .] steps (either by means of negotiations or an outright military attack) were taken in Berlin.
They are not sure whether they in the Soviet Union realized that the missiles could be so quickly discovered and so thoroughly photographed.
Received on 10.29.1962 at 13:05 Despite the pressures, Kennedy is determined to maintain a Came into the Deciphering Department on 10.29.1962 at moderate attitude and he is determined not to undertake any 11:00 actions that could clearly be provocative.
KRAJEWSKI, Urgent, EYES ONLY a quick liquidation of the bases in Cuba, because he From: JELEŃ105 started this process publicly and he is prepared to do it by using various means.
The latter possibility is, in his opininformation only from the radio broadcasts from abroad.
It ion, least realistic. seems that the solution that is emerging from the letters, as will strive, more than ever, to overwell as Soviet and American statements, would in essence throw Castro.
Kennedy’s readiness to give guarantees for the possibility of holding a bilateral summit meeting on of not invading Cuba, and expressing the conviction about the Cuba.
After the bases in Cuba are liquidated, he is readiness of other countries from the hemisphere prepared to regulate, among other things, the issue of elimifor such a move and allowing for a principle of international nating the United States bases in Turkey and Italy.
From the understanding to permanently solve the Cuban problem, military point of view, these bases are useless to the United should, in principle, give the Cuban side a far reaching States.
The Soviet reaction up until this point the headlines in the press are very cautious.
I think that Fidel has been assessed as one which is moderate and will submit to UN inspections. which allows for various possibilities peaceful 2) the text of today’s solution.
Based on [Soviet Ambassador posed by the Cubans were made after the decision of the to the United States Anatoly] Dobrynin’s information, it looks like USSR to withdraw the Soviet military installations.
When conditions may be calculated in order to show that Cuba I mentioned that there were no clear guarantees of Cuba’s participated in making the decision.
The interpretation of the condition When I asked about how the issue of eliminating the regarding Guantanamo can however boil down to the Cuban military bases in Turkey looked like, Firyubin answered that definition made until now, that is, that this is the only one this problem has not left the daily agenda.
It is also worth was no accident that the issue of the military bases in Turkey mentioning that today’s communique by Fidel announced was not mentioned in the statement made by Khrushchev on that Cuba would open fire on military planes that violate 28 October.
Carrying out this action takes some time and is connected 3) According to unverified, but credible information, with the issue of NATO-Warsaw Pact put forth by Kennedy. is said to have had a telephone The issue of the Guantanamo Bay will surely constitute one of conversation with Castro on the 22nd soon after Kennedy’s the points of detailed conversations.
Firyubin is aware of difstatement. insisted that Cuba accept ficulties connected with fully securing Cuba given the stormy inspections and suggested that Castro have a full authority to moods in the Pentagon.
Firyubin thinks that this fact, that decide the composition of the inspections.
Castro is said to have is, that these events are not taking place after the elections, decisively rejected even the thought of the inspection.
Allegedly, inhibits Kennedy’s actions, but that after the elections the on the 27th, Roa is said to have common sense will deepen within the United States governing circles. come out with a request to the Brazilian government for Brazil As to the summit meeting, the USSR is not exerting any presto use its influence in order to solve the crisis. sure in this direction, but there are those in the USSR who believe that talks at the highest levels are beneficial.
Szyfrogramy from Hawana 1962, 6/77 w-82 t-1264, of a summit meeting is only a matter of time.
Firyubin is fully convinced translated by Margaret K Gnoinska .] that the recent developments are in favor of the USSR and our countries and that the first goal (Kennedy’s statement renouncing the United States aggression against Cuba) has already been achieved.
He thinks that the United States does not want to get involved in the problem.
Dispatched from Moscow on 29.10.1962 at 18:00 Undoubtedly, SEATO is benefiting much from this event Received on 29.10.1962 at 16:50 when it comes to spreading their propaganda.
According to Came into the Deciphering Department on 29.10.1962 at Firyubin’s personal opinion, this conflict should be resolved 19:20 by the parties involved.
He did not have much to add to the already published Polish Foreign Ministry Archive , Warsaw.
KRAJEWSKI, Urgent, EYES ONLY To: RAPACKI, IMMEDIATELY From: JELEŃ108 From: JASZCZUK109 1.
He was well received by the reminds that the oral commitment of the United States Americans, who are pleased with his arrival. is not sufficient.
The situation of the past few days has been exceptionally he states that the liquidation of the Guantanamo base tense.
The USSR had must take place sooner than later, but through peaceful information about an imminent invasion of Cuba. means.
Khrushchev’s statement regarding the dismantling of the starting devices was made pretty much at the last minute.
Based on the information from various sources it would If the Americans went into Cuba and wiped it out, half seem that Fidel is not pleased with how the decision to of the Cuban population and many Americans, could withdraw was made and the disclosure that perish in the process.
This would not the installations are exclusively the property of the USSR. have been a nuclear war, because only a madman would One can sense much bitterness on the part of Cubans dare drop an atomic bomb.
It is noteworthy that the prestige and Cuba, would pose a great obstacle. of Fidel Castro could seriously suffer within the Latin We received guarantees from Kennedy of not attacking American context.
We are relying on this the president’s conditions” were also statement.
If he were to break the promise, then all Fidel Castro’s reaction to the Soviet position. international norms would be trampled.
The blockade of Cuba continues, but the Soviet ships will be rather difficult.
There is said to be an especial were already given instructions to leave the Cuban ports. envoy on the way sent by Goulart who is carrying a letter to Fidel.
Dorticos of inviting U Thant and that this influenced Fidel’s letter from the 27th which contained this invitation.
However, Alexeyev Yours 12930. counts on the fact that Fidel will understand the The police security around the embassy building situation. has somewhat decreased, but it still continues although it is less visible.
The building of the consular section, Fidel stubbornly continues to reject even the the economic cone, and the Consulate General in thought of inspections in Cuba.
Szyfrogramy from Waszyngton 1962, 6/77 w-86 t-1312, The “5 conditions” proposed by the Cuban side are, Polish Foreign Ministry Archive , Warsaw.
Obtained in the opinion of Alexeyev, a correct and official by James G Hershberg and request for the evacuation of the [US naval base translated by Margaret K Gnoinska .] at] Guantanamo.
Alexeyev understands that Castro is only making a formal request while realizing that fulfilling this request cannot take place at this time.
KRAJEWSKI, EYES ONLY UN Secretary] U Thant on his announced visit to Cuba.
Obtained Relay this , if possible, by James G Hershberg and today, but not at night, to Minister Rapacki translated by Margaret K Gnoinska .] and Naszkowski, 31 October 1.
MILNIKIEL,113 among other things, by demanding the removal of [the URGENT, EYES ONLY United States Naval Base in] Guantanamo), as well as [other issues From: DROŻNIAK114 such as] the moves by China [on the international arena, including] a further exacerbation of the conflict with India, egging Castro on to oppose the reached agreement, and presenting the USSR position as a serious concession 1) thinks that the unpublished exchange to the United States.
Szyfrogramy from Waszyngton 1962, 6/77 w-86 t-1312, maximum propaganda purposes as a victory achieved Polish Foreign Ministry Archive , Warsaw.
Kennedy is getting ready by James G Hershberg and to make a statement at a press conference on November translated by Margaret K Gnoinska .] 1, warn against adopting such an attitude, he is going to draw attention to the fact that reaching an agreement in the area of disarmament is now more urgent than ever.
To: RAPACKI the ban on nuclear tests; the ban on nuclear weapons’ From: JASZCZUK116 proliferation; a declaration or a treaty of non-aggression between NATO Kohler’s (which Organization] and the Warsaw Pact; the elimination of lasted 50 minutes): some bases; declaring both Africa and Latin America as non-nuclear zones.
The United States will not go into Cuba and it was happy to hear that [First Deputy Minister of Foreign does not intend to topple Castro from outside of Cuba.
Affairs Vasili Vasilyevich] Kuznetsov was appointed as He thinks that the nation will change its system the head of the delegation Cuba from within, and that the United States will continue as a sign that the USSR is going to quickly resolve the the blockade until they receive the guarantees of the full Cuban Crisis. elimination of bases.
He clearly 3) He thinks that as long as there are no complications dodged taking any position on the issue.
They continue to Averell] Harriman was the first one to see that Khrushchev’s ask themselves this question and they don’t seem to find intentions and behavior the crisis aspired the answer.
They nature” of the missile weapons and I also returned to the think that right now the disassembling and transport of the issue of unfriendly United States policy towards Cuba missiles back to the USSR will take place very quickly.
This is because, the Soviet Union will not want to create the international commisPolish Foreign Ministry Archive , Warsaw.
It by James G Hershberg and will make the effort for commission translated by Margaret K Gnoinska .] to merely state facts.
KRAJEWSKI, URGENT, EYES ONLY S., to a large degree, confirms the content of From: JELEŃ120 cable 825.119 In his opinion, the assessment of the installation of the missiles in Cuba as the attempt to strength1.
The whole propaganda action is carried out en the position of the USSR before a possible conin a very rigid manner and is based on the arguments frontation over Berlin, ended up prevailing within the made by Fidel in his speech on 23 October . administration. despite the criticisms does not take into consideration the made by the Republicans, claiming that Kennedy decisive events that followed afterwards and continues to should have exploited the opportunity to topple press for the “5 points” proposed by Fidel on 28 October.
Castro and that he should have called for I think that the main aim of such pressure is not to show a policy based on a position of strength, among other places initial rigid position for negotiations with [UN in Berlin, President Kennedy is determined to seek peaceful General Secretary] U Thant, but it is the main reflection solutions and those based on compromise. is of the confusion which is taking place among the party most interested in concluding a treaty to ban nuclear tests.
The existence of is sympathetic to the idea of the projects of nonsuch confusion is becoming more and more apparent in nuclear zones in Africa, and possibly in Latin America.
It is very clear President] characterized Khrushchev’s unpublished that they do not understand the international situation letter as very personal and one that expressed [the Soviet and one can sense among many of them the feeling of leader’s] concern over the possibility of a nuclear war to a being abandoned by the USSR. much larger degree than in his published text.
Now, the major issue is Received on 11.01.1962 at 6:50 to have it encapsulated in some kind of an international docuCame into the Deciphering Department on 11.01.1962 at ment.
As to my question of how Fidel sees the solution to the 7:00 crisis, he responded that now we should see a major problem.
KRAJEWSKI, URGENT, EYES ONLY Besides, he is not aware of anything else other than what has From: JELEŃ121 already been announced publicly regarding Fidel’s opinion.
According to unofficial information, the first conference Ministers of the Soviet Union Anastas] Mikoyan left for New with U Thant is said to have been difficult even though York City and then onto Cuba in order to more broadly disthey have not yet discussed the issue of inspections. cuss current problems.
Szyfrogramy from Hawana 1962, 6/77 w-82 t-1264, Received on 11.01.1962 at 21:07 Polish Foreign Ministry Archive , Warsaw.
It was agreed upon between the USSR and the United States that disassembling of the bases takes place. regardless of Cuba’s maintaining the blockade, Soviet ships will be able to go into Cuba’s seaports without any problems.
We need to wait a few days for the results of the talks Polish Foreign Ministry Archive , Warsaw.
It seems that the United States will not by James G Hershberg and insist on the UN supervision of disassembling the rocket translated by Margaret K Gnoinska .] launchers and removing the missiles.
The most pressing issue at the moment on several is a quick removal of the missiles from Cuba.
They are Department, and the United States delegation to the United not planning on giving them to the Nations that the USSR is acting towards eliminating the Germans. this state of affairs would be Cuban crisis with the utmost honest intensions, difficult to maintain in case other countries obtained and it is also showing a far-reaching will for cooperation. nuclear weapons.
Szyfrogramy from Waszyngton 1962, 6/77 w-86 t-1312, Castro continues to show further resistance.
Rodriguez assesses, however, , 8 November 1962 that the views are converging, but the situation is exacerbated by “the increased demands of the US,” especially when it comes to the withdrawal of Secret the bombers, something that the USSR does not Of Special Significance consent to.
Raul Castro confirms that the Cuban AntiMaking copies is prohibited Air Forces has the orders not to shoot.
Ambassador JELEN prolonged and this does not bode well, especially [when Politburo it comes to maintaining a uniform position] externally; Czesak133 one cannot foresee when they will end, perhaps by the end of the week.
They only printed a succinct summary of Kosygin’s Politburo statement, emphasizing only the sentence of Soviet support and aid to Cuba; as far as [Soviet defense minister Krajewski Rodion] Malinovski’s statement, they only printed the part which condemns the aggressive moves of the US; This information is based on the conversation on with both statements are wholly lacking in the assessment Valdes Vivo who is the editor-in-chief of Hoy during of the whole crisis.
He is in constant contact with the according to AP and UPI of Khrushchev’s statement party leadership, he comes from the old PSP [Popular Socialist at the Kremlin and the full text of a letter to Mikoyan.
As far as comrade Cyrankiewicz’s speech, 1) The missiles were installed at the Soviet initiative.
During the far as the information given by the Xinhua agency, they preceding talks, they bilaterally considered all possibilities published only those parts of statements and declarations and the most far-reaching ramifications, as well as the supporting the elements of 5 points. variant of a possible withdrawal in exchange for an analogous idea of the United States with taking into consideration c) The celebration of 7 November the Turkey option.
The leadership condemning the weakness, the equality between both believes that the withdrawal took place too suddenly.
Szyfrogramy from Hawana 1962, 6/77 w-82 t-1264, 3) The most difficult issue is not just the inspection of Polish Foreign Ministry Archive , Warsaw.
They , 12 November 1962 are awaiting a reply to the memo delivered to Mikoyan.
Szyfrogramy from Waszyngton 1962, 6/77 w-86 t-1312, [i.e., Nationalist-controlled islands such as Matsu and Polish Foreign Ministry Archive , Warsaw.
Obtained Quemoy ], but instead it exacerbated by James G Hershberg and the situation with India, something that translated by Margaret K Gnoinska .] does not help Cuba.
Among the leadership, it is Fidel who shows the Secret biggest understanding for the Soviet position and for the Of Special Significance school of thought of the old cadres.
Szyfrogramy from Hawana 1962, 6/77 w-82 t-1264, at 11.17 at 16:00 Polish Foreign Ministry Archive , Warsaw.
Now they are saying that he Dispatched from Washington, D.C., on 11.16.1962 at 10:00 may come either on Saturday or Sunday. and received on 11.16.1962 at 17:30 Came to the Decoding Department on 11.16.1962 at 17:40 2.
They are expressing fears that the announcement of /From J Alsop/. shooting down American planes, an announcement that There is a belief within the administration that [First was included in the letter to U Thant from November Deputy Chairman of the Council of Ministers of the Soviet 15, could cause grave complications if it were carried Union Anastas] Mikoyan was not successful in convincing out.
They are also saying that besides the reconnaissance Castro as far as adopting a Soviet point flights there are also provocative ones which are at low of view.
The administration thinks that the USSR has altitudes. lived up to all of the obligations, which has taken upon itself.
As far as who possesses the bombers, there are they will consider the Cuban issue as a diverging opinions.
Ambassador JELEN leadership think that the divergences are much more serious than they thought, but they are not giving any A meeting between Mikoyan and the heads of specific examples. diplomatic posts of socialist countries took place today.
The withdrawal of the bombers [from Cuba, which is to take place] within the period of one month following the There are two opposing views as to the prospects lifting of the “blockade,” is necessary in order to appease of Latin America that emerged in the talks with the Caribbean nations.
This is related to the merging the United States and USSR guarantees. issues of inspection and American flights over Cuba.
There are divergences within the Cuban leadership regarding all issues that had been considered thus 4.
They are expecting an internal discussion, proposed until now is well-founded.
The effect until now that the number of flights has significantly decreased.
In two cases, they opened fire without hitting the targets. thinks that these were American planes that were sent in order to test the veracity of warning.
Caribbean region, the situation is looking differently in other parts of the world.
The withdrawal of the newly introduced b) In a casual conversation, he mentioned his visit to strategic weapons is to recognize the existence of Cuba Hungary in 1956; in this moment he turned to the as a socialist country and to give it guarantees.
M further gave the sense that the concept of “no war, no peace” emerged in Cuba.
Szyfrogramy from Hawana 1962, 6/77 w-82 t-1264, by James G Hershberg and Polish Foreign Ministry Archive , Warsaw.
KRAJEWSKI137, Eyes Only To: Krajewski From: JELEŃ138 From: Ambassador JELEN In the conversation with [one of the Polish embassy Here is the supplement to our dispatch no.1 employees] Czyżycki, Gallan – a Mexican journalist – relayed the following statement made by Castro in the a) [First Deputy Chairman of USSR Council of Ministers conversation with him on the 26th of this month (after the Anastas] Mikoyan did not mention the issue of Sovietdeparture of Mikoyan): Cuban differences.
He also did not mention the objectives of bringing the missiles to Cuba.
The decision to install, and subsequently to withdraw, that a situation emerged in which one could compensate the bases, was not well thought out.
Ipso would never have agreed to the proposition of their facto, the Monroe Doctrine and the Rio Treaty had been installation had it known that there was a possibility of struck. pointed out that the United States will not give their dismantling.
Cuba agreed, and it was ready to bear up on its anti-Cuban policy, and he emphasized within consequences, because it believed that the point here this context that the current balance of power was the strategic goals of the camp [as a favorable to Cuba.
If the installation of the bases resulted from resulted from the conviction of the republic’s authorities ignoring the abilities of the opponent, something that that the rocket launchers are a part of the global strategy had already taken place not for the first time in the plan of the socialist camp.
Having expressed approval for Soviet policy, for example in 1941,139 then the the installation of the Soviet missiles, Cuba was aware to dismantle the missiles resulted from the of the enormous responsibility and the enormous risk, exaggerated . such as nuclear bombing of the island in case of a world conflict.
Nobody from the Cuban leadership took into account any circumstances in which these weapons would be 4.
Castro is absolutely convinced about the honesty of the removed from Cuba.
Most likely the society. both decisions were flawed, but surely the latter one was.
The decision to remove , formulated in the second Havana declaration should be intensively Khrushchev’s letter, was a total surprise.
However, this issue found Fidel Castro at breakfast on Sunday morning, 28 is related to the overall attitude of the USSR towards October.
Then the policy of the communist parties of Latin American suddenly, without communicating, but only with the cocountries, which do not support the declaration.
The procedure adopted by the USSR is not to be tolerated Secretary General] U Thant to Cuba is quite great. and is not acceptable for a sovereign nation.
Szyfrogramy from Hawana 1962, 6/77 w-82 t-1264, Cuban government, has led to an open conflict between Polish Foreign Ministry Archive , Warsaw.
Retreating in the presence of imperialism is a flawed and futile policy.
The guarantees, such as have been formulated by Kennedy, do not present any value and in fact do not guarantee anything.
Even if one 27 November 1962 were to treat the decision to remove the missiles as saving peace, then giving away the bombers was absolutely Secret unfounded.
The conversation took place on 27 November and lasted over three hours from 9:00pm until 12:00 midnight.
Thant, the UN Secretary General stated in Havana that he forewarned the United States president that in case of an assault 1.
The decision of the on Cuba he would call a United Nations session, he would accuse Soviet government regarding the installation of missiles the United States of aggression and he would resign his post.
The Soviet concessions are thus one-sided and ineffective. countries on the continent.
The only correct one would be a response of force to force, and the USSR was capable 10.
It did not do that because the fear of Ministers Anastas] Mikoyan’s talks in Havana did not of war is the main element of the policy in Europe and lead to anything.
But at the same time it was certain exchange of opinions on the history of the most recent that the Americans were not ready to go all the way and days, and after Mikoyan’s explanation of the Soviet risk a war.
The version that stance, it was jointly decided not to focus on an analysis Khrushchev decided to make concessions as a result of of the past as there was no hope for agreement.
The entire Fidel’s sudden letter indicating that the Soviet missile matter should be seen on a somewhat broader plane, that bases would be bombed in a matter of hours is not true is, a flawed one in relation to the general lack of any because Fidel ’s warning reached Khrushchev Soviet policy toward colonial countries and the colonial after the Soviet premier had already sent [US President revolution.
Kennedy the letter expressing agreement to and now Cuba testify that the USSR does not possess a remove the missiles.
An individual armed with a small proper conception of its assistance to the anti-imperialist caliber revolver who withdraws his weapon in the face of revolutionary movements.
At one of the international an enemy’s bigger revolver cannot state that he saved the conferences not too long ago, Molotov peace; for the threat remains.
The only correct response as the minister of foreign affairs included Cuba in the would be to introduce yet a bigger gun to the discussion. national territory of the United States.
The current draft Armed conflict would not take place because in fact this of the protocol by Mikoyan, that is, the joint Sovietwas not what the United States intended.
The rickety and weak Cuban proposal position of the USSR made possible the success of the is an example of the ignorance of Soviet officials in the United States’ imperialistic policy.
An invasion or some other type of United States aggression against as entirely subject to the United States and he assumed the right of Cuba has not taken place not because the United States is taking the United States to make decisions on their behalf without taking into account the armed response of the USSR, but into consideration even the formal sovereignty of these because it would be an enormous and politically costly nations. military operation.
Cuba is splendidly armed; it has a superb army and the landing operations would have to 11.
The ending of the exchange of opinions with Mikoyan cost 60,000 American soldiers.
It would be a over the analysis of past mistakes and the degree of very long-lasting loss of face politically and a definitive correctness of Soviet policy does not mean that the decline in United States prestige. matter will not be returned to at an appropriate time.
The essence of our differences lies in different however, did not render possible a fruitful exchange of understandings over the issue of coexistence with opinions on this topic.
In relation to this the Havana imperialism and over the nature of the main conflict talks exclusively referred to the future, the joint tactic of the era.
The fact that the Soviet press, along with the press of they know the horrors of imperialism.
In terms of the military, This is a shameful policy of concealing the most serious or rather war, it turned out that such assistance is not matters from public opinion.
This significantly weakens the revolutionary to criticize the Soviet leadership, but one cannot not do forces on this continent, because it is known that even it if one wants to follow one’s conscience and be in accord if one comes to power following a peaceful path, let us with history.
The fact that the Polish press published this say the party in Chile, a putsch from the right, from the excerpt of Fidel’s speech should be treated very positively. military and oligarchic elements, is unavoidable.
The In this regard, one should not attach more importance incidents with Cuba showed that the party would then to the distrust towards certain political aspects of the be defenseless.The only future lies exclusively in a very PUWP142 which one can observe in some circles of the active Cuban policy.
One has to respond to the aggressive ORI143 apparatus, mostly on the part of comrades who policy of imperialism with a policy of an armed fight were recruited from the previous PSP144.
The example of the tumbling, and cadres, of a low ideological level, live by the old formulas. near abolition, of the Brazilian communist party of [Luís Despite, for example, critical opinion of its films or too Carlos] Prestes testifies to where reformism leads.
One great of a retraction in the area of agriculture policy, should remember the report of [Finnish Communist Poland deserves respect and admiration.
One should Otto] Kuusinen at the VII Comintern Congress. contrast the level of Kalecki, Lange, and Schaff with the low theoretical level in the Soviet 16.
The fact that it was precisely Mikoyan who Declaration is current and alive.
The national bourgeoisie, not because Stalin to this one should emphasize the exceptionally low and said so at the XIX Congress but because it is primitive level of Ponomarev’s article. rickety and afraid of socialist transformations, is not capable of and cannot lead revolutionary movements.
The main question currently boils down to how far the Only the working class can lead the revolution.
Certain anti-Soviet moods undoubtedly have been guarantees as of Soviet guarantees.
Taking away weapons from Cuba had ill-fated this matter is not known and Cuba is inclined to think psychological consequences and the view that Cuba is that it is difficult to count on a Soviet decision to join alone became very widespread.
This problem government to the request by the Soviet authorities not will be raised by Cuba at an appropriate time and in an to shoot down American aircraft that were inspecting appropriate forum. the removal of the missile installations demoralized the Cuban army.
One sympathy towards the USSR awaits the authorities of has to repair the consequences of the mistakes of Soviet the republic.
Obviously, the conduct of the Cuban policy both on Cuba’s territory and on the territory of press, which contains elements of acrimony or mockery Latin America, and even Africa.
L.U.) are, in principle and according to the main lines, in accord with the views of the Cuban leadership.
As far as the first question is concerned, after years of may remark on certain details, but in principle they are complete fiascos and the humiliation of the USSR due to correct.
He will have Galan wrote his articles before contacting members of meetings with Rusk and [US the Cuban leadership, and these are exactly the articles Attorney General] Robert Kennedy.
The President evaded which enabled him to get access to Fidel and Dorticos giving a formal guarantee of non-aggression as far as (he has conducted an interview with the president which Cuba, referring to the failure to keep the promise will appear on Thursday, 29 November in “Siempre”). inspections in Cuba.
Mikoyan attacked by pointing out that Khrushchev fully carried The conversation ended after three hours due to out the substantial promises . fatigue and the late hour.
At the request of the interviewer, it was Cuba’s sovereign right to C.R.R. agreed to come back to it in a few days.
At the consent or not to the inspections . same time he announced that he would deliver to his Castro proposed that a multilateral inspection [could be interviewer the text of the article which C.R. wrote carried out in Cuba and elsewhere]. outright in 1950 on the topic of the Leninist conception of asked whether K was reneging on his promises. coexistence –an article that is entirely topical.
The President expressed his readiness to issue yet another is a member of the national leadership of ORI, he personal declaration regarding the non-aggression participated, in the absence of Blas Roca, as the only ex.
Mikoyan 7 November this year he gave a speech at the October insisted that be of Academy. a formal nature and under the auspices of the United Nations.
They talked about the [U-2 and received on 11.30.1962 at 21:50 reconnaissance] flights over Cuba.
The president stated Came to the Decoding Department on 11.30.1962 at 22:00 that such flights were only flying at high altitudes.
RAPACKI,147 IMMEDIATELY, M said that such flights were no less piratical BUT NOT AT NIGHT than those carried out at low altitudes.
The Section for with the socialist Came into the Deciphering Department on 12.18.1962 at countries in the International Department of the CC 9:40 CPSU has recently encompassed Cuba.
Zenon KLISZKO149 From: JASZCZUK150 … From Spychalski’s visit to meet 5.
The Soviet missiles that were installed on Cuba were At the same time, they do not agree (without showing it ready for action.
So, they were brought in, assembled, and externally) with the withdrawal of the missiles without disassembled in the period of two months.
They are pointing to the issue of took the kulak out of our pockets,” the Americans gave up guarantee.
To be sure, everyone is aware their aggressive intentions towards Cuba.
We did not plan on of the fact that we cannot have complete guarantees using the missiles.
After we economically and politically; this is our responsibility. received Kennedy’s pledge , we withdrew Andropov reiterated this by making the following the missiles.
This is an organization which is patchy the United States acknowledges that the Soviet Union is and loose.
Besides the dedicated Marxists, there are those essential in solving world problems.
After all, Cuba is in the in the organization who do not agree with Marxism. region of the Monroe Doctrine, but the United States had to They are all very honest people but they have no agree to our activity and we forced them to make a decision revolutionary experience.
This is why there are possible regarding Cuba… deviations within the party.
They fully agree with the international 8 Official in the Polish Foreign Ministry.
Having received the he served as the Vice-Chair of the Administrative and Budgetary second part of Khrushchev’s speech which contained a Committee of the UN General Assembly.
In 1965-1970, he served secret criticism of the position and conduct of the CCP, as Poland’s ambassador to Brazil.
As we can see, he served as the vice-vhair of the Administrative and Budgetary they are following a policy of balancing two sides.
Obtained 12 On 5 May 1948, the foundation of the Organization of the by James G Hershberg and American States took place in Bogota, Colombia.
Cuba was translated by Margaret K Gnoinska .] one of its founding members.
On 22 January 1962, the OAS held the Eighth Meeting of Consultation of the Ministers of Foreign Notes Affairs in Punta del Este, Uruguay.
As the result, Cuba was effectively suspended from the OAS from January 22, 1962 until June 3, 2009.
The Lost Chance for Peace in Vietnam (Washington, DC/ the United Nations in the early 1960s.
Comparable domestic political complications also plagued 20 Commonly used in reference to Finland’s policies of not and ultimately derailed Kennedy administration efforts around this challenging the Soviet Union during the Cold War; the term is also time to secure Congressional approval to remove trade barriers with used when referring to a country’s policies of not challenging the Yugoslavia. policies of its greater neighbor 6 See Henry Raymont, “Poles Try, But Fail to Calm Castro,” while maintaining its national sovereignty.
That Castro that overthrew the regime of Fulgencio Batista in Cuba in this incompatibility excludes the present Government of Cuba from 1959.
To as Poland’s ambassador to Brazil. request the Council of the Organization of American States to 43 Poland’s ambassador to Cuba . maintain all necessary vigilance, for the purpose of warning against 44 Organizaciones Revolucionarias Integradas was formed any acts of aggression, subversion, or other dangers to peace and in July 1961 following the Cuban Revolution and the fall of the security, or the preparation of such acts, resulting from the continued Fulgencio Batista regime.
The Special Consultative Committee on Security the Revolutionary Directorate of March 13th of Faure Chomón shall submit to the Council of the Organization, no later than May Mediavilla.
On October 3, 1965, PURSC was replaced 45 Official in the Polish Foreign Ministry.
In 1965-1970, he served 58 In early 1962, Fidel Castro openly denounced Anibal as Poland’s ambassador to Brazil.
Comrade Gomulka, Comrade Cyrankiewicz, Comrade 49 Przemysław Ogrodziński , Polish diplomat, Gierek, Comrade Jedrychowski, Comrade Kliszko, Comrade LogaPoland’s head of mission to the International Commission for Sowinski, Comrade Ochab, Comrade Rapacki, Comrade Spychalski, Control and Supervision in Vietnam, Poland’s ambassador to India Comrade Zambrowski, Comrade Zawadzki, Comrade Jarosinski, and Norway.
Comrade Strzelecki, Comrade Czesak, Comrade Winiewicz, 50 Edward Drożniak , Poland’s ambassador to the Comrade Wierna, Comrade Michalowski, Comrade Birecki.
In 1965-1970, he served 52 Poland’s ambassador to Cuba . as Poland’s ambassador to Brazil.
Poland’s head of mission to the International Commission for 64 U Thant visited Poland in September 1962.
Control and Supervision in Vietnam, Poland’s ambassador to India 65 Gaitskell visited Poland in August 1962. and Norway.
The Casablanca group was founded in 1961 and included 54 Edward Drożniak , Poland’s ambassador to the Algeria, Egypt, Ghana and Morocco.
The group, which represented United States . more radical and socialist attitudes combined with the idea of 55 Charles E “Chip” Bohlen , United States career Pan-Africanism, was eventually dissolved and merged into the diplomat; he served as the United States ambassador to the Soviet Union organization of African Unity in 1963. , to the Philippines , and then to France 67 Reference here to the Soviet Declaration that the United States attack . on Cuba will lead to nuclear war.
In 1950-1951, Gierek, Comrade Jedrychowski, Comrade Kliszko, Comrade Logahe served as the vice-chair of the Administrative and Budgetary Sowinski, Comrade Ochab, Comrade Rapacki, Comrade Spychalski, Committee of the UN General Assembly.
In 1965-1970, he served Comrade Zambrowski, Comrade Zawadzki, Comrade Jarosinski, as Poland’s ambassador to Brazil.
Comrade Wierna, Comrade Michalowski, Comrade Birecki, 70 Reference here to the Soviet declaration that the United States attack Comrade Milnikiel. on Cuba would lead to nuclear war.
Kasman, Comrade Gede, Comrade Trampczynski, Comrade Wicha, 72 Brezhnev met with President Josip Tito of Yugoslavia and Comrade Bordzilowski, Comrade Moczar, Comrade Szlachcic.
Reference here to the conference of Afro-Asian nations held 57 This political group was formed in July 1961.
The group in Belgrade in 1961, a conference which led to the establishment of consolidated the 26 July Movement of Fidel Castro, the Socialist the Non-Aligned Movement during the Cold War.
Comrade Strzelecki, Comrade Czesak, Comrade Wicha, Comrade 1957 – 1962 and 1967 – 1969.
Bodzilowski, Comrade Korczynski, Comrade Naszkowski, Comrade 84 The reference here is to Khrushchev’s visit to Beijing in Wierna, Comrade Michalowski, Comrade Birecki, Comrade KatzOctober 1959 (following his successful visit to the United States Suchy, Comrade Milnikiel.
In 1965-1970, he served ambassador to Great Britain . as Poland’s ambassador to Brazil.
Loga-Sowinski, Ochab, Rapacki, Spychalski, Zambrowski, Zawadzki, 92 It is not clear which communist embassy the Polish Jarosinski, Strzelecki, Czesak, Naszkowski, Wierna, Michalowski, Ambassador is referring to here.
In 1965-1970, he served Union from 2 December 1959 to 25 September 1963. as Poland’s ambassador to Brazil.
Miroshnichenko the Soviet about Cuba’s capacity to meet promised sales figures.
A year earlier, Khrushchev had written Gomułka regarding a shift in the prices they were going to pay Havana for sugar, to recognize … a rise on global markets.The May 1963 letter is included here.
The agreement amounts to 10 million tons replacing the missing American buyer that had vanished due to annually. the United States economic embargo, constituted an ideological obligation, Gomułka: Our people didn’t believe it. to support a threatened fraternal country, rather than merely an Khrushchev: I am not going to lie.
Cuba possesses ideal conin October 1964, deal with other issues—most visibly the Sinoditions for sugar production.
In April in Warsaw, the new general secretary of million] tons of sugar.
With my hand on my heart: I don’t believe it. to the recent visit to Moscow of Cuban defense minister Raúl Khrushchev: I trust Fidel’s estimates.
He came to us recently Castro, and both were pleased to note a recent precipitous decline as a totally different person.
He thinks practically Chinese—to the point that, in this zero-sum contest for support and that his own people are being subjective.
Some of within the communist world, Fidel Castro’s trust in Moscow had our comrades also share your attitude, but I am of a different so greatly improved that even his unpleasant memories of Sovietopinion.
We proposed to him that we would increase Cuban discord during the missile crisis exactly three years earlier the mechanization of sugarcane planting and harvesting.
Guevara said that mechanization [of agriculture] does not always work under Cuban conditions.
They ran out of workers and they were late with their harvest that was to Chile.
The only thing, though, is that they need to be tested for one season and the Cubans Secret of Special Significance do not want to wait.
And, after all, this was towards us in the future if these machines don’t work properly. the hardest year.
Castro is buying ready production is such a plant that easily submits to mechanizafrom America and Japan.
And I would leave the Kuban lands tion ability of their sugar refineries is higher.
Maybe us to agree to accept yet 10 million tons at 6 cents per English we will change machines in the sugar refineries in Kuban… pound.
If we decide to export that sugar, we will do so in our K Gnoińska.] traditional markets.
Sugar will cost us more than our own production, but the price will be more beneficial to the people.
He asked us to Letter from Nikita Khrushchev to give him a permanent price, , these are temporary prices.
Władysław Gomułka regarding Sugar , however, counts on the fact that he will be able to Prices, 16 May 1963 maintain the prices at this level.
To be sure, we signed an agreement [with Cuba], but we will also develop our own production because, In connection with a drastic change of the sugar as the saying goes, you can count on God, but it is better to world market, the Soviet government examined the prices of count on yourself.
I don’t think that there is much danger of him Cuba 4 United States cents per one English pound, which amounts providing you with the 10 million [tons of sugar which he to 75 rubles and 37 kopek per one ton of sugar.
At that time, promised]. sugar prices were less, that is, about 5 rubles per one ton.
I believe that he will, because sugarcane is the Recently, , the prices of sugar on the world markind of plant which easily submits to mechanization.
The ket have greatly soared and are currently significantly higher workers will make very good wages and they will than the price which we are paying the Cuban side for sugar cherish their professions. deliveries.
Raul explained that Fidel’s statement was not while exploiting favorable situations in some cases. directed at us, but against the Chinese.
They are concerned The Cuban side has not broached the issue of revising the about a possible withdrawal of our troops from Cuba.
He prices of sugar provided by Cuba and continues to adhere to assesses our moves in Vietnam as correct ones.
He approves of the agreement which we made. them, because, as they say, by defending Vietnam we are also However, in order to maintain and to develop fraternal defending the whole world and our camp.
They insist that I relations between Cuba and our nations, the Soviet Union visit Cuba, but I have many other planned activities.
In case the world prices go down, this price will be … appropriately readjusted.
China is becoming more isolated, for example, they you about this decision the Soviet government. have already lost Cuba and therefore their hope of creating some kind of a base in Latin America has been shattered.
L I Brezhnev, First Secretary of the CC … CPSU Brezhnev: Raul Castro came to visit ; he hunted for two days.
Ayub Khan, Shastri, and four times Chairman of the Council of Ministers of the USSR Cubans (Raul , Guevara and [Osvaldo Torrado] Dorticos)……They all wanted to get to know the new leadership, but not only that.
I have talked about the process that is taking place them: do half, that is, 70 plants and then construct the second in the world.
Right now, in Fidel’s feelings Reform Institute in Cuba] immediately came to see us. towards us, and his trust towards us even the Caribbean Crisis They have not understood our intentions well and they were has disappeared …Therefore, the process of isoconcerned.
But, we have explained to them how many people, lating China continues, including that of their position, their how much technology, and how much it would all cost.
The last thing is the issue emerged… of the international conference of the communist movement and the possibility of convening such a conference.
Now, we have no possibility to talk about the dates of the conference, but we should not give up on the idea.
But, we must continue bilateral, trilateral, or multilatthen we could immediately send soda ash to you. eral conferences.
Italian and French meetings—these are large and influential parties, but they also have their conflicts.
It is not nice to talk about a fraternal country, but that they all went to China to listen to the heavenly Marxist the Czechs are using more fertilizers than we are.
Brezhnev, don’t want to agree with what I am saying in order Rodriguez simply was afraid to return to Cuba, he was simply to treat us equally.
The fact, however, is that the Czechs are afraid that Fidel would not believe him.
Czechoslovak documents published elsewhere in this issue Of course, you know the story of the visit. of the CWIHP Bulletin.
On the downturn in relations In a word, if we were to analyze this whole chain of events between Havana and Beijing in late 1964 and early 1965, see then we could easily say that the process of isolating China Yinghong Cheng, “Sino-Cuban Relations during the Early continues and so does understanding of their Years of the Castro Regime, 1959-1966,” Journal of Cold War rowdiness, differentiation of Marxism from Trotskyism, etc.
Cuba’s Struggle with the Superpowers after the Missile Gomułka: Raul Castro visited us in March.
I extensively Crisis . argued that China would not go for such an agreement.
A legendary ghost ship that can never make port, doomed to sail the oceans forever.
Yes, this is a very acute and interesting problem… 17th-century nautical folklore.
It could be either cotton, Notes nitrogenous fertilizers, or metals for metallurgical industry.
Recently we acquire the atom bomb), but the talk also touched on the recent witnessed the stand-off between forces of two powers, US-Soviet showdown over Cuba.
In this excerpt—taken from a between two positions in connection with the events around Russian-language record found by Vladislav M Zubok in the Cuba.
Like bacteria in a body get used years earlier, reflected on the meaning of the recent crisis for the to certain conditions and resist them, so people, too, get used danger of nuclear war.
Not surprisingly, as a loyal Warsaw Pact to the danger of war, when it is talked about for a long time, ally, Gomułka praised Nikita Khrushchev for making the “main and no longer react to it.
Recently, this danger of war, which contribution” to preserving peace and denied the Soviet leader had not been clearly defined, became reality, a question of had been “scared” or “forced to retreat” under pressure.
Yet, today, a question of the hour, it became an immediate threat, observing that the world was but “one careless step, one careless which the entire world faced.
One careless step, one careless action the abyss of war,” Gomułka also commended United States action could have pushed the world over into the abyss of President John F Kennedy for his sensible and moderate actions, war.
The stand-off of the USA and the USSR made everyone restraining those military commanders eager to use America’s feel the sharpness, the extent of this danger.
Ultimately, while certain forces in the USA, who wanted to take matters to that, cautioning that cold war tensions could still erupt into violent who consider that they have a military advantage over the clashes elsewhere in the world , he optimistically and, Soviet Union and that they can destroy it.
Kennedy did not represent these forces. brush with disaster could prompt leaders of both superpowers to Kennedy did not want a war.
If it happened that the move toward détente.—J.H. position of the President of the United States was occupied by a person who represented the military forces, then one cannot know what could be happening in our world today.
I do not want to give an appraisal of the Cuban 19 November 1962 crisis itself.
Union] was forced to retreat, that it got scared – are not based on anything.
If this is so, if one can move forward détente everywhere in the world, this will be a positive side of the Cuban crisis.
Obtained by Vladislav M Zubok. concessions, these problems cannot be solved.
The last standTranslated by Sergey Radchenko.] off between the forces of the USA and the Soviet Union made everyone understand that war is not something far-away, Notes something that one should not now be apprehensive about.
By contrast, it showed that the war can be unleashed at any 1 Astor edited The Observer from 1948 to 1975. time.
Today a clash like this occurred around Cuba; tomorrow 2 The document was marked “Top Secret,” so presumably the there may be clashes in other parts of the world, for example, conversation was off-the-record. in Germany, in West Berlin, which is a time-bomb, placed 3 Gomułka had met with Khrushchev in Moscow two weeks earlier, on 4 November, in one of a series of bilateral meetings the under peace in Europe.
The record of that conversation has not surfaced (either from Russian or Polish A fully agrees to this. archives), but for other documents on Polish policy toward the crisis, including translated cables from Warsaw’s ambassadors in Moscow, G continues.
But the Cuban crisis changed the planned aged the warheads of nuclear missiles requested by Romanian agenda and Gheorghiu-Dej and Maurer were very surprised authorities would reach Romania beginning in 1963.2 by the events.
R-11 system was purchased for training purposes in Ploieşti at After the returning at home, Foreign Minister Corneliu the Missiles Training Center.
Khrushchev’s conduct in the Cuban case less than compelThe aviation would remain ready for action to the base ling or reassuring.
Former United States official Raymond L Garthoff aerodromes; the number of combat aircraft in service must has revealed that following the crisis, in the fall of 1963, double it.
Romania’s foreign minister secretly informed United States Secretary The radar system must operate in continuous research. of State Dean Rusk that Buchaest had not approved of It would ensure continuous operation of links.
Khrushchev’s deployment to Cuba, would remain neutral in It must strengthen the security for the military objecany East-West conflict triggered by such an aggressive Soviet tives and it must guard strategic objectives which have not step, and asked, consequently, that Washington refrain from been guarded until now. targeting Romania for retaliation.
According to Garthoff, it It must take urgent action to repair the combat techwas clear that the missile crisis was the “precipitating event” nique and the repair techniques in Romania’s decision to distance itself from the Warsaw that would be able to ensure a perfect shape for combat.
Pact, a development that only become evident publicly in the The border divisions must have proper ammunition ensuing years as Bucharets—under both Gheorghiu-Dej and and fuels as planned in such situations for being ready to Ceausescu—refused give a proper response to the aggressor.
It must ensure the to back Moscow in the Sino-Soviet split and in other major viability of access roads in the districts of concentration. foreign policy controversies.
Although he could have informed the Romanian Minister of Armed Report on Romanian Government Forces about the operation “Anadyr,” which was ongoing, the Delegation Visit to Moscow and SovietSupreme Commander of the Warsaw Pact Unified Armed Romanian Talks, 23 October 1962 Forces made no gesture in this direction, and General Sălăjan was also surprised as Gheorghiu-Dej and Maurer were by 30 October 1962.
Kennedy’s revelation on October 22 of the existence of Soviet missiles in Cuba.
The report submitted by Foreign Minister Corneliu Mănescu In fact, it appears that Romanian authorities didn’t know to the members of the Politburo of the RWP CC, regarding anything about the existence of the Soviet operation “Anadyr” the discussions of the members of a Romanian government delegations and several members of the CPSU and Soviet until United States President John F Kennedy revealed it to the world state’s leaders .10 on 22 October 1962.
Khrushchev was somewhat apologetic about his failure to inform Gheorghiu-Dej GD in advance, but explained that few knew the secret even in N C Moscow, and defended his decision to deploy the missiles C S as necessary “to frighten America” and thereby protect Cuba I M from being lost to the socialist camp.
P B Thus, he mentioned that during the same day he had signed a decision of the Council of Ministers for postponing Comrade GHEORGHE GHEORGHIU-DEJ the demobilization of the old quotas from the missiles, air defense and submarine units. Sole copy.
It also sets the performance of some military maneuvers on I propose to send to the members of the the border with Turkey and Iran, and in the GDR [German Politburo.
Democratic Repuublic; East Germany], where will be sent several additional divisions.
Marshal Grechko, the supreme October 30, 1962 commander of allied military forces of the countries from the ss.
Gheorghe Gheorghiu-Dej, Ion Gheorghe Maurer, at Corneliu Mănescu, Nicolae Guină [the Romanian Ambassador Finally, of course, he was elected president by a series of in USSR], Ştefan Voicu, A Păcuraru, Tudose V machinations.
Brezhnev, Frol Kozlov, work, made to earn the trust of the people, while enjoying Kosygin, A Mikoyan, Suslov, E Grishin, authority.
Only in socialist countries leaders are elected based Vasilii V Kuznetsov (first deputy Minister of Foreign Affairs of on merit and proven quality of service.
Even presented the visit of the governmental delegation of the from the beginning, the RWP and Romanian state’s leaders and PRR in Indonesia, India and Burma, dwelling more on the the CPSU leaders bound a friendly discussion. impressions that our delegation had left from these countries.
Khrushchev Minister of Foreign Affairs, is more withdrawn and it seems toasted to the Romanian-Soviet friendship and mentioned that the most times he has a reactionary position, similar that the relations between the two parties, between the two to Nasution’s position.
Ne Win, highcountries are very good, very close. lighted by comrade Gheorghe Gheorghiu-Dej, seems to be After comrade Gheorghiu-Dej had similarly toasted, we quite shrewd and far-sighted in international affairs.
Khrushchev, comrade Mikoyan, and experiments , the disarmament debates etc. other companions in these countries and currently.
Khrushchev insisted more on the attitude of S Khrushchev said that during the conflict between Indonesia Nehru and the Sino-Indian problem.
In this context, comrade and the Netherlands, conflict generated by the intention to generally mentioned that Nehru had oscilfree the ex-Portuguese colonies’ territories from Indonesia, lated between the line of imperialist countries, neutrality and Sukarno took the initiative and sent Subandrio to Moscow for the socialist countries.
Lately, under the influence of the asking a military aid – submarines, aircraft and commanders for ruling party, of the reactionary forces, Nehru seems to be closer these things.
Starting from the idea that the Soviet carriers can to the line of imperialist countries.
The position he occupies in do a good attempt to destroy Dutch aircraft in case of an air the last time, toward the issue of border conflict with China, is attack of the Dutch aviation, the Soviet comrades accepted the downright reactionary.
The Chinese side (the Soviet ambassador help requested, at the same time saying the argument mentioned in China was informed directly by Zhou En-Lai about this) to Subandrio as well.
Also under the pressure tioned that he doesn’t have any guarantee that Sukarno had of the reactionary forces, the Indian side rejected this proposal on known about this.
Khrushchev said that this is not fair because Netherlands, which can look like a war of the USA against the McMahon line was established by the British in 1912, when the colonies and neutral countries in the eyes of world pubIndia was an English colony and, of course, the British had lic opinion) these have influenced the Netherlands to accept every incentive to take as much Chinese territory as possible. negotiation.
On the other hand, to prevent excessive growth Therefore, based on proposals of the Chinese side, now would be of the prestige of the USSR in Indonesia, reactionary circles normal to start bilateral negotiations. of the world have convinced Sukarno probably not pay much v i attention to the aid received from the USSR and to reduce the The point of view of the Soviet side was communicated to the number of Soviet soldiers who are in Indonesia.
The fact is that P.R. of China on 8 October and India on 20 October (through a this trend is observed by Sukarno.
Khrushchev showed that it creates show the decision that will be taken by him.
In principle, was in a wrong position this time, supporting the view of J the Soviet comrades agreed to the military aid, but it couldn’t Nehru.
This is dangerous because it can lead to divisions directly be done because it hadn’t been a free way [from the among the party.
But here intervened [Egyptian leader Gamal opinion of CPSU, including the opinion of General Secretary of Abdel] Nasser, who was interested in supporting the achievement the C P of India. of the coup in Yemen.
Previously, some workers came and put conditions on aircraft, flown by Soviet crews.
Such situations are not repeated It didn’t tell anything about this to the Yemeni Prime Minister, today. at v i but he likely realized what it is about because, when the bombOn tests with nuclear weapons the issue of a ban ers had arrived, he saw that they had the flag of UAR, but began to take shape with the prospects of reaching an agreewere flown by Soviets.
British V i inf scientists have recently proposed to solve the main proceedNasser represents an intermediate step, which will be removed ings problem by installing an automatic control stations, in time.
Khrushchev said that the tests made so far emphasized that even here it being obtained was a positive thing. have given not only data on existing weapons, but also on the In this “has contributed” President J Kennedy, who in one of his new weapons to be equipped with the Soviet armed forces in recent speeches reminded the danger posed by the Soviet misthe coming years.
Series of experiments conducted under a siles installed in Cuba for a number of United States cities (it seems that nuclear test were performed only in the atmosphere, as the Kennedy has even nominated, adds comrade Mikoyan), Canada costs of underground experiments are enormous.
Khrushchev stated that there is the possibility of signedy without authority ... at ing an agreement with the United States Nuclear-Test-ban issue, but the These statements will awaken a little the consciousness of Cuba’s issue currently prevents achieving this.
Perhaps later it the American public opinion, which so far has been dormant will be reach the mentioned agreement.
Initially, the USSR proposed the destruction of all these that awaits him; this shows the weakness of imperialism, which means. v i at began openly to show the fear.
Khrushchev said – we believe that this problem will continue to be discussed for that this issue has no longer the acute character which it once a long time because the United States practically rejects disarmament.
Currently it has more importance in terms of moral the prestige and authority of the United States continues to decline, the factor.
Comrade said that it before the German doctors were using the term “Sir”, addressing got a good crop this year, but it hadn’t obtained the planned to the Soviet people in GDR, recently they have begun using the amount of grain.
The livestock sector also receive in this day and answered that they are busy (he has have good results, but not as good as expected.
Khrushchev said that the GDR achieved a fair the experience of this year shows that the reorganization of agriproportion between the labor productivity growth and the wage culture’s management proved to be a welcome step, which gives growth, for the first time in this year.
Khrushchev stated possibility for the socialist accumulation to be achieved.
So thus it is obvious that the United States can be matched in ning. v i the production of the main industrial products.
Khrushchev stressed – it was necessary to bear in mind that the United States is not currently working at the form in which it demanded economic aids.
In the third quarter of this year, the steel comment:] at v i industry only used 52% of production capacity.
Khrushchev stressed that but the Soviet people’s standard of living was lower than the GDR the Soviet industry still has great possibilities.
In addition, all the Soviet people must give economic aid to the German people.
When you stan the position of org the hand reached for s aid, you are not enjoying the prestige; When there is only one regional party organ that deals 2.
You should keep in mind the realities, to rely firstly on them – with problems of industry and agriculture issues, inevitably you house well, to stay on their feet Each socialist country must one of the two sectors suffers.
Gavriil Preda, Petre Opriş, România to the RWP CC and on this occasion comrade Gheorghe în Organizaţia Tratatului de la Varşovia.
Firstly, comrade started with simple information from our delegation about the visit which comrade Walter Ulbricht is going to Report on Conversation with Yugoslav do in the USSR on 31 October.
I know comrade Gheorghiu-Dej was upset that I start from nothing, from a weapon fire or a challenge.
And he fight for peace is hard also because it is believed that only the has been rightly upset.
The wise step of the Soviet Union, of comLast year I met him personally to tell.
Gomułka, Zhivkov, rade Khrushchev that made for solving the Cuban problem Novotný, Ulbricht knew.
This kind of interpreting is Comrade Dej didn’t know, but I done by mean, irresponsible people, who never experienced think he will understand me.
The Chinese didn’t know that we have missiles in Cuba. winter and the fights still continue.
The problem is extremely China thinks the United States will absorb Cuba.
I thought well and gressive forces, who want to go with the socialist way, regardI realized that the socialist camp will lose Cuba.
I sent missiles less of which socialist way, and we must keep them away there to frighten America.
Many people American cities.” do not see this constellation; nobody should be humiliated; they need to sit down and solve the problems.
Why it bothers him that issue raised Forces, Romania, on the Defense Ministers’ meeting of the member by the Chinese, who said that primarily each one should rely states of the Warsaw Pact , on themselves 6 February 1962, Central Historical National Archives, Bucharest, Comrade Gh.
For the full text, see the CWIHP Digital Archive. ism and we do not know what it is based on.
Of course here, with Cuba, I think şi imagini , (Bucharest: that he never forgot that he had said to Comrade Editura Centrului Tehnic-Editorial al Armatei, 2010), 113.
He didn’t talk with me, he didn’t ask my – and they bought six 2 K-6 systems, equipped opinion, but just so, I only was informed by him that he sent with missiles 3 R 10 “LUNA” – which had a maximum missiles to Cuba.
Such a problem should be dis3/1962, 4-5. cussed; by himself he said that we were close to war.
For details, see Petre Opriş, Warsaw Pact Military Exercises Comrade Gh.
Institutul Naţional pentru Studiul were strictly necessary to defend Cuba.
In its public leader thought for the first time of deploying missiles declaration of 23 October 1962 the Bulgarian Government in Cuba during his one week visit to Bulgaria.
Walking announced that an order has been issued to raise the combat around the Bulgarian state residence Euxinograd at the Black readiness of its Armed Forces.
Similar actions were taken as Sea coast near Varna in mid-May 1962, Khrushchev looked well by other Warsaw Pact allies. at the sea line toward the Turkish border reconsidering the According to later testimony by Bulgarian Ambassador to newly available intelligence information that the United States Jupiter Moscow Luben Gerasimov, on Sunday evening, 28 October missiles sites in Turkey had become operational at the end of 1962, he was in the Kremlin watching a performance of April.
He was furious that United States missiles were deployed so close Bulgarian National Theater “Ivan Vazov” together with Nikita to the Soviet border and associated his concern for the fate of Khrushchev, when the Soviet leader was urgently informed “fraternal” Cuba with his broader desire to challenge the United States that the United States government accepted the last Soviet proposal by deploying Soviet nuclear missiles close to its territory. to resolve the Cuban crisis.
A special paraHowever, the key issue discussed between the two leaders was graph at the joint Soviet-Bulgarian declaration at the end of the sudden decision to oust Bulgarian Prime Minister Anton Khrushchev’s visit announced “the fervent decisiveness to lend Yugov and replace him with Zhivkov.
The question for from Moscow a CC BCP plenary session approved Zhivkov’s deployment of Soviet missiles to Cuba was put on the CPSU proposal for excluding Yugov from CC BCP membership CC’s Presidium agenda a day after Nikita Khrushchev’s return and expelling former Bulgarian dictator Valko Chervenkov from Sofa at a session on 21 May.
Thus, in and Marshal Matvei Zacharov, Chief of General Staff, gave less than seven years Zhivkov Khrushchev a top secret handwritten proposal to organize a had defeated consecutively all his former political rivals and military operation code-named “Anadyr” which would station finally established his monocracy, which continued until his the 43rd missile division to Cuba. own removal from power in November 1989.
The Bulgarian leadership was not informed in advance At the 8th BCP Congress in mid-November 1962 the about the Kremlin’s decision to deploy Soviet missiles to Cuba.
Soon after the crisis resolution the BulgarianWarsaw Pact) consultations on the issue.
Nor was there direct Cuban political, economic, and cultural relations received a consultation between Moscow and Sofia at the height of the new impetus and a more dynamic development.
The Bulgarian leaderIn Bulgaria, the Cuban missile crisis was closely related to ship just followed the official information from the available the state of nuclear proliferation in the Balkans, particularly open sources, collected at the Foreign Ministry and “Foreign with the eventual removal of United States Jupiter missiles in Turkey.
This collection of Bulgarian documents on the Cuban missile crisis below was selected from four major state archives.
Most of the documents were found at the former BCP CC records, stored after 1993 at the Central State Archive in Sofia.
The second Message from the Bulgarian Foreign main source was the Diplomatic Archive [Diplomaticheski Ministry to the Cuban Embassy in Sofia, Arhiv – DA] of the Bulgarian Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
October 1962 Several documents were taken from the Bulgarian military records, which were subsumed under the Ministry of Defense VERBAL NOTE to the Central State Archives in 1999 under the name State Military History Archive [Darzhaven Voennoistoricheski Arhiv The Ministry of Foreign Affairs pays respect to the – DVIA], located in the city of Veliko Tarnovo.
Note from Cuban Ambassador to Bulgaria, Salvador Garcia Aguero, to Bulgarian Foreign Minister, 2 September 1962 Chief of Staff, Bulgarian Navy, Order re Naval Combat Readiness, 24 October 1962 Sofia, 2 September 1962 Secret Comrade Minister, Only 1 copy ORDER I have the honor to send Your Excellency a copy of a OF THE CHIEF OF STAFF OF THE NAVY recently received declaration, prepared by the Prime Minister 24 October 1962 of my country, Commandante Fidel Castro, with regard to Nr.
C 3198 recent libels and threats against Cuba by the United States government.
Varna The content of this declaration absolves me from the need to provide a detailed description and comments, which are Ref.
Preparation to raise combat readiness in the formations not necessary for Your Excellency, since you are aware of the and units of the Navy maneuvers of the aggressive North American imperialists.
To check force recruitment, ammunitions, fuel and reinforce the security in the sea garden and to make lubricants, food provisions and other necessary supplies the operational regime more efficient in the zone of with regard to the requirements for combat readiness operation of the Navy.
When surveillance with SKR and preparation for combat tasks. is not possible, it shall be performed with a 2.
Duties shall continue in the Navy staff, formations and 12th Brigade OVR shall organize every two days at units. night, surveillance with a PRG 4.
To appoint officers and enlisted personnel on permanent October 1962, 1 November 1962, etc. duty in storages and workshops in the Navy. north of cape Emine to cape Shabla on 27, 7.
To prepare SNO and to be ready to This order is in force until superseded by another order. enter into special working regime.
To mount DShK machine-guns on KATSh Chief of Staff Bulgarian Navy and stations “Rome-K” in 11th and 12th Capt /N/ Yanakiev7 Brigade OVR on those ships specified in the plan.
To check the state of portable devices (torpedo barge, floating workshop, automobile transport, auto cranes), to prepare them for use in the Navy.
To raise alertness, guard and camouflage of coast areas Chief of Staff, 2nd Bulgarian Army, Order in the naval formations. re Raising Army Air Defense Combat 14.
The Navy staff shall work out a plan with activities to Readiness, 29 October 1962 enhance visual and radio-technical surveillance and be ready to use them when an additional order is issued.
By 27th this month, to check the magnetic state and to Copy Nr. demagnetize all ships, subject to demagnetization by 5 November this year.
By 25th of this month, the commander of 11th Brigade OF THE CHIEF OF STAFF OF 2ND BULGARIAN ARMY shall organize every two days during the dark part of the 29.10.1962 PLOVDIV day surveillance with SKR-1 of the territorial waters from cape Emine to cape Kaliakra in order to Ref.
The air defense command post of the army, the air Washington DC defense posts in the formations, anti-aircraft regiments Outgoing Nr.
TO THE MINISTRY OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS CABINET OF THE MINISTER The air defense command post shall maintain continuous SOFIA contacts with the command post of 2nd anti-aircraft brigade.
As we have already informed the Ministry with a cable, with regard to the extremely tense international situation 2.
One combat ready battery shall be formed in each antiand a direct threat of an imminent war, we have destroyed aircraft division in the formations and in 32nd anti-aircraft all confidential reports, memos, instructions, work plans and regiment, and they will be deployed in the vicinity of the accounts, as well as correspondence, in order to prevent the barracks and will stay on combat duty. enemy from getting hold of them.
Stations P-10 from air defense of the army and 32nd antimaterials concerning the code, the Embassy annual work plan aircraft regiment shall be deployed close to the garrison and the last quarterly plan, which are of confidential nature and shall be ready to act by additional order. but due to their small volume, are easy to destroy if the need arises.
The army commander shall give permission to the antiincoming and outgoing reference numbers. aircraft batteries to open fire after permission is granted With regard to the Cuban crisis and the high chance for by the General Staff. provocations and attacks against legation facilities, employees and their families, we have strengthened the security of the room 5.
All important information from the Instruction for fire where the coded materials and other secret correspondence are interaction between air defense and air force and air kept.
For this purpose, we have appointed three guards on overdefense in the troops shall be provided to the commanders night duty after working hours two in the room with secret of anti-aircraft units. materials and one in the adjacent room who will be able to give 6.
Each anti-aircraft battery shall be supplied with 0. set a timely warning of any imminent threat.
All flammable materiof shells. als have been thrown away from the offices and the basement, and all fire protection facilities checked.
CHIEF OF STAFF OF 2ND BULGARIAN ARMY The employees and their families were summoned and instructed what precautions to take in order to increase their Colonel /sign/ Alexiev level of alertness and to prevent provocations like kidnapping, attacks, beating, etc.
DVIA, Fond 317, Opis 4,e., 249; translated by sion and anxiety, a sense of duty and the self-confidence [on Greta Keremidchieva, edited by Jordan Baev.] behalf ] of all employees in the Legation, in the Commercial and Military missions is required.
We are proceeding with all special measures to strengthen security and to raise the alertness and readiness of employees and their families.
During the Cuban crisis, all northern and north-western ports in the Federal Republic of Germany were subject to Bulgarian Embassy, Havana , to NATO command and combat readiness.
There were intensive Bulgarian Foreign Ministry, 12 November transportation activities and stockpiling of large quantities of 1962 ammunitions, especially in the area of Lübeck, where military supply troops were deployed.
There was intensive movement of supply troops XIII – 0 12 from the ports to the inner regions of the country, tanks and 70714 artillery – mainly anti-aircraft.
Embajada de la Republica Wealthy West German families were hoarding stocks of Popular de Bulgaria food and were getting ready for evacuation to Switzerland, La Habana Spain and other places.
Due to the strong and effective propaganda, a large part of the population justified the aggressive Nr.4 acts of the Americans, who averted Soviet actions not only in the western hemisphere, but also in Berlin.
To the Ministry of Foreign Affairs SOFIA MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS /sign/ Gen.
Diko Dikov By the order of Ambassador K Michev, on 28 October 1962 the confidential archives of the Embassy were 14.
Sofia Attached are two protocols and a list of the demolished Nr.58/NS 3 copies materials.
Thus, the Americans confessed that General Assembly voted a special resolution, as well as the no control and verification was necessary to stop the tests in question of removing the means for procurement of nuclear these three categories.
No agreement was reached because the weapons with regard to the latest Soviet proposals.
Western countries insisted on compulsory verification after Neutral countries highlighted their eagerness to achieve the cessation of underground tests.
The question of cessation an agreement on nuclear tests by the end of the year.
A series of nuclear tests became a primary issue in the debates on disof proposals were made in order to create an opportunity for armament at the 17th United Nations session. bringing views closer.
These proposals, although with difEven before the interruption of the work of the Conference ferent nuances, offered possibilities for on-site control and of the 18 with regard to the 17th session of the UN General verification and thus came closer to the United States view.
Their aim was to create the impression among non-committed countries that they were willing to 1.
Establishing a temporary commission of scientists and achieve an agreement with the USSR on some urgent quesexperts to control the implementation of a temporary tions regarding disarmament as soon as possible. cessation of underground nuclear tests; Western countries had in mind not only the public opin2.
On-site control in dubious situations by the decision of ion in neutral countries but also the reaction to every interthe temporary commission; ruption of the negotiations in their own countries, which was 3.
The public reaction in Great Britain and which nuclear states are obliged to allow on their Canada is indicative in this respect.
They came to the concluterritories. sion that continuing the negotiations on disarmament does not imply any particular risk for their opposition to disarmaDuring the last session of the Committee of the 18, India ment to be entirely disclosed, taking into account their methdemonstrated considerable uncertainty and stepped back ods of procrastination by inquiring “explanations,” asking from their earlier statements on cessation of nuclear tests and questions with regard to verification, requests disarmament as a whole.
The Indian representative defended for founding technical commissions and working groups for the idea of a certain “quota of invitations” which nuclear investigating some issues related to the Soviet proposals. states should be obliged to extend in case dubious tremors are The socialist countries, members of the Committee registered on their territory.
On the other hand, in the very of the 18 [e.g., the Soviet Union, Bulgaria, Czechoslovakia, beginning when the question of the need for prioritizing the Poland, and Romania—ed.], were also ready to resume the talks elimination of the nuclear threat was put forward, the Indian right after their return from the discussion on disarmament in representative reacted in a strange way stating that conventhe United Nations.
On the one hand, they were willing to meet tional weapons shall not be neglected either since they could the requirements of neutral countries for achieving consensus on also be a serious threat to peace.
In tries expressed their reserved attitude towards the positions this context, the United States representative severely criticized United States allies of socialist countries.
They tried to create an atmosphere for who should not have strived to become independent nuclear negotiations on nuclear tests between the Soviet Union and powers since they lacked resources and capabilities, and they the United States even beyond the memorandum framework.
This declaration would continue underground tests after 1 January 1963 in order considerably deprived Western countries of the opportunity to prove that they are not committed to this date.
A number of neutral new proposals on cessation of nuclear tests, most likely in countries emphasized that it opens new opportunities to solve mid-February. the problem with nuclear tests suspension.
Considerably less time was allocated to the agreement on The position of Sweden was typical for the position of total disarmament. the neutrals.
US in their attempts to impose their position on compulsory Dean] characterized the new Soviet proposal concerning mison-site inspections, even in the presence of automatic seismic stations.
Relevant to this context is the report by Swedish scisile weapons as interesting, deserving attention and opening entists, submitted by the Swedish delegation, which contains opportunities for negotiations, in his speech on the general conclusions on the impossibility to identify [automatically/ principles of disarmament on 14 December the United States represenremotely—ed.] all underground phenomena. tative rejected these suggestions.
The United States, however, Despite the seemingly constructive tone of the declarations did not succeed in making neutral countries or their allies of the American delegation at the start of the session, later accept their negative attitude concerning the Soviet proposals. statements aimed at creating the impression among the neutrals The behavior of Great Britain is typical.
This became information from the Indian delegate, when Dean11 delivered particularly obvious in the speech of the American delegate in his speech to reject the Soviet proposal, the British delegate the Committee of the 18 on 14 December, on the opening had a printed copy of his speech for the same session in which day of NATO’s session.
In his speech, he summarized the United States he made clear that they were ready to negotiate on the new positions on disarmament underlying that they would never Soviet proposals.
Taking into account the decisive American agree to such kind of disarmament which would pose a threat position, he had to abandon the printed text and to the existence of their military political alliances.
In unofficial speak extemporaneously, not to differ from the United States delegate’s statements during a lunch, attended only by Czechoslovakian statement.
The British representative stated that the United States posiand Bulgarian delegations of all other socialist countries, the tion surprised and even disappointed Great Britain.
Later, the US delegate tried to create the impression among the present chief British delegate and his deputy made clear in their stateneutral representatives that the United States was in fact the only nuclear ments that they differed from the United States positions and assumed power.
When asked what that meant and wasn’t the Soviet a more constructive attitude towards the issue of automatic Union a nuclear state, the American delegate replied that the stations for nuclear tests control, as well as on the proposal Cuban crisis had proved that the United States was the only for keeping a strict number of missiles on the territories of the nuclear country.
This statement was immediately mitigated by USSR and the United States until the end of the second phase. another American delegate who explained that they mean the Typical for the differences between the United States and other only real nuclear country without underestimating the entire Western countries is Canada’s position on tests.
In this context, Western countries will Canada is a non-committed country. find support among most of the neutrals.
A number of stateAs far as Italy is concerned, the Italian delegation always ments, made by neutral delegations, show that neutral states are supports the Americans unconditionally, but the Italian replooking for a way out in the negotiations on total disarmament resentative cannot help emphasizing that the Italian governthrough reaching an agreement on some partial issues. ment is openly trying to stop nuclear tests and that it is for serious discussions on the Soviet proposals.
When speaking Sofia, 27 December 1962 in the lobby, the Italian participants are considerably more inclined to mutually acceptable decisions than in their official Milko Tarabanov12 declarations in the Committee.
Debates and talks in the Committee give reasons to believe that the chances for reaching an agreement on cessation of nuclear tests in the near future are not very big.
The attitudes in some influential circles in the US, which have been reflected in private conversations with United States representatives, Ivan Budinov, Minister of Foreign Trade, concerning the possibilities of closing American bases under Report to Todor Zhivkov, Chairman of the the pretext that they have become redundant with the new Council of Ministers, Report on Granting a US strategic capabilities, give some reason to expect more Credit to Cuba, December 1962 productive negotiations on disarmament.
During the Caribbean crisis, the topic of finding appropriTop Secret ate ways and time for closing some foreign military bases in Copy Nr.
A similar attitude was presTHE CHAIRMAN OF ent in private talks at the Geneva Conference.
For example, a THE COUNCIL OF MINISTERS member of the American delegation and representative of the so-called “Agency for armaments and disarmament control in COMRADE TODOR ZHIVKOV the US” [Arms Control and Disarmament Agency; ACDA— ed.], by the name of Mark, made it clear that they did not REPORT exclude the possibility of closing some of their bases which From IVAN BUDINOV from military and strategic perspective were considered Minister of foreign trade redundant.
Granting a credit to the Republic of Cuba13 reckoned this as necessary and possible.
Prospects exist as well for more productive discussions of COMRADE PRIME MINISTER, some parallel and partial measures in disarmament in order According to the special export plan for 1963, our country to minimize risks from an accidental war through declaring is supposed to export to the Republic of Cuba special equipmaneuvers, establishing fast direct links between the leaders ment at the amount of 5 million currency leva.
Cuba, however, has requested that our country supply part of In this situation, it could be expected that at the next sesthe special equipment on credit due to economic difficulties in sion of the Committee of the 18 the United States would try the country.
TsDA, Fond 1-B, Opis 64,e.3, 2-3; translated request for import of special equipment from our country, as by Greta Keremidchieva, edited by Jordan Baev.] well as our capabilities, I believe it would be correct and reasonable to grant a credit to the Republic of Cuba at the amount of up to one-third of the total cost of the special export, which will be negotiated in 1963, with loan repayment term of five years.
Republic of Cuba as a grant to the revolutionary movements To be returned to Cipher in Latin America.
We received wholehearted gratitude and Department in 48 hours requests for future deliveries.
Ministry of Foreign Affairs in support of the revolutionary movements in Latin America From: Washington through the Republic of Cuba.
The above-mentioned equipWritten on 18 January at 11.00 am ment is not in use in the Ministry of National Defense and currently there are no opportunities for sale.
December it had been decided to grant military assistance to Greece for 1963, amounting to 23 million dollars.
However, the western countries were not in a hurry since the bad economic situation in 1.
It seems as if Greece is once again concerned about our relationships with the US. repayment term.
The implementation of the decision is assigned to the Ministry of Foreign Trade.
Ministry of Foreign Affairs From: Istanbul Thus the United States government would demonstrate before the Written on 28 January 1963 at 5.00 pm world its military presence in Turkey.
They will be replaced by Polaris missiles, which will float in the Mediterranean and will be under the command of Sixth United States Fleet.
Today, Istanbul newspapers published statements from foreign media agencies according to which Turkey and Italy are not going to be at a disadvantage Bulgarian Legation, Washington , after the removal of Jupiter missiles since NATO will obtain Cable to Foreign Ministry, 15 February access to Polaris missiles and they will be deployed in the 1963 Mediterranean this year.
Written on 13 February at 1.00 pm United States Deputy Secretary of Defense Gilpatric has stated that United States would send three POLARIS submarines on April 11,th to replace the missile bases in Turkey and Italy.
Bulgarian Legation, Washington , These submarines are intended to be under the control Cable to Foreign Ministry, 12 February of the NATO Commander-in-Chief and to be assigned 1963 operationally to the Sixth United States fleet.
Ministry of Foreign Affairs response to the presence of three United States submarines with misFrom: Athens siles Polaris in this region.
According to this information, the Written on 16 March 1963 at 5.00 pm armed forces of the Soviet Union and its allies were quickly procuring most modern weapons, especially Bulgaria, which Today’s newspapers present brief information on the has modernized its troops systematically with Soviet assault NATO meeting that was held in Athens yesterday.
NATO received information that during the last two introductory remarks, the Chief of the Greek General Staff months the Bulgarian army had conducted a series of maneuGeneral Pipilis stated that the purpose of the meeting was to vers close to the Greek and Turkish borders.
The maneuvers further strengthen the relations and cooperation between the included exercises aiming at achieving full combat readiness.
The Chief of the Turkish According to newspaper Katimerini, a NATO declaration General Staff, General Sunay, the Commander of states that in the upcoming months the fast adoption of NATO NATO Staff in Izmir, General Brown, and the Chief of Staff forward strategy in Greece will start, according to which Greek of South European forces, General Seyds, also expressed their divisions will be deployed in a new pattern at a short distance positions on the same issue. along the borders.
This strategy aims at the preparation for All the speakers demonstrated their solidarity on the topattacks from 50 divisions, used by the Soviet Union.
The To be preserved in American Attaches coordinated the activity of all NATO 1 handwritten copy only Defense Attaches.
Ministry of Foreign Affairs During the Cuban crisis of 1962, the United States Defense Attaché To: Ankara Col.
Cleary brought the instructions from the Istanbul According to information from [Bulgarian Ambassador Intelligence Center for carrying out active spy activities.
Radenko] Grigorov from London, the Turkish Ambassador Under his guidance interaction and coordination with the has told him that United States submarines visit the Turkish waters, Defense Attaches from France, Greece, Turkey and other thus constituting a more powerful defensive nuclear weapon NATO countries took place.
Some diplomats were included and that Turkey had agreed for the creation of NATO fleet, as well.
Military bases, movement of the military units and equipped with Polaris missiles.
According to the Ambassador, roads were kept under observation night and day. there was a Soviet submarine in the Mediterranean Sea.
Cleary informed his French and Greek colleagues Paul Murat and Loumakis that in the actual situation ANGELOV18 it was difficult for the United States diplomats to travel inside the country; that’s why he relied entirely on the collaboration with them for 23 June 1963 receiving new intelligence information.
He had asked his colCiphered and delivered leagues in Bucharest to report on troops’ movement through on 24 June 1963 the Danube River as well.
DA, Opis 5s,e., 115; translated by Greta obtained information, Oljai responded that they were represenKeremidchieva, edited by Jordan Baev.] tatives of one same Alliance, and he would deliver the requested information voluntarily.
The Greek Defense Attaché informed that he heard about several missile sites in Bulgaria.
Joint intelligence activities were evaluated highly by the United States Plenipotentiary minister, Anderson, who sent information to Washington, thanking NATO member-states Ministry of Internal Affairs, Information Defense Attaches.
Report, 5 July 1963 During the visual observation, one of the most commonly used tricks was the usage of Russian language.
The Personal, Top Secret agents made photos of the barracks and the military equipment.
The regular visits to the legations were also used for gathering of information and NATO Military Intelligence Services had developed for arranging secret meetings with some agents. instructions concerning the work of their agents in the The official press was used as an additional information Warsaw Pact countries.
Some of the Armed Forces battle readiness. secret designations of the military units were known, too.
Air Forces structures was available and more concrete information about the military airports and some missile bases.
Atanas Semerdzhiev, Chief of General Staff and First Deputy Minister of Defense , Minister of Internal Bulgarian Consulate, Istanbul Affairs , Vice President of Bulgaria . , Cable to Foreign Ministry, 5 9 Eighteen Nations Committee on Disarmament – established August 1963 by UN in December 1961 in Geneva.
Department in 48 hours 11 Most likely Arthur H Dean, head of the United States delegation to INCOMING CABLE Nr.11 the 18 nation disarmament committee in Geneva, rather than Sir 5 August 1963 Patrick Dean, UK representative at United Nations—ed.
In the 1940s-1950s he was chief of diplomatic Written on 4 August 1963 at 12.00 pm missions in Italy, Czechoslovakia, and Turkey.
Yugoslavia , Deputy Minister of Foreign Affairs (1974The Turkish side stated that they could only accept these sub1979). marines, in case that they were used for the defense of Turkey.
However, the political contacts arrived in Bulgaria to continue their education and training. between the two parties for most of the decade-and-a-half In May 1965 a joint intergovernmental committee for ecoafter World War II were scarce and rather fragmentary. nomic, scientific and technical cooperation started its work.
The armed struggle against the Batista regime in Cuba In January 1964, the Bulgarian minister of defense Gen. and the name of its leader Fidel Castro appeared in the world Dobri Djurov visited Cuba for the first time, and Raul Castro news of Bulgarian media only in 1958.
Additional politibilateral correspondence in 1959 1960 were accomplished cal tension emerged from the categorical insistence of the initially between the youth and student organizations of the Cuban representatives to organize the 9th world youth and two countries. student festival in Havana, thus opposing the Soviet effort On its way back from Argentina and Mexico in late May to organize the festival in Sofia.
The Cubans even accused early June 1960 a Bulgarian governmental delegation visited the leadership of the world leftist youth federation Cuba and had talks with Raul Castro, Ernesto “Che” Guevara of “opportunism” and continued to demand participation and other Cuban officials.
At the end of June the proposals only of the “revolutionary organizations” who accepted the for the establishment of diplomatic, commercial, and cultural armed struggle as a political imperative.
On 5 October 1967 the CC BCP Politburo approved a Years later Zhivkov related that their improvised unofficial resolution and measures for increasing and strengthening of meeting happened on 27 September 1960 in a small room Bulgarian-Cuban relations.
However, the envisaged first visit at the Hotel Theresa in Harlem, where Castro also more of Todor Zhivkov to Cuba in the beginning of 1968 was famously met Nikita Khrushchev.
Zhivkov’s official visit in June 1970 – the first ever visit of an East European leader to Cuba – played a significant role not only for the development of the bilateral relations, but also gave an impetus for the improvement of Soviet-Cuban relations in the near future.
Establishment of diplomatic relations with Republic of The next talks between the two leaders in Sofia in March Cuba 19768 and in Havana in April 1979 confirmed the existing quite informal and confidential nature of their relations.
Regarding the establishment of diplomatic relations influenced the development of economic, cultural and public with Cuba. contacts between the two nations as well.
The same could be said even for the secret contacts and collaboration between the Comrade Todor Zhivkov reports. intelligence and Security services of the two countries.
During the visit of the director of Cuban State Security service Manuel Piňeiro to Bulgaria in November 1968 an exchange 1.
Gives one’s consent to establish diplomatic relations of Intelligence information and operational equipment was between the People’s Republic of Bulgaria and the agreed.
In 1976 and 1978 the first bilateral long term agreeRepublic of Cuba and to announce the latter in the ments were signed for intelligence and security cooperation, press after coordinating it with the Cuban government. which were extended during the visit of the Cuban minister of Internal Affairs Ramiro Valdés to Sofia at the end of 2.
The Foreign Affairs commission at Politburo should December 1982.10 work out concrete measures Cuban-East European relations suffered drastic changes after the “velvet revolutions” of 1989.
Soon after the “palace regarding the establishment and expansion of political, coup” on 10 November 1989 in Bulgaria the bilateral ties economic and cultural relations between our country and the with Cuba, which were established on a purely ideological Republic of Cuba. base, deteriorated visibly.
Several new Bulgarian periodicals published in the beginning of 1990 for the first time criticized 3.
Raul Castro should be invited to visit our country. the Castro regime,11 while the Bulgarian delegation at the UN Human Rights Committee in Geneva together with the delegations of Poland, Hungary, and Czechoslovakia voted in favor of an anti-Havana resolution.
This episode led to a To sharp emotional critique by Fidel Castro towards his former The Prime Minister allies in a public speech on 7 March 1990.12 However, in the Comrade Anton Jugov13 next months the Cuban leaders had to realize the new realiReport ties and the irreversible political process in Bulgaria and other By Georgi Kumbiliev – minister of foreign trade East-Central European countries.
For some time now Cuba has been showing an interest in Zheliu Zhelev in February 1992 the Cuban leaders confirmed signing a trade agreement with our country.
Czechoslovakia and some other socialist delegation to visit our country as well.
It should be explicitly countries have already come to an agreement on the construcdeclared that if the delegation has the authority to do it, we tion of different enterprises in Cuba. are ready to sign a trade agreement and to buy certain quantiA Cuban economic delegation led by ties of sugar, exporting our goods in return.
Jiménez, the director of the National Institute for Agricultural Depending on the answer, we will announce the negotiaReform, is at present in the Soviet Union.
It has also signed a joint communiqué on Comrade Todor Zhivkov reports. the trade-economic relations etc.
The same delegation will also visit other countries from the socialist bloc – Poland, the 1.
Gives one’s consent to establish diplomatic relations GDR and others, where it will also negotiate.
Hence it is necessary to ensure the export of sugar after coordinating it with the Cuban government. on the one hand and the import of petrol and petrol products, 2.
The Foreign Affairs commission at Politburo should work agricultural machines and others,g. goods with which it has out concrete measures regarding the establishment and so far traded with the USA. expansion of political, economic and cultural relations Since the ideas of the Cuban revolution and the socialist between our country and the Republic of Cuba. community are close, the USSR and other socialist coun3.
Raul Castro should be invited to visit our country. tries view the development of trade and economic relations with Cuba as a support for the Cuban revolution.
For the time being Jiménez’s delegation is not expected to come to Bulgaria.
We consider it appropriate to invite the delegation REPORT to visit our county after signing the trade agreement.
Of the Governmental delegation visiting Argentina and Preliminary research has shown that we could export to Cuba Cuba some of our goods.
With a view to the development of trade relations with Cuba, it is necessary to sign a trade agreement with Cuba, under which our country could eventually ascertain preferenFrom Mexico we left for Cuba.
While we were still in tial treatment in terms of either duty tariffs or on the foreign Argentina, when asking for visas, we told Cuba’s ambassador trade regime. that our delegation would like to make a goodwill visit to Under these circumstances the question about our import Cuba and to discuss our state relationships.
If the delegation comes to our country it will by all means want told us that we were expected guests who were absolutely us to buy certain amounts of sugar from Cuba, in return for confirmed when we arrived in Cuba.
Yet we do not import at the airport by the Deputy-Minister of Foreign Affairs and sugar for satisfying our own needs.
The preliminary research important people from the protocol department.
At the first made by the Ministry of Foreign Trade regarding the oppormeeting, the deputy-minister Chevari explicitly declared that tunities for importing raw Cuban sugar and after processing Cuba wanted to establish regular diplomatic and cultural it in our plants re-exporting it, showed that it is not economirelations with the People’s Republic of Bulgaria.
It would be more profitable if the sugar, Finally, the text for a joint message was coordinated.
After after being processed were left for the internal market, while being approved by the competent organs in the two countries, the Foreign Trade Ministry would export the respective quanthe message would be published simultaneously in Havana tity of our sugar.
Raul Castro told us it wasn’t easy for you as well, but your neighbor was a big friendly country like the Soviet Union, while our neighbor The greatest interest was directed towards the trade was a powerful unfriendly imperialist country.
The interest was so great, that the question time fallacious opinions were imposed on the Cuban people – concerning the signing of a trade agreement was posed by for instance, that the geographical situation of Cuba was such the Cuban delegation at the first meeting.
They informed that it should necessarily go together with the USA, that Cuba us that they had already signed agreements with the USSR will fail without the USA, that is, as the Cuban leaders said, and Czechoslovakia.
Cuba was receiving a long-term credit a geographical fatalism that was implanted.
One of the most amounting to 20 million dollars from Czechoslovakia under serious complaints at all meetings was the lack of specialists. the credit agreement.
While we were there, a Czech trade As we already mentioned, the revolution’s major support were delegation for signing a trade agreement arrived. the peasants and they were almost totally illiterate.% of We did not only meet with important people from the the soldiers of rural origin in the army were illiterate.
The old Ministry of Foreign Affairs, the Ministry of Education and intelligentsia – specialists and tutors at the universities and economic Institutions, but with important people from the schools – are brought up in a pro-American spirit.
During the whole time we were there, comrades in Havana told us an acute clash Fidel Castro was busy somewhere outside Havana (we saw between the old and the young in the intelligentsia circles. him the last evening at a performance of some visiting The support was for the young.
Jiménez was 25 years old are entrusted with the most responsible state and in Moscow at that time.
A program has been worked out to raise the head of the National Bank and Raul Castro, Minister of people’s general educational and cultural level.
They informed program is only an attempt, as the leaders themselves admit. us about the development of the revolution and about the Earlier the trade union leaders were in the imperialist internal and foreign situation the country was in now.
It has been admitted that after seizing power situation in the country during Batista’s time made the they made a mistake by keeping these leaders for some time. revolution necessary.
All people’s forces were united in a People from the army were sent but they were inexperienced. huge front in the beginning of the revolution.
The peasants were the revolution’s Federation of Trade Unions. major force.
Now After Batista’s overthrow, the fight between the revolutionary about two thirds of the land is in the hands of the state.
For some, the aim was already achieved after of the land was acquired as a result of confiscation of [propoverthrowing the dictator.
Hence they had to stop . erty owned by] American companies, while the other part was Others gave their consent on a restricted agricultural reform. through the agricultural reform.
Cooperative farms There were also disputes on the size of the land that should are being formed on that land which should better be called remain private property after the agricultural reform was state agricultural industries.
The situation of the people necessitated radical farms in the country now.
For a great part of the progressive forces it was clear by the end of the year, with which about 40% of the land will that they should keep on going; if they stopped that would be cooperated.
The cooperative farmers are the ex-agricultural put an end to the revolution.
The ideas of the revolution had to be clarified. fixed salary from INRA durThe rightist wing started to disintegrate [under pressure from ing the whole year.
Thus 1959 was a period of intense discooperative farmers form a consultative body.
Perhaps, it is exactly this clarity of the ideas together of agricultural, social and cultural buildings.
The major issue with the economic difficulties that explain the revolutionary is how to distribute income.
Only the head of the family is considalso trying to infiltrate the revolutionary segments ered to be a cooperative farmer.
The family members get wages and to perform their contra revolutionary acts from there. for the time they work.
The funds, which are raised by INRA, are being The text of a joint message for establishing diplomatic used for building homes for the peasants in central sites, thus a relations between the People’s Republic of Bulgaria and the concentration in larger towns and vilRepublic of Cuba should be endorsed as soon as possible, and, lages will be achieved.
We visited one of the cooperative farms after being coordinated, should be published simultaneously and some of the newly-built houses.
It suggests that metallurgy be developed on the basis of the mineral resources discovered so far – chrome, iron, 2.
The Americans have done research, but the whole relations, taking into consideration the necessity to help documentation is in their hands. it is necessary to continue the the Cuban revolutionary government. research.
If one day the USA happens to which we could offer technical help to the revolutionary refuse the supply of petroleum, Cuba’s whole life will die, since government of Cuba. the whole transport is based on petroleum, electrical energy 4.
To invite one of the leaders of Cuba to our country. is produced by a petroleum electric station etc.
The sale of With view to that the Bulgarian Embassy in Prague Cuba’s goods, above all sugar, followed by coffee and tobacco is should be entrusted with Raul Castro’s invitation, if another question of vital importance.
Thus the interest towards he happens to go the Prague, which is due by the end the trade issues is justified.
The Cuban Ministry of Foreign Affairs from the USA it will fail have been refuted by the facts.
For suggested this invitation. instance, the revolutionary government found 60 million pesos foreign currency.
What had Sofia, 16 June 1960 been accumulated during the war was squandered by Batista’s camarilla.
The country is living in revolutionary condiLubomir Angelov, Deputy Minister of Foreign Affairs tions and the young people are particularly active.
TsDA, Sofia, Fond 1-B, Opis 6,e.03; USA’s provocations against Cuba have not ceased but translated by Assistant Professor Kalina Bratanova, edited by they have decreased considerably.
This does not mean Jordan Baev.] that the USA has put up with the loss of Cuba.
They consider the latter to be prepared by the neighboring Latin-American countries above all the Dominican Information on VIII Congress of National Republic, Costa Rica and Guatemala.
They have collected Socialist party of Cuba, 29 October 1960 many facts indicative of that.
It looks like that this opinion is shared by other of Cuba leaders of the government.
Through its party body the party conducted a big campaign against Yugoslavia.
The Yugoslavs During the congress Politburo of the CC of PSP received protested sharply before Castro and then before the Central the delegates of the parties from the socialist countries.
Both answered them that the press was free to occasion for this meeting was presented by our delegation, write whatever it wanted.
However, the Central Committee which posed a number of questions in written form to made an assessment.
Franco was wrong and gave orders for Yugoslavia not to be In answer to our questions, Comrade Blas Roca told us attacked so severely. that Fidel Castro was fully aware that the prospect of the Fidel Castro received the delegates of the socialist counCuban revolution was socialism.
However, they do not speak tries together with the delegates of the French and the Italian in public about this.
During all the time of the guerthe whole night from 11 pm till 6 am. rilla struggle, members of the party have worked in the Castro The meeting with Fidel Castro made a great impression headquarters and in other high-ranking posts.
He spoke and reaof Fidel Castro to the party constantly evolves and improves. soned like a Marxist, like a man who appreciates very highly The party criticized itself that it mobilized late in order to the Soviet assistance.
He felt extremely grateful to the Soviet assist the movement of Fidel Castro.
He explained to us the tactics of that congress that a fully positive assessment was given to the the Cuban government to secure against every strike of attack of the barracks.
Initially Castro had certain doubts in the North-American imperialist the delivery of a methodical the sincerity of the party.
Namely because of this intention to oust him and now he is convinced that without they have not nationalized at once all American enterprises, the support of the party the revolution cannot develop.
He said that in Fidel Castro thinks that steps should be taken for creating a relation to this they should have a great deal of reserves about united party in Cuba but it is premature to proceed to practicounter-strikes. cal implementation of this task.
Such is the position of the Focusing on the issue about the guerrilla movement, Fidel People’s Socialist party, as well.
Castro told us that according to him, if the communists had All big measures of the government should be coordinated started that movement, neither the Americans nor Batista in advance with the leadership of the party.
At one time, he said, “there agrarian reform, the nationalization, and the position of the were only 12 of us left one half under my command and government at the conference in San Jose and others.
But nobody speaks Batista and the Americans thought that it referred to a few about this. intellectuals, idealists and utopians who will grow desperThe relations with Yugoslavia developed in a very interestate quickly and will give up the struggle.
For tactical considerations, diplomatic relations were , it was late the movement had restored first with Yugoslavia.
After its arrival in Cuba, the grown and consolidated. mission of Yugoslavia displayed intense activity, and made a Castro is well acquainted with problems of agriculture and big fuss.
They acted as the most loyal and good friends of the speaks very competently about them.
However, when they openly and directly Our impression is that the Cuban revolution is in strong posed to them the question of selling weapons to Cuba, hands and that there is no danger of what happened in Iraq. the Yugoslavs practically refused on the grounds that they The party renders full support to the government and were conducting important negotiations with the Americans does its best not to allow any misunderstandings.
The same and, in order not to get into trouble, they could give them is the attitude to the functionaries of the “July 26th” moveweapons only in principle.
Everything is conducted under EMBAJADA DE LA REPUBLICA the sign of national unity and Fidel Castro is promoted as a Havana, 4 March 1961 leader of the country and the people.
POPULAR DE BULGARIA Only the Politburo had been informed about the meetLA HABANA ing in Bucharest.
Everywhere in the country the Chinese delegation was received very warmly.
After objections by the representatives of the other of the Cuban revolutionary government implemented on 23 socialist countries, the Politburo acceded to our suggestion, February 1961. to have the GDR representative speak on our behalf and the Chinese delegate spoke only as a representative of China.
Recently, one of the most characteristic political events As it was already noted, now the army in Cuba is a comwas the reorganization of the Council of Ministers the pletely new.
The main body consists of former guerrillas. foundation of a Ministry of Industry, of the Central Planning This constitutes both the strength and the weakness of this Committee, of the Ministries of Foreign and Domestic trade army.
These are completely loyal and well-trained soldiers. and the resolutions adopted with regard to that and some However, a significant number of them, who come from other issues. villages, have the wrong attitude towards military discipline.
The militia these are the armed squads begins a vast and comprehensive reconstruction of the backof the people.
Everywhere, it is has been emphasized that militia, not only in the struggle against the enemies, the this is done with the generous assistance of the Soviet Union counter-revolution and the intervention forces, but also in and the other socialist countries. the consolidation and the strengthening of the army and in 1.
The first important resolution of the Council of training future commanders who can serve as an example to Ministers and of the Chairmanship of the republic on 23 the military commanders.
Because of its great 29.10.1960. significance, the Chairman is the Prime Minister, Fidel Castro SOFIA himself, and deputy chairman is Raul Castro.
Another important resolution is the foundation of the Ministry of Industry, which will be led by Ernesto Guevara and which is assigned the task to play an important and historical role in the industrialization of Cuba.
Invitation enormous aid which will be received from the to Fidel Castro to visit Bulgaria, socialist countries.
It includes the hitherto existing Bank for CENTRAL COMMITTEE OF THE BULGARIAN foreign trade.
The newly created Ministry of Domestic Trade will Bulgaria rule the state trade enterprises, will take care of supplies, and will control the prices and the commercial sector, which at the Comrade Yugov, moment makes up the greater part of trade.
The law for the length of service and the social Our Ambassador in Havana has talked to Cuba’s Minister of Foreign Affairs Roa, who told him that, if the insurance for the working class was also important. circumstances allow it, Fidel Castro will visit Moscow this year in order to receive the international Lenin award The task of diversification and increase of the agricultural “For strengthening the peace among the peoples” for 1960 production is set together with the issue concerning induswhich has been conferred on him.
If the visit takes place, he trialization. intends to visit the other socialist countries as well.
Visit to Bulgaria of Cuban against the intervention, organized by the Americans.
According to an instruction by Comrade Grigorov,21 please inform our ambassador in Cuba, comrade Michev, that The Ambassador has been informed that Fidel Castro he could invite comrade Escalante to visit Bulgaria personally insisted not to be given publicity for this visit. when it will be possible for him.
International Relations” Department From our embassy in Havana report that the group of Cuban children, in which Fidel Castro’s son has been Top Secret BCP Politburo Resolution on included, departs from Havana on 21 August.
Initially the Arms Delivery to Cuba, group will visit Moscow and Beijing, and it will arrive in Sofia through Bucharest.
The group will travel with a common 2 December 1961 passport issued for Pedro Diaz, Luis Sanchez, Fidel Castro Diaz, Buenventura Rodriguez, and Rolando Soto.
Copy No… MINISTRY OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS DECISION “B” No 15 27 September 1961 of CC BCP Politburo TO CC BCP 2.12.1961 “Foreign Policy and International Relations” To: First Secretary of CC BCP Department Comrade Todor Zhivkov From our embassy in Moscow report that the group with Cuban children is currently in China.
Later on the group REPORT will visit North Korea and Vietnam, and will return again to of GEORGI KUMBILIEV Moscow.
Note Re: Granting to the Republic of Cuba German model From 16 to 22 November 1961 a group of Cuban children weapons and credit free of charge. visited our country.
He stated that Cuba relies on our help for the execution by Vanja Petkova, edited by Dr.
Rositza Ishpekova.] of this undertaking and the required quantity of carbines should be granted free of charge at a Cuban port.
Taking into consideration the country’s enormous defense expenses and serious financial difficulties, comrade Lopes demanded that the loan be extended for a 5-year period Bulgarian Defense Minister, Note to in exchange for our purchase of special equipment.
He also informed us that the loan request does not refer to our signed contract from this September for the export of special equipment for 1962.
Agree They can be delivered from the 50,000 Mauser carbines that T Zhivkov have been disposed by the Ministry of National Defense and To Comrade Todor Zhivkov -were granted to the Ministry of Foreign Commerce for export First Secretary CC BCP in 1962 to the underdeveloped socialist countries.
The credit shall represent September 1962 about $1,500,000 USD­­, from the stipulated amount ––on condition of a 2/3 credit for a 5 year term, starting from 1 COMRADE ZHIVKOV, January 1963.
TsDA, Sofia, Fond 1-B, Opis 6,e.00; translated 1 January 1963 during the negotiations for the signing of a by Julia Cherneva, edited by Jordan Baev.] protocol for the export of special equipment to the Republic of Cuba in 1962.
Decision to send a group of Bulgarian It assigns to the Ministry of Agriculture and the Central experts to Cuba (n.d., apparently late Committee of DCYU the task to send to Cuba for one year September/early October 1962) for rendering assistance in the development of agriculture 76 young specialists in agriculture.
TsDA, Sofia, Fond 1-B, Opis 6,e.39; translated From Ivan Prumov Minister of Agriculture by Julia Cherneva, edited by Jordan Baev.] and Ivan Abadzhiev First Secretary of the Central Committee of Dimitrov Communist Youth Union REGARDING sending agriculture specialists to Republic of Resolutions by Bulgarian CP Cuba. organizations in Havana, 18 October 1962 In March this year a secretary of the CC of DCYU took PROTOCOL part in the work of the First Congress of the Union of the Today 18.10.1962 the annual surveyYoung Cuban communists.
In conversation with him, the election meeting of the party organization at the embassy and President of the Union of the Young Cuban communists Joel the trade representation of P R Bulgaria in Havana was held.
The hosts would pay The following agenda was voted unanimously. for the stay of our specialists in Cuba and we would pay the 1.
Survey report and financial account of the primary party expenses for their travel. organization.
Election of committees according to the resolution and the the Foreign Ministry advised us that Comrade Konstantin motions.
Agriculture of Cuba, and with the Soviet specialists Comrades Titov and Ustinov.
They will live under the same condiWe all know about the activities of the organization.
They will live and work report gives a lucid picture about the activities of the orgain a State Agrarian Cooperative where they will receive nization, the office and the employees.
Besides, for meeting other personal needs, the report that the activities are big and extensive and the they will receive role of the organization has increased is correct.
They ask the specialists to leave as under review was strenuous, as it was last year.
A ship with the young Soviet specialists will was assigned a lot of tasks and responsibilities.
We have been leave in the end of October from Odessa. working in an atmosphere of constant threat of aggression The Ministry of Agriculture and the Central Committee and we fulfilled our duties for the development of our multiof DCYU discussed the offer and they consider sending faceted relations and for rendering assistance to Cuba.
On Bulgarian agricultural specialists to Cuba expedient. the tasks of expanding our relations, we strove maximally to In connection with this we propose to the Secretariat of publicize the activities of our people, government and party, the CC of BCP to as well as the declarations of the Soviet government.
The revolutionary government was taking prompt measures for rearming the army.
In such an atmosphere Comrade Michev ignored the opinion of the collective body could the leader of the revolution, who during those months and found himself a captive of dogmatism.
He substituted delivered speeches incessantly at rallies in the country, mobithe specific scientific analysis of the processes and the phelize the people and prepare them for a life-and-death struggle nomena in Cuba with ready, prepared schemes.
TsDA, Sofia, Fond 1-B, Opis 33,e.7; translated Bulgaria by the Prime Minister comrade Anton Yugov.
How by Julia Cherneva, edited by Jordan Baev.] was it done so that an invitation came about for a visit, is a secret to us until this day.
To me, sending such an invitation, which happened at the recommendation of the ambassador, is a proof for his not knowing the situation.
OF THE CC BCP POLITBURO countries from Latin America broke diplomatic relations with MEETING Cuba.
Proclaiming of the socialist character of the revolution Of 9 April 1963 threw the American imperialists into panic.
About issuing a long term credit to the Republic of of American States whose most important goal was Cuba. the expulsion of Cuba from this organization.
The Republic of Cuba, the first socialist country in America, passed the fifth year of its existence in a more favorable international situation and in a more difficult economic situation.
The general détente exerted an influence on the Cuban Arms supply to Cuba, 13 August 1963 people’s life and struggle for the building of socialism.
Ivan Mihailov, Member of Politburo strength of the Soviet Union, and of the whole socialist comComrade Ivan Budinov, Minister of Foreign Trade munity, the Cuban people, united around its revolutionary Gen.
Dobri Djurov, Minister of Defense government, continued more confidently along the path it had chosen.
RESOLUTION “B” No 9 OF POLITBURO OF THE CENTRAL COMMITTEE I Political situation in the country OF THE BULGARIAN COMMUNIST PARTY FROM 13 AUGUST 1963 1963 was a difficult year for the Cuban people.
Gives one’s consent to form a governmental delegation national situation, they continued to transfer Intelligence to negotiate with Cuba’s governmental delegation and Service agents and contra revolutionaries, to import arms in sign a protocol for the supply of special property in 1964 the country and thus to sustain tensions in Cuba.
The USA in Cuba. undertook new measures for economic repression against Cuba and exerted influence on the capitalist countries to 2.
TsDA, Sofia, Fond 1-B, Opis 64,e.4; translated by a negative influence on the country’s political life.
The Cuban International Situation After the Caribbean crisis, Cuba’s international situation Information of the Bulgarian Embassy in improved significantly.
The situation in Cuba in 1963, before the USSR and the whole world, not to attack Cuba.
A great part of them came back in 1963 and were ments against the imperialists’ aggression.
These circumstancsent to work at different sites in the country. es strengthened the Republic of Cuba’s international position This comprehensive assistance, which was self-evident and increased its authority amongst the Latin American and in all spheres of life, shattered all attempts of the slanderous other countries.
Quite a lot of people relations with it. were hoping that this discord will intensify, but they expeWe must note that the Cuban government leaders and rienced a great disappointment when Fidel Castro went to Fidel Castro, above all, are especially sensitive toward the Moscow in April 1963.
The disappointment was still greater USA and are constantly dealing with it and its policy in their when, seven months later, in January 1964, he went to the speeches.
Fidel Castro’s double visit to the Soviet the expense of the more vital to the revolution questions and Union made the Cuban people extremely happy.
These circumstances have an strated the strong and indestructible friendship between the impact on the attempts to normalize the relations between Soviet Union and Cuba. the two countries and to apply the principles of settling controversial issues among different countries by peaceful means.
These are valuable political and state docuFidel Castro’s second visit to Moscow, but it is still early to ments on the further activities of the two countries.
These draw conclusions. are documents with which the USSR has added to Cuba’s As a result of the Cuban government’s policy and the international prestige as a country and Fidel Castro’s personal USSR’s and other socialist countries’ fraternal help, the authority as a state leader.
Of considerable importance to the “walls” built by American imperialism around Cuba have Cuban people is the signed long-term economic agreement been demolished. for the sale of sugar to the Soviet Union that places the economic relations between the two countries on a new basis and marks a new stage in the economic cooperation between the two.
As in the preceding years, so in the year that has just ended, Similar relations of fraternal solidarity are being estabthe USSR thoroughly backed the Cuban people’s attempts lished between Cuba and the other socialist countries.
The to build a socialist society in the country and their heroic latter saw the great economic difficulties that Cuba was faced struggle against the American imperialists’ aggressive acts. with and offered economic and scientific help as far as they The USSR would not allow the life of the country to could afford it.
In the current accounts of their balance sheets be interrupted due to the lack of petrol, it would not allow the result was positive balances.
It helped Cuba external difficulties, Cuba was not able to make up for them. to strengthen its defense.
In October 1962 it stopped the In spite of their own economic difficulties, the socialist councampaign to overrun the country.
The USSR paid great tries helped Cuba in accordance with the fraternal relations attention to and cared for the internal difficulties Cuba was and international solidarity that existed among them. experiencing when transforming its life, economy, and state When the natural disaster, the cyclone “Flora,” befell organization.
It helped with the training of personnel, and the Cuba, the socialist countries were the first to offer not only education of the army.
Thousands of young people went to symbolic, but effective help so that the damage incurred is the Soviet Union to study in its plants, collective farms, and promptly made up for.
Under the pretext of preserving the unity of the comIt would have been more appropriate if the Cuban governmunist parties, Cuba’s leaders undertook a centralist position ment had signed the agreement and together with it had made in the ideological dispute between the CPSU and the other its objections and notes on the United States aggressive policy.
This communist and workers’ parties, on the one hand, and the would have corresponded to both Fidel Castro’s stand on the Chinese CP, on the other.
They created favorable conditions agreement in the beginning and to the Cuban people’s desires. for Chinese propaganda.
It of the Soviet Union’s and other socialist countries’ peaceful published the letters between the CPSU and the ChCP withmutual coexistence policy. out expressing a clear and definite opinion on them, without In terms of its foreign policy Cuba has a special underacquainting its party members and the people with its stand standing and attitude toward the Latin American countries on this important question of the revolutionary struggle.
It takes for granted the party members and the people were given the “freedom” to existence of a revolutionary situation in all Latin American orient themselves alone. countries and the necessity of revolutionary actions.
The Cuban leaders declare all Latin American communist parThe role of the Chinese embassy in Havana in this respect ties, not adopting their line of behavior old, defeatist, unable was very pernicious.
It took advantage of the favorable conto undertake a revolutionary struggle and seek other social ditions that were created in order to carry out the basest forces to lead the struggle.
Soviet Union, the latter having helped the Cuban revolution Because there is a non-Marxist view common among the generously and gratuitously.
The same bulletin also distorted Cuban leaders that a revolutionary situation in a country can the statements of important comrades from the fraternal always be created if there exists a group of brave people to countries, caused disputes on definite issues with the aim of become partisans /guerrillas/ and lead the people to a revolublurring the working class’s political ideas. tionary struggle.
The Cuban leaders find the “theoretical” works of some Moreover, another widespread view among them is that Chinese theoreticians especially appealing and they rely on Cuba is entitled to lead the revolutionary struggle in Latin them in their practice.
This refers above all to the so-called America and that is why they abruptly interfere with the building of socialism on their own; to the ways the working other parties’ deeds.
There is also a tendency to lead the anticlass should seize power etc. imperialist struggle not only in America but on other Quite interesting is Cuba’s attitude to the Moscow agreecontinents as well.
So when we talk of Cuba’s “own line of ment on a partial ban of the nuclear weapons experiments. behavior,” we have to take into consideration these peculiariOn the very next day after the agreement had been signed in ties of its foreign policy.
The exchange of evident after Fidel Castro’s second visit to the Soviet Union. delegations on different levels is extremely important.
During this year, unlike the preceding ones, our top-level delegations came here.
Political, economic and cultural relations between the People’s Republic of Bulgaria and the Republic of Cuba We should also mention here that the Soviet Union and Political relations our country were the only ones to send a youth specialist brigade to help the Cuban agriculture.
This visit was important The relations between the two countries in the preceding not only for the technical support for the Cuban agriculture period were constantly developing, expanding and strengthbut for the solidarity expressed by our Youth communist ening. organization /Comsomol/ to the Cuban Union of young communists.
A lot of friendship activities took place and the In the first place, our political relations with Cuba develyoung people came to know each other better in their work oped under the conditions created after the Caribbean crisis. activities.
This is the only relationship of this kind between Our country, together with the other Warsaw Pact countries the two youth organizations, not taking into consideration showed complete solidarity and support for the Cuban revothe Soviet Union.
Some vague points in the events that took place during youth brigade is extremely positive.
These relations between the crisis were gradually clarified, in spite of the propaganda the two youth communist organizations should, in one way of the Chinese Embassy here.
Soviet Union during the Caribbean crisis, due to the withdrawal of the missiles, was felt towards our country and our specialists here as well.
Economic relations way the crisis was resolved and the nuclear war avoided; and what was very important for Cuba – the salvation of the The economic relations between the People’s Republic Cuban revolution.
More and more people were becoming of Bulgaria and Cuba improved a lot.
The trade for 1963 convinced that the socialist countries of the Warsaw Pact had amounted to 20,640,000 dollars in the two countries.
Our defended Cuba and helped avoid the immediate threat for country undertook the design and equipment of 12 Cuban Cuba.
The idea that Cuba’s economic problems had to be industrial enterprises.
Bulgaria is second after the Soviet Union in the opportunity to express their solidarity, help and support for number of specialists sent to Cuba.
The solidarity and help was realized the basis of a close scientific and technical cooperation, which, in different ways.
First, we should mention our government’s from now , will develop on a larger scale.
Undoubtedly, support for Cuba against the aggressive North American this is a significant success, a result of the Embassy’s and imperialist acts in front of the international organizations, Commercial Representative’s efforts to improve the economic the UN above all.
We should also mention the manifested relations between the two countries. solidarity with the Cuban revolution in our country; the conIn spite of all that was mentioned above, the economic tribution of the press and radio in this respect, the delegations cooperation between the countries did not reach the which were exchanged.
And finally, we should mention the level the opportunities that scientific and technical help and the help offered when the existed between the two fraternal countries.
Both the trade cyclone struck the eastern part of the country. and the scientific and technical help to Cuba could be greater, Mentioning these solidarity acts the Cuban could be realized on a larger scale. people and revolution, we should emphasize the positive role played by some of these in bringing the two countries closer and in strengthening and improving the relations between them.
The drawbacks of our practical economic cooperation In the second place, we should mention the significant with Cuba became most evident during the trade negotiarole played by the exchange of delegations in improving the tions for 1964.
TsDA, Sofia, Fond 1-B, Opis 6,e.80; translated ables were taken into consideration.
Our country was obliged by Julia Cherneva, edited by Jordan Baev.] to assume additional duties to supply Cuba with other valuable goods, which it was short of in satisfying its own needs.
Cultural cooperation Cuban cultural relations, 25 February 1964 As was already mentioned in the report in November and in different information and reports, the existing cooperation FOREIGN MINISTRY regarding the cultural agreement was not satisfactory.
Cuba to cover the plan for applying the cultural agreement Sofia, 25.02.1964. between Bulgaria and Cuba, signed in May 1963 in Bulgaria.
To the Central Committee of BCP Quite a lot of its good and useful initiatives simply remained Department “Foreign policy and international relations” hanging in the air.
To the Committee for Friendship and Cultural Relations with Foreign Countries 1st Copy – CC BCP In relation to the motion of CFCRFC and our embassy 2nd Copy – Ministry of Foreign Affairs for opening a cultural center in Havana, the Foreign Ministry 3rd Copy – to the Archive is of the opinion that for the time being we should not take steps to open such in Cuba.
The conclusions, that there are suitable conditions in [Source, TsDA, Sofia, Fond 1-B, Opis 51,e.; translated by Cuba and more open and purposeful propaganda activities are Assistant Professor Kalina Bratanova, edited by Jordan Baev.] required, are correct.
However, establishing a cultural center could not achieve our goal in this respect.
RESOLUTION “A” No 31 It will be right if next year the issue of the possible openOF POLITBURO OF CC BCP 6.02.1964.
G Grozev embracing relations and links between People’s Republic of Bulgaria and Republic of Cuba, it is considered expedient to: [Source: TsDA, Sofia, Fond 1-B, Opis 51,e.8; translated 1.
Ministers to invite on an official visit in our country a partygovernmental delegation of the fraternal Republic of Cuba.
They had established and maintained close contacts with organizations outside the communist parties.
Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Second Department American parties for the fact that they considered the opporCC BCP, Department “Foreign Policy & International tunity to take the political power by peaceful means, a matter Relations” debated at the 20th Congress of the CPSU as a dogma; thus they had neglected and discarded all other means to achieve We are sending you attached an Information re: The Latin this political goal.
Atanas Kulbov23 all measures to prepare an armed struggle within the country and had therefore found itself in a critical situation during last Information year’s coup d’etat.
The proposal to convene was made in of the unity and solidarity of the international workers’ and July last year, when many representatives of these parties took communist movement, the danger of it being split up as a part in the celebrations on the occasion of the tenth anniresult of the harmful impact of the activities of China’s party versary of the attack against the Moncada barracks in Cuba. leaders.
According to the available informunist movement, the danger of it being split up in factions mation, this delegation was highly appreciated in the Soviet and the measures necessary to preserve and consolidate its Union.
Representatives of other parties will pay a visit to the other In recent years the relations between Bulgaria and Cuba socialist countries to inform of the conference’s work. – economic and cultural – expanded and intensified and The following exchange of views on the conference’s work the prospect is to become broader.
However, the and results shows that it’s decisions are defined as positive. relations between our parties are unsatisfactory.
The Conference is viewed as an initial attempt to put the struggle against imperialism on a broader and more organized Proceeding from the resolution of Politburo for bolsterbase using the experience of each party without interfering ing of the relations with the fraternal countries, we consider in its internal affairs.
It is stated that the Latin American that on our behalf we have to display an initiative for the Revolution is a common deal, and has to be developed having expansion and consolidation of the relations between our in mind the concrete circumstances in each country.
Our ambassador in Havana made a suggestion in confirmed that the Communist parties are the leading force this spirit, as well.
On behalf of Cuba, Raul Castro demonof this Revolution. strated willingness for such an expansion during his visit to Bulgaria last year.
For the translated minutes of the Bulgarian record of magazines with “Socialist Cuba” magazine. conversation between Bulgarian leader Todor Zhivkov and Cuban Defense Minister Raúl Castro in Sofia on 26 March 1965, see the report elsewhere in this issue of the CWIHP 11.02.1966.
In the same lines, a suggestion Cuban Revolution proved the irrelevance of the so called was made by our Ambassador in Havana.
Apart from that, Cuba proved to be an example to Gavrilova24 in January this year in Havana. follow by the masses of people in Latin America, and accelerated the revolutionary processes there.
Dimo Dichev Marti viewed Latin America as something consolidated and quite different from Europe and North America.
Bolivar and his army had liberated a number of Latin American countries from the dominion of Spain.
The truth is that, in its argument with the Chinese leaders, Marti’s and Bolivar’s political views have strongly impacted the Cuban party has not adopted the international commuand imbued their spirit into Fidel Castro’s revolutionary ideas. nist movement’s stance, since they share essentially common The Cuban leaders have often claimed that Cuba will feel views on certain issues. completely free, when all the peoples of Latin America are liberated.
There are certain messiah-like qualities, typical First, the preparation and holding of the Tricontinental of the present Cuban leaders, which have been inherited from Conference has aggravated the contradictions between the Bolivar and Marti. two countries, since there was a clash of ambitions to rule the Third World.
A large part of the present communist party’s leaderThe Chinese propaganda made great effort to discredit ship, including members of the CC, adopted bourgeois views the Soviet Union and the socialist countries in Latin America just a few years ago.
Of course, for the last 7 years after the and undermine their prestige.
However it has become quite apparent that Leninist outlook and have adopted its postulates.
However, China’s influence prevents Castro from achieving his political the latter turned out a rather difficult process and has not aims, and, therefore, he wants to restrict this influence and been completed yet. eliminate it.
The Cuban leadership is themselves in, the Cuban party thinks it is high time that it ambitious enough to keep looking for new roads to follow made a statement on China’s policy.
However this is not all especially in Latin America. there is to be said.
The Cuban comrades’ conviction is that Third, the Chinese made serious mistakes in Cuba.
Not the “old” European revolutions have contributed all they only did they flood the country with a wealth of propaganda could have, and that the new further development of the materials, manipulating public opinion in their well-known revolutionary theory and practice will be provided by the consistent and insolent manner; they even made an attempt Cuban Revolution.
As it is well known, Fidel argument between Cuba and China is not backed up by Castro has exposed the Chinese policy towards Cuba to severe support for the Soviet Union, denying China’s libeling and criticism in his latest speeches.
In his last speech of 19 March mudslinging against the latter while emphasizing their role his criticism was directed towards Mao Zedong personally for and significance in our modern age.
There is a major issue that remains unsettled relating to the discord between China and Cuba.
Castroism is nothing else than a renewal of Marxism party, since it has maintained its relations with the pro-China and Leninism on the basis of the specific Latin American factions so far, it has relied on their support and will most political environment and the historical development of each probably want to win their support.
The Cuban leaders’ ambitions to assume the leading role In the same book the author writes about /Leonel/ Brizola in the world revolutionary process determine their attitude of as “the greatest revolutionary leader in Brazil.” overlooking and underestimating the Soviet Union’s role and The question that naturally arises is whether Debray is that of the CPSU. committed in any way to the Cuban leaders.
Cuba is a country where even a single word cannot be uttered publicly unless it has been approved by Fidel Castro; it is therefore impossible that such an article might be As a matter of fact, the Cuban leaders have demonstrated published without Castro’s consent.
It is highly unlikely that their independent and non-aligned policy in a strange manDebray published his articles without receiving any response ner.
Fidel Castro is regularly stating that nobody has taught by anyone since the Cuban leaders disagree with him.
Fidel the Cuban revolutionaries how to seize the political power; Castro himself has spent a lot of time with Debray.
During the party will therefore not let anyone tell them what course his stay in Cuba he has been offered the accommodation and the revolution should take. attention of a high and honoured guest.
CPSU and the international communist movement); he Thus the fears, relating to Cuba’s firm insistence that the also declared that no influence on Latin America was to be Tricontinental Conference be held in Havana, are reinforced. allowed, no matter where it came from.
The Embassy has been sending a number of bulletins on The Cuban leaders have often stated their not being comCuba’s sending people to certain Latin American countries to mitted to satellitism. do training and organize a guerrilla movement, disregarding No matter how hard we try to account for these statethe attitude of the brotherly parties.
The Che Guevara case is ments on the nature of the Cuban Revolution, one cannot but being considered of mythological importance, an example to realize that they essentially attack the Soviet Union and the follow by every Cuban and Latin American.
They are aimed at causing a disruption carried out in the military divisions to take part in the struggle between the Latin American Revolution and the international against imperialism in any country, has intensified.
Even the communist movement. particular country, appropriate for certain cadres, has been These claims on the part of the Cuban leadership to be specified.
The information that the Latin American guerrilla leading an independent and specific policy in the internagroups include Cubans has been confirmed as well.
There tional communist movement can be detected in the theories is a setback to the period before the Havana Conference of developed recently. the communist parties.
The Cuban press has not published The available data reveals that the French /Regis/ Debray, even a single word about the resolutions of this conference, well-known for his theories of the nature of the Cuban which laid the basis for the regulation of the relations between revolution, has started a book that will provide the grounds the Latin American communist parties.
The Cuban leaders to justify the political stance, adopted by the Cuban leaders keep building up their relations with the Latin American concerning the Marxist ideology.
After publishing his article communist parties depending on whether the latter have in the “La Casa de las Americas” and “Bohemia”, Havana adopted Cuba’s policy.
We have already informed Tricontinental and Latin American organizations. you of his viewpoint that Castroism is the new Leninism of One of the major aims of the Cuban leaders is to carry our modern age, and that the European type of Leninism is out a revolution in Latin America.
The issues, concerning delegations was devoted to the experience of the Cuban the guerrilla activities and their simultaneous beginning in as Revolution and, in particular, to the fact that a couple of many countries as possible, are considered the task of prime people could start the armed struggle and achieve victory. importance.
Castro elaborated on present situation does not provide for a peaceful action, his thesis that the establishment of a guerrilla movement in expressing the people’s will, suffices to consider that the the Dominican Republic was to be immediately carried out, objective conditions to start an armed struggle and take since there were American troops deployed on its territory. the political power are present.
The starting of an armed Dominguez replied that should the party, at that moment, struggle does not presuppose other factors, which will call for an organized armed struggle and set up guerrilla units, develop in the course of the revolution.
The only way to trigger off the big engine people; was to start the small one.
Moreover the armed struggle in Santo Domingo is carried out mostly in the towns and this struggle is, therefore, closely The revolution’s global strategy must counteract the impedependent upon the traditions and experience of the workers’ rialist one.
Sending groups of people in the mountains would be organized in all countries of the continent.
There may be not solve any of the problems of the Dominican Revolution a need for exporting the revolution.
Major events are expected to Dominguez explained that the revolution’s major task take place in Latin America, he said.
Soon similar events are was to consolidate the activities of all progressive forces in likely to happen in Venezuela as well.
The USA will never let the country to achieve their common goal, and to organize Venezuela slip out of their control and will therefore deploy the people neither hastily, nor too slowly.
Such a situdecide upon the appropriate time to call for armed struggle ation is likely to be created not only in Venezuela, but in a to take the political power.
Fidel Castro did not approve of number of other Latin American countries as well.
We must Dominguez’s position. never forget the potential might of a giant that is still sleepThe Cuban leaders were acting impatiently, neglecting the ing, namely Brazil.
And when imperialism deploys its armed specific situation when taking revolutionary action, which forces throughout the continent, we will then be able to fight was not the Cuban style.
In brief, what are the arguments in favor of the fact that The issue of triggering off the armed struggle has many it was high time the peoples of all Latin American countries aspects.
The example the Cuban revolution gave, was the major most responsible among these leaders feel Cuba is doomed to argument.
The efforts to improve the economic situation in Cuba and the results of these efforts, may play a significant role in re-directing Cuba’s policy.
Fidel Castro has made self-criticism several times actually hinders the revolutionary process and the establishbefore representatives of these parties; he claims that he has ment of powerful united fronts in the countries of Latin not been informed on separate issues and has, therefore, America, underestimates the role of the communist parties, made wrong judgments and statements.
The Latin American and encourages terrorism in these countries. parties can best discuss Latin America’s problems in depth, as The Latin American communist parties, or least most of well as the problems of the revolutionary movements in this them, are being blamed for the lack of a pro-active attitude as part of the world. well as for being too theoretically-minded, unwilling to start Of course the other brotherly parties and the communist a revolution.
It is necessary that the contacts and meetestablish close contacts with anti-party adventurous elements, ings with the Cuban comrades be more frequent, as well as willing to start an armed struggle without any delay. the exchange visits of delegations.
On the contrary, we comrades’ ambitions and infatuation collide with reality; it is will always support such a struggle, in case it is relevant and reality that will help them overcome these problems.
Cuba is appropriate in the context of a country’s particular revolutiona small country and its economic resources are limited for its ary situation.
However, we cannot adopt the view that armed leaders to become leaders on a world scale. struggle is the only means of struggle, and that the action taken It is obvious that whatever measures are decided upon to by the guerrilla forces must start simultaneously in all Latin provide assistance to Cuba’s party, it would take a long time to American countries, irrespective of the specific situation in each implement them.
This assumption gives rise to a schematic and formalwrong views will be an easy task.
The Cuban comrades need istic attitude, which results from the desire to turn the Cuban more time to arrive at the right conclusions.
The time, when revolution into an example to follow and an objective law of information of this kind will be directed at analyzing Cuba’s the revolution in general.
Even less acceptable is the policy positive experience, will hopefully come. adopted by the Cuban leaders to organize the armed struggle abroad, disregarding the communist parties’ stance.
The latter Havana results in substituting the socialist revolution’s objective laws 31 March 1966 with petty bourgeois views of the revolutionary process.
Specialists and experts from the socialist countries work in all industries of the national economy.
The contacts with these experts and their work contribute to bringing closer both the parties and the countries.
Sofia We can accept 30 people for training only on counterintelligence work.
According to the delegation, the of the Tricontinental Committee and Comandante Manuel Cuban leaders made or will make the same request to other Piňeiro member of the CC of the CCP and head of the European socialist countries as well.
The Cuban party and State Security service, before my departure from Havana state leaders are going to send the aid to those regions and on 21 May there was a demand for accepting 30 Cuban countries, where according to him there was a revolutionary comrades for training in sabotage and contra revolutionary situation, and to those powers and groups, including the ones activity.
They consider the training period to be about a year not affiliated with the communist parties, which read corand the training itself should be at our expense.
They expect rectly this situation. to receive an answer in principle not later than 5 or 6 June On behalf of the CC of the BCP the delegation received this year.
The assistance should be required directly from the I would like to ask you for your instructions. leaders of the communist party in the respective country, through Cuba or any other socialist country.
The assistance rendered to the national-liberation Sofia movements in those countries should be coordinated among the socialist countries.
I asked him to explain to Letter from Bulgarian Embassy, Havana, me what exactly was their position and whether there was a 26 January 1967 change in it after the visit of our youth delegation led by comrade Georgi Atanassov in October last year.
He informed me that From Petar Marinkov, Third secretary at the Embassy of PR such a decision was already adopted.
Its sense was that in case Bulgaria in Cuba. that a resolution was adopted the festival to be conducted in Europe, in Sofia, Cuba would not take part in it.
Comrade Ambassador, Elucidating the reasons which had provoked those Cuban resolutions on that issue, comrade Mora told me that the Last week, at my request, I met twice comrade Lazaro meeting of the organization committee would be only a Mora, Secretary for the international relations of the National facade and even a farce, because an already adopted resolution Committee of the Union of the Young Communists.
Long first meeting we talked on topics connected with the conductago WFDY stopped to be an independent international orgaing the Ninth World Youth Festival, and at the second about nization and the powerful countries, the ones that give the the implementation of the treaty between our two youth money, dictate its course, and it is the USSR. organizations.
Everything up to now shows that the USSR and the other I requested the first meeting, so that he could explain to socialist countries are against hosting the festival in Cuba and me in more detail the formulation of Jaime Crombet in his for the last time they got convinced in this during the recently report at the Third Plenum of the National Leadership of the concluded visit of the delegation of the Soviet Comsomol led Union of the Young Communists about Cuba’s not taking by comrade Torsuev.
In brackets I would like to note that part in the meeting of the Organization Committee of the at its departure no representative of the National leadership festival, called for at the end of this month in Vienna, and [to of the Union of the young communists was sent and only remind him] that the issue about the participation of Cuba at noon did comrade Mora apologize on the phone that he in the festival should be discussed.
In relation to this the could not go to the airport because he overslept. counselor at the Polish embassy in Havana, comrade Curus, Further comrade Mora told me that they would send a has informed our counselor, comrade Cohen, that the editor letter to the organization committee, in which they would of the Polish youth newspaper, who was in Cuba on the occastate their position.
He added that one of the reasons not sion of the 8th anniversary of the revolution, has accidentally to participate in this meeting is that they did not want to enter into bitter discussions with the delegations because by attended the first meeting of the plenum, and during the no means would they like to spoil their relations with some closed-door meeting a resolution was adopted by voting to youth unions.
He told me that Cuba wanted to conduct a the effect that Cuba should not participate in the festival and festival of the young revolutionaries, who immediately after it possibly organize a counter-festival. would be ready to take to arms and to go to fight where the I also visited the man in charge for the work with the conditions require it.
Once again they suggested the festival Soviet Comsomol in Cuba, comrade Shlyapnikov, who to be conducted in Vietnam and if this could not be carried was accompanying the Soviet youth delegation led by the out, that the only other place, where the festival should be Secretary of the Soviet Comsomol CC Torsuev that also took conducted, given the current situation, was Cuba.
Some issues of the preparation of the Ninth World during this short period had such big changes happened in Festival of Youth and Students the life of those students to require the trip of the Minister of Education and first secretary of the National Committee Comrades, of the Union of the Young Communists.
At my second meeting with comrade Mora we revised the As it is well known, the candidates for hosts of the festival fulfillment of the agreement between DCYU and the Union are two countries Bulgaria and Cuba. of the Young Communists.
For more lucidity I am going The talks and the consultations up to date show that the to present his opinion about the fulfillment of the separate overwhelming majority of the organizations members of clauses in the agreement.
From 42 organizations members of IOC up to now about 23 organizations have supported our nomination.
Marinkov28/ GDR, Czechoslovakia, Romania and Yugoslavia, a number of organizations from Africa Sudan, Senegal, Guinea, UAR, Havana from Latin America Argentina, Brazil, Chile, from Asia 26 January 1967 India, Lebanon, Iraq and the organizations from France, Australia, Canada and Cyprus.
Cuba Guatemala, Venezuela, Congo , Japan, Indonesia, in one or other form the youth unions of Finland and Italy give their preference to the nomination of Cuba.
Approximately the same number of organizations has not defined their position yet or has not announced it.
Festival in 196729 At such a configuration of the powers, the talks and the consultations between the different youth organizations are CENTRAL COMMITTEE conducted at the moment.
America , about the rejection of They unambiguously emphasize that a resolution of the the Cuban nomination have a principle basis.
IOC in favor of another nomination will be interpreted by This was emphasized at the meeting conducted in them not only as an attitude to the Union of the young comNovember 1966 in Moscow of the first secretaries of the munists, but also as a lack of understanding of the needs of Central Committees of the Soviet Union of the Communist the revolution and the situation in Cuba.
Pavlov confirmed once again their Africa, or Latin America. position that the festival must not be carried out in Cuba Therefore, the festival must be staged in the country that and that they support firmly the nomination of Bulgaria. needs the most international-support and solidarity.
Such a He declared unambiguously that such is the position of country is Vietnam.
This of the young people from Asia, Africa and Latin America and includes the Cuban understanding about the resolutions of a challenge to the American imperialism.
IOC the right to issue visas to the participants, to give one On the other hand, there are definite difficulties regarding million dollars in optional currency for maintenance of the the complexity of the political situation in Cuba.
There is a festival, and to take on a significant part of the transportation real danger for it to limit the possibilities for a full display expenses. of the festival slogans for solidarity, peace, and friendship.
A For many years Dimitrov’s Comsomol (Young Communist possible festival in Cuba unquestionably would become an League) and the Union of the young communists of Cuba expression of the solidarity with the struggle of the peoples have kept very good contacts.
We are constantly making of Cuba and Vietnam, but the other problems of the world efforts for their further development.
An expression of this democratic youth movement and particularly those of the was the recent visit of our delegation in Cuba and the friendly African youth would remain in the background.
The experimeetings and talks which we conducted. ence up to now does not give ground to believe in the Now the nominations of our two brotherly organizadeclarations of our Cuban comrades that the IOC will have tions as hosts of the festival will be discussed.
Provided how the full opportunity to define the contents and the character fervently the Cuban comrades stand up for their nomination of the festival. and the fact that the majority prevails in favor of Sofia, There are technical difficulties referring to the remoteness, it is not impossible for our nomination to be interpreted as transport, financing and others, which inevitably will limit opposing theirs, and for this to have an unfavorable effect the representative character of the festival in Cuba and on on the relations between our youth unions.
The other brotherly youth of Dimitrov’s Communist Youth Union thinks that there unions could do this.
At the same time however, we consider should not be a festival in Cuba. it necessary for the Foreign Ministry, through the embasIn order to avoid possible aggravation of our relations with sies of PRB in Algeria, Mali, Tanzania, Guinea, Sudan and the Union of the young communists of Cuba, from the viewMorocco, to explain to the leaders of the youth organizations point of the interests of our country, perhaps it is expedient in these countries our motives for the carrying out of the to find a third nomination for conducting the festival.
In our opinion only such a majority can influence the Cuban youth leaders.
In our view, the Ninth festival, with its appeal and mobiWe think that our nomination does not contradict the lizing power over the youth masses all over the world, based nomination of Cuba.
We regard it as we do any other one, as on the ideals for solidarity, peace, and friendship, must be a an opportunity.
We could welcome other nominations, which powerful, large-scale political demonstration of the activity will present an opportunity for a better choice.
We showed and the unity of the world democratic youth. that this is so with our positive attitude to the previous two Together with this, we are for a festival open to all powresolutions of the IOC about Algeria and Ghana.
And now ers that want to participate in it, a festival that gives a full we are also ready, if the international youth movement decides opportunity for broad discussions and numerous meetings of that it will be more expedient for the festival to be conducted different youth powers. in another country, not to protest and to participate in such Therefore, from political point of view we are willing to a festival. ensure full success of the festival.
TsDA, Sofia, Fond 1-B, Opis 6,e.26; translated Cuban comrades and to the fact that some youth unions supby Julia Cherneva, edited by Jordan Baev.] port them at the forthcoming meeting of the IOC for the decision in favor of our nomination not to be adopted unanimously and for some unions to make a statement that they do not support such a festival.
INFORMATION This depends to a large extent on the position of the youth by G Grozev, Deputy Minister of Foreign Affairs organizations from Africa.
Proposed measures for strengthening of the Bulgarian – WFDY suggested to us to consider whether it is not expediCuban Relations ent to send a delegation of ours to Africa.
The relations between the Cuban communist party and the European communist parties have grown colder for the last few years.
Out of the 8 member such relations support local oligarchies and hold the revoluof Politburo, 6 are military officials; there is not a single memtionary process back.
Up to the end of 1965 Fidel isolating themselves from their natural allies and friends on Castro openly opposed the Chinese leaders, for there was a the continent. conflict of interests between the Chinese and Cuban ambiThe Cuban leaders have manifested the adopted policy tions about playing a central political part in Latin America. of actively assisting Latin America’s revolutionary moveCuba’s criticism of the Chinese government was based totally ment, thus facilitating the reactionary regime’s activity on its own positions and interests.
The Chinese leaders’ ideolaimed at enhancing terrorism and establishing the so called “American forces” to act against Cuba both in Latin America ogy and policies have not been condemned yet.
Presuming the false postulate that the conditions for starting a revolution Political, economic and cultural relations between the in almost all Latin American countries have ripened, the People’s Republic of Bulgaria and the Republic of Cuba were established after the triumph of the Cuban Revolution.
Tolerant, calm and frank talks with the defended Cuba against the offence of the United States imperialism.
Cuban comrades on all levels so as to persuade them to give Apart from the economic and cultural agreements at up the present harmful policies are necessary. the government level, agreements for cooperation between It is considered appropriate that the relations in the field public and political organizations and creative unions were of science and technology, as well as the economic relations concluded; these agreements play an important part in our be further developed.
Such a policy will stimulate building getting to know each other and establishing closer relations. socialism in Cuba, and will contribute to socialist Cuba’s Useful and fruitful contacts were established between our increasing role as a suit to follow by the other Latin American Comsomol,31 the Bulgarian Union for Sports and the corcountries. responding Cuban organizations.
An important step towards On the other hand, a deepening of the economic relations expanding the economic, scientific and technological coopbetween Cuba and the socialist countries, and thus the higher eration between Cuba and Bulgaria was the setting up of an dependence of Cuba’s economy upon the socialist countries’ inter-governmental commission for economic, scientific and , will make the Cuban leaders refrain from maktechnological cooperation. ing “weird” statements.
The trade between the two countries has marked an increase by 38,633,000 USD in 1966 from 500,000 USD in The following measures are considered appropriate to this 1960.
Our major import item from Cuba is sugar and molasI In the sphere of political relations. ses.
Ministries, agencies, institutions, public organizations and artistic unions must follow a policy of expanding and strengthening the relations and cooperation with the respective Cuban bodies and authorities.
Bulgarian musicians are also working in Cuba at Chairman of the Council of Ministers, Fidel Castro’s present.
All these specialists’ work has been highly appreciated visit to Bulgaria is to be agreed upon and arranged. by a number of high-level Cuban leaders, including Castro.
There are the necessary conditions to supply Cuba with complex properties.
We consider that expanding and intensifying our cooperation in terms of party and political relations, 4.
PEKO TAKOV Alternate Member of CC BCP Politburo, Member of the Board of the Council of Ministers, and Minister of Trade, Chairman of the Bulgarian part of the Joint Bulgarian-Cuban committee for economic and 5.
A proposal made to Cuba to have military attaches scientific-technical cooperation; exchanged between the two countries.
KONSTANTIN TELLALOVAlternate Member of CC BCP, Head of “Foreign Policy and International Relations” 1.
The State Commission on Planning and Forecasting and CC BCP Department; the Ministry of Foreign Trade are to submit proposals GERO GROZEVAlternate Member of CC BCP, and First about additional events on expanding the import Deputy Minister of Foreign Affairs; and export product range to and from Cuba, so that DOBRI ALEXIEVDeputy Minister of Foreign Trade; the trade balance may be evened.
These suggestions STEFAN PETROVAlternate Member of CC BCP, are to be submitted to the Commission of Economic, Bulgarian Ambassador to Republic of Cuba; Scientific and Technological Cooperation at the Council MLADEN ISAEV-A writer, Honored Art Worker, and a of Ministers by 1 December 1967.
The focus of our Hero of Socialist Labor. attention must be an increase in our exports of machines and plants.
His petty bourgeois These views and conceptions diverge from our party’s background has strongly affected his personality. views and assessments.
In the past, prior to the Cuban revolution, all members of the present leadership used to be revolutionaries with not well-established ideological views; Fourth, Castro’s anti-Soviet attitudes.
He cannot appreciate many of them were anti-communists, or at least had adopted the USSR’s part in the winning of Cuban independence.
These can neither understand, nor appreciate the USSR’s part in the were mostly intelligentsia, participants in the students’ moveworld revolutionary process.
He has adopted a similar stance ment, and followers of Marti’s ideology, that had mixed views towards both American imperialism and the Soviet bloc. and conceptions.
All this impacted the party’s policy, which, Castro’s attitude towards the Soviet Union is cold and though referred to as communist, is not a well-established distanced, often even hostile.
Cuban leaders have adopted a policy of denying and underStep-by-step, within the 1962 to 1968 period, after the mining the CPSU and the USSR’s role and significance.
January plenary session, Castro managed to do away with the The process of distancing from the USSR has become more old communist party and establish, at his own discretion, a significant. new one in its place.
Such a policy is hazardous, and therefore surprises are Sectarian mistakes and blunders on the part of Escalante likely to take place. and other party leaders, who failed to get properly oriented, motivated Castro.
Mistakes were made both during the revoFifth, the manifestations of nationalism among Cuba’s leadlutionary struggle and after it. ers.
Although they are constantly talking about internationalThird, without taking into account certain traits of Castro’s ism, their actions are essentially nationalistic. personality, it will be difficult to analyze Cuba’s domestic and All these circumstances affect our relations with Cuba, and foreign policy.
It is Castro that has been shaping it so far. set up obstacles to the further progress of political relations.
In his activity Fidel Castro is an idealist, and, in many cases, an adventurer.
He would like to establish a new social Notes on certain aspects of Cuba’s foreign policy and its attiorder, ignoring socialism’s basic laws, and the CPSU’s experitude towards the international communist movement ence, and seeking an independent “peculiar” manner of solving both international and domestic problems.
For the last five or six months there has been no visible Despite the fact that he calls himself a Marxist-Leninist, change in Cuba’s foreign policy. he is unable to make a Marxist analysis of all facts and events.
His leadership obsession and self-confidence and self-conceitedness, the over-estimation of his own strengths 1.
Douglas Bravo made efforts to split the party, and these were attempts to make the party give in.
On the other hand, For the last two years the Cuban conceptions about their there were unscrupulous/ruthless attacks coming from Cuba. “own” way of development and the international communist All these attacks against the party––organized by people movement have been clearly shaped.
Within a short period of outside Cuba and people within Cuba completely failed. time the gap between Cuba and the international communist These attempts proved to be futile.
The attempts made to apply unwilling to cause problems to Cuba’s relations with the these views in real life have resulted in economic difficulsocialist countries.
The was provided as an example in this respect; another example conference’s bodies have been dissolved.
However no person has yet been in January 1967; he was informed of Castro’s disapproval of appointed.
The only practical result has been the growfact that Jesus Faria has been given the floor, for he attacked ing tension between Cuba’s leaders and the brotherly parties.
Cuba’s unwillingness to spark such a debate Guevara’s death was a terrible blow to Cuba’s policy. gave rise to its leaders’ decision not to send any delegations to Until his group’s defeat, Cuba tried to stimulate revolution such congresses in the future. on the continent; it actually organized about 40 small gueThe Cuban leadership makes no effort to seek ways of rilla groups within different Latin American countries.
Yet all overcoming its ideological differences with the international these attempts failed.
On the contrary, Castro has made it Debray, the famous proponent of the Cuban conceptions, clear, that Cuba has taken its own road of development, and was captured by the enemy and was forced to disclose many that it is determined to follow it, despite all risks that it might things. be exposed to.
Three Cubans were captured as they were trying to unload Top-level Soviet comrades, such as Gromyko, Masherov, a group of guerillas along Venezuela’s coast.
Materials on the statements frank discussion and to seek by Cuba the appropriate ways to made by Romania’s delegation were published.
That attitude was demonstrated by the conference’s closure, there was a special edition Cuba during the talks with Kosygin.
What matters only is • on the nature of the major antagonism of the that these friends support Cuba and make official statements contemporary age.
The latter is new theory and ideological weapons are necessary. considered by Cuba’s leaders as a conciliation with Cuba’s leaders consider themselves the modern Leninists imperialism; therefore they favor the idea of having “the and they are determined to struggle to attract parties and first, second, third...many Vietnams...” communists to their cause.
They hope that our parties, • the driving forces of Latin America’s revolution.
The including the CPSU, will undergo ideological changes. role of political parties is rejected.
Debray’s theory is essentially aimed at establishing the petty bourgeoisie’s leading part in the revolutionary process.
Conference of the fraternal parties; however its press gave no releases on this conference.
Since then, Therefore, as a result of the pressure they have been the attacks in the press or in the leaders’ speeches are not so exposed to by Cuba, and their objective development, these frequent.
Yet their relations and attitudes have not changed parties face the necessity of having to­reconsider their ideolmuch.
Whenever Venezuela is talked about, a remark is ogy and make a serious analysis, on the one hand, and having always made about the Venezuelan communist party.
Venezuela’s ber of the party leadership; another factor that may provoke example was followed.
Then the groups united with Ion Sosa’s adopting such a political course may be the guerrilla groups squad, when Sosa was elected first officer-commander, and that have been established within the countries, despite the Montez––second officer-commander.
These attacks against disapproval of the communist party. the party brought about a crisis in their relations with the This threat is more than probable.
Many commuCuban leaders. nist parties such as Venezuela’s, Guatemala’s, Honduras’s, On its relations with the Dominican communist party.
Hence the danger and threat of undertaking adventurous Fabio Vazquez’s efforts were aimed at imposing Cuba’s actions and thus weakening the parties’ unity and the revolupolicy on Colombia’s revolutionary movement; his guerillas tionary movement. are now painstakingly trying to separate Marulanda from Another threat is their underestimating the changing envithe party and make him follow Fabio Vazquez’s behavior or ronment on the continent.
Unless the party leaders respond actions. to these changes adequately, showing their activity, flexibility Cuba keeps training Latin American military groups, so and skill in uniting and consolidating the democratic and that they may be transferred to their respective countries. revolutionary forces, the problems within the parties are We have information about the training of groups from likely to be aggravated.
An example of this is the situation in Guatemala, the Dominican Republic, and Nicaragua.
The some of the parties in the Dominican Republic, Honduras latter are members of the pro-China group in Nicaragua. and Brazil, and some others.
There is a tendency towards These facts are indicative of the fact that there has been no a renewal that unfortunately is beyond the party leaders’ significant change in Cuba’s policy, nor in the political means control; this renewal does not always comply with the party to implement its strategy in Latin norms.
It is often accompanied by extremism both in terms America, although it has become less influential. of action and ideas.
Latin America’s communist parties share a negative attitude towards Cuba.
On the Cuban leaders’ attitude to the USSR parties about their lagging far behind the events, the lack of an active leadership and the outdated methods used is based Even with the new Soviet Ambassador to Havana, [Alexander on facts.
However, denying these parties’ role in the struggle, Alexeyevich] Soldatov, taking office, the situation has not Cuba’s brutal intervention in their internal affairs and stimuchanged much.
Insinuations about the USSR’s exerting pressure on have many things in common, and that our experience might Cuba have been maintained in a hidden form.
Insinuations well be the guiding light for Cuba building socialism. about the USSR’s exerting pressure on Cuba can still be Or as Castro pointed out in his speech of 30th May, the assumed. countries that are exposed to the danger of imperialism, such Some Cuban leaders still argue that Cuba does not conas Cuba and the German Democratic Republic, have to work duct an anti-Soviet policy, and that the present situation is in close cooperation. transitional and a result of a micro-faction’s action.
On our work in Cuba and the further development of Cuban leaders. our relations.
At a recent meeting between the new Soviet ambassador to Havana and Fidel Castro, the latter maintained that The development of relations between Cuba and the Soviet the Soviet Union is unwilling to help Cuba and that is has Union will determine Cuba’s future relations with the socialist adopted an incorrect policy towards Cuba.
Moreover, these relations will determine the future very distanced and did not show any willingness to seek ways policy adopted by Cuba’s leaders. to improve contacts and normalize relations.
There was no The problems in the relations between Cuba and the press release about this meeting.
It is a wellThe lack of tribute paid to the USSR’s role and the disknown fact that Cuba has not yet come to terms with the misgracing of the Soviet Union has lasted for years.
This negative siles being moved from its territory; therefore the Caribbean attitude was enhanced with the Caribbean crisis. crisis brought about the distrust of Cuba’s leaders towards the Tension has artificially been built up along the following Soviet Union.
The Cuban In 1964 Fidel Castro visited the Soviet Union for a secleaders insist that the parties adopt their assessments, ond time.
The documents signed gave rise to confidence methods and forms of struggle.
According to the Cuban that problems resulting from the Caribbean crisis were being perspective, the Cuban Revolution will be exposed to the overcome. risk of being invaded by imperialism, unless the revolution At the end of 1964 the conference of the Latin American is triumphant on the whole continent.
Even when there are communist parties was held; this conference was positively no prospects for a successful end to the armed struggle, the regarded as an important step forward to further improving latter still deprives the USA of its opportunities to attack and the relations between the CCP and the communist parties of invade Cuba. the other countries on the continent.
The policy of intensifying the trade relations and economic cooperation between the Latin American countries and the socialist countries is considered a blow behind Cuba’s On the further development of our relations in the present back.
This policy totally contradicts Cuba’s policy in Latin situation America.
We have been blamed not only for helping people that kill the partisans, but for the regimes that are boycotting All circumstances, outlined so far, will obviously determine Cuba as well. the further development of our relations. b) Cuba opposes the policy of peaceful co-existence, As we have already pointed out, Cuba’s leaders have maniconsidering it a form of reconciliation with imperialism. fested a positive attitude towards our country and party.
They The draft of the Treaty on Nuclear Arms Proliferation, that are looking forward to Todor Zhivkov’s visit.
The Cuban was tabled for discussion before the UN, was yet another realeaders take an interest in this visit.
This visit will strengthen son for Cuba to attack the Soviet Union’s policy and consider its authority and prestige both within the country and abroad. it analogous with the USA’s.
Georgi Dimitrov’s name is well c) It must be noted that recently there has been a known. marked difference in Cuba’s attitude towards the European Another factor that determines Cuba’s positive attitude is socialist countries and the USSR. the high-quality work of our specialists there.
Relations of the communist parties, create favorable conditions for furwith Latin America,d. ther development of the process for liberation of the countries of Latin America from the economic and political dominance To: the Secretary of the Central Committee of of the USA and the local oligarchy.
Moscow However, the facts show that the penetration and the Dear comrade Ponomarev, influence of the socialist countries are falling behind the development of the progressive tendencies in this region of Recently the Politburo of CC of the BCP discussed the the world.
The economic, political, and cultural relations report of the delegation of our party, which in the end of with the countries of Latin America are limited and do not 1969 visited Venezuela, Colombia, Peru, Chile, Argentina, meet the constantly increasing opportunities.
Uruguay and Brazil and adopted resolution for activating of In our view, the most essential weakness is that the socialthe economic, political and cultural relations of PR Bulgaria ist countries do not implement common and coordinated with the countries from Latin America. policy in relation to Latin America, in order to concentrate We would like to share with you some considerations of their efforts where there are most favorable conditions, to be Politburo of BCP CC about the situation in Latin America used most fully.
However, the policy of the USA and the local reactionary regimes meets bigger and bigger resistance on behalf The communist parties, the trade unions, the youth, the of the peoples of Latin America.
They are fighting for true women’s and the other public and state organizations and sovereignty, for economic independence and social liberation, institutes from the socialist countries do not coordinate sufwhich Rockefeller, too, was forced to admit after ficiently their efforts in Latin America. his tour in Latin America.
The struggles of the working From all this we arrive at the conclusion that the fraternal class, the peasants and the students are growing.
They are socialist countries should discuss coordinated actions for more and more characterized by mass participation, organized ensuring a constantly increasing participation and influence character and political purposefulness.
The social basis of the in the economics, the politics and the culture of the Latinanti-imperialist struggle is broadening and new layers and American countries depending on the interest which they forces join it including certain circles from the army and present for us and for the common struggle against imperialthe Catholic Church, and in separate cases, from the ruling ism, to develop and to implement a common strategy and circles.
The communist parties, with all their weaknesses tactics in relation to Latin America so that these countries and and faults, as the most staunch and organized revolutionary their peoples can gradually be won as our friends.
Naturally, the center of the coordinated efforts of the powers, are aspiring more and more consciously to extend socialist countries should be the Soviet Union.
All the rest of the brothand working-class movement. erly socialist countries could cooperate, each of them giving With small exceptions, the communist parties in Latin its contribution in conformity with its national interests and America stand on correct Marxist-Leninist positions, the its international obligations. working-class movement is organized and the revolutionObviously, the change of the attitude of the socialist ary process is at a higher stage of development.
We can be countries to Latin America should not be measured with the convinced that the common efforts of the socialist countries attaining at all costs of a big relative share in the economic inevitably will render good results. relations with the separate countries.
At the moment it is On account of all this we suggest that a high level meetnot realistic to consider the task of ousting economically the ing among the brotherly parties of countries members of USA from this continent.
But the opportunities with which COMECON be summoned, at which the possibilities for the brotherly socialist countries, and first of all the USSR, coordinating and implementing our policy and [strengthdispose of, are such that even at relatively no big share in the ening] our comprehensive relations with the countries of economic sphere, the coordination and the increase of our Latin America will be discussed.
If you think that it is necesparticipation in all spheres of life in Latin America inevitably sary, we are willing to go to Moscow in order to inform the will yield the results that we wish.
In this respect we can give as an example the Peruvian BORIS VELCHEV case.
TsDA, Sofia, Fond 1-B, Opis 35,e.58; translated aid their policy for wringing themselves out of the by Julia Cherneva, edited by Jordan Baev.] paws of imperialism and for independent development of the country.
The Peruvian leaders feel best that if the new regime is not aided by the socialist countries, then the American imperialists quickly will find a way to submit Peru to their will.
Reports re Bulgarian leader Todor The economic difficulties and the strife for the weakening Zhivkov’s visit to Cuba, July-August 1970, the dependence on the USA force the Latin-American bourat BCP Politburo Session, 4 August 1970 geoisie to seek cooperation with the countries from Europe (including excerpts from Zhivkov-Fidel and Asia, including the socialist countries.
By expanding our Castro memorandum of conversation, 30 economic relations we can cooperate in intensifying of the July 1970) nationalistic and anti-imperialistic feelings on the continent, to win new allies in the struggle against imperialism.
The activities of the delegation and the to Cuba. results of the conducted talks and negotiations are approved The motion for drafting a special resolution in relation and highly valued. to the visit of the delegation and the further expansion of the relations and the cooperation of our country with the 2.
Next we have to consider what a talk on the Bulgarian radio and television about the visit the contents of this resolution will be and what actions it will of our party-governmental delegation in Cuba; to talk with encompass. comrade Leonid Brezhnev and to inform him personally Obviously, we have to make a reassessment of lot of things, about our impressions, conclusions and assessments about a political reassessment, first of all.
The leaders of the fraternal parties in the socialist counof scientific socialism, and that we were not sufficiently aware tries, besides the Socialist Republic of Romania, to be of this circumstance in developing our approach to Cuba. informed about the visit of our party-governmental delegation in Republic of Cuba. About the Council for Mutual Economic Assistance.
The “Foreign policy and international relations” Department dinate their prospective plans with the plans of the member of the CC of the BCP and the Foreign Ministry, coordinated countries of COMECON gradually, so that the cooperation with the respective ministries, institutes and departments, and the aid for Cuba will become more expedient and more to develop and put forward for approval in Politburo an effective. overall program for consolidation and expansion of the relaAbout the ration system.
COMECON has to spare a few tions and the cooperation of our country with the Republic of milliards in order to eliminate this system.
This situation canCuba in the economic, political, and cultural spheres. not be tolerated any more.
To take immediate measures for the consolidation of the our impressions, assessments and condiplomatic and the trade representation of PRB in Havana clusions, it is appropriate to inform the leaders of the fraterwith personnel that is capable of solving the issues connected nal parties in the socialist countries, with the exception of with the further expansion of the economic, the political, and Romania, . the cultural relations and cooperation of our country with the Notwithstanding the talks with comrade Brezhnev, posRepublic of Cuba.
First of all the ambassador of PRB Diko sibly with comrade Kosygin, it will be expedient to prepare Dikov39 and the commercial representative Fidan Avramov written information and to send it to the leaders of the brothwill be replaced by suitable people. erly parties in the socialist countries. About our representations in Cuba.
At the meeting that we had in the embassy he informed us at great length, NOTES but he could not reveal the true picture.
However, it is most important that there they strive decisively to construct a new socialist society.
Castro declared that he was convinced that money was not necessary and they could do without it.
However, on the following day he Politburo in August 4th told us about the production of their state factory for shoes. this year by comrade Boris Velchev He boasted that their shoes were very cheap.
However, they sell them three times more expensively and in this way they Comrades, collect revenue from the population and effect accumulation.
In other words, practically, he admits the need for money and In order to assess correctly the results from the visit of our its role . delegation in Cuba we should be reminded at what moment Like the other Cuban leaders, Castro thinks that coverit took place. ing money with goods in general is impossible and that We can definitely say that we visited Cuba at a favorable this problem can be resolved only with rations, moment.
These are very honest people (for implementation of revolution in Latin America but the develexample, the price of sugar.
I ask Castro why we have to opment of the economics of Cuba and the solving of the tasks receive Cuban sugar at a lower price than the Soviet Union. of the socialist construction.
The Cuban leaders adopt a course of rapprochement and and, therefore, we have to work very carefully and sincerely all-embracing cooperation with the USSR and the other and to apply a special approach.
However, it turned out that brotherly socialist countries in which it seems they see one of we were not working in this way.
Let’s take for example the the main prerequisites for the success of socialism in Cuba. issue with our specialists in Cuba.
The leaders more and more definitely make statements to payment of the leaves of these people and their families. for unity of the socialist community and of the international And this is a big colony. communist movement, while supporting the claim that this About our aid and the Soviet aid for Cuba and the develshould happen on a bilateral basis.
The aid is enormous but it is scattered in towards the documents at the meeting in Moscow dozens of countries and in a lot of cases it turns into consumand towards the importance and the role of our common ers’ aid, without playing the role of a factor for the developorganizations, for example COMECON. ment of the productive forces of these countries and being a constructive factor in their economies.
They take more and more realistic positions on the issues the effect of this aid is diminished and sometimes it is even of the struggle against imperialism and so on. lost.
It Thus, for example, we agreed not to mention anywhere was obvious that they had not seen the problems of the scienthe CPSU and the Soviet Union.
We had the impresworld was well aware of the relations of Cuba and Bulgaria sion that the words of comrade Todor Zhivkov sounded to with the USSR and that it referred to bilateral relations and it them as if in an unknown language.
Comrade Fidel Castro was not necessary to speak about a third party. displayed keen interest and a few times asked how and when Also they made it clear that they will not cede. we had discovered all this and whether it was the same in the Everyone understands that if on this and on some other other socialist countries.
The other issues we had not displayed the necessary flexibility, it could comrades did the same. have only harmed our efforts to attain the major goal, which We could not implement fully this scheme in our tactics we sought after. not to argue with them and not to moralize, but to tell them We agreed not to mention the communist parties of Latin more about our experience (how we overcame the difficulties, America, but as it is said in the Communiqué the Marxisthow we resolved the problems, and so on) because the time Leninist ideas and the communists. was not enough.
And obviously, it was necessary to talk with Something else, not to speak about the interthem more about some other very important problems of the national meeting of the communist parties, since they were construction of socialism. not actual participants in it.
But in the Communiqué were Such are the specifics, which first of all, comrade T. included passages that both parties would fight for the unity Zhivkov suggested.
And in these circumstances, we could not of the world socialist system and of the international movebut attain good results. ment, as well as for intensifying the anti-imperialistic struggle.
PROTOCOL They were convinced that we had a sincere wish to coopabout the talk between the delegation of CC of BCP and erate with them and to assist them.
They thanked us for Politburo of the the aid, which we had rendered them up to now.
From the Cuban side the meeting attended comrades Fidel Castro, Osvaldo Dorticos, Raul Castro, Sergio del Valle, Ramiro Valdez, and Armando Hart.
And something very important comrade Todor Zhivkov posed the question for assistance on a broader basis.
Our meeting has no agenda. recommended to the Cuban comrades to think about partial or complete participation and membership of Cuba in TODOR ZHIVKOV: In Bulgaria they saya meeting withCOMECON. out a speaker.
This is the Bulgarianus, is the foundation of trust among the socialist countries.
I Cuban friendship. told comrade Zhivkov that we are ready for bilateral cooperation.
The question is that there are no big probproblems, which can be resolved at the annual meetings of lems between us. the Committee for economic and scientific-technical cooperation.
I would like to emphasize our goal and willingness to attain maximum cooperation with Bulgaria.
There are big problems we are improving our relations with the Soviet Union, with but we are small countries and they do not fall in our radius which our connections have been developing very well recentof action. ly, and we would like to develop our relations with Bulgaria.
It is the small pebbles that overturn ist countries are developing very well.
We would like to make our relations closer and to like to take the floor before the talks begin. exchange experience.
We are interested in your plans during the and we benefit more from such cooperation.
In the end, the benefit will be for the and the agrarian industrial complexes.
We are isolated and we know do not wish to resolve our problems by creating difficulties for less.
Bulgaria has no natural resources and you should work a lot in About COMECON we know only about the issues, which order to overcome these difficulties.
For example, we know that the GDR ate on issues of mutual interest. will stop producing busses, that Poland will stop producing airplanes, and so on.
We hear about COMECON when we meet difficulties with the import of some goods.
He gave an assessment that COMECON level, we came to an agreement, but after that things did not played a big role for the development of the socialist coungo well.
He concentrated on the role of COMECON for the tations of the resolutions of the political leadership. victory of socialism in Bulgaria.
After that comrade Zhivkov However, we have to say that we are not complaining of spoke about the new tasks, which confronted us.
In this rade Todor Zhivkov to act as our representative where it is connection Fidel Castro expressed the position that it would necessary and to represent a friendly voice for us.
However, be better if there were common economics for all socialist this is already a reality and I want something which I know countries and he asked where the crack, which Cuba could is true, since comrade Zhivkov is already a friend of ours in squeeze in COMECON through, was.
What he said about the pointed out that Cuba could participate in the building of a trusts is very important.
Bulgaria and Cuba are small counbig metallurgic enterprise in the Soviet Union, in the plant tries and they have not many natural resources.
That is why, for caustic soda in Bulgaria and in the development of the as comrade Zhivkov said, you are supporters of coordination manganese ore in Bulgaria.
The numbers, which comrade Zhivkov the efforts of all socialist countries a common enterprise for announced about the role of the foreign trade in the formaexploitation of nickel ore, and so on could be built in Cuba . tion of the national revenue of Bulgaria, are very interesting.
They enjoy the confidence of the people and have set to build a socialist society with The visit of our party-governmental delegation, led by great energy, and strive to develop comprehensive cooperacomrade Todor Zhivkov in Cuba in July 1970, marked a new tion with our countries. and higher stage in the development of the all-embracing relaThe bilateral Bulgarian-Cuban relations are developing tions between Bulgaria and Cuba.
The economic and the scientific-technical coopthat the positive process of rapprochement with the USSR eration mark a constant advance.
Cuba occupies fifth place and the socialist community, which was being observed in in the foreign trade exchange of PRB with the socialist counrecent years, continued to develop and to intensify.
The Cuban leaders especially appreciate the work of the main problem of the Cuban leaders is the economic developBulgarian specialists and the assistance, which our country ment of Cuba, along with resolving the issues renders in the training of personnel for the different sectors building socialism in the country. of the people’s economics.
During the last years the relations along the party and the state line also expanded.
The relations between the public organizations of the two countries The economic development of the Republic of Cuba after expanded, as well.
The relations and the cooperation along the revolution in 1959 marks constant advance.
The socialist the culture line are constantly developing, too. sector strengthened its basic position in the economy of the However, the opportunities for the further expansion and country and the collective state property became leading in intensification of our bilateral relations at the current success almost all branches in the national economy. are not fully utilized, which was determined by the party-governmental delegation, led by comrade Todor Zhivkov.
The difficulOne of the reasons about this is that the information about ties are still big and they additionally complicate the severe the situation in Cuba was incomplete and one-sided.
The conditions in Cuba, resulting mostly from the highly underCuban reality was assessed purely from our position. developed economics, the economic embargo, the provocaIt was approached from our viewpoint and experience for the tions, the diversions and the sabotages of the North American construction of a socialist society and the specific peculiarities imperialists.
Besides, a lot of mistakes have been made and are being assessments and conclusions of the delegation unanimously made on behalf of our economic units and enterprises, while approved by Politburo, the “Foreign policy and internafulfilling their obligations towards Cuba with respect to the tional relations” Department of CC of BCP and the Foreign mutual commodity circulation.
The agreed upon deadlines Ministry suggests to Politburo to approve the enacted meaare not observed in the shipment of commodities and in [the sures for the expansion of the all-embracing relations between completion of ] comprehensive projects, a great deal of our PR Bulgaria and Republic of Cuba.
The measures are preproducts are sent with lower quality indices than the negotipared in accord with the motions and the recommendations ated ones, the spare parts for the machines which we have sold of the ministries, the departments, the institutions, and the are not delivered on time and so on.
All this creates difficulties organizations concerned with the expansion and the intensifor the Cuban comrades and there is a danger that our counfication of the relations between the two countries. try may lose the positions already won on the Cuban market, especially for agricultural machines.
K Tellalov upon with the signing of the long-term trade treaty between PR Bulgaria and Republic of Cuba for 1965-1970, for veto of Foreign Minister: Ivan Bashev export and re-export of sugar from Bulgaria.
TsDA, Sofia, Fond 1-B, Opis 35,e.27; translated tion of that clause has exerted and will exert restricting influby Julia Cherneva, edited by Jordan Baev.] ence on the development of the relations between Bulgaria and Cuba.
Not enough initiative is exhibited for establishing lasting relations between the Bulgarian and the Cuban ministries and Report on Fidel Castro’s visit to Bulgaria, departments and for the quicker drawing in of Cuba in the May 1972, and Bulgarian-Cuban relations coordination of the positions of the socialist countries in the international organizations.
Sometimes in the musical and artistic exchange, the respective institutions are guided mainly by INFORMATION commercial interest and thus create difficulties for the norAbout the visit of the Cuban party-governmental delegation mal development of the cultural relations between the two led by comrade Fidel Castro in Bulgaria countries.
All this requires a radical turning point in our relations A Cuban party-governmental delegation led by comrade with Cuba.
It returned the visit of our party-governmental means, which has a historical significance mostly for the delegation led by comrade T Zhivkov that visited Cuba in development of the revolutionary process in Latin America.
In the future, the relations between our country and Cuba The Politburo and personally comrade Zhivkov attached should be built and bolstered on the principles of Marxismgreat importance to that first visit of a delegation of such a Leninism and socialist internationalism and on mutual high rank led by comrade F Castro. respect and trust as well.
With the correct approach, to create an atmosphere of Our main goal was to reinforce and to quicken this posifull confidence and brotherhood. tive process, which is taking place in Cuba now.
That is why we took to the imminent task very seriously and responsibly.
The program for the negotiations itself and the work of the two delegations was First of all, the situation in Cuba, which Politburo and personally developed by comrade T Zhivkov. especially comrade T Zhivkov know very well.
Zhivkov’s visit to Cuba the positive process continues but How did the visit of the Cuban delegation led by comrade F. the problems remain the same.
And it seems that there On the very first day after the reception – 17 May, by is no real planning.
It is said that it would be done but it request of comrade F Castro, outside the approved program, is carried out slowly and it is not felt like something very there was a visit to the exhibition of new food products. important in the construction of socialism.
Similar things After the presentation in the exhibition, an animated discan be pointed out about the leading role of the party, about cussion among the Cuban comrades, with the participation of the bodies of the proletarian dictatorship, about the material comrade T Zhivkov and especially comrade F Castro, took interest and others. place.
Despite our efforts to explain to him that the comBefore the visit of the delegation, we got hold of the informodities are available and are sold in the shops, he [comrade mation that some leading comrades in Cuba were hoping F Castro] continued to ask who was distributing the candies, that we would exert influence on comrade F Castro and that for example.
We explained to him that from the industry, the visit would turn into a lesson to show him the positive the commodities were directed to the network of shops and experience of PR Bulgaria in the construction of socialism. were available and sold to the people.
The Cuban comrades Some Cubans who have been to Bulgaria told our specialists displayed a great interest how much sugar and in Cuba – “show comrade F Castro how you built socialism, sugar products cost.
The Cuban comrades and especially comrade F that they apologized and said that they had no intention to Castro to be introduced to the methods of ruling the discuss the price of sugar but they had asked simply for their party and the state, to the role and the place of the party in own information.
It was obvious that they came with some the social system and, first of all, in the sphere of economics, prejudices, and also that the mechanism of price-formation and to the role of planning in the overall life of the country. in a trade without rations was not clear for them.
It was evident that he would respect to be overcome. display a great interest, at that, on a broad range of issues, 3.
Our economic and scientific-technical cooperation to which was good. be improved and made more effective.
Those were the feelings and the mood when the work In defining the ways and the means for attaining the goals of the two delegations began.
Not to insult their self-confidence and national dignity, was reached that the issues of the international situation be to take into consideration comrade F Castro’s character and discussed at the meeting with Politburo.
The statement of not to leave the impression that we are edifying them. comrade T Zhivkov evoked great interest.
To let them understand that we acknowledge their big panied with a great deal of questions and it turned into a merits, their heroic deed, to let them feel our warmth, respect, friendly talk.
Because of comrade F dedicated to specific topics, which in our assessment showed Castro’s questions, the statement of comrade T Zhivkov was the positive experience of Bulgaria and were of interest for prolonged from one hour to two hours and a half. the Cuban delegation and most of all to comrade Castro.
Comrade Castro related in great detail about the hard Comrade Zhivkov guided all this directly and practically led capitalist legacy left to Cuba, about the those talks, or more precisely, seminars. country’s poor natural resources, and about the difficulties provoked by the sabotage activities of the American imperialists, who forced them to keep a large army.
Still, they have success and they take measures for the further Comrade F Castro accepted with great interest everything development of their economy. that was said, especially by comrade T Zhivkov.
However, Comrade Castro pointed out that the main production in it felt that these things were relatively new and to a certain Cuba’s economy is the turnout of sugar.
He announced extent foreign to him, and made a strong impression on that they had set before themselves the task to obtain 10 him.
Although nobody insisted on repayment, Zhivkov better. they think that it is not proper to go on in this way.
As in the statement at the first meeting, at other occasions, Everything was accompanied with a lot of questions and too, comrade F Castro emphasized that the development of great admiration on behalf of the Cuban comrades. their economy had to be assisted, so that the country would be saved from poverty.
At that time comrade Rodriguez told me that comrade Castro wanted to be allowed to send a Cuban group to Rousse unofficially, so that they could study our experience, After that comrade T Zhivkov declared that he fully planning, development of models, management of producunderstood the economic difficulties and that he was willing tion and so on. to look for a common solution.
Perhaps a special meeting of The extent of the effect on comrade COMECON or something else is required said he, about F Castro can be determined by the fact that summawhich it is good to ask the Soviet comrades for advice.
They were informed when Nixon was going to top in this respect and it was very useful in the discussions and arrive in Moscow and how he would be welcomed. in the propaganda against the capitalist agriculWhen comrade F Castro learned that there were no people in ture.
The work on the communiqué went off in a calm and Unquestionably, his views were getting broader and richer. business friendly atmosphere and in a spirit of frankness and The agrarian issues and the ways for developing socialist agriwillingness for concessions.
Practically, our views on most of culture were becoming clearer to him. the issues were identical or similar.
The Cuban comrades suggested texts in which the role and the significance of the national-liberation movements Thus the goal of acquainting comrade F were exaggerated.
They held back from judgments about the Castro with PR Bulgaria’s experience in building socialism, difficulties in the international communist and working-class as well as with the life of our people and the country, along movement, they did not approve our text about the struggle with its accomplishments in the spheres of culture, tourism, against the deviations from Marxism-Leninism and they did including the training of our armed forces. not agree that the role of the communist parties in Latin Those were 10 days of continuous hard work, first and foreAmerica be emphasized.
They strongly insisted that the war most, on behalf of comrade T Zhivkov. in Vietnam and the American government, and personally Comrade Zhivkov seized every opportunity in the airNixon, be condemned with convincing phrases. plane, in the car, at lunch or at dinner to talk and to explain This required long discussions of some formulations until one problem or another.
In informal atmosphere comrade we adopted a mutually acceptable version.
Our group had to Zhivkov explained to him that we regard explain, at length and patiently, the positions of our country, Maoism as a teaching hostile to Leninism.
In the airplane from Russe to Pleven comrade course, we had to be aware of and to take into consideration Zhivkov joked that soon he would go to Romania and probtheir positions, as well.
Essentially, the disputed texts were ably would listen to a great deal of speeches for independence, prepared on the basis of mutually acceptable formulations. noninterference, sovereignty and so on, “but I do not want to interfere in your domestic affairs” concluded comrade Zhivkov.
At the same At the meeting with the Politburo comrade Zhivkov and time, it was evident that they had not yet shaken off comcomrade Castro made statements on international issues. pletely some of their wrong positions.
Besides, comrade Castro considered some problems of the economic development and of the situation in Cuba, as well.
About the economic and scientific-technical cooperation I will not dwell on the statement because everybody heard it.
During comrade T Zhivkov’s visit to Cuba these issues were I will dwell only on the issue about the visit discussed in detail on a large scale with a view of creating a of Nixon to Moscow.
Comrade model for cooperation between the two socialist countries, Castro expressed very clearly their critical attitude and their employing all possibilities.
The visit in Sofia and everywhere else in the country was accompanied with great respect and love towards the Cuban revolution, towards the delegation and personally towards It was decided to study the possibilities for cooperation in comrade F Castro. the production of electric trucks and for the construction of a plant in Cuba for the production of starter and traction batteries on the basis of Cuban lead.
In the future, the emerging joint markets for electrical trucks, motor trucks and batteries The meeting with former partisans from the “Chavdar” in some Latin American and other countries can be discussed, brigade,40 which continued until after midnight, was also as well.
An agreement was attained about the building of very well designed and organized.
When comrade Zhivkov a repair plant for tractors and attached farm equipment in spoke about his wonderful impressions from Cuba, comrade Cuba.
You have to speak about the develop a plan about the production of system machines for future visits, as well.
I would like to invite you to Cuba again.” comprehensive mechanization for basic agricultural crops in Cuba in order to render more effective assistance to Cuban agriculture.
On leaving Bulgaria, comrade Bravo (deputy Prime Minister) and comrade Naranjo (Minister of Food It is deemed expedient to explore the possibility for Industry) declared that they were very pleased with the visit assembling electronic calculators and electronic calculating and that they were convinced that it was the best one, which machines in Cuba.
We accepted the motion to share our had left most wonderful impressions on them. experience in the application of the electronic-calculating equipment in the organization and the management of About some conclusions and suggestions agricultural-industrial complexes.
We pointed out the big experience of our country in the sphere of non-ferrous metalThe bulk of work completed gave and will give its positive lurgy and we offered to develop our cooperation in the sphere results.
Extremely of geological mining and in the delivery of equipment for useful work was done for our bilateral relations and for our mines, ore-dressing factories and metallurgic works for extraccommon cause.
We created very favorable preconditions for tion of lead, zinc and copper.
We suggested also receiving a group of Cuban specialThe basic thought that guided comrade T Zhivkov in all ists, so that they can study our experience in the sphere of the this incessant work, efforts and labor, was our great desire to planning of the national economy and of the development of be useful to the Cuban Revolution, to the Cuban Communist the machine-building industry.
They [the Cuban comrades] perceived these intentions, in the most noble sense.
About the atmosphere, which contributed to achieving good results It is obvious that comrade Fidel Castro and the other The visit of comrade T Zhivkov in Cuba in 1970 has left comrades have walked a long revolutionary road.
They are deep and lasting sentiments of confidence and friendship. building a socialist society, they are guided by MarxismThe Cuban comrades highly appreciate the fact that the first Leninism and proletarian internationalism, to cooperate with visit of a leader of such a rank is from Bulgaria.
And what is our countries and first of all, with the USSR, and they are more important, it has had an extremely favorable effect on strongly opposed to imperialism. them in a number of ways.
At the meeting with Politburo, Also, during their visit in our country they tried to make the most of it and to enrich and to strengthen their Marxist583 Leninist views.
Their attitude towards our country and our party shows an absolute approval of our policy and admira1.
Deep qualitative changes in the economy (industry tion for our successes, which comrade F Castro expressed and agriculture), culture, ideological life, which determine the repeatedly. socialist character of the Cuban revolution.
Strengthening and consolidating of the hegemonic In order to attain greater and more effective results on this role of the working class and of its union with the rural masses stage, it is very important that our countries assist decisively and the progressive intelligence. the economic development of Cuba, which will play a positive role for its still closer rapprochement with the socialist 3.
After the visit of comrade T Zhivkov in Cuba, at his suggestion, a special program for the development of ecoThe congress adopted basic documents in which this revonomic and scientific-technical cooperation between the two lutionary development is reflected and fixed normatively and countries was developed and some measures are being implethe main directions in the development of the party, the state, mented.
It is necessary to start working comprehensively for the economy, as well as the political line are outlined. the implementation of the program, and to this end, to look for and to reveal new resources.
In the development of these materials the documents of our party are utilized creatively.
In his report Fidel Castro indirectly criticized the Chinese leaders and their policy.
Comrade The period since 1959 is a difficult period, during which Suslov did not speak about the Chinese.
Now there is clarity in the line and the basic and the other Cuban leaders. directions in the development of the socialist revolution in Cuba.
Three distinguished men were elected in the new Politburo, including Blas Roca.
About the attitude of CPSU towards the Congress: Common socialist road of development; Official greeting of CPSU to the Congress, published in Consolidation of the socialist character of the Cuban the press. revolution, clarifying the ideological and political views of the Greeting of comrade Suslov.
Ford which one must not speak about. It can be said that now we are picking the fruit that we We are representatives not only of communist parties but also planted in due time. of states.
The necessary objective and subjective prerequisites for strengthening and deepening of these relations exist.
In conversation with Fidel Castro I asked him to give the About some unresolved economic issues (the price of floor first not to me, but to Janos Kadar.
But they did not sugar, our late deliveries of equipment and so on). comply and I had to speak first.
We have to discuss this issue and improve the reservations towards Bulgaria.
Second, if there specialists use the shop for diplomats, buy food is something in our economic cooperation, in our trade, just and sell them.
For each of them it has to be but not in order to receive a generous welcome, but to talk determined what post he is going to occupy, because when with you.” they go there, they begin to fight who the leader will Those were the talks that I had with him on different be.
Regardless of who the occasions. comrades that intercede are, we have to make a check to give We talked with comrade Stanko Todorov41 and comrade them confidentially a note – so that we concern ourselves Tano Tzolov42 and we think that we must not dramatize the very seriously with these intrusions.
About some new forms of cooperation between Bulgaria and They provide for the whole army.
Now, let’s come to an agreement and when Fidel Castro Fidel Castro promised to come to Bulgaria before or after comes, we will move forward to a broader cooperation and we the CPSU Congress. will find a way to make up for the losses.
There is no need to It would be difficult for him to come to our congress. dramatize this event.
Our party has earned exceptional The expansion and the intensifying of the comprehensive trust in Cuba.
We must not lose it because of the trade relarelations with Cuba this is our international and patriotic tions.
Besides, they are on the right path, they have [estabduty. lished] ties with the Soviet Union and they remain true to the Soviet Union.
TsDA, Sofia, Fond 1-B, Opis 35,e.81; translated SUPPLEMENT by Julia Cherneva, edited by Jordan Baev.] to the information of comrade TODOR ZHIVKOV about his visit in Notes Republic of Cuba, delivered at the meeting of Politburo on 5 January 1976.
TsDA, Fond 1-B, Opis 33,e.72, 1324; Fond 28, Opis This is very pleasing.
Baev, Jordan , Bulgaria in the Cold Minister of Foreign Trade , Bulgarian Ambassador to War.
Zhivkov’s Office Milko Balev in connection with Zhivkov’s visit to 13 CC BCP Politburo member since 1938, Minister of Internal Cuba, postponed for 1970.
On 10 June 1970 CC BCP Politburo approved Boris 15 After Iraqi nationalist revolution on 14 July 1958 there was Velchev’s final proposal “On activation of the BCP and PRB relations armed split among the new military junta and an attempt on life of with Latin America.” its leader Gen.
Todor Zhivkov was a CC BCP political 20 Karlo Lukanov – Minister of Foreign Affairs . representative at the brigade.
During Zhivkov’s rule, several of the 21 A member of Politburo and a Secretary of CC BCP (1958brigade commanders received influential positions – Gen.
After his removal from Politburo was sent Ambassador to Djurov became minister of defense , Dimiter Stanishev London , but in July 1971 was elected a member of – CC BCP Secretary for International Relations , and the State Council , and from 1974 until his death in Yordan Yotov – a Politburo member and CC BCP Secretary for 1987 served as Vice Chairman of State Council.
According to one copy to the Embassy the agreement signed in July, Bulgaria will give a 1. million dollar loan to Cuba at 2% interest, the amortization of which In connection with the instruction of the Center of the above will take place through Cuban goods between 1967 and number of reference, we have proceeded in 1978.
According to the previous loans and the agreements the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Foreign Trade, just signed, Bulgaria has undertaken to supply complete we had a meeting with the first employee of the Cuban Embassy plants and to build factories for Cuba, so in 1962 they started to Sofia, and on the basis of the conversations and our experiences, to build two cold-stores, a transformer factory, a cog-wheel we would like to report the following on the Bulgarian-Cuban factory, seven ice plants, and a carbide factory.
The Bulgarian comrades emphaplant cultivators to Cuba to convey their experience in vegsized that the political, economic, and cultural relations etable growing.
At the time of the skilled workers are trained now in Bulgaria and 18 Cuban mentioned crisis Bulgaria’s sympathy toward Cuba only grew students study at Bulgarian universities. stronger, at that time in Sofia violent anti-American demonIt is a problem in the economic relations between the two strations took place, declaring solidarity with Cuba.
On two countries that the quality of the supplied Bulgarian goods or three occasions the demonstrations were of such size that does not always correspond to the requirethe competent Bulgarian party and government officials had ments, and the Cuban Minister of Foreign Trade R Leon, visto interfere to prevent the from escalating.
The minister must be mentioned because later, through the Bulgarian told the Bulgarian leaders that the Cuban workers had gotten specialists traveling to Cuba, quite a large number of the used to high quality and he considered it a question of population was informed about the economic difficulties that politics that no poor quality goods should come from socialist caused problems in the supply of the population Bulgaria to Cuba, because this would undermine the prestige with goods and asked the competent Bulgarian officials in of socialist countries.
The minister and the Cuban Embassy letters and at meetings to alleviate the mentioned problems have asked the competent Bulgarian officials several times to by sending food. discuss the question of supplying some articles of food and important machines on credit.
They asked the spread anti-Soviet propaganda freely and the Cubans did not Bulgarian foreign trade officials to do more intensive market protest against it at all.
They do not want to real1963; the relations between the different organizations are ize that they have made mistakes in economic policy, significant too.
In the coming period, they are not planning and because of the lack of well-trained experts, they have an any relevant changes in the relations between the two counidealistic approach concerning a lot of questions.
It is worth mentioning that that the countries of the socialist camp should help Cuba the new Bulgarian ambassador, Atanas Kalbov, was assigned more as there is a danger of increase in Western, but mainly the task to try to establish the widest mass relations in Cuba.
Their foreign As a special task he was instructed to watch the activity of the mission in Havana received such a task as to study the Cuban Chinese in Cuba.
During Fidel Castro’s visit, it was most important that he Ambassador emphasized the need for unity in the international communist and workers’ movement.
According to the Bulgarian comrades’ evaluation, as a result of the visit the Soviet-Cuban alliance has become consolidated to a large extent, and Ministry of Foreign Affairs they think that it was the first time that Fidel Castro had Budapest talked so clearly about the rightness of the Soviet Union’s approach to solving the crisis.
For additional translations of Hungarian documents sented the correct position in the argument with the Chinese, on Cuba and the missile crisis, see the compilation of such materials elsewhere in this issue of the CWIHP Bulletin.
Their goal was to create a tool that would a selection from the “Highly Confidential” and enable neutral or non-committed countries to safeguard their “Confidential” collections in the Diplomatic Archives independence and sovereignty and their right to choose their of the Foreign Ministry of the Republic of Serbia in Belgrade. own model of development through active participation in The primary criteria guiding the selectors was to show a less global affairs.
Ideological polarization and munications between Belgrade and its embassies in Rio de division of the world into two antagonistic military alliances Janeiro and Havana between 26 October and 8 November perpetuated a threat of nuclear confrontation and annihila1962.
Yugoslav diplomats’ assessments and actions taken by one of the first opportunities for the NAM countries to demBelgrade at the apex of the crisis and during the first days folonstrate the positive effect their active engagement could lowing its denouement.
Notably, the Yugoslav ambassador’s have on global affairs and for the peaceful resolution of crises. reports of his frequent contacts with some of the highest It was a chance for the nascent movement to promote itself. figures in the Cuban leadership provide unique insight into The initiatives born out of the Conference in Belgrade, in their behavior during the apex of the crisis.
The documents particular those related to nuclear non-proliferation and those reveal a surprisingly active role of the non-engaged or nonpromoting the dialogue between two superpowers, provided aligned countries, notably Brazil and Yugoslavia, away from legitimacy for the engagement of Yugoslavia and Brazil, the the limelight of the Kennedy-Khrushchev showdown.
It is, of latter only being a mere observer at the Belgrade Conference. course, true that the impact of actions undertaken by the two Beside the two, other non-engaged countries, notably India countries did not determine the outcome of the crisis; howand Egypt, took active part in various initiatives and were parever, they played a constructive role in its resolution. ticularly active at the United Nations.
Understandably, their To understand fully the activities of Yugoslavia and its role is not visible in the presented documents.
In addition to president, Josip Broz Tito, and the motives behind them, the above, the non-engaged were interested in helping Cuba several aspects are of importance.
First and foremost, there uphold its right to choose its own political system and model was genuine fear among the Yugoslavs, as was the case around of development, one of NAM’s basic tenets.
Within this the world, general public or politicians alike, including the aspect, one cannot disregard an additional concern guiding main protagonists, that the escalation may lead to a nuclear the Yugoslavs.
In addition, the correlation between the timing interested in the survival of the first socialist country in the of the crisis and the consolidation of the new Non-Aligned Western hemisphere.
Movement explains the political calculations that guided the The documents presented here (together with translated Yugoslav leadership’s actions and their determination not to Brazilian documents appearing elsewhere in this issue of the be left on the sidelines, a seemingly paradoxical endeavor for CWIHP Bulletin) confirm very close coordination and cola country affiliated with the Third World at the time of the laboration between Belgrade and Rio throughout the crisis. nuclear stand-off between the two leading superpowers.
As This cooperation was founded on symmetry of their political the crisis itself and its chronology are being deliberated and outlooks in general and on the crisis, in particular.
Telling of documented in great detail elsewhere in this Bulletin, it is this closeness is Brazilian President João Goulart’s message appropriate to award attention to this particular aspect.
In this, an unusuthe founding conference of the Non-aligned Countries held ally short message, Tito even apologizing for its curtness and in Belgrade in September 1961.
The gathering of the heads of justifying it with the urgency of the moment, the Yugoslav state or governments of twenty-three Third World countries President makes several points.
By equating the two actions, Tito fully identified towards the Yugoslav President.
Coupled with his own access with the non-aligned standing, in collision with the Soviet to top Cuban leaders through his Ambassador in Havana, and Cuban position.
Secondly, Tito emphasized that the UN an association with Goulart offered Tito an opportunity to was the only legitimate forum for the resolution of this and exert more influence on events, albeit indirect, than he would similar crises.
Again, this reflects the Non-aligned precept—to otherwise have had. wrestle global issues away from the exclusive prerogative of the The documents presented here confirm the Yugoslav superpowers to the UN where the Third World has a voice.
Ambassador’s unique access to top Cuban leadership throughWithin this point, however, Tito makes an additional demand out the crisis, surpassed only by that of the Soviet Ambassador. that, if the Security Council of the UN proves to be impotent Cuban President Dr.
Osvaldo Dorticós Torrado and Foreign “as has often been the case in the past,” the issue must be put Minister Raùl Roa repeatedly asked Ambassador Boško before the UN General Assembly.
Last, the Yugoslav President Vidaković to remain in continuous contact, implying cominsisted that the crisis demands that the Heads of the nonmunication with Belgrade, as well.
The Cuban leadership committed countries “must” exert pressure through personal was obviously keen to maintain a line of contact with Tito.
A messages to the Secretary General of the UN, U Vidaković telegram on Friday, 26 October, following a meetThant, and the President of the UN General Assembly.
The ing with Dorticós, reveals that the Cubans were convinced response from President Goulart shows remarkable congruthat an American invasion was imminent.
According to the Ambassador, with real guarantees for Cuba, were the main motives behind the Cubans were at this point more than ready to comproBrazilian President’s important involvement and mediation mise, as long as they received international guarantees for during the crisis.
In a remarkable insight, he also provides confirm that Brazilian support for Kennedy’s resolution in the an account of the Cuban leaders’ state of mind during these Council of OAS, was a genuine political decision and not a critical hours, describing them as “deflated and dejected,” far result of the loss of direction within the Brazilian leadership. from being belligerent.
The Ambassador’s astute observations Radical rhetoric in support of Cuba, coming from those close provide a rare witness account of the mood, often fluctuating, to the Government, was clearly dismissed by the Yugoslav among the top Cuban leaders during the crisis, from dejection Ambassador as resulting from the “pressure from the masses.” to belligerence.
Firstly, ers after learning of Khrushchev’s decision, without alerting Tito viewed Brazil as the biggest and most prominent country or consulting Havana in advance, to withdraw the missiles of Latin America, the most influential voice of the continent. under United States pressure.
The Ambassador’s reports also suggest Secondly, the Yugoslav President felt strong sympathy towards that Cuban decision-making during the crisis was a result of Goulart, who was perceived as “progressive” and left-leaning long discussions and evaluations within a wider collective, but not a communist.
Yugoslavs were convinced that Brazil rather than a very small circle around Castro.
Illustrative would have participated at the Belgrade Conference had it of the irritability and mood swings among the Cubans was not been for very strong American pressure.
As the presented documents confirm, Tito was much to the later constant rivalry between the Cubans and informed of Goulart’s unique access and continuous comthe Yugoslavs for the soul of the Non-Aligned Movement. munication with Kennedy or his closest advisors throughout Ambassador Vidaković was, for example kept informed of the crisis.
Tito’s Ambassador in Rio, Barišić, as evident from Cuban leadership’s deliberations when drafting a response to his reports, had intimate access (perhaps only exceeded by U Thant’s message.
The Cuban leadership also heeded Tito’s the forthcoming United States mid-term Congressional elections, the proposal to come up with an appeal or declaration.
Nonetheless, Da Silva trast, as Roa confided in the Ambassador, the leadership did remained optimistic in the final success of his mission, which not even “have time to think about the Chinese and their the Ambassador followed up in his report of the conversation stupidities” nor did they bother to reply to Indian Prime with a caustic comment in parentheses, “(This general is very Minister Jawaharlal Nehru’s message.
The Yugoslav Ambassador’s cynicism derived from his 29 October, Vidaković conveyed that during two conversaunderstanding of Cuban options.
He then Cuban pride truly suffered and Roa kept emphasizing that concluded that only the Soviet aid and assistance could help Castro’s declaration (i.e., his “Five Points” statement of 28 Cuba escape the catastrophe and that Castro better bear this October) was really more aimed at the Soviets than at the hard fact in mind.
At one point, according to the Ambassador, Roa Buoyed by the extent to which Cubans heeded their advice exclaimed, “We exist.
He then decisive influence on Havana’s future “behavior,” namely its kept returning to the theme of how “hard it is for the small foreign policy orientation.
Popović’s signature suggested that the instrucBelgrade that, during tions were cleared with Tito.
Popović repeatedly underlined his first meeting with Da Silva, Fidel was antagonized by a change in style and tone to be of greatest significance for Goulart’s proposals.
This was Belgrade’s appeal for tion and UN inspections, visibly infuriated by the fact that the Cubans to tone down their “revolutionary” rhetoric. “the Russians and the Americans” have reached an accomAccording to the Yugoslavs, as a result of the favorable outmodation without him.
According to Ambassador’s account, come of the crisis the Cubans had won their place in the Fidel was equally stubborn and uncooperative during his first sun—they secured their rights to independence and to pursue meeting with U Thant, who had also travelled to Havana in socialism.
This, in turn, required from Havana a more mature the days immediately following Khrushchev’s climb-down.
In approach to relations with countries of different ideological his subsequent meetings with Da Silva, however, as reported orientation.
Yugoslavs advised against antagonizing others, by the Ambassador, Castro accepted Brazilian proposals in particular the countries of Latin America.
Belgrade recomfor denuclearization of the whole of Latin America and the mended a stable and constructive foreign policy, based on embargo on atomic weapons deliveries, and had “committed genuine non-alignment.
According ing the United States and fueling dangerous escalation of confrontato the same report, Fidel sealed his accord with a bitter remark tions between the superpowers.
As Da Silva active and constructive engagement in the international later confided in Ambassador Vidaković during a long latesystem securing in the process the support of a great number night conversation, “Castro could not conceal his outrage of countries.
The attractiveness of this change of “behavior” were certainly also aimed at eliminating new global initiative of the Third World was evident in the consistent Cuban radicalism that, in the name of “progrescongruence of views held between Yugoslavia, and active siveness” and “socialism,” was undermining Yugoslav efforts member of the Movement, and Brazil, whose government to strengthen the Non-Aligned Movement by increasing its was sympathetic to the non-aligned principles but outside the membership.
As the documents show, this congruence of the broadest inclusivity, regardless of countries’ ideological views enabled the two countries to work in synchrony and bent.
The Yugoslav “proposals” also supplemented the gist play a constructive role during the crisis.
The documents of Brazilian President Goulart’s initiative (secretly instigated also provide ample evidence of unknown closeness between by Washington) for a longer term resolution of the crisis the Cuban leadership and the Yugoslavs during the crisis, in that were conveyed to Fidel Castro by his Private Secretary particular its critical days.
To many, it will be a surprise to and special envoy, General Da Silva, on 30 October.
Given learn how eager the Cubans were to take very seriously Tito’s close cooperation and communication between Goulart and suggestions during these fateful hours.
Yugoslav Cuba in the Non-Aligned Movement but to support Goulart’s Ambassador Vidaković’s unique access to high-level Cuban initiative. leaders throughout the crisis enabled him to observe and The Cubans, however, must have perceived these “proposreport on the personal drama, insecurities, and doubts that als” as an intrusion.
In my opinion, this would certainly be these people went through as the crisis evolved.
The Yugoslav an aspect that would plague Yugoslav-Cuban relations for Ambassador’s accounts, as recorded in the documents prethe rest of Tito’s life.
Although, as underlined several times sented, offer an insightful, albeit very limited peak into the in the directive, the Ambassador was instructed to commudilemmas, frustration, disappointment, and even errors of nicate these “proposals” as his “personal opinion,” they were judgment the Cuban leaders underwent in the face of possible certainly seen by his hosts as paternalistic and coming from imminent annihilation. the highest authority in Belgrade.
The Ambassador reminded Belgrade that the Cuban tion with Che Guevara during the night of 8 November.
It press took note only of Tito’s first message at the beginning of tells us so much about the dichotomy and co-existence of, the crisis and that there was only a very brief mention of the on the one hand, a multi-layered dimensionality and, on the Tito-Goulart exchange of messages on 26 October.
Equally, other hand, an inexplicable tunnel vision of an ideological the activities of the Non-aligned countries were hardly noted, mind.
Che boasted to have been ready to cause millions of while the visit and mission of General Da Silva was not even deaths in the United States in the name of “defending” the working men mentioned in the Cuban press.
At the crisis, as was vainly hoped for by the Yugoslav leadership, the same time, his loathsome bravado could have simply been Belgrade’s Ambassador in Rio was able to report the sincerest evidence of an immature adrenalin-driven cockiness of a selfappreciation from the Brazilian side.
He also underlined a perceived revolutionary and evidence of boundless fear.
Most feeling of unanimous pride among the Brazilian political and disturbing, however, is the fact that at one point in human military elite for the role Goulart and Brazil played in the history, during the Cold War, there were people on both sides resolution of the crisis. who spent their days and nights making war calculations The documents presented here suggest several concluaimed at causing millions of deaths or a thousand-year long sions.
On the sidelines of the big Kennedy-Khrushchev show, environmental and cultural Dark Age on Earth.
Their minds smaller, non-aligned countries, namely Yugoslavia and Brazil, were pacified by the “justification” of a higher cause. made a substantive effort to contribute towards the resolution The documents constitute, in sum, a fitting contribution of the most dangerous crisis of the Cold War.
Immediate to the memory and commemoration of the most dangerous inspiration for an active engagement was the new awarecrisis of the Cold War when, for far too long, humanity stood ness created in the wake of the September 1961 Belgrade on the verge of self-destruction.
DDD The last information from the MFA [Ministry of Foreign To the Ministry of Foreign Affairs Affairs] received here from the Ambassador in Washington says that the USA is getting There is a general feeling in Brazil that the military blockready for military intervention in Cuba.
The approximate ade of Cuba, for the first time in the history of the Cold War, plan is that United States planes will start bombing Cuba in the places has brought the USA and the USSR to the very verge of the where there are alleged bases with nuclear weapons and that war because of one LA country, making in that way LA and Brazil the center of the Cold War.
The feeling of immediate will be as soon as Cuba refuses to accept the UN Commission danger mobilized all circles in order to find a way out.
The Brazilian Government advised Cuba concluded values of their former independent polto invite the Commission itself so as to clear the charges icy, especially towards Cuba, enable them to influence more about the existence of nuclear weapons.
However, Cuba freely and with more authority in seeking peaceful solutions. rejected it.
The Government is of opinion that the USA is However, there are differences within Government circles responsible for the instantaneous intensifying of the conflict regarding the real intentions of the USA as well as the ways and they are very worried about the unyielding attitude of and means for solving the crisis over Cuba.
Kennedy sent a letter of the United States here managed quite well to conto Goulart from which it can be vince that the United States option was not the invasion.
On Tuesday concluded that the USA is getting ready not only for disarKennedy phoned Goulart explainmament of Cuba but for the military liquidation of Fidel’s ing the reasons for the blockade.
He pointed out his intenGovernment as well. tions and asked for support in which he partly succeeded.
X 62. at 08.40 ing the support for their plan of keeping the blockade as long as the UNO Commission disarms Cuba.
Brazil accepts the UNO engagement, sending a Control Commission consisted of neutral people, To the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and expects certain guarantees by the USA about the demilitarization of Cuba.
They are of the opinion that through I provided to these actions a real guarantee for Cuba could be achieved Bernardes an extract from Tito’s and at the same time the role of non-aligned countries and appeal and talked about the active role of the UNO [United Brazil could be affirmed.
He is expecting directives from the Brazil supports American intentions, expecting alleviating of Government and President.
The 25th of October news about the war dangers and shows the wish to help Kennedy, so only the USA preparing a military invasion appears moderate pressure is exerted on him in the UNO without any to have helped the Government realize the issue and come condemnation or neglecting American interests.
Governor expect that there is a way out from this crisis, especially about negotiations on Cuba and Berlin and they also believe that the Brizola attacked severely the USSR will avoid crossing swords at seas and that it will make United States imperialism on TV at night on the 24th of October askCuba accept the UNO inspection.
Because of the pressure ing people to stand by the President and Government who are of the masses Government representatives make more severe acting for peace and the preservation of the independence of statements against the USA, that is, confrontation with the Cuba.
Prime Minister Lima of OAS of voting for the blockade which was against the made a statement to the unions and students that Cuba had Government’s directives that authorized him to vote against the right to its own socialist regime.
It seems that overburdening pressure asking Lima’s resignation and demand a Parliament of both the Prime Minister and Foreign Minister Hermes session to deal with foreign policy.
Lima9 led to the situation in which the Government lost control over the whole situation, letting Americans influence Barišić through the MFA supporting their line.
Archive of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs , are rumors that Santiago Dantas will take over foreign affairs Belgrade, Serbia, PA 1962, Kuba, folder again.
Obtained by Svetozar Rajak and Ljubomir Dimić and USA is demanding from all LA countries that voted for the translated by Radina Vučetić.] blockade resolution to take part symbolically in the blockade of Cuba with their own ships.
That is the reason why the voting of the Brazilian representative at the Council of OAS is being half-officially denied.
Archive of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs , to Yugoslav Foreign Ministry, 25 October 1962 Belgrade, Serbia, PA 1962, Kuba, folder Ministry of Foreign Affairs, FPRY F-67.
If it weren’t like that it could have been timed earlier and not twenty days before elections.
He says that they have very urgent phoned Brasilia to warn at least twice a day and all that in the prime of elections.
Forged the Comrade Koča . resolution and published it and only at his explicit demand Talks with they corrected it 12 hours later.
They point out the unconvincing side of the stated reasons by Kennedy for such an act.
He doesn’t believe in installing They were informed by the United States embassy that the work on the rocket launch sites.
He pays attention to the lack of any the missile launching pads was being carried on day and night logic in Kennedy’s attitude and that of the Administration and that if the work didn’t stop in the next 24 to 48 hours, in the last ten days in comparison to the earlier period.
B thinks USA is neither naïve nor is advancing to Cuba without solid that these works are against invasion and not for nuclear information.
Personally, he thinks that this was provoked by missiles launching pads.
They have the impression that the USA won’t be against and that Cuba also accepts the idea.
Very convinced ernments would make official steps to neutralization that Pentagon prevailed and the attack was inevitable. giving guarantees to Cuba.
He said there would be a great surprise if the attack could be avoided tonight.
The American Embassy is exerting pressure, using its American planes fly over many sites ruthlessly photomilitary circles, to bind Brazil stronger to American plans as graphing again the whole territory.
Military disposibegin with classical weapons focusing at first only on bases. tive gave resistance to various intrigues, so the government reacts more freely to the situation.
Informed him about the statement and the message of our Goulart is preparing his response to Kennedy for today or President .10 Extremely grateful and wants me to convey tomorrow, in which he will stress his beliefs in the printhat.
They were ready for everything without any restrictions ciples of self-determination and non-intervention.
Couldn’t accept disarmament without guaransion, while Goulart is a pessimist. ties, not to become the victims of aggression in future.
Any action, no matter the form, and initial steps from our side is Barišić looked forward to.
I have an Belgrade, Serbia, PA 1962, Kuba, folder impression, according to Dorticos, that they were ready to F-67.
Obtained by Svetozar Rajak and Ljubomir Dimić and accept many things that were out of discussion in the near translated by Radina Vučetić.] past.
If they overestimated, it’s difficult for me to judge because of the lack of the outside information, but it is the right moment to hold them to their word.
I will be in permanent contact during the night with Dorticos’s office.
Archive of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs , that he would reply to comrade President Tito this very day Belgrade, Serbia, PA 1962, Kuba, folder and that he sent him his regards.
Obtained by Svetozar Rajak and Ljubomir Dimić and In the end he mentioned the wish of his government translated by Radina Vučetić.] to expand economic relationships with all countries and especially with us,e. with the country with which Brazil has already had old and traditionally friendly and economic relations.
Archive of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs , to Yugoslav Foreign Ministry, 27 October 1962 Belgrade, Serbia, PA 1962, Kuba, folder F-67.
The suggestion to address to the presidents of the 15 SC and GA he finds Very urgent reasonable and he will do it.
He sent a message to Kennedy appealing for common sense and avoiding war.
His opinion To the Ministry of Foreign Affairs is that negotiations are necessary, and that Cuba must be prevented from becoming an atomic base for it could be the conKoča.
He thinks that the UNO [United Nations Organization] could take over the blockade of Cuba Visited Dorticos at 1 P.M. during negotiations, and that the UNO should stand for Just today received U Thant’s message.
Their intention is to address public opinion throughout that He said that he would reply to the comrade President this answer.
According to what he stated I conclude that there very day whose action he considers very useful and of current is no necessary flexibility at all.
They don’t have full texts interest; he also considers that the initiatives of all countries, either of the last message to Kennedy from Khrushchev or both aligned and non-aligned, should be further developed in Kennedy’s answer, so they are still not completing the final order to prevent and avoid the beginning of the war.
To the Ministry of Foreign Affairs The idea of a special declaration of the Cuban Government can also be taken into account.
He stated that there was information from Brazil that the possible attack could be in next 48 hours.
There are up against limits made I have received with great pleasure your message of the up by Fidel’s speech.
Today there is a certain deterioration in 26th of this month concerning the ‘critical situation which ha regard to our talks from yesterday.
I couldn’t possibly find out been developing about Cuba.’ more precisely how far they can go.
I have an impression that I was already acquainted with the statement of your D. was a protagonist of accepting our ideas.
However, it seems Government in which you have invited the ‘countries in that each issue is being discussed for too long.
Archive of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs , efforts in the UN and the constructive support of the acting Belgrade, Serbia, PA 1962, Kuba, folder Secretary-General U Thant with the aims to reduce tensions F-67.
Havana Brazil and other countries in 1961 and renewed now about Received: 29.
In that TO THE MINISTRY OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS case, Brazil had the opportunity in earlier times to propose measures which would implement a special status for Cuba Our 233.
Archive of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs , delivered that he accepted publishBelgrade, Serbia, PA 1962, Kuba, folder ing of these messages if we are interested in that.
He wants to be informed previously so that he could ask for the formal F-67.
Archive of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs , Belgrade, Serbia, PA 1962, Kuba, folder F-67.
XI 62. at 08.10 suggested to Roa the necessity of calm and cool reactions.
Khrushchev hasn’t informed us about his last Ministry of Foreign Affairs, FPRY message to Kennedy.
He read me U Thant’s letter in which he announces his arrival with his assisEmbassy of FPRY – Rio tants on Tuesday.
It is Yours 405. underlined that sovereignty of Cuba was undisputable, etc.
Roa has already prepared to go to the UNO [United Consented and interested in an announcing the messages.
His trip was put off until U Thant’s If they agree, they could be announced today, if impossible – arrival. tomorrow morning.
They don’t know what the special envoy to the Brazilian Contact immediately. president Goulart will bring.
In further talks he confirms that they didn’t have time Koča to think about the Chinese and their stupidities.
Belgrade, Serbia, PA 1962, Kuba, folder Much talks on the topic “it’s hard to the small ones when F-67.
In that framework the suspension of defensive level so as to prevent the repetition of the military Guantanamo is legitimate. threat.
In setting out these which could be renewed . demands, resolutely but calmly, they should highlight the necessity and readiness for negotiations and settling all conFor your information. tentious issues.
Nobody has doubts about their readiness to Lekić defend themselves at any cost, which they showed fully.
Of course, we are not asking their recognition for our tiveness. great engagement in recent hard days.
We have been fully Secondly, the relations among LA countries shouldn’t be engaged in the most useful and realistic way.
Doing that we antagonized unnecessarily, because they are their [i.e., the have shown again our great friendship towards them.
The Cubans’] safest and the most important support in the long fact that our activity was in the service of the general cause of run. peace keeping doesn’t change anything.
Going through all the troubles and the outcome of the Koča recent crisis, they have achieved, or they can achieve and consolidate, a number of issues with the right policy.
Archive of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs , have consolidated their existence as an independent country.
Belgrade, Serbia, PA 1962, Kuba, folder Possibilities of the aggression, blockade and interference by F-67.
Obtained by Svetozar Rajak and Ljubomir Dimić and the USA could be significantly reduced or eliminated.
Therefore, it is more important to work out and convey a suitable and constructive policy.
In that context, the internal consolidation, both economic and political, is of utmost importance.
Havana We insist on the style and tone, which they might find Received: 30.
So, the To the Ministry of Foreign Affairs main point is that they, without their own weapons “equal to American ones,” should be protected by international mechaYours 435141. nisms as well as by their own policy which would attract active support of a great number of nations, what the highest On the bases of my and guarantee is against and the means of repulsing a possible Roa’s agreement to keep in touch on everyday basis, I saw repeat of American aggression. him again today.
We are quite aware that this They were having conferences all morning in the presineither can be nor should be stated in full of each partner, nor dential palace. can it bring quick results.
Following this line of our action During the conversation it was emphasized in the proper we are offering the greatest help to them.
They should also form that the further development greatly help themselves with their own attitude, making our support depended on the form and tone of their actions.
He fully agrees personally and presents to Yugoslav Foreign Ministry, 30 October 1962 collective opinion.
Their attitude is to wait and be absolutely quiet until U Thant’s arrival.
He will be welcomed warmly Ministry of Foreign Affairs, FPRY and attentively.
X 62. at 13.30 gratitude, he wants it to be known that this belief was widely spread among the whole leadership.
I remarked that the whole situation was instructive for From the talks with the Brazilian ambassador the little ones who let them be objects in the games played by Bastian Pinto. the big ones.
His immediate response was that they had never Fidel came to the residence.
Talked to [Brazilian been nor would ever be the object in someone’s game and that President João] Goulart’s special envoy, Private Secretary they had had and would have their own policy.
Informal talks. to insist any further, in particular since what he has said barely Da Silva expressed the standpoint of Brazil on all current hid his intimate conviction that it is so. problems and especially on the running crisis.
The essence Great support given in the whole world should be appreciof Goulart’s position defined in P Del Este.
It is especially important for the LA countries. must consider the course towards neutralization gradually if He fully agrees with that, underlining the role of Brazil. he takes into account the possibility of final relations with Goulart’s special envoy [Gen. the United States being resolved.
Suggested accepting control [e.g., Albino Silva] with the message for Fidel has just arrived. inspection] as a necessary measure, under the condition of Doesn’t know the content yet. lifting the blockade.
Said that he couldn’t accept the consphere as among friends, with some pranks on the account of trols, stating all kinds of reasons . their “great friends” the Chinese and the others.
Besides, the agreement between Russians and Americans I will slowly try to broaden the circle of the executives for without him was a matter he couldn’t either understand or contacting.
Da Silva explained to him the necessity of accepting your instructions.
Goulart calls on the phone 2-3 times every day Belgrade, Serbia, PA 1962, Kuba, folder wishing to know the course of the talk.
F neither offered, nor accepted any of and the embargo on atomic weapons suggestions.
Inspection of the fulfillment of this decision details continued. will be performed by the UNO, which would make a precedent for the overall problem of inspection.
Archive of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs , from the continent but this doesn’t mean any new issue of the Belgrade, Serbia, PA 1962, Kuba, folder Monroe doctrine, because all the decisions and inspections F-67.
Bonding to the bloc proved unfeasible but the small NATO in LA will not be made either.
A somewhat more flexible policy is expected from Kennedy, which Brazil will try to make use of, but there will be no big changes in the Alliance for Progress.
The influence of Brazil as well as the position of Goulart became stronger.
They are to Yugoslav Foreign Ministry, 31 October 1962 spreading interpretations that non-aligned countries, and especially Tito, want Brazil to take over the initiative.
XI 62. at 11.20 but they either couldn’t or didn’t want to understand them.
Let them do what they 14 want inside Cuba, but outside they must stick to the frameworks dictated by real circumstances which couldn’t be To the Ministry of Foreign Affairs changed either by Cuba or Castro, nor would they be able to do so in future.
Had Goulart’s messages, and our activity in the UNO [United talked about all sorts of things.
Thus, he stubbornly refused any control nonaligned was significantly strengthened.
See our 814. showing both sides that he must have been consulted as well.
He tried to convince Castro that he Belgrade, Serbia, PA 1962, Kuba, folder couldn’t let U Thant to return without anything.
He was of the 14 opinion that Fidel was very honest to him and grateful that Very urgent Brazil had taken such an initiative.
Therefore, aspirations of Brazil are too ambitious for this Fidel met with Goulart’s envoy in the moment.
Expressed his satisfaction be neutralized following the formula of Yugoslavia.
Accepted thesis on it should be based on negotiations Kennedy-Khrushchev disarmament inspection and guarantees in the UNO [United excluding Fidel from them.
All this world fuss, even if it ends for the deatomization of LA and Africa.
The only factor that could solve all F demands the evacuation of Guantanamo for what, these problems now as well as in the near future could be the according to B., Americans stop their ears.
Castro as well as all the others should bear in mind this dence that the USA would accept disarmament and guarfact and should bear it further, no matter what they said on antees through the UNO and the nonintervention of Cuba.
At this moment, this fact is unchangeable The USA had some minor comments to their proposal about and obstinate. the deatomization for which they are expecting unanimous support.
They know that the United States press praises Brazil follow ing directives, while Kennedy has personally made some tiny Vidaković friendly gestures towards Brazil, which implies that the USA will try a kind of agreement with Cuba.
Archive of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs , expect any stronger engagements of the USA before the 7th Belgrade, Serbia, PA 1962, Kuba, folder of November elections.
They estimate that Kennedy has assured his victory on the elections F-67.
Obtained by Svetozar Rajak and Ljubomir Dimić and because of the popularity he had gained with this crisis, maktranslated by Radina Vučetić.] ing it possible to negotiate more seriously later.
He considers that the USSR has lost its prestige and confidence although at the last moment it did much to secure peace.
Archive of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs , Sending: Rio Belgrade, Serbia, PA 1962, Kuba, folder Received: 5.
Tito’s Ministry of Foreign Affairs stimulus contributed to Goulart’s There has been only the first Tito message after the blockdetermination, and now when everything is running smoothade in the Cuban press in the first days since the beginning ly, everybody is grateful. of the crisis, concerning Yugoslavia, as the indicator of the Russians counted wrongly, but they political reaction and understanding of particular events.
Nevertheless they are responsible for this was short information, but placed very well.
Then news on Tito-Goulart Anyway, the real victors weren’t Americans, but the “third messages 26 were mentioned in the moment side,”e., Brazil and the others who insisted and proved that of the culmination of the crisis.
Besides the meeting of U a peaceful solution was the only possible one.
Maurel Filho who couldn’t cope with the situation, but the The role of the nonaligned countries during the crisis was matter was quickly determined because he didn’t have any presented only through individual cases of the countries, and support in the Army. not as a coordinated action.
UAR [United Arab Republic; We would appreciate that, sometime after the solution to Egypt] and Brazil were only mentioned.
The visit of [Brazilian the crisis on Cuba has been found, Tito sends a message to emissary Gen.
Albino] Da Silva wasn’t mentioned at all in the Goulart and even more to the Brazilian people congratulating press, the letter from [Mexican President Alfonzo them on their success.
His coming and talks Brazilian concept, which Castro was informed by [Brazilian were defined as “he is coming to talk and not to make an emissary Gen.
About Chinese declarations and manifesta3. guarantees to Cuba for its sovereignty and independence. tions of solidarity , [in the Cuban press there is] a lot.
Today, the entire editorial from “Renmin Ribao” Allegedly Castro welcomed the idea of the above plan. related to the Soviet decision to withdraw Brazilians think that the USA could accept it after nego“offensive weapons” and whole-hearted support tiations. for Castro’s 5 points.
Archive of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs , [Source: Archive of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs , Belgrade, Serbia, PA 1962, Kuba, folder Belgrade, Serbia, PA 1962, Kuba, folder F-67.
With substantial patience and Extremely satisfied with Tito’s message which contributed gradually the Cuban leadership will nonetheless understand to Goulart’s decisiveness on Cuban the basic reasons of Soviet tactics.
USSR unconditionally Russians withdrew in time, although responsible for the gives Cuba all necessary material help, without which the crisis.
They started talks about that they wanted peace, besides demonstrating its power. economy while political talks are still ongoing.
He says he is However, Brazil and the others proved that the peaceful an optimist, still. solution was the only way.
They would like that comrade President sends his Vidakovic message to Goulart and even more to the Brazilian people, as soon as the Cuban crisis approached the solution.
Archive of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs , The embassy states that the Army is more united than ever Belgrade, Serbia, PA 1962, Kuba, folder and is with Goulart.
The path for Latin America is revolution, opinion has no practical meaning.
On their terrimean the imminent victory of socialism, it is a question of tory or in their territorial waters—there are no inspections. years of struggle with which imperialism could not come to Every vessel in their waters they will sink, they will down terms.
A road within the confines of legality, alliance with every plane; they still have enough arms. different bourgeois groups as is promoted by the communist If there is a direct attack they will defend with all their parties of Latin America, does not lead anywhere.
On the elections towards peaceful changes is absurd. critical night of the 27 October he gave instructions to his In many specific cases they do not agree.
No power can control villages in He noted that their fighting determination is known to huge areas.
The everyone and asks what are their concepindustrial worker in Latin America is in an advantageous positions on the political plane; what and how do they think to tion compared to the villager.
He participates in the division use and nourish the factors of moral political support which of plunder and exploitation.
This is the explanation of the Cuba received during the crisis. says that these factors opportunistic character of the communist parties of L have no practical meaning.
Where have A Their main base is the working class of the cities, those factors ever played any sort of role He never saw it. etc., etc.
In the last few years in Columbia the guerrilla is They said so to U Thant as well.
Thus, armed and continuous, and their determination to fight to the death.
There is no compromise armed struggles] directly, they encourage with all with imperialism.
It is true that the American Guevara, Fidel Castro, and Raul Castro—ed.], the rest either imperialism is not a paper tiger but a real one.
If the socialist do not have them or if they had elephant turns its back this one would jump their own opinions they are worth nothing.) on its neck and defeat it.
The concrete struggle around Cuba Talks with Mikoyan are still ongoing and he represents a loss for the socialist world because of the USSR’s cannot say anything more specific about the results.
The decision by the Pentagon and the rest not agree with Khrushchev’s tactics.
They do not agree with of the military in the USA to attack Cuba on the critical 27 his conception of the struggle for peace.
Nikita—appeaseOctober is an immediate result of previous Soviet steps that ment; they—fist.
They [i.e., situation would be completely different, imperialism would Cubans] without Russians couldn’t even move.
Next year it could easily be double. governments, the position has not changed an inch, on the The Russians are obliged to help the revolution.
They will contrary, the traditional position of the Second Declaration certainly do it.
In the closed meet3 Message from President Tito to the President of Brazil, ing between Fidel and U Thant, the latter expressed sympaGoulart, 26 October 1962; AJ , KPR thies for their struggle and said that he’s on their side, the rest , I-1/114.
See the is known. translation from a copy in the foreign ministry archives in Mexico Yugoslavia, as he says, has fully identical positions with City, included in the collection of Mexican documents on the Cuban the Russians on all current issues.
He wanted to say, here you Missile Crisis elsewhere in this issue of the CWIHP Bulletin—ed. see we are the only ones fighting for the purity of Marxism4 In fact, although some outside observers (including many Leninism, for revolutionary-ness.
Cuban missile crisis—including the sending of a special emissary to He didn’t want to say anything openly.
They do not know Havana—to his collaboration with Tito, it had in fact been secretly what is the essence of the Sino-Indian conflict and this is the solicited by the United States.
On this, and Brazil’s efforts to mediate reason they do not declare their position.
They are considerbetween Havana and Washington in 1960-62, including Yugoslaving it currently.
Previously, we could not 5 The Yugoslav ambassador in Havana consulted closely on take these positions too seriously.
However, after this test [i.e., after this talk with Guevara—ed.], yes.
This should not be October 26 and succeeding days with his Brazilian colleague, Luis taken as demagogy.
They firmly believe that the people follow Bastian Pinto; see Bastian Pinto’s cables in the collection of translated them and will follow them even into suicide.
This dose of courage and tenacity, now that the main 6 Regarding the Chinese, and Cuban attitudes toward them, danger has passed, points towards something that should be see the translated Chinese documents and commentary elsewhere in opposite to this.
Not all foreign diplomats in Brazil reported such pride regarding Goulart’s mediation attempt—see the disdainful reports Vidakovic of Chile’s ambassador, citing Brazilian newspaper commentaries, published elsewhere in this issue of the CWIHP Bulletin—ed.
Archive of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs , 9 Premier Hermes Lima was then also serving as foreign Belgrade, Serbia, PA 1962, Kuba, folder minister due to the illness of Santiago Dantas.
Even though the East-West showdown measures being taken by the East German authorities and over Berlin in October 1961 was still fresh on everyone’s other Warsaw Pact governments during the initial days of minds, and even though tensions resulting from the United States govthe Cuban missile crisis.
The first item, a protocol and annex ernment’s discovery of the missiles in Cuba nearly sparked a from the SED Politbüro meeting of 23 October 1962, only renewed confrontation over Berlin in the fall of 1962, East hours after President John F Kennedy’s speech announcing German officials had been left in the dark about the secret the discovery of Soviet missile bases on Cuba, outlines a widedeployments.
By coincidence, a leading Cuban official, Blas ranging campaign of “peace” propaganda to be undertaken by Roca, was in the GDR when the Cuban missile crisis erupted SED officials at all levels.
Such campaigns were not new — peace propaganda staged in East Berlin on 26 October, a rally that stemmed efforts had been a staple of the Soviet bloc since the late directly from the program adopted by the SED Politbüro on 1940s — but these latest efforts took on special urgency as 23 October. the crisis unfolded.
SED First Secretary Walter Ulbricht traveled to Moscow The second document, a telegram from East German on 1 November for consultations regarding Cuba and the Ambassador Rudolf Dölling, who had been representing the security of Berlin and the GDR, two issues that Ulbricht (and German Democratic Republic in the Soviet Union his Cuban counterparts) hoped to keep separate.
The leaders since 1959, was sent to GDR Deputy Foreign Minister Otto of other East European Warsaw Pact countries also came to Winzer on 26 October 1962.
Some of the discusfrom a briefing that Dölling and other ambassadors from sions were multilateral; others were bilateral.
The most interesting part of the telegram comes ing his four days in Moscow he held intensive consultations toward the end, where Dölling notes that the Czechoslovak with Soviet officials, including one-on-one discussions with and Polish ambassadors were able to provide Kuznetsov with Khrushchev on the evening of 1 November and again on 2 up-to-date information about the status of their countries’ November.
The East German records from these talks, which ships that were near or within the perimeter of the United States naval I obtained by chance in the late 1990s from the former SED blockade against Cuba.
He writes that “because Kuznetsov has asked for search for these notes and will translate and present them in information, I think it of utmost importance that I be a future issue of the CWIHP Bulletin.
Agenda: 1) Visit of comrade Gromyko, Foreign Minister of Concerning the provocation of US-imperialism against Cuba the Soviet Union 2) United States aggression against Cuba Rapporteur: comrade Ulbricht In the night of October 22nd to 23rd, the US-Administration present members: Ulbricht, Matern, Stoph, imposed a blockade on Cuba which President Kennedy had Ebert, Leuschner, Honnecker, Warnke, Norden announced in a speech full of anti-Soviet invective.
Mewis, Verner, Hager, Kurella Grüneberg, is to be considered a crass violation of international law, a Apel blow against freedom of the seas, and against free trade, it is others present: Mittag, Axen, Kiefert impudent interference with the very national affairs of Cuba absent : Grotewohl, Neumann, Mückenberger, and with all nations entertaining normal relations with Cuba.
Mittag test movement against the flagrant violation of International beginning: 10 am Law, the Charter of the United Nations and against the threat end 11.15 am to peace must be organized.
The arguments against American imperialism acting as international policeman against the Items freedom of nations is to be linked with concrete arguments 1) Visit of the Foreign Minister of the Soviet Union comrade against revisionists and militarists in Western Germany.
Ulbricht Imperialist circles in the United States mean to dictate to Cuba The information about the arrival and the visit of comrade its political course, the establishment of its political system, Gromyko is noted. and which arms it may own for its defense.
Imperialists in the United States are not willing to accept the fact Area administrations and district committees are to be that the Cuban people have cast off the dominance of US informed about the decisions. monopolists and big land-owners.
They intend to force Cuba again under the imperialist yoke although Cuba has made use Ulbricht of its right to self-determination.
But so far, the United States administration has opposed these and with thirty times more inhabitants, is pretending to feel suggestions.
This State of all States, havthat it is in the interest of peace for Cuba to renounce its ing military bases in Japan, Turkey, Saudi Arabia, Western defensive weapons.
Germany and many other countries, even in Cuba, that Once again Bonn imperialists are the first to side with constitute a permanent threat to peace, this State means to the aggressors and enemies of peace.
This is definitely applaud the American US-imperialists and promised them an attempt at violating the sovereign rights of free and indesupport for their dangerous enterprise.
Not only are the US-imperialists illegally tion is disturbance of peace.
Numerous neutral countries keeping their powerful military base in Guantanamo, Cuba, responded with indignant outrage to Washington’s new attack which dates back to colonial times, not only are they staging against world peace.
The protest includes some of its own armed attacks against Cuban villages, they are now trying to allies, as it is reflected in comments of quite a few bourgeois strangle little courageous Cuba with an outrageous blockade. papers and public personalities.
Clearly the peoples of After attempts of economic blackmail by imposing a trade the world oppose neo-colonial arrogance and disturbance of embargo, and after the attempts of bandits, paid and trained peace.
They are against the American imperialists’ wish to act by the US, to land in the Bay of Pigs had failed, and after as world-policeman. threats and pressure to halt navigation to Cuba had been of All freedom-loving people are disgusted at the methods no avail, the United States are now resorting to a blockade, exerting the US-oligarchy is using to establish its tyranny in free Cuba. direct aggression.
The first reactions of many countries in the world show that The US-imperialists have taken steps against free Cuba. the new aggressive acts of the United States result in its further isolation.
This is an obvious blow against the program of general and Forty-four years ago the attempt of imperialists, in parcomplete disarmament as initiated by the Soviet Government ticular of the Americans, failed to defeat the young Soviet and supported by most nations in the world.
The peoples must It is typical of the aggressive and violent character of be more vigilant to preempt the aggressors.
US-imperialism that it does not think it necessary to consult In connection with the campaign against the American with its own allies.
On the contrary, its allies had simply been aggressor it is important to explain the existing balance of presented with a fait accompli to drag them into the military power.
It assists nations fighting for their freedom and The US-Administration does not approve of the Cuban allows them to determine how to lead their lives.
The Soviet Government taking the necessary safety measures against Union is conducting a far-sighted policy.
It is necessary to continuing American threats and provocations and against demonstrate that in the current international climate powerrecurring attacks of military bandits.
In its note the USSR tives, institutions, universities and schools and send a solidarwas quite right to emphasize the fact that it had several ity-message to the Cuban Mission in Berlin.
The United States insists on a halt to arms-delivery and removal Thursday there will be a big central demonstration on of existing missiles.
Resolutions of US, SU, and Cuba dealt August-Bebel-Platz. with session of Security Council.
The neutral States, Ghana, This campaign is to be linked with the mass-competition and United Arab Republic , submitted their concerning preparations for the 6th party-conference. well-known resolution, missing fundamental issues.
Today, U and agricultural productivity will increase the power of the Thant is having individual talks with [Soviet UN Ambassador socialist camp, and hence the power of peace.
The GDR will Valerian] Zorin, Stevenson be made stronger by mass-competition and aggressors will be and the Cuban representative.
After receipt of Khrushchev’s defeated. letter U Thant has again resumed talks with Khrushchev.
Anything that could increase the war-psychosis incited Draws again attention to dangerous situation, concerned by the United States should be avoided.
Our security and strength depend on the posal suggesting that SU instruct its ships to avoid the ringunity of the socialist camp, on peace-policy, and continuous blockade of United States ships to allow for the growth. possibility of a peaceful settlement.
The Soviet Government With calm and with nerves of steel we in the GDR will will give such an instruction to captains of Soviet ships.
Thant has handed a similar letter to Kennedy proposing not With socialist regards to engage Soviet ships in order to avoid conflict and play for time.
The Soviet Government deems development of situation unfavorable for the US, as it is under pressure of neutral States.
State Otto Comrade Kuznetsov asks the ambassadors to inform Winzer, 26 October 1962 their governments.
The Ambassador of the CSSR asks whether such directives applied to all ships notwithstanding COPY their freight.
Secretary of State Winzer 26.10.1962 Comrade Kuznetsov did not comment on the remark that the United States was preparing an armed invasion of Cuba.
He, however, On October 26th, comrade Zorin, Minister Vasily] Kuznetzov asked the ambassadors of the Stevenson, and the Cuban representative were ongoing.
Emphasized that U the GDR-ship “Völkerfreundschaft” was within the ringThant’s letter and Khrushchev’s response had been made blockade.
Obtained for says that three of their ships are concerned, two en route to CWIHP by Hans-Hermann Hertle, translated for CWIHP by Cuba, one in Havana.
Both ambassadors informed Kuznetsov about the orders the ships had received from governments.
United States President Kennedy actually announced that I am informed about the position of GDR-ships and the the blockade of Cuba in a televised speech orders they received. beginning at 7 pm, Washington time (after midnight in Germany), on Monday evening, 22 October, but it did not Dölling actually go into effect until 10 am Wednesday, 24 October.
He accuses Soviet leaders of being ing a conversation he had with a leading figure in the “evasive” and of repeatedly failing to offer an explanation for Cuban Communist regime, Blas Roca Calderio.
Lösch the conversation is not specified in the memorandum, but the claims that Blas Roca appreciates the Soviet Union’s role content (referring to events that occurred in November and in having “preserved the peace” (presumably a reference to early December 1962) suggests that it was in late 1962.
The avoiding a United States invasion of Cuba) “during those critical days” document is dated 8 January 1963, four days before Cuba in October 1962, but he acknowledges that Blas Roca and the and the German Democratic Republic formally estabother Cuban leaders will not be satisfied until they receive a lished diplomatic relations.
The memorandum was appardetailed explanation from Moscow about the inspection issue. ently submitted to the East German Foreign Ministry by Lösch during a trip back to East Berlin as the GDR prepared to elevate its ties with Cuba.
Fritz Johne became the first full East German ambassador to Cuba in July 1963, and Lösch went on to become the GDR ambassador to Algeria.
He had arrived in the East German capital delivered from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and to use the on 5 October and was still there seventeen days later when opportunity to have a conversation with him.
Both he and and he expressed thanks for the great help that the GDR had the head of the East Berlin party committee, Paul Vermer, given him personally, and explained that he would convey his sought to avoid any links between Cuba and Berlin when thanks personally in a letter to the Central Committee for the they spoke at the rally.
Although Blas Roca declared that hospitality and assistance extended to them.
Both he and Vermer since his departure on the 3rd eschewed any threats against Berlin and sought to portray the , he said it had been very impulsive and two issues as entirely separate. promised to take care of the matter immediately to settle it.
Lösch’s memorandum touches only briefly on Blas Roca’s We then spoke about the Cuban crisis.
Cde. trip to the GDR and instead focuses mostly on the contenBlas Roca told me that the main problem lies in the as yet tious aftermath of the Cuban missile crisis.
Observers at the unresolved question of why the Soviet Union in the letters time were well aware that Cuban leader Fidel Castro had from Cde.
Khrushchev to Kennedy had offered international been angered by Nikita Khrushchev’s willingness to agree inspections, even though Cde.
Fidel Castro had previously to international inspections of the removal of Soviet SS-4 expressly rejected any international inspections on Cuban missiles from Cuba.
This infringement of Cuban sovereignty is a source the past twenty years from Russia, Cuba, and other countries of concern for all the comrades.
If this fact is not taken into have underscored just how deep the rift between Cuba and account in all actions, it could have a significant the Soviet Union was over this matter.
Echoing Castro’s adverse impact on Cuba’s role for developments in Latin view, Blas Roca expresses concern that “this infringement of America and potentially deal a blow to the revolutionary Cuban sovereignty” could endanger Cuba’s role in all of Latin process in Latin America.
Blas Roca said that the Mikoyan visit had produced no satisfactory Berlin, 8 January 1963 results for the Cuban National Committee and the Cuban Lösch government because he offered no explanation for the problem of why Khrushchev had offered inspections in his Notes letters to Kennedy.
No date was filled in here, but attended the party congresses in Bulgaria, Hungary, and Italy the conversation seems to have taken place in midto late he had tried to receive such an explanation from the Soviet December 1962. comrades who were present there, Kuusinen and 2 Translator’s Note: This is referring to the visit by Brezhnev.
These comrades had replied evasively, Anastas Mikoyan, a member of the Soviet Presidium and offering no explanation for Soviet behavior and implying that one of Nikita Khrushchev’s closest aides, to Cuba on 3-26 the Cuban friends overestimated the process November 1962 in an unsuccessful bid to mend relations in Latin America. between the two countries.
Blas Roca said that the National Committee must Cuban alliance had emerged after the Soviet Union affirmed no longer spend time on discussions of secondary problems, its willingness to permit international inspections of the and he repeatedly came back to what he himself believed (and removal of Soviet missiles from Cuba.
For translations of the other comrades even more so) was the main question to Soviet transcripts and reports from Mikoyan’s visit, along be clarified, namely, why the Soviet Union had offered no with a perceptive introduction by Vladislav M Zubok, see explanation for the procedure it had agreed to.
For a full Soviet record of Mikoyan’s mission to Cuba, time pressure or some other motives, they had a right to be including exchanges both with the Cubans (and others informed by the Soviet comrades about it. in Havana) and with Khrushchev in Moscow, see Sergo I had the impression that Cde.
Secretary of State Dean Rusk to protest the serious breach of confiBut, of course, nowhere in Europe was the immediate impact of dence.
Hurt by the accusation, Adenauer withdrew his longstandKhrushchev’s nuclear missile gamble felt more acutely than in ing confidante and ambassador to Washington, Wilhelm Grewe.
Ever since the Soviet premier’s November 1958 ultimaRelations went from cool to icy when the chancellor publicly distum, designed to dislodge Western allied forces from the western tanced himself from Washington’s negotiation package at a press sectors of the former German Reich’s capital, Berlin had been the conference in May.
By time the missile crisis erupted in October, focus of heightened East-West tensions.
Following the building Adenauer’s trust in the United States had been severely shaken. of the Berlin Wall in August 1961 and the October stand-off The missile crisis spurred a momentary warming in the between Soviet and American tanks at the Checkpoint Charlie uneasy Adenauer-Kennedy relationship.
Having looked the other way for years as amity city’s western sectors hung in the balance.
It was here where future blossomed between the East German communists and Castro, aggressive moves on the part of the Soviet Union were expected, Bonn demonstrated its hardline attitude towards Castro when possibly later in the year.
Not surprisingly, upon discovering the Cuba formally recognized the GDR in January 1963.
Applying Soviet nuclear missiles in Cuba, the Kennedy administration the so-called Hallstein non-recognition doctrine, Bonn broke off all immediately suspected that the deployment aimed at providing relations with the Castro regime, even rejecting Havana’s appeals Moscow with new levers of pressure on Berlin, even that the to retain some limited trade or consular mission in Hamburg.
Cuban action might be a precursor to another move to evict But worries about the United States soon resurfaced in Western forces from the divided city.
The aging chancellor (the French President Charles de Gaulle his incredulity at the fact FRG’s only leader since its inception in 1949) was having difficulthat the Russians had managed to move the missiles to Cuba ties connecting with the young American president.
At the same time, he grew critical of the Kennedy administration’s search for a Berlin solution as part of a larger effort at détente.
Negotiations led by the US ambassador to Moscow, Llewellyn E Thompson, for an international access agency for Berlin that could settle the thorny Allied Cable from Federal Republic of Germany access problem conjured up old fears of a US-Soviet deal over Embassy, Washington , 22 German heads.
The current situation is characterized by the Cuba blockade imposed by the American government.
Especially the facilities in Cape Canaveral are considered potentially vulnerable.
This way the United States is supposed to be forced more years (reliably confirmed by U 2 [reconnaissance into either accepting the deployment of these weapons planes] and satellites, of which the Soviets are said to be next to the coast of the American continent, or into giving aware), the government believes to [be able in to Soviet demands concerning disarmament and Berlin. or willing to] run an increased risk.
Yet the window for The dangerousness of this “big gamble” and “extreme freedom of action is said to be not unlimited. move” is taken extremely seriously.
In case the first offensive expansion of the Cuban base action on a separate treaty , or on is accepted, Moscow will step up further.
If America reacts Berlin, might soon provide a “pretext” to act against Cuba. , Moscow will retreat.
In the same meeting there existed immediate aggravation of the Berlin crisis, the question agreement that a Soviet reaction could also affect Berlin. about the timing of the Cuba action poses itself in a difNone of the participants present indulged into speculations ferent way. which Soviet measures might be considered likely with regard a)In addition, the current timing is certainly influto Berlin. enced by the upcoming elections where signifiNitze negated the question whether the Soviets might have cant losses for the Democrats are predicted.
Republican party leadership recently decided to turn the Cuba question into the main election issue.
The the Bay of Pigs landing operation with all the consequences it actual political reasons are the Cuban threat and would have needed.
Back then a revolution could have been Soviet policy on Berlin. launched.
Since then, there exists iron communist discipline b) Maybe the timing also seemed favorable in in the country.
Castro has about 50,000 well trained and context of problems Moscow is facing with the equipped soldiers and a militia of 150,000.
The latter had provided a legal expertise according of the Berlin crisis by the American political leadership, to which the American blockade is incompatible and the increasing number of public hints according to with international law.
It would be more important instead, if which the United States is ready to go it alone if it has to world opinion will get the impression that Cuba’s population do so. does not stand behind the regime.
The Chancellor himself voiced the opinion it will not come to a conflict as long one remains firm.
He reiterated Knappstein again it should not cause any insurmountable problems to stir up domestic unrest within Cuba.
Akten zur Auswärtigen Politik der Bundesrepublik Mr Acheson referred again to practical difficulties cripDeutschland 1962: Band III: 1September bis pling such an approach.
He then explained the deliberations 31Dezember 1962 , discussed in Washington.
The first one features an immediate use of military force, the second one just a blockade without any direct use of force.
According to the first scenario, the missile bases in Cuba would be destroyed by conventional air attacks.
This approach would hardly have caused casualties Republic of Germany Chancellor Konrad among the Cuban population.
Adenauer and Dean Acheson, Special As a next stage, airfields where Soviet MIG planes and IL Envoy of United States President Kennedy, Bonn, 28 jets are deployed would have to be eliminated.
At the same West Germany, 23 October 19626 time, surface to air missile launching pads (of which there are 24 on the island) have to be taken out.
This would have Conversation of Federal Chancellor Adenauer with the Special caused casualties among the Cuban population in the range Adviser of the American President, Acheson of 10,000 to 15,000 people.
A/62 highly secret first two actions described above, followed by a landing operation of about 75,000 to 100,000 soldiers on Cuba.
Instead he preferred a blockade targeting in the first place On 23 October 1962 at 1745 hours the Chancellor offensive weapons and oil shipments.
If the other side would received Mr Dean Acheson accompanied by Ambassador resort to the use of force, one will not hesitate to intensify its Dowling. own actions.
The President believes, however, the blockade At the beginning, Mr Acheson reported how he particihas prevented an emotional and irrational immediate action pated in the course of recent weeks in many consultations in from Khrushchev, such as action in Berlin or a nuclear strike.
In this context he referred to the trial position with the population, the allies, and in world of Soviet KGB operative Stashynsky at the [West opinion.
If it comes to an armed conflict, the United States does not German] Federal Court . want to be accused of having launched a Pearl Harbor type He asked the ambassador to provide Mr Acheson with of attack in reverse. material about this trial for the President.
During his last The Chancellor doubted anything will come about if you visit, Gromyko also had lied to the President.
The current threat is terrible for the United According to Mr Acheson’s statements, the President is States.
Unfortunately, the Russian action will also have a aware that the Soviets want to achieve three objectives with negative impact on other parts of the world.
They want to build up nuclear capacities not expect any positive result from steps taken at the United ready to be used against the United States.
If an operational Nations as Khrushchev is not impressed by United Nations Resolutions. readiness of such weapons in Cuba will occur, this will result This is why he sees the only hope in a blockade as in a very large threat to the United States.
Soviets want to undermine the position of the United States Mr Acheson stated the Chancellor is making it difficult in the Western hemisphere.
Those were exactly better terms of negotiations in order to force concessions from the arguments he himself had made during prethe US, for instance through an exchange deal Cuba-Berlin. liminary deliberations.
Hasty military action by the United In light of all this, the President is completely aware that States could have triggered a nuclear counterstrike or Soviet these weapons cannot remain on Cuba, and that one cannot actions in Berlin.
Then the allies might have said those crazy afford a loss of prestige in the Western hemisphere.
Moreover, Americans should have approached things more carefully. the President does not feel the slightest inclination to make President Kennedy is ready to use force.
He thinks, however, concessions on other issues for the removal of these weapons. it is better not to do such right away in order not to block the The Chancellor said, according to what he was told option of escalating his measures.
If we currently talk about a yesterday there are about 8,000 quarantine, then it means to gain enough freedom of action Russians in Cuba.
Also one has to take into account that there to escalate measures at a later stage. are nuclear warheads on the island already.
As a consequence, The Chancellor referred to the possibility of clashes on you have to assume that those 8,000 Russians can prepare Guantanamo base between conventional American forces and those missiles to the extent that they are operationally ready, Cuban forces. and that a use of those weapons cannot be excluded despite Mr Acheson responded the American garrison there is getthe blockade. ting reinforced.
Due to the geographical location of the base, Mr Acheson concurred with those thoughts.
However, he however, it is very difficult to launch an attack from there. added that through the blockade the President intends to give In conclusion, the Chancellor expressed its hope it will not Khrushchev a certain time to think things over.
This deliberation as Dezember 1962 , docusuch is not dumb at all, since one thought the allies and world ment 409.
Translated for CWIHP by Bernd Schaefer.] opinion will support the United States if it has sent a warning to Khrushchev first.
Right now only maybe two, three, or four missiles are actually ready, and their target accuracy is still not very high.
Yet the number of operationally ready missiles increases from Cable from Federal Republic of Germany week to week.
Within two months all those missiles would Embassy, Washington , 24 be ready for a launch.
The October 1962 more time is passing by, the more the danger is growing.
Up to now, about eight to ten missile launch sites Telex nr.78 had definitely been identified plus at least 30 missiles.
Very likely, at the moment, there are three missileequipped regiments counting about 8000 servicemen Today, at 3.00 pm , [US Secretary . of State Dean] Rusk has asked [French Ambassador to the United States Herve] Alphand, [UK Ambassador to the 9.
Cubans did not play an important role at all in United States David] Ormsby-Gore and me to attend a meetthe deployment of the missile system.
If any of the high flying reconnaissance aircraft were hit by ground-defense one of the existing 24 anti1.
The first six Soviet ships had been withdrawn before aircraft batteries would be destroyed without any further reaching the quarantine zone.
However, this should not hostilities. lead to premature conclusions; the ships might come back with escorts, perhaps submarine protection.
Up to then Soviet aircraft en route to Cuba had incident should be kept secret, a message would be issued been refueled in Dakar and Conakry.
Provisions have been that quarantine was in full force and that there had been made in those places to detect nuclear warheads aboard no special incidents.
There were further signs that Khrushchev had been According to very precise intelligence of the American mistaken in his timetable and that the missile sites had Navy there were only few Soviet submarines within range been discovered too early.
United States to attend the UN General Assembly—ed.] in November he had obviously planned to surprise the 3.
For the first time that day, six low-flying American President by telling him that in the meantime there were aircraft had flown over and explored the launching instal60 operational missiles stationed in Cuba and that the lations in Cuba.
They had not come under fire from the President consequently had to make the desired concesCubans, although the 14 anti-aircraft batteries around the sions in Berlin. island were operational.
The principal aim of quarantine operations, to Soviet foreign minister Andrei] Gromyko had not only keep further nuclear weapons out of the island, should be made a general statement that there would be no deployattained with a minimum of force.
Therefore, in case of ment of “offensive weapons,” but had definitely assured hostile conflict, there would be only one “wounding shot” the President that there would be no emplacement of misafter the usual “warning shot” to affect the ships’ maneusiles capable of reaching the United States.
This assertion verability but not to sink them if possible. had been an obvious lie.
For the near future certain changes were expected sites were yet operational.
In this statement the Soviet this had been prevented by the communist ( say Government was explaining its view on the blockade the Russian) party apparatus.
It also commented on the other aggressive steps President Kennedy intended to take 4.
As for current affairs, Rusk did not seem to attach against Cuba as announced on 22 October.
For ment the Soviet Government called upon all governments instance he had pointed out that it had been of utmost in the world to condemn the aggressive acts of the United importance for the United States to have the quarantine in full States against Cuba.
The Soviet Government was hopeful force before any decisions had been made by the United that the German Government would also react favorably to Nations.
Ambassador Smirnov then presented the text of the statement the Soviet Government had made on 24 October.
The In conclusion Rusk emphasized that an unavoidable clash declaration had already been available in the world press. was by no means imminent.
He The Federal Government would examine the statement of could imagine that their miscalculation [in having sent the the Soviet Government in detail and consider it carefully.
On missiles to Cuba?—ed.] might also lead them to proceed more the assumption that the Ambassador’s introductory remarks carefully in the Berlin question.
The Soviet Government had mentioned American aggresKnappstein sive acts.
However, the Ambassador was well aware that the VS-Vol.18 United States held a completely different view on this matter.
Band III: 1September bis 31Dezember 1962 entirely different light, in contrast to unambiguous evidence , document 412. that was now available.
On account of that evidence it was Translated for CWIHP by Regina Schmidt-Ott.] obvious that Cuba was being expanded into an offensive base.
Consequently the present Soviet viewpoint on this matter was completely untenable.
So much for the Federal Government’s opinion concerning the problems themselves.
According to the Federal Discussion between Federal Minister Schröder and Soviet Government peace would at any rate be preferable to an Ambassador Smirnow armed conflict for all those involved.
However, peace meant bringing about a situation that would guarantee a peaceful life Notes of a conversation between Federal Minister of Foreign for all people.
Reinkemeyer for the German party ably departing from the fundamental terms of the contractual 26 October 1962 basis the Four Powers had agreed upon for Berlin.
The Ambassador Smirnov said he had come to present to the example made clear that world peace was threatened in several minister a statement of the Soviet Government concernplaces of the world, not only in Cuba.
With Germany being ing the aggressive acts the United States had committed one of those places, the German interest in a peaceful settle627 ment was particularly strong.
In its memorandum of February The Ambassador had put forward the American base in 1962 in reply to the Soviet memorandum of December 1961 Cuba as an argument.
However, the base had existed for a the Federal Government had clearly pointed out the imporlong time and been leased by contract for 99 years [sic; the tant terms for such a settlement.
Incidentally, the response February 1903 Cuban-American treaty actually granted the to the German memorandum remained outstanding.
The Ambassador could also learn American base had been understaffed, only very recently that from recent debates in the Bundestag [Federal Lower and due to the aggressive projects in Cuba had the American House of Parliament] and from the statement made there garrison been reinforced to a certain degree.
Besides, the Americans the United States was now turning the tables accusing Cuba of aggreshad never imposed a blockade on Cuba.
However, there was no doubt possible about the actual only trying to prevent delivery of special offensive weapons aggressor, as the United States owned a military base in Cuba the emplacement of which in Cuba would seriously threaten where—against all legal norms of International Law—it world peace.
In no way did they intend to block delivery of had accumulated gigantic quantities of troops and all kinds food items and other commodities, nor did they mean to stop of weapons to expand it into an offensive base against the delivery of purely defensive weapons.
This was a fact, no matter how hard the was no disputing that the Soviet deliveries consisted of offenAmericans were trying to talk their way out of it.
The other hand the Soviet Government was making every effort problem should be dealt with by the United Nations, after to avoid atomic and ballistic warfare.
The purpose of his, relevant evidence had been submitted to them. the Ambassador’s, present visit was to call upon the Federal Concerning the Ambassador’s appeal he wanted to make Government asking it on behalf of the Soviet Government clear that the Federal Government would always use all its to exert its influence on its allies accordingly, in order to strength to maintain peace.
He had only mentioned Berlin maintain peace. to emphasize that peace was endangered in other places, too.
Although the Minister had rejected the existence of a direct As to Berlin the danger consisted in the Soviets’ departing or link between Cuba and Berlin, yet there still was a connection rather having already departed from a settlement which the between the two problems as there was no peace settlement four Powers had agreed upon at that time.
It was of course with Germany, which explained the tense situation in Berlin possible to consider departing from certain positions of the and further complication of world politics in general. agreement.
He had also told Minister Gromyko that a ment of December, notwithstanding the serious and useful new German Ambassador to Moscow would be appointed suggestions the Soviet Government had put forward to solve soon.
Like his predecessor he would consider it his first duty the problems of Germany and Berlin. to work for a good relationship between the Soviet Union The Minister replied that the USA-Cuba conflict was and the Federal Republic.
He was taking the opportunity about Soviet installations on the island.
Although a precise of the Ambassador’s visit to emphasize that, by appointing definition of the aggressor in case of conflict had always been Ambassador Groepper, the Federal Government a tricky problem since International Law had come into had sent a highly qualified diplomat to the Soviet Union. existence, there could yet be no doubt that those installations Ambassador Groepper was fully aware of his task and willing were no defensive weapons, not even surface-to air-missiles, to do everything in his power to achieve it.
Not only was he but medium-range ballistic missile sites with a range of 1800 qualified for this mission but he would also set to work with a to 3700 km; their deployment had definitely to be regarded will and an eager interest.
That might go without saying, but as an aggressive act against the United States.
In reality it was been raised in a similar way in his, the Minister’s, discussion the other way round.
Without directly referring to the memoby step disregarded the terms of the agreement and thus randum, Foreign Minister Gromyko had remarked that antieroded the foundations to which the Soviet Union had been Soviet propaganda was widespread in the Federal Republic. committed.
With respect to Cuba, one should on the other in their respective countries.
At the time he had realize that there was a clear difference between defensive and been sure that such expert opinion would find favor with the offensive weapons.
The weapons being brought to Cuba at Federal Republic. the moment clearly belonged in the second category, and the He had made that remark to Mr Gromyko half in jest American steps were definitely to be considered as an attempt and half in earnest, however, he had strictly to reject the to stop further delivery.
The Ambassador had been trying Ambassador’s dismissing the German memorandum as proto compare the American steps with the defensive measures paganda.
This was inadmisof the German Government to come to an arrangement sible.
NATO was but a defensive alliance and at the time with the Soviet Union.
He was sure that the day was not were well-known, whereas the motives of the Soviet Union far off when the Soviet Union would realize that the German were less clear.
It is to be hoped that the imminent talks solution to the pending problems was also in the interest of might result in further information as the Soviet Government the Soviet Union. was sure to comment on this issue in the Security Council.
He was not disappointed To reproach the United States with counter-revolutionary at all at the Minister’s view on the intentions in Cuba was unfounded as President Kennedy had American-Cuban conflict: the Minister had stuck to his forexplicitly recognized the Cubans’ and every other nation’s mer interpretation, namely to consider all American weapons right to determine their own social systems.
This was also and sites of defensive purposes only and weapons and bases the position of the Federal Republic.
Could missiles Minister, had to protest vigorously against the Ambassador’s with a range of 5000 to even 10000 km, stationed in the insinuation that the Federal Republic was a military base of United States, the Federal Republic, even in Norway on the the United States.
The Federal Republic was a sovereign State Soviet borders, in Turkey and Greece, be qualified as purely and an ally of the United States.
The Foreign Minister might have Concerning the Berlin question the Ambassador ’s assessa problem to prove that the American sites the United States ment of the Four Power Statute did not agree with the had installed all over the world after the end of the [Second German view.
The Ambassador said that according to the World] War, among others especially in Germany, the most Soviet Union’s viewpoint the foundations of the Four Power powerful American base, were for defensive purposes only.
It had of its own free will Federal Government the Soviet Union had installed itself in liquidated the base it had owned in Finland and was now Germany against the will of the German people.
In their suggestions with concern the continuous dismantling of the original to clarify the situation, the Cubans had never even asked for agreement such as the recall of the Soviet City-Commandant removal of the American base from the island.
Finding a common denominator for hand the American measures were definitely aimed at doing future negotiations would certainly be difficult.
However, away with the revolutionary achievements of the Cuban according to the Federal Government, attempts should be People.
The scope of the threat is “significant,” since it is directed against the “soft underbelly” of the United States.
Band III: 1September bis 31Dezember 1962 After the launch of a missile, there is no more defense , document 415. available.
However, there is no exact proof that nuclear warheads were brought onto the island.
For good reasons, though, it is considered as likely with regard to the “operational” missiles.
For the first time, the latter would acquire capabilities to launch a nuclear Information we receive here about deployment of Soviet surprise attack simultaneously against Europe and the nuclear missiles and aircraft on Cuba are dispelling any potenNorth American continent. tial misunderstandings about type, scope, and dangerousness Until now, the strategic potential of the United States proof the threat. vided a nuclear umbrella for Europe, since the Soviet Union was incapable to launch such a simultaneous attack due to the 1.
Purpose and Current Impacts of the Cuba Blockade heights, is proving an accelerated and continuous expansion of ICBM positions.
At the same meeting, Nitze provided the following sites for nuclear warheads were completed.
Construction of additional sites All ships suspected of carrying offensive weapons has not been discovered.
IBRM missiles have not been material have reversed course and are on the way back to located in the positions, though they are expected at a later their ports of departure. stage of construction.
Simple tankers continue their course towards Cuba It is assumed that the Soviet ship “Poltava,” which and probably do not contain any banned load.
Recently reversed course, had IRBMs on board; or that such misabout 30 ships per month arrived in Cuba, this is 1 to 2 siles are already deployed on Cuba. per day.
Some ships turned around; so overall the number of objects affected by the blockade operation is very small.
Additional MRBM sites have mately allowed to pass was asked to identify its name, port not been discovered. of destination, and country.
It was granted passage without further search, as there were additional reasons for assum3.
The public was informed that eight to ing it carried just a load of fuel. ten missile sites were identified.
The first Cubabound Soviet ships most suspected to be affected by the 4.
There exists certainty that nuclear warheads are blockade reversed course and returned already six hours already deployed on the island for those MRBMs that have before the President’s speech on 22 October, this is folbeen made operational already.
Otherwise it would have lowing just the pre-announcement of the speech.
Aircraft are not yet subject to the ing readiness” is between five and eight hours.
This time is blockade operation, as it is evident from the 23 October needed to transport the warhead to the missile, to mount proclamation.
One does it, to move the missile into a launching position, fuel it, not want to arrive at a situation where you are forced, for and launch it.
Nuclear warheads are not mounted before instance, to shoot down a passenger plane over high seas. the “countdown” starts.
During the tranOne must assume that nuclear warheads can arrive in sition from “operational readiness” to “firing readiness,” Cuba by aircraft.
Searches of planes flying to Cuba from there is a certainty that the missile will actually be fired.
Camouflage will somewhat increase the time needed all, as it was promised to Canada and Conakry.
This is viewed as this way will severe incidents, undesired by anybody, be an indication for caution on the Soviet side. avoided.
None of the American surveillance aircraft were they re-fuel in mid-air. fired at.
Time has been won to provide the world public present convincing evidence for the threat emanating from with evidence about Cuba’s offensive threat. the Soviet base on Cuba especially to the neutral and nonaligned countries.
Respective understanding is still lacking The other main objective still stands out, namely the on this side. “removal” of offensive objects already on the island.
Official information from inside the administraexchange for the removal of an American overseas missile tion, and official press information since yesterday and espebase are not the path to be chosen by the government to cially over the last hours, bolster the impression that the time reach its objective. factor is of utmost importance.
Situation of Negotiations in the United Nations accept on-site inspections.
Brazilian governments tried diplomacy to move Cuba Currently Stevenson and towards an acceptance of inspections.
However, they were U Thant are negotiating about rejected. a two-stage approach.
None of the attendees at the meeting had any During the second stage of about two to three weeks, information according to which the Soviets are undertaknegotiations will have to to be held about how to remove the ing any special military preparations at any place in their material from Cuba. global area of influence.
The Soviets deny the existence of mediumand result in a “standstill,” is unsatisfactory.
There exists only a long-range missiles in Cuba, its installation, and its furfive-to-eight-hour timeframe to get the missiles ready for ther expansion ( Zorin in the a “countdown,”e. for firing.
It cannot be excluded they will opinion, on-site controls and inspections are needed in order continue their denials, as they did before 22 October, in to verify the “standstill.” order to leave an exit door open and portray the United States as the one who acted aggressively.
The blockade would remain in force until the the ridicule Zorin was subjected to in the Security second main objective is achieved, this is, the removal of Council when he denied the evidence offensive potential already there.
Though remain on alert, without enforcing blockade measures it also could be that the Soviets want to keep the nuclear , until effective control mechanisms of warheads up their sleeves.
United Nations inspections are established to monitor the complete removal of offensive potential from Cuba.
You might surmise from this that mentioned above, will produce results in due time; Soviet embassies did not yet receive instructions from b) whether Castro will tolerate inspections.
Hans Globke and from Paris, that Soviet diplomats there spread the rumor the undersigned . that a political trade-off between the Cuban base and Ambassador Dowling had asked for the meeting. bases in Turkey is imminent.
Nitze replied this is perhaps First he handed to the Chancellor Kennedy’s response to the solution the Soviets envisage.
He again reiterated that Khrushchev’s second letter of 26 October there are negotiations only about the elimination of the 1962.
Then Mr Dowling informed that the American governIn an information directed to the NATO Council ment will today ask to convene the NATO Council in order to , the brief it on the situation.
Soviet intentions as follows: The secret build-up of Cuba into a Soviet nuclear base serves as a preparation for another Soviet 1.
Developments in build-up of Soviet missile bases in move against Berlin to be expected at the end of the year.
There as well as messages between the American and the Soviet an instruction to governments transmitted through the Secretary General of Finletter will be discussed.
Based on this instruction, he will the United Nations . have to inform the Council about “political 3.
A later letter from Khrushchev to Kennedy (26 [sic; actually 27] October), where Khrushchev, contradicting Knappstein his previous statements, suddenly raised conditions again, namely the dismantling of American bases in Turkey.
Band III: 1September bis an accelerated pace after results from surveillance flights 31Dezember 1962 , were presented.
The fact that yesterday American surveillance planes were fired at for the first time.
This might Adenauer and United States Ambassador Walter either occur in form of bombing the missile bases with conDowling, Rhöndorf, West Germany, 28 ventional arms, or through an invasion where the missiles will October 1962 be destroyed by American ground forces.
With Khrushchev referring to bases in Turkey, and 28 October 1962 through involvement of other Soviet troops and facilities, there is now a chance that Europe and NATO might be dragged into On 28 October 1962 the Chancellor received Ambassador the conflict.
Therefore the United States wants to sound out Dowling in his house in Rhöndorf together with State opinions of its NATO allies.
Since, on the other hand, Dowling had to get material of military action gets shorter.
Since NATO might be affected to report back to Washington, he then began to summarize the Europeans are asked what they think about military action; his previous statements.
He asked the Chancellor whether probably they will still be able to stop the latter at this point. he now is in favor of bombing the missile bases in Cuba, The Chancellor stated he does not want to stop anything. or in favor of an invasion, or against any kind of military He is in favor of both measures; the bases must go.
However, action. he wishes, and here he wants to repeat what he already told Here the Chancellor repeated again that he is in favor of Acheson, he wishes that the Americans focus more on eliminating the Soviet missile bases.
Therefore he agrees to Castro as the one mainly responsible and guilty here. both kinds of military intervention, to the bombing as well Certainly Khrushchev is behind the entire affair, but Castro is as to the invasion.
We always must in favor of an invasion, not the least in order to enable the refer to Castro before the global public; it is easier to find in Americans to offer something as a concession later, namely the United Nations a majority against Castro than a majority their withdrawal from the island.
Then the Chancellor against the Soviet Union; in particular, it must become absostated in addition to these military actions one should raise lutely clear to the Cubans who is responsible for their situation political pressure against Castro.
Mr Dowling, the Chancellor provided as an example a Ambassador Dowling did not really address the 24-hour ultimatum to Castro containing demands very difChancellor’s argumentation for quite a while; one got the ficult to comply with. impression he actually did not correctly understand the The note-taker got the impression that from Chancellor.
Dowling asserted that the United States had outnow on Ambassador Dowling understood the Chancellor, also lined for weeks Castro’s responsibility to the world and the with regard to his position on Castro.
President Kennedy will not even have known which missiles the Russian unloaded. certainly be very happy that the Chancellor, like during preCargo ports were closed to all Cubans, even to Castro. vious days, is siding so unequivocally with the United States The Chancellor rejected those and other remarks by the in this difficult hour and declares its solidarity with the US ambassador (for instance those about the use of unarmed surThe Chancellor has been much clearer than many other allies. veillance planes) as in part inconsistent and missing the point.
There already had been the incident I provide my property to allow Mr Dowling to with the surveillance plane; another one will occur with the fire a missile to the house of [Soviet Ambassador to West Soviet ship; that completely suffices.
He then gave another letter to the Chancellor stating that However, Mr Dowling still did not understand.
Globke explained it will be more Allied Commander Europe, NATO] until 31 December face-saving for Khrushchev if Castro is accused.
Finally, the Chancellor promised to Mr Dowling he will Even then, it looked like Ambassador Dowling did not take care that our representative at NATO will be properly understand the argumentation.
It was Khrushchev[, instructed according to the results of this meeting. said Dowling,] who delivered and built the missiles.
As for Khrushchev, we know he lies Adenauer and United States President Kennedy, and there is no reason to believe his statements.
For all these Washington, 14 November 19627 reasons, the President is not interested in a new Western initiative.
Far better to let the Soviets come to us and see what Secret they propose.
Then The Chancellor congratulated the President on his success maybe, he will feel tempted to try to cause trouble somein the last weeks.
He assured the President that the FRG would always stand The German experience under National Socialism shows on the American side. that dictatorships change people, their thinking and morality.
The President thanked the Chancellor for speaking with This is also true for Khrushchev.
We cannot expect him to Ambassador Dowling right after the first announcement.
This change suddenly. immediate support for American measures was valued all the The President says that now as before we must assume higher for it still being clear what the effects of the American that Khrushchev has the same goals as the Red Chinese, measures would be on Berlin and the FRG. although possibly somewhat different methods.
The setback The Chancellor explained that he understood that the in Cuba – and this was only a setback, not a defeat – will President must keep an eye on the global situation in making cause Khrushchev some problems.
He suggested with the Chinese and the fighting with India doesn’t work for that later on in the talks, he would like to discuss his thoughts his plans either.
The situation has changed substantially in the on Berlin in as small a circle as possible. last weeks and one must think clearly how the various factors The President asked if the Chancellor considers that the will affect Khrushchev. present situation is worse or better for improving the situaThe Chancellor thought this was absolutely correct and tion in Berlin. said the Soviet Union was going through a slow evolution, The Chancellor answered that one must be careful on this but it remains to be seen how far it goes.
He is convinced that matter and he can’t really say if the Cuba issue is definitively Khrushchev did not want to run the risk of a war, but will finished.
The decision whether to try to make up with the try his intrigues again, so we must pay attention.
On the side Soviets, also in regards to Germany, depends on the of the West, we should not give the impression that nothing President.
If the President believes that the Soviets have corhappened and that all is forgotten.
The President succeeded in rectly carried out the American demands, then maybe we turning aside the greatest danger the United States has ever experienced, could undertake this.
But if the President thinks that the a great success for himself and the American people.
We also don’t think it would be never thought that the Americans would react so decisively. an advantage for the Soviets to keep any missiles in Cuba.
We Both sides had false ideas about each other… don’t think it likely that the Soviets would try the thing with The Chancellor notes that one should not judge the missiles again, because they know that next time, there’ll Khrushchev based on what he has failed to get so far, but be an American invasion.
But even if the Americans say that rather on how much he has succeeded already.
For example, the missiles are no longer there, we are still fully conscious in 1953, the Soviet Union did not even have atomic weapons that Khrushchev has not yet fully fulfilled his promises.
The [sic; the Soviets actually achieved their first atomic detonation issue of the bombers and ground inspections is still open. in 1949—ed.], and now, nine years later, they are taking misWe think in any case that air inspections are more reliable siles to Cuba.
He is a smart, reckless man withThe Chancellor said that the presence of the technicians out conscience, who certainly doesn’t want to lose all he has would be a big issue, since they would want to have somegained up to now.
Khrushchev has now learned in Cuba that the United States is stronThe President joked that we unfortunately can’t tell from ger and more decisive than he had thought.
He’ll think this the air, if someone is a missile expert or not. over now and reorient himself.
The Chancellor agrees with Mr Smith8 answered “yes” when the Chancellor asked if the President that the solution of the bomber issue should all the missile-launchers had been removed.
Until then, one should American experts had no doubts that the missiles have been not offer negotiations… removed.
We photographed these ships from low altitudes and confirmed the rockets on deck.
The conversation was then continued with a larger group The Chancellor asked how they got the rockets to Cuba. present.
Stiftung Bundeskanzler-Adenauer-Haus, Bestand the best way to handle missiles.
Band III: 1September bis 31Dezember 1962 , President Kennedy concluded that as far as one could document 445.
Translated for CWIHP by David Wolff.] verify, the missiles have left Cuba… President Kennedy stated that the United States had succeeded in having its way on Cuba, because it had superior conventional and nuclear forces.
In Cuba the United States was in a position to play the whole gamut of conventional and nuclear forces.
President Kennedy, Washington, 14 The Chancellor said that he shared this interpretation November 1962 fully.
The President answered that people say bad things about all heads of government.
Sir Frank Roberts [the British President Kennedy opened the talk by indicating that the ambassador in Moscow] had even reported during their short Cuban crisis is not yet over.
According to American inteltalk that Khrushchev looked tired, but then perked up. ligence, the Soviets have probably removed all their missiles The Chancellor asked again if Khrushchev was drinking from Cuba.
The Americans had confirmed 32 or 33 missiles in Cuba, but under the assumption that there could have again. been as many as 48 there.
From the Soviet point of view, it is Ambassador Thompson, asked by President certainly better to transport the missiles back to the USSR on Kennedy for information, stated that Khrushchev does drink boats than to leave them in caves in Cuba which would lead a little sometimes.
By the end of the week, we’d like to put his health and psychological state under observation. learn a bit more about the bombers.
The Chancellor continued that he shares the President’s The Chancellor asked if all Soviet technicians had left wish to see the free peoples stronger, both in nuclear and Cuba. conventional weapons.
This matter lies close to his heart [am The President answered that we don’t know exactly about Herzen liegen]. the rocket experts.
Translated for Berlin; Schroeder did not pass any intelligence about Soviet CWIHP by David Wolff.] missiles in Cuba, and Kennedy did not confide that the US had discovered them, or even raise the Cuban issue as a matNotes ter of renewed concern.
The former secretary of state flew to Bonn to see about this fact with comrade Fidel Castro.
Not further identified; possibly Abbott E Smith Oval Office on the morning of 17 October 1962, they were of the Board of National Estimates of the Central Intelligence clearly mistaken.
Such idea was developed by the worried about the angry reaction of the Cuban leaders against Soviets and surfaced among the European Communists.
At the negotiation between the superpowers and rejected Chinese the same time, conflict between the Soviet Union and China criticism of the Soviet conduct.
In June 1960, the Soviet Union withdrew its technisuch an orientation, showing concern about the diffusion in the cal personnel from China and attacked the Chinese for violatparty of radical and apocalyptic views influenced either by the ing the principles established at the Moscow Conference of Chinese or by the Cuban romantic myth. world Communism of 1957.
In the second world Conference In late July 1963, a delegation led for the first time by held in November 1960, Khrushchev and Deng Xiaoping a member of the PCI Direzione, Ugo Pecchioli, was sent to exchanged harsh criticism, and the formal unity of the moveCuba with the aim to establish more solid relations and to ment was preserved only thanks to the mediation of Ho Chi exercise some influence.
By 1962, the Soviets source on Castro’s position after his trip to the USSR in the and the Chinese were accusing each other of threatening the spring of 1963—when he realigned Cuba with Moscow. unity of International Communism.
Nevertheless, quite clearly the strategy tion of the people cannot ride on the use of thermonuclear of “peaceful coexistence” could be hardly acceptable to Third arms”—a statement even more significant as he was speaking World revolutionaries and increasingly distanced them from while the great powers negotiated the treaty banning nuclear the European Communists, who for the most part remained tests , disapproved by Beijing.
Hopes for an expansion played restraint on the export of revolution, acknowledging of International Communism in the Global South had to be national differences among Latin American countries.
Nevertheless, Castro’s thus became a crucial event not only for the Cold War, as also autonomous stance was hardly in tune with the PCI on the for International Communism. relationship between “peaceful coexistence,” anti-imperialism, The documents here presented show, first of all, how in an and revolutionary violence.
As Pecchioli had to admit, early phase the PCI had poor contacts with Cuba. “considerations for a democratic route to socialism” seemed Admiration for the “national and social” revolution was bal“still like a very foreign political idea to the Cuban leaders.” anced by some skepticism, which involved even the personality Regardless of Chinese influence and despite Cuba’s realignof Fidel Castro, though the PCI seemed eager to play a role in ment with the Soviet Union, the political views and strateterms of propaganda and economic support.
The tone changes gies of the Cubans and the PCI would diverge in the times in subsequent documentation.
The note by Vidali of June to come—an aspect of the fragmentation of International 1961 records a shift towards the representation of Cuba as a Communism in the 1960s.
The support of the peasants7 was due also to the fact that the Fidel Castro movement adopted as a rallying cry the need to implement DOCUMENTS agrarian reforms.
Today the United Situation in Cuba,” 3 December 1958 States seeks to intensify the help to the government in the political sphere by supporting the rigged elections of November 3rd INFORMATION ON THE POLITICAL SITUATION IN and in the economic sphere with the provision of arms for the CUBA government troops.
The risk is ever more likely that in the case Supplied from the Foreign Section, 3 December 1958 that Fidel Castro’s troops are pushed into the North American from Cuban comrade Lazaro Peña, Director of the Latin nickel mining concessions, the United States would take advanAmerican syndicate tage of this by provoking military intervention.
For the most part the comrades of to stand on its own feet with the assistance of the United States. the Directorate of the party still reside in Cuba.
The opposition to the Batista regime clearly manifested itself during the political elections of 3 November, that were backed Political Prospects above all by the Americans with the intent to give an appearance of legitimacy to the political regime in Cuba.
What resulted from these rigged elections, the victory of government candidate The central objective that the party is pursuing is that of orgaGeneral Andres Rivero Aguero, was that not more than 40% of nizing itself and the support for the unified anti-imperialist the electorate participated and in Havana not more than 25%. front, whose job it will be to overthrow the Batista dictatorIn the country reigns the most savage terror of the work ship and form a national and democratic government. of a powerful police and military apparatus.
Every day they Actually, though the opposition to Batista is rising in every commit assassinations, torture, arbitrary arrests.
American FBI party, there has not yet been an organization that agents frequently participate in the interrogations of political will be the heart of the anti-imperialist front.
The police hammer away at, in a special way, the of the opposition parties to create a unified front without the communists and their sympathizers. communists were fruitless.
For the rest, control of the Cuban countryside is in the hands of partisan forces and armed peasants, that have taken the place of the army and the police of the previous regime, which have been completely dissolved with the revolution.
Fidel Castro does not adopt any decision of a certain importance NOTES FROM A CONVERSATION WITH ANTONIO anymore without hearing first the opinion of the commuNUNEZ JIMENEZ nists.
To help the peasants, the State, other than the machine In the conversation we talked about the various problems relating centers, has instituted in rural zones also the “tiendas del to the internal and external politics in Cuba and the solidarity pueblo” a type of store where the that the PCI can provide to the Cuban liberation movement. merchandise is sold at cost or very close to it.
In fact this was Regarding the Cuban situation, Captain Antonio Nunez possible because one did not have to strike down any type Jimenez illustrated some problems underlining how the revoof “middle class,” such as merchants, which did not exist; lution that led to the overthrow of Batista was essentially a commerce was only carried out occasionally by speculators peasant revolution and how he naturally correlated the agrarat a high price and almost only American products.
Landed estates the State sells almost exclusively national products and conhave been abolished and there is a fixed limit on property. sequently has the support of the national sector of the bourExpropriated land does not generally become assigned to the geoisie, which is in a developing phase. peasants, but is organized as state farms or as cooperatives.
Landowning peasants, after all, were a miniscule minority, Because of the low level of mechanization, he does not advise when they weren’t American citizens.
The state is creating reform practically struck a very meager social class, meanwhile special mechanization centers that will assist and lend help to it helped the peasants and it opened up to national industry the cooperatives.
The machinery is bought almost exclusively a market that now is protected from the invasion of foreign from the United States and belongs to the State. commerce.
The “anti-Batista tion of the INRA is called “Section of Industrialization of Cuba” revolution,” as such was deployed behind Fidel Castro, whose and it is responsible for state investments in national industries in name has become from now on a legend.
He is even an object accordance with the national sector of private industry.
Never has a “cult of personality” reached a pinnacle as high that it is not opportune to re-establish diplomatic relations as that of Fidel Castro in Cuba.
They are not involved in a certain sense in this end will also bring in French comrades) will be able to the current economic battles, confined to an ideological opposidevelop more solidarity with Cuba, above all in regards to the tion of principle, which is not always an insurmountable obstacle media; they don’t request any specific operations of solidarity; to collaboration.
It was asked that the PCI help with the formation of a clergy, in the last decades, has been spontaneously replaced with Roman office of the “Latin American media agency” which local elements who are closer to the people and their problems. will be financed by Cuba; Because of this the Church had also assumed hostile positions 3.
And of note is that today there is a progressive transfer to comrade Anelo Franza, the PCI will send it — differentiation between Catholics and the regime10, even if dayfor now— to the INRA through Franza; then there will come to-day such differences are still vague.
The important thing is to establish an sion is the expected message from the Pope in favor of the rural exchange that is regular and constant; reforms underway in Cuba and of the fondness that John XXIII 4.
The request was advanced to the PCI (analogous had expressed to Antonio Nunez for the courage with which he to that which will be made to the French PC) to send to combated poverty in the Cuban countryside.
Marginally it was also hinted that support from the States of America would have to land a considerable armed force PCI could contribute to Cuba’s economic relations with to impose its will.
The Cuban leaders think that if they were Europe ; it was also aired out was the able to overthrow the Batista army and his police forces with few eventual nomination of an ambassador to Rome so we can men, it is now even easier to resist pressure from abroad with a easily understand each other, saying assurances that this “People’s Army” and with the support of the peasants.
Relations would bring a positive result. with South American governments are mostly cold, when they are not outright bad.
Regarding relations with the The impression that we got from this conversation is that USSR, a Soviet mission, which recently visited Cuba, held he spoke enthusiastically and honestly when it came to techni641 cal knowledge and organizational capability, but maybe a little The Cuban revolution represents progress for revolution in disingenuous on the political side.
This last observation comes every country in Latin America. from the hurried way with which he responded to questions For that, the first duty of every anti-imperialist revolutionabout relations with the national bourgeoisie, the danger of a ary, socialist or Latin American democrat is that of defending class conflict capable of impeding the revolution, etc. the Cuban revolution.
One can not be anti-imperialist, patriIt appears evident that this cadre made miracles during the ots, progressives, revolutionary, socialists, communists, without war against Batista and the intense popular and peasant supdefending, supporting Cuba. port, above all considering the value brought forth by numerDefending Cuba means defending national independence, ous economic and political reforms, is very energizing.
In independence of politics and economics, national sovereignty, every way a good impression and the reflection of a country unity of Latin American and the rights and demands of the workers and poor peasants.
From when the Cuban revolufull of national and social revolution — highly esteemed and tion triumphed, every country in Latin America is more free. very friendly to our party.
Yankee imperialism can not use the same past methods of appeal through discount offers, coaxing and blackmail.
Giuliano Pajetta Cuba is especially interested in the development of the national and social liberation movement and vice versa.
The United States of America wants to use the countries of Latin America in the battle against Cuba.
A victory over Cuba would mean reinforcing imperialism; a victory for the Cuban revolution facilitates revolution in every country of Latin America.
In accordance with the Declaration of the Moscow Conference Vittorio Vidali , of 81 communist and workers’ parties, one must be against the Notes on a Trip to Cuba, Spring 1961 exportation of revolution and at the same time struggle with maximum energy against the exportation of counterrevolution.
The North American aggressions against Cuba, the prepaRome, 14 June 1961 rations for military intervention in Cuba and in every Latin NOTES OF COMRADE VIDALI’S TRIP TO CUBA American country, the proclamation of the right to “intervene” invoking the Monroe doctrine, the fight against communism for the “security” of the West, etc. are all done and thought up only to protect, and defend the interests of the yankee monopolies.
For that, the defense of national P.S.P. leadership, Che Guevara, Fidel Castro and others. sovereignty and of the right of self-determination of every Latin The discussion unfolded on the basis of a detailed document American population must be undertaken with vigor, energetifrom the B.P. of the P.S.P. and this lasted, I think, five cally denouncing every effort of imperialist intervention, unilatlively days.
In spite of the recent aggression, the Cuban government is in was charged with publishing an editorial in “Fundamentos” for favor of a method of direct negotiations for peacefully resolving the May issue, on the basis of the discussion. every problem and is prepared to re-establish diplomatic and The discussion fundamentally revolved around the problem friendly relations between the two countries. of the pacifism and violence of socialism and of the tangible Peace is defended by defending Cuba, fighting for the prinefficacy of guerrilla warfare.
There were differing opinions, parciple of “non-intervention” and respecting the right to self-deterticularly from the Argentine delegations and mination of the people.
Friends of the Cuban revolution are the people, patriots, revoEven if the final vote gives a fictitious majority to the lutionaries, anti-imperialists, and partisans for peace.
Other than the Ché Guevara) for which I made a request to the Press Office of the monoculture, everything else was for local market only.
Cuba Cuban Foreign Ministry just after my arrival (the first attachment was forced to sell at international prices but forced, instead, is a copy of my working plan presented to the Foreign Ministry). to buy at the prices imposed by the United States.
Castro); the international situation related to Cuba; the problem The United States brought in their enterprises with advanced techof Catholics ; economic development ; nology.
As is clear, I exaggerated with my requests because I knew continued operation and, so, of having a base of spare parts I would have got just some.
Despite these difficulties we managed preceded this interview, with all the questions to guarantee the yearly growth of industrial production, if and some notes written by me for the newspaper I work for and you don’t consider the sugar sector, of 7%. for a biography.
The request was made on the 21st of September; the We can now lay the foundation for the spread of indusinterview was given, more or less, one week later.
It seems to me that, trialization and not limit ourselves to develop what already before giving the interview Ché requested some information about me exists. from the Cuban Institute of Friendship with people and to the Foreign At the end of the next four-year-period we’ll gain a big Ministry.
There was, other than hand we must consider that now our economy is, for sure, me and the interviewee, a young escort of the Institute of Friendship opened while previously the American domination was barthat didn’t want to leave the office, I believe to show off in front off ring the development of other sectors. a Cuban leader.
It seemed to me that the presence of the young boy was fered damages because of the drought that hit our country damaging for the course of the interview, because Guevara was giving, in the strongest measure ever registered in the last 40 years. sometimes, laconic answers, not thorough and motivated.
After some I have to say that some mistakes in the organization of the pleasantry the conversation started with a personal note.
But, today we can Guevara that I was particularly attached to him because two years be sure that even in this sector there is now constant growth. before during a rally at which he spoke, I met a Cuban girl that now is my wife.
At your conference, in which I participated in two years ago, I remember you saying that Cuba shouldn’t DE LIPSIS: I present to you a list of written questions.
Then be considered an underdeveloped country but a badly I am going to ask you some questions that come from the developed country due to monoculture.
No, the monoculture aspect of our economy has GUEVARA: still not changed, but it’s changing: we need the sugar, the These are all questions on economic matters, so I will try coffee, and tobacco to provide us the currency fund. to answer to them all together.
The most serious problem with aims is the self-sufficiency for our semi-tropical products which Fidel, me and the all the other men of the Sierra, had and to develop some specialization that would allow us to to face right after the victory was the complete dependence export all over the world.
This development of the industrial of our economy on the United States.
Cuba, when we took sector, will be realized on the basis of a technology equal to it, wasn’t a underdeveloped country but a badly developed some of the most advanced countries.
That’s why productivity is of a fundamental mining, the engineering industry (to strengthen the other importance.
It had a double effect of deterrent for the 6th year 2) toward a specialization.
We concentrated the proeconomy I) troubles supplying foodstuff II) deficiencies duction and with the same vigor we are preparing new “cadre”. in the development of the economy.
It forced us to make There is going be a successively more elevated phase, more some sacrifices for the basis of rational development.
Our elevated to get them to be more specialized. duty now is fast development of the engineering sector and the creation of new products of good quality.
That is going to cause an elimination, in for the popular masses, whose enthusiasm has allowed us the short term, of the small private production, of the small to ensure a constant growth of our production.
We need to produce with high-level technological processes keep pushing forward, even far forward.
On the other hand it wasn’t much time ago. insist that we should introduce collective economic manageSo we can pass to the question on the meaning of the three part ment and financial autonomy in the factories.
We insist, on the contrary, on the centralization An increase of production is necessary to supply the population. of the economy, the way we chose is the concentration of the Now we need to save as much as possible because of the lack production.
A pesar que nos llaman from the Spanish text one we have of a supply shortage.
The saving goes hand in hand could translate in Italian as “no matter what or in spite of it we with the organization.
Even if we need to improve are called revisionist.” the growth of productivity, trying to modify the absurd salary system that there was before in Cuba.
The moral factors are still important, but let’s not forget We’ll do all that we can to ensure the growth of the technological the material gains that are implicit in the socialist system. progress.
I can’t tell The basis of this system is the same as the one found in other when it’s going to happen.
We have, already, one third or one socialist countries with a few differences.
Now we are on more fourth of the sugar cane production mechanized and in two or solid ground.
We entrusted the old party with so the more because your country, having an advanced indusmuch power because we were in need, right away, of experts trial system, could replace, for some items, the United States. and of solid system.
But things didn’t go as we expected, Italy has many products that for us are really interesting, they were accumulating offices, centralizing the power, and and already some Italian enterprises came forward, like the bureaucratizing the relations with the masses.
At one point Oronzio di Nora company from whom we bought completely we realized that even the statistics that were given to us about equipped factories.
I had the chance to talk with some diplomats from the we realized that things were not working right, we looked Italian Embassy in Cuba.
Comrade X summons the their opinions, but before I have to warn you that the workers so that at 6 in the morning they go to volunteer old staff of the Embassy is of a clear Fascist nature, and so I work.
At six in the morning, all the workers are there but don’t know how much their opinions can be considered valid. not comrade X He shows up at ten in a government car; he Concerning our new Ambassador my opinion is different, he’s checks the number of those present, and leaves.
And then there’s the story about people expelled between Italy and Cuba is not increasing, could be the missing from the old communist party that revealed thempayment by the latter of almost one million dollars, which Italian selves, instead, to be good revolutionaries... there enterprises have had on their books since prior to the revolution. are people that just want to boast of thirty years in the party.
I remember perfectly this situation, because at the time i was the director of the National Bank.
They are the ones that in Italy we call Stalinist “trombones.” interest of Italy in trading with us.
Anyway we all agree, what would do the job is a party that anyway with new relations, when you have a mutual interest, would be the engine of the revolution and we are building it on a anything can be cleared up (the answers to the written questions new basis, since the experiment with the old PSP didn’t go well. have ended, now we start an extemporaneous dialogue) There are going to be also aspirations for a new period of change.
We’ll try to create an operative party, controlled by the worktogether.
Let’s try this new method and let’s see where it leads. young man who is quite active.
The one that I saw was ing and going to work in a factory, because they are not so working well, but they told me that in other places the volunteer attached to the work of their workshop. work, in a word, that they are pushing toward a sharp proletarianization also of the culture.
Nods tone, upset with my question) we can coexist with the lower middle class, but not on the basis of mutual concessions on D.L.: I did some personal research around the shops of Galiano principles... and San Rafael and I found out that they sell many items.
You mean accepting the proletarian hegemony. food, I had the impression that in Havana one can eat pretty well, that the essential items, in the end, are not missing, but in G: ... coexthe province of Pinar del Rio where istence, but accepting the ways of development of the we have been, things for the farmers are much different, they are revolution.
On this question there’s need to be intranmissing also the rationed food (in this area the farmers were getsigent.
In the countryside one has to make do... we have made a parG.: Of course the problem depends, also, from the way in which ticular effort in Havana, where the counter-revolution is stronger. this policy is applied.
The impression that I had during my stay about the three G: Nods, the petit bourgeois was living in a North American main internal factors of the revolution, the military one, the way, which in has in many ways different characteristics than that political one and the economic one is the following: the miliof the petite bourgeois in Europe.
There is a racial component that is popular support; but the economic one ... that’s where you can important here too.
I’m not talking about the bands coming from the Eastern from socialist countries (I think that here he was talking about countries; they came also in Italy and had a great success, I’m the Soviets ed.) asked us why we let them go away.
We don’t talking about the Cuban bands, made of Cubans, but dressed force anyone to stay.
There was the case of some technicians like Cossacks and talking like Russians from Kharkov [in Soviet who clearly told us that they didn’t want to stay any more.
I agree with you, the technician without a structure is cal isolation, which it is not, but about a political one.
Apart from that we have Soviet technicians who are working wonderfully.
But course.... the imperialists are preparing for military intersometimes one has the impression that it has taken a religious vention all over Latin America.
But this harmony revealed economic matters, since you are an economist, the other is about to be a misunderstanding during the rest of the conversation, the intellectuals.
Because they accuse us of wanting to be the field the production is growing.
The farmers are accepting the “popes” of the revolution, and we don’t want to interfere in the collectivization up to a point, some strata do better accept the politics of the “popular fronts,” that have their different managers cooperatives. of the progressive forces on the Latin America.
There are parties that are born in the city, and farmer does not have the attachment to the land. are closed in the cities.
There’s need for building alliances for the masses of farmD.L: I have been talking to many intellectuals.
But I was talking about revolutionary alliances, farmers’ Cuba” (the new weekly of the Union of the Writers, directed by conflicts, starting from the occupation of the land.
Everything started with a film about Havana completely of Porto Cabello, it was not democratic: it was all about made in the old style.
From the new Havana, with the militiareplacing one puppet with another.
We tolerated it, but we tried to open up a dialogue with one of the “Frontes then we had to intervene.
Two that we are making, we don’t take much care of them, we’re not days after Fidel congratulated the victory of Arosemena, he experts in that field.
My journalistic duties impose me to ask you some more questions about your private life.
They did that trying to oppose me to Fidel, and even more to Raul, to show that there is rivalry among us.
Amadesi the afternoon until 6 in the morning, in company only of two revolvers and my working documents: I would like to point out Objectives of the Day: that I have just one revolver, and above all that I have my wife.
I’ll show you the written text of the interview, and you 2. On the Congress of the Italian Communist Youth will tell me what can be published and what can’t.
No, no everything can be published but the two things I 3. The situation of the dailies and other periodicals have told you not to.
On The fight for peace. the last point I didn’t get if the veto was limited to just this last part or over all the judgments about Latin America.
It is difficult today to try and reconstruct the full course time to insist, because it was already 4:30 in the morning when of events related to the American aggression in Cuba.
The second message of Khrushchev and Kennedy can was delayed, through the writer Retamar, be explained by the need to exert pressures.
What is unexplainable a friend of mine that was meeting with Guevara, I asked him is the affirmation of Zorin [to if he had been offended by any of my questions.
Guevara let me the UN Security Council on October 25] that in Cuba, missile know that he wasn’t, that I just had done my job of journalist.
He bases do not exist. didn’t let me know anything about the check on the written text The conclusion of the incident is positive only if the guaranthat I asked from him.
At the door, while saying goodbye, with vague words he just were fundamental proponents.
The reaction in Cuba is with battles, even bitter ones, for singular concrete aims.
For not good; the reaction is negative for the fact that everything example, the agreement on the objective of obtaining real developed about and outside of them.
The Cubans legitimately guarantees for Cuba today is now possible, meanwhile 15 demand to obtain effective guarantees and justice on their days ago it was not.
Among other things it helps us connect with the socialist A great possibility has opened for the development of actions masses and other dispositions.
The actions of the Chinese in in favor of coexistence, for the abolition of the bases, and disthis moment are not comprehensible. armament.
The élan of the students and the potential units that for a long time did not hold demonstrations intellectuals seems to have surpassed that of the workers; at many in Rome at Brancaccio.
Certain unclear aspects of the events do demonstrations they are the vanguard.
That must be because of not justify the incorrect orientation of some comrades.
Let’s not the fact that many people don’t believe that the danger of war put on the same level those that renounce the struggle and those is real.
That is not only happening in Italy, in all of Western that are ready to fight. positive judgement for the way that Europe, the reaction of the masses has been very limited.
We are not, the one that accompanied the previous act of invasion of Cuba. and, I do not believe we have to be, supportive of China for When there is a dramatic episode, like that in Milan, popucondemning certain positions of Nehru. lar support becomes so vast. diverse reactions in Throughout this crisis, we attacked the government and we the party to the events.
The United States has “legalized” its right to control insist on the opportunity to defend the independence of Cuba, Cuba militarily and that can make more likely the renounceand to develop actions against American bases in Italy and the ment of the invasion. world. enlarge and consolidate the alliances that are installed.
I do not doubt that the position: “ben venga” the for discussion. war27, exists in certain circles.
On the diplomatic front there is something that can two men. give you pause for reflection.
The fact that Zorin denied the existence of the bases doesn’t worry me much.
The majority of the public opinion has risen in the party about this and that episode and concentrate them on regarding the views of the U.S.S.R. but in the class of Western fundamental problems, of principle. managers, extremist elements are unleashed and even some Compared to other countries, in Italy we have done more, that critically orient themselves toward Kennedy’s politics but the limits, the growth of the movement are evident.
In many remain perplexed and convinced that he was right. cities, they aren’t doing anything or hardly anything — at the positive judgment of the mobilization of the most some small demonstration.
There’s a need to review the growth of the movement, the zones of passivity that are in the party.
In places where we are strong the movement has be done, the USSR won’t risk war.
This is due to the orientation of our show the Americans what they are not expecting.
There’s not just incredulity about the risk understand that it’s possible to arrive at peaceful coexistence of the war but also some fatalism.
Let’s discuss the orientation of the party, I did not intend to open up a conflict with Chinese comrades worry about the vast areas where incredulity, fatalism and on their current disagreement with the Indians.
In certain active parts of the party in border question they are not wrong.
The mistake is instead the last few days you see there is a certain crisis … of not accepting preliminary discussions and to have pushed forward with military operations at the present time.
The peace march set for 1 November will not take place because the Kennedy-Khrushchev agreement Alicata: Let’s properly orient the party on the fight for produced a certain demobilization.
The demonstrations coexistence, coordinating moments of attack and when they instead will probably take place in a theatre against the missile ebb.
If this does not happen, the consequences can eliminated the residual malcontent of last year with the generate a lot of confusion.
Let’s not have illusions about what resumption of Soviet nuclear experiments [in September the USA will do against Cuba to make sure it is not attacked.
There are comrades that undervalue It is critical to the government that their position was not the strength of the USA and therefore do not understand the need to find a way towards a modus vivendi.
For the India-China conflict, I underline that the existed for a bigger battle than that which manifested itself. solution would be easier if China was in the United Nations.
There is an important function that non-involved countries not involved had.
The proposal to collect signatures against the planned bases seems to me opportune.
We protested in defense of Cuba, exerting pressure Carmine de Lipsis to Senior Italian on our government because it modified its foreign policy.
Communist Giancarlo Pajetta re Interview There are also those favorable to the independence of Cuba with Che Guevara, 26 November 1962 who did not criticize the government.
Let’s move forward in the developments of actions for solidarity with Cuba.
In the theses, a different avenue was adopted for China I’m taking the initiative of sending to you and to the and Albania which to me seemed incorrect.
Cossuta points out that in Milan they reading of the notes, and it is faithful in spirit and in form, but, always acted in accordance with the C.d.L. [perhaps the small and secondary variations and omissions are possible in the Consulenti del Lavoro—trans.] and that it was better to final version. take charge of the demonstrations rather than leaving them Comparing the two texts – the one I’m presenting to you without any direction.
I was faithful to the spirit and nearly always to the form What you told me, at the end of our conversation, about the given to me by my interlocutor; possibilities of my collaboration with the Foreign Section and 2.
I left out the more bitter things than the Print and Propaganda have reassured me. the ones published; There are, anyway, some expressions that you used toward 3.
That in the hurry in which I had to write the interview me during our conversation (the journal didn’t gave me the chance to stay at home writthat you used many times in a kind way and that, however, I ing with more attention to the piece, but forced me – while firmly reject.
He said that with an irritated pitch himself — as will result from the text of the interview — risking and even the personal interests I have with them. then the word “myth” came out like an interpretation, sumAfter my dismissal several “discontented” (mainly from ming up the content of the tone of his answers; the left) got in touch with me, and also some “ex-journalists” 4.
But I’m sure about the spirit and the form. and “Paese”) during which I resolved any doubt — that I sincerely confess I had — about the leading group of our I took the initiative of sending you the uncut text of the party, noticing that “my” demands weren’t out of line interview both for dispelling the doubts that you raised about with party or its leaders but were already involved in their some sort of an intentional alteration of it (and what for, in dialogue of development.
On my side I About this “atmosphere” and these epithets I don’t give a already intend to send to Havana the published text with the damn, and I leave them to petit-bourgeois and sectarians, to other articles. tired and frayed ones.
I put too much trust in my qualities as I’ve already taken note of your assurance — repeated by a militant and professional revolutionary (with or without a Lusvardi — that my dismissal from “Paese Sera” salary) to let myself be affected by them.
Or maybe, by chance, tion of the line of revolutionary action of our party.
Still a few To prove to you what I’m saying, I’m ready to intervene, in days ago some Italian comrades who were in Czechoslovakia in words and actions, in our print and in our organizations, with the same period as me, told me that the reason of some behaviors the modest weight of someone who, like me, has already been that were held toward me was related to the fact that I went “in a to Cuba twice where these kind of rallies have happened.
Where did they arrive was hold a conference on Cuba, entering into a debate with those to hide other reasons like the insane internal fight of that party expelled by that Federation who, as has been said to me, raised and its attitude toward us, for which I was just an easy target. these stupid principles.
And the same happened mainly at “Paese Sera” in demonstrated, to the line followed by our party — I might controversy with Riccardo Minuti; with youth from “Nuova have “provocatively” modified the Ché Guevara interview.
I month, about the newspapers that were following the XXII conjust tried to provide a truthful description of a situation I saw gress of the C.P.S.U. in which I was the protagonist of a political “on-the-spot”; to make further developments understandbattle leaded against the two main tendencies manifested on that able.
They reported to me some antiall of that on a sane basis, clearly, supporting always our party, P.C.I. opinions of some old and always refusing to get down to rumors and information comrades.
With a group of newspaper didn’t gave me the option of staying at home Argentine and foreign comrades, who considered the ideas concentrating on writing more carefully.
I had to work expressed in the debate of “new generation” coming from the 10 hours per day editing, writing the pieces in my spare P.C.I. saying that we had rehabilitated Trotsky, explaining to time; I finished the interview with Guevara that was under them how thing were, instead. editing, while I was pushed to publish it immediately.
Also I was half-sick from an annoying vaccine given to me at the -For two years, even through my personal friendship airport in Prague. relations, I argued and many times entered into a debate with almost all my Cuban friends from the Roman Embassy -I prepared a scheme of the whole “reportage” for Coon replying to their extremism before the crisis exploded.
It was accurate and polished, and their prejudices about the P.C.I., trying, often in vain, right for more quiet times.
I had to highlight the TURIN reasons behind the position of the Cubans more than my critics.
The initial scheme, that Che approved, was more 12 August 1963 critical and distanced.
I’m surprised that all that happened for a one-time incident, forROME getting all the rest and mainly all my past as a militant and as a journalist, that is in a completely opposite Dear Comrades, direction from the suspicions to which I’ve been subject.
I want to make it apparent to you that this demonstrates how I send to you the first notes on the results of the trip inefficient, superficial, and non-political the connection between to Cuba in reference to the principal political questions the newspaper and your source are, if it’s true that no one pointed examined in the meeting with Fidel Castro.
I consider that all of the complexities of the discussed proposals for Cuba should be well-examined as soon as possible, elaborating the opportune solutions.
In this sense, I hold that we do not just much more out of them, taking advantage of the incident content ourselves to sending more materials, but we must think and of your intervention to do what was missing to the plans about the ways to have Cuba as another Comrade of ours.
Heartfelt thanks to you for offering me the possibility of this experience, I salute you all cordially.
The conversation unwound itself in consists of youths that are out of work or not studying.
A well a climate of great cordiality and is considered very useful. thought decision of conscription means precisely an effort in favor of the social and economic development of the country.
Relative to the international situation of Cuba, Fidel Castro continue to be trained and armed by the United States) and on openly acknowledges that in the months that have followed the the other that the army and the Cuban militia are today capable crisis of last autumn there has been a marked improvement. of repelling and disrupting in little time any operations of this Although there remains a significant imperialist threat, for Cuba kind.
Also to this idea Castro underlined that the USSR fura phase of increased security has opened up.
Many times he nished the Cuban army with massive quantities of conventional underlined — on this subject — the firmness of the responsibility arms, technical assistance and the most modern equipment. to guarantee Cuban independence from every aggression directed He continued to add that the normalization of the internaby the United States.
This commitment was confirmed in tional situation of Cuba, and of relations between the United States and the joint Soviet-Cuban communique penned during the trip Cuba, are strictly tied to the success of USSR in the socialist camp to the USSR of Castro and — added Castro — in different for the fight for peaceful coexistence.
They firmly reject every classified cables, marked with a strong support, from the Soviet prospect of aggravation of the international situation by means government to that of the United States.
Castro is definitive in of accelerating, in Latin America and the world, the revolutionsaying the solution given to the crisis was positive, opens a new ary process.
In this regard — Castro affirmed — a solution must period of increased peace for Cuba, thus allowing the be found for the problem of Guantanamo.
He considers, however, that at nistic route” of Kennedy. this point it has become necessary for PURS to take an official There is today in the Cuban leadership absolute certainty in position and that this position is under consideration.
Soviet protection; they have the conviction that a direct aggresThe preference to not dive into a position of dissent (and sion by the United States would mean a world war.
From this the that, as I see it, is even more important than not disturbing documented opinion of a new level of relative security is derived. enthusiasm and revolutionary tension of Cubans and other rev657 olutionary movements in Latin American) has also caused the sees that at this moment it is difficult.
Among all the comrades Cuban leaders to publish nothing —up to the last few days in leadership, there was talk of great indignation toward the — on the international debate in their media.
Peaceful coexistence, achieved by the moments that have led to these divergences.
The liberation of the people can not ride Cuban people lives a sentiment of gratitude for the help given by on the use of thermonuclear arms.
It’s also We did not have an inkling of eventual clashes in the group needed to point out that in his speech on July 26 he really of Cuban leaders in terms of the present controversy in the underlined the Soviet-Cuban friendship, he emphasized the communist camp.
Comrade Grobart, speaking with me, did agreement with Moscow to partially suspend nuclear experinot exclude the possibility that the inferior level of the cadre of ments, he referred many times, to exalt them, to the policies leaders might necessitate a political struggle, but he said that he of peace of Khrushchev.
It is not without significance the fact that the socialism in different Latin American countries Fidel Castro slogan repeatedly chanted by the hundreds of thousands of affirmed that he shared the conviction that it is not possible people present at the July 26 rallies was “Fidel-Khrushchev to generalize through a single model.
They are and democratic organizations, for the amount of United States ready to create an expanded media agency whose publications intervention, etc.) consequently the revolutionary vanguards of will reach every environment.
Comrade Grobart sustains that every single country vie to elaborate and pursue their own avenues the PURS and the and objectives of advancement.
Speaking with us he wanted, country by country, to solidarity of Italian workers during the landing at the illustrate to us where a peaceful avenue that could be taken and Playa Giròn and during the crisis of ’62. where instead there was no other option but armed struggle.
He recognized that the exchange of information Chile, and in general in the countries where it is today possible to between the two parties is too meager and occasional and that advance in a more peaceful way, he parsed that he fundamentally forms of organic contacts must be added.
To this proposal he could identify with a peaceful avenue and with the possibility of welcomed with enthusiasm the invitation contained in the the conquest of the majority in an election. letter of Comrade Togliatti to send to Italy a PURS Considerations for a democratic route to socialism, that for delegation.
His opinion that was 3) Reciprocal translations of political documents and proposed is that in only a brief matter of time there will be other books etc; breaks in countries that today are today subjects of the United States.
Relating to defining a period for receiving a outright reproducible everywhere.
For them Italians offer a double advantage comunista internazionale , Carocci, Roma 2007.
Cold War in the Communist rades in the Cuban leadership the question was proWorld ; posed always with great insistence.
Castro strike down any ‘middle class,’ such as commerce, which before did not said that, through their touristic agency , Cubans exist, it was only carried out occasionally by speculators at a high price are able to offer easy payment terms also and almost only American products.”—trans.] for up to two years.
To tourism from Europe they give great impor13 tance and it must be remembered that the preexisting 14 hotel-touristic apparatus that the old regime which 15 has been recently prepared, offers ample possibilities 16 in this sense.
According to Italian scholar Leopoldo Nuti, the allusion 2 westad, The Global Cold War.
This in Italian is an expression Pechino . of welcoming indifference but not of want or need.
The most important was the fact that Reinhardt replied that, if properly handled, a swap with the together with Turkey, Italy was one of the two European Cuban missiles could be implemented, particularly if it was countries which hosted the United States Jupiter Intermediate Range presented as a result of an Italian contribution to the solution Ballistic Missile , which inevitably drew comparisons of the crisis, thereby playing on the Italian government’s cravwith the Soviet deployment of the SS-4 and SS-5 (R-12 and ing for major international status.
Italy also played, or tried As for the Italian government, the crisis drove home that to play, an active diplomatic role in the second phase of the the presence of the missiles had really become a double-edged crisis, after President John F Kennedy’s 22 October television sword.
According to a number of Italian documents from should also take into account two additional aspects.
First, by the late 1950s, Italian diplomats were convinced that the October 1962, the country was well advanced in an imporpresence of these weapons gave Italy the right to participate tant domestic political experiment, the so-called opening to in whatever inner circle of nuclear decision-making NATO the left, which affected Italy’s international posture during the was going to set up.
Khrushchev did not The presence of the Jupiter missiles in Italy was stressed by fail to make this point clear to Prime Minister Fanfani in the ExComm at its very first meeting, when National Security their August 1961 meeting in Moscow.
President Kennedy, moreover, was also quite of the Jupiter missiles at the time of the crisis.
Fanfani talks concerned that the missiles in Italy or Turkey could be fired openly with some of his diplomats about a possible trade of without the proper authorization, and on the 22nd, before his the missiles, even if in his notes he is very careful to attribute television address, he asked that personal messages be sent to these ideas to his correspondents and interlocutors and not to the commanders of the Jupiter installations “asking them to himself.
The more conservative Brosio, in Rome a reliable diplomat who, acting confidentially and on the other hand, was concerned at the idea of any United States covertly, might develop a closer relationship with the Vatican trade-off, which he saw as the symptom of a frightening United States and the new course opened by the Council and John the trend to seek an understanding with the Soviets at all costs, 23rd.
Bernabei and Schlesinger may as well have also talked and the pages of his journal reveal a gloomy pessimism about about the crisis—after all it was on everybody’s mind at the the possible solutions of the crisis.
Fanfani’s diary offers controversy since the publication of the memoirs of Ettore a possible explanation for this choice,but not a terribly conBernabei, one of Fanfani’s right-hand men and the long-time vincing one.
In his the dismantling of the Italian missiles was raised in the Soviet book, and in a number of interviews (including with this Politburo, but was eventually discarded as a sign of respect for author), Bernabei tells the story of his trip to the United Italy “on account of the memory” of Fanfani’s States in October 1962 to attend a special meeting to discuss visit to the Soviet Union.
Bernabei then adds that at the height of Italian Jupiter missiles stopped playing a central role in the the crisis Fanfani asked him to remain in Washington, keep discussions about the solution of the crisis, which focused in touch with Hombert Bianchi, Fanfani’s Press Secretary, almost exclusively on the missiles in Turkey.
After the staof the crisis, as well as the fact that Arthur Schlesinger was bility of the early postwar years under the leadership of the certainly the man inside the Kennedy administration who Christian Democrat Alcide De Gasperi, Italy had entered a had the closest personal connections with the Italian politimore troublesome course, in which the pro-Western forces cal scene.
One way out of the in the Fanfani diaries or in the available United States documents—or, predicament seemed to lie in gradually drawing the Socialists documents from elsewhere.
In the Arthur Schlesinger papers away from the Communists, and in their eventual inclusion at the JFK Presidential Library in Boston, there is significant in the democratic camp.
Such a change, which might isolate documentation on the 27 October meeting, but what comes the Communists and promote social reforms at the same out from it is a completely different story.
In the last few of the heavy neutralist streak in years, a number of important personal collections of papers the Socialists’ foreign policy.
The debate about the reliability from some of the central figures in Italian postwar history— of Nenni’s Socialists lasted almost ten years, and reached a cliincluding Fanfani to Moro, Nenni, Gronchi, Andreotti, max in the early 1960s, when some members of the Kennedy and Brosio—have been opened to research.
Most of these administration—Arthur Schlesinger in particular—graducollections contain not only personal papers but a vast amount ally took a strong interest in the idea of a center-left governof government records which politicians and diplomats stored ment and started encouraging the PSI and the DC to form away in their own files for their personal use.
In October State Central Archive has 1962 the new alliance was cautiously taking its first steps, also opened up a number of collections which contain precious and the Cuban crisis was in a way a test of its trans-Atlantic information about the evolution of Italian foreign policy, reliability.
This somewhat lukewarm offer an important contribution to our understanding of position, which sharply contrasted with Fanfani’s previously Italian politics.
Disarmament and arms Roberto Ducci, I Capintesta control initiatives would become a central feature of United States foreign policy in the following months and years, and while this Agostino Giovagnoli e Luciano Tosi Amintore Fanfani e turn undermined any Italian hope for nominal nuclear status la politica estera italiana through a policy of Atlantic cooperation, it made possible for the new center-left coalition to support the United States in its new search for a less confrontational attitude in the Cold War.
La politica estera italiana e le about his activities, rather than a place where he could muse armi atomiche, 1945-1991 at length about the meaning of what was going on.
The few excerpts about Cuba are a good example of the importance Onofrio Pappagallo, Il PCI e la rivoluzione cubana.
I call Segni DOCUMENTS on the phone and I advise him to get back within the day.
They are available at Affairs Carlo] Russo and the Chairmen of the Parliamentary the Italian Senate Historical Archives [the Archivio Storico Committees for foreign affairs. del Senato della Repubblica] in Rome and are about to be I receive from Ambassador Ward a message from published in an integral version.
This remarkable document, Macmillan, obviously critical of Kennedy’s decision, and askmust be approached with care, as it alternates longer analyses ing for an entente.
I reply immediately suggesting an action and very fragmentary, sketchy information.
S thanked him for what I said in Parliament and then he asked him what we would think about At 9:30 I see Segni, who has come back from Sassari yesan exchange between a withdrawal of the missiles from Cuba terday evening, and I inform him of the events by reading and a withdrawal of the missiles from the European bases, him Kennedy’s message, Macmillan’s , and my own particularly if obsolete.
He approves them, suggesting some corrections in my preferable to use the dismantling of the European bases in the reply to Kennedy, which I will deliver at 12 to the United States ambasframework of the conclusion of the disarmament negotiations. sador—something I could not do yesterday evening as I had The Brazilians instead are proposing denuclearization to chair the meeting on the shipping yards in Leghorn until South America and Africa.
In the evening comes the news midnight, after the meetings at the Parliament.
I have a call made to back from Brussels. the United States and at half past midnight I learn that there was a I inform Saragat about both messages.
Moro knew about stiffening in the morning but that now it’s been reduced a them since yesterday. bit.
I have lunch at Segni’s and I find there [Chairman of the The French Ambassador Berard expressed to Senate Cesare] Merzagora and [Chairman of the Chamber some friends his appreciation for the speech I gave yesterday, of Deputies Giovanni] Leone who are trying to paint a black which on the contrary worried picture of the economic situation.
In Moscow, TASS too interpreted it as pro-US, the serene report presented by [CEO of the Italian Commercial criticizing it.
Moro Bank Raffaele] Mattioli to the Commercial Bank on the 19th, was satisfied with it.
I solved the problems of the aqueduct they fall back, saying they certainly do not want to open a in Paola and of the shipyards in Leghorn.
I gave instructions parliamentary crisis, knowing full well that “they would be that tomorrow at the NATO meeting in Paris Italy should not the ones who would have to replace me,” and this modest associate itself with the United States proposal to suspend the supply of prophecy changes the tone of the conversation completely. aid to the USSR, and to postpone the issue in order not to I receive an anonymous express message from Milan with exacerbate East-West relations. the announcement from the of a death sentence for me and my family if I do not resign within 48 hours.
I 25 October give a copy of it to Vicari and De The Pope who has been informed about Lorenzo. my activity for peace in the past days, lets me know about his satisfaction.
At 11 am, at the Capitol, delivery of the Balzan 27 October Prize to the Nobel Foundation.
I learn that Cuba would be willing to dismantle the missiles At 5 pm at Villa Madama reception of the Italian under UN control, if the United States would publicly declare that they Episcopate.
I see Piccioni and I ask him to cable Russo that has crowned today’s manifestations of peace, climaxing at he should go back to see U Thant encouraging him and supnoon with the Pope’s radio speech in favor of negotiation porting him in his conciliatory actions.
Straneo and In the evening meeting with the ministers, about the Fenoaltea to meet hospitals.
We conclude the project which we should respectively with Gromyko approve.
Piccioni has met both the United States and the Soviet ambasand Rusk encouraging them sadors, encouraging a peaceful resolution of the Cuban issue. to find a solution for Cuba.
I reply that I was certain that they would not bring that, in case of necessity and if asked by the US, we might the Italian bases into the picture for their discussion in a as well consider a trade-off of the dismantling of the bases in possible treaty between NATO and the Warsaw pact.
He says Cuba with the dismantling of the United States missile bases in Europe. it’s a good argument.
After half an hour I learn that Khrushchev has suggested to U Thant a trade-off for the Cuban bases as well as the Turkish ones.
The Manlio Brosio Diaries At 8 pm, Taviani informs of his fears about the airplane of [ENI President The Diaries of Manlio Brosio span his entire career as a dipEnrico] Mattei, which has not arrived in Milan at 7 pm.
I lomat in the Italian foreign service (Ambassador to Moscow, order the necessary search to be carried out and unfortu1947-51; Ambassador to London, 1952-54; Ambassador nately at 9 pm we learn that the plane crashed in Bascapè near to Washington, 1954-61; Ambassador to Paris, 1961-64; Linate.
Secretary General of NATO, 1964-71) and offer a unique insight into Italian foreign policy as well as into the evolution 28 October of the postwar international system.
They are available at the Einaudi Foundation in Turin and have been published (not I order that Mattei be given a state funeral.
For fifteen years in their integral version) by Il Mulino, edited by Umberto he has given the republic powerful tools of progress and he Gentiloni Silveri.
If Fanfani’s notations are sometimes sparse has honored Italy everywhere.
His widow, pages and pages about the events of his life, both the profesthat I visited together with Bianca, is in the sional and the personal ones.
Washington that the USSR is willing to remove the missile bases from Cuba since the United States does not intend to attack Monday, 22 October Cuba has generated new hopes.
Then I waited for a confirmation and at 6 pm I let the United States and the An eventful evening intrudes upon a colorless day.
While Soviet ambassadors know that we look upon with favor to the [Director General for Economic Affairs at the Foreign news and that we encourage both countries to draw useful Ministry, Egidio] Ortona arrives around 11m., [Diplomatic consequences for peaceful restoration of the situation.
Counselor to the Prime Minister Carlo] Marchiori calls me on the phone to have more news about what is going on in Cuba.
I get in touch with [General Secretary 11 December of the French Foreign Ministry Eric] De Carbonnel who informs me about the NATO meeting which is going on and Dinner at the Russian Embassy where I find Kozlov, who at 6 tells me “Il ne fait pas de doute que la notre sera une attitude p.m. paid a visit to Segni.
I phone this message to Marchiori and in the is gracious enough as to tell me that I have left a great impresmeantime I get in touch with sion there.
He tells me that he visited Pompei, and that the Orlandi ; later I get a call from [Italian Ambassador ruins have deeply impressed him, make him imagine what to the North Atlantic Council Adolfo] Alessandrini and I also the world would have become if on the 28th a inform Casardi in nuclear war over Cuba had broken out.
After the only the wisdom of Kennedy and Khrushchev has saved us NATO meeting Alessandrini tells me that Dean Acheson has from the abyss, twice very close.
Now he believes that an arrived, and that the French have been the only ones to issue understanding can be achieved.
Alessandrini behaved “as a for Kennedy about Cuba initially included also the request to friend who asks some clarifications on a matter of common withdraw the missile bases from Italy.
I speak again with Carbonnel. reassured Cattani and he has asked for instructions.
These He refrains from giving any assessment about the measures will come, if possible.
In the meantime Ortona has listened to ment crisis in Italy if the international crisis will get worse.
It will allow the Cattani believes that we cannot discuss the issue in Italy on Soviets to react with an offensive—once again with words— a bilateral basis with Americans.
He goes into his office 15 minutes each day, and it not resort to force by asking for the presence of the carabinieri is almost impossible to speak to him.
First you use it and then make him chair the meeting of the Six—after which, instead consent will come. of rushing down to Rome he Before going to bed Ortona discusses with me his seriwasted an afternoon in a carefree walk through the Waterloo ous preoccupations about the Italian political and economic battlefield.
There is a lack of confidence, nobody is investing, of a systemic crisis. people fear a major crisis in six months.
In the meantime, At elevenm. the last news announces that everyone is criticizing Fanfani and no one dares to challenge part of the Soviet ships had turned back.
Kennedy operation had been badly conceived as it raised to the level of the missile bases an issue which should have Tuesday, 23 October remained at the level of Cuba and Castro.
We wait for the meeting for the Communists, but Khrushchev will not fail to get his between the Soviet ships and the American fleet.
The French payback with the European bases. are in favor of solidarity but they are critical of the lack of consultation.
On the other hand, we once more witness Thursday, 25 October the close interdependence among the different parts of the world as well as the impossibility for a great power to base In fact this morning Lippmann is its decisions—in an area that interests it directly—upon the already proposing to obtain the dismantling of the bases in consultation and the doubts of all the other ones.
It’s the usual I talk others I have at lunch the Norwegian Ambassador, who about it with Andreotti who sees the whole situation exclusively from the viewpoint of the arrives during the morning.
Cattani is happy about the be discussed at the December NATO Council, it’s too early) meeting in Brussels.
Kennedy does not seem inclined did not intend to attack him, and he started shouting like to accept the mediation terms proposed by U Thant.
In the evening at the Opéra I see [Head of Kennedy, but only a half one; and a subsequent trade-off for Treaty Service and of Atomic and Space Affairs at the French the bases cannot be excluded, as it may happen through the Foreign Ministry, Jean] De La Granville who tells me that the disarmament negotiations, as Kennedy promised.
Why did Americans talk too much about the necessity to dismantle Kennedy feel it necessary to grant Khrushchev a certificate of the Cuban bases.
I reply a direct agreement with the Russians and they do not want to that Kennedy is now emboldened by the Russian prudence, interrupt it.
Kennedy condescended to and that if the operation is not carried through to the very end hint to its allies. it will not be a success.
Tuesday, 30 October Saturday, 27 October Domenico Bartoli dropped by, he is all happy about the Kennedy victory.
I go to see Lucet [Director of Political that Kennedy’s action will have on Europe (bases in Turkey, Affairs, French Foreign Ministry] in the afternoon. etc.) and for the influence that the unilateral American deciWe also talk about Cuba.
There may be a tacit comuncertain about the reasons for Khrushchev’s oscillations promise between the two colossi, in the sense of tolerating and still worreciprocal interferences.
The respect for the spheres of influried, even if less than before, by the development of a direct ence is relative, since for Russia all of Europe is a sphere of Russo-American dialogue.
All Socialist intellectual] Suzanne Labin when she complains that the Italian left of course rises as one man in defense of Cuba, the Americans underrate the cold war. including the intellectuals.
He is now stronger than ever ing his conditions, U Thant’s mission is failed, [First Deputy and it would be a disaster if he does not use it.
Premier of the USSR Anastas Ivanovich] Mikoyan is arriving, the Republicans in Washington are asking Kennedy some Sunday, 28 October embarrassing questions.
Nothing can come out of this other than a bad compromise, or a new crisis without tragedies, in The referendum day.
It’s a unilateral decision which Reinhardt in Cuba and the elimination of the Communist outpost in has communicated to Piccioni on Wednesday January 9.
American foreign policy of decoupling from their nuclear Ducci did not keep a Diary but wrote a book of memoirs commitments in Europe, but it may also be the sign of an which fully reflects agreement, of which I am not entirely persuaded yet.
Nenni his witty, incisive and lucid understanding of Italian foreign must know about it and probably is referring to it when he policy and international affairs.
Italians the American gesture as the result of his own initiative In the early pages of the chapter, Ducci describes how by 22 and as his own success.
Everyone wants to assume the sad merit of Carlo Russo, Secretary General of the Ministry Attilio a foreign policy that does not exist.
Cattani, and a number of other key dignitaries, including himself, who at the time was at the head of the Italian delegaMonday, 14 January 1963 tion which negotiated the possible accession of the United Kingdom to the European Economic Community.
They I go to see Couve [de had all gone to Brussels for a week of meetings between the Murville] to inform him about the American decision on Six members of the EEC, and were engaged in a preparathe bases in Italy and Turkey.
He does not believe it to be a tory meeting for the work ahead, when the news spread that Russo-American agreement; he believes in technical-military the situation between the United States and Cuba was deteriorating reasons, the obsolescence of the Thor and Jupiter missiles.
I and that President Kennedy was about to give an important point out that the decision also shows a policy of concentratspeech. ing nuclear weapons in American hands.
The President of the Council, Amintore Fanfani, Lauris] Norstad if abanwas on the line from Rome and wanted to talk to the hon. doning the bases in Turkey would have been catastrophic Piccioni.
Mumbling something in his thick Roman accent, from a military point of view.
Norstad answered yes, both , Piccioni stood up without from a military and above all a psychological point of view. enthusiasm and followed the ambassador in his study.
We Thus he thought about it, but this does not mean that he learned afterwards that Fanfani was furious, as he had placed negotiated with the Soviets, then or afterwards.
Those were several calls to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs searching for the days when one talked about it.
In general, the withdrawal the Undersecretary for Foreign Affairs, the secretary general, of the bases has made a strong and bad impression to the Quai the General Director for political affairs, and so on, without d’Orsay. finding any of them; and as a first reaction he unleashed his wrath on the Minister of Foreign Affairs who had taken all of them with him to Brussels.
He told him that a few Roberto Ducci—I capintesta (The Big minutes before he had received the United States Ambassador, Freddie Bosses) Reinhardt, who had asked to meet him to deliver him a message from Kennedy.
Fanfani asked Piccioni to try and get Ducci was another of the key Italian diplomats of the postwar in touch with the authorities of the other European countries period.
We did not wait for sulted by him mostly to discuss how we could implement him at the gaming table, and followed him in the study.
It was a dead afternoon, if one did not gathered around him and heard his replies to the President know what was going on across the Atlantic—the dramatic of the Council, who was still in Palazzo Chigi.
Fanfani had talked with a half from Rue de la Loi they informed us that the President of the dozen foreign ambassadors in Rome and with four or five of Council was gone, at the Quatre Bras Palace neither [Foreign our own ambassadors abroad.
He had even managed to get Minister Paul-Henri] Spaak nor his deputy, Fayat, could be in touch with someone at the White House, where they had found.
Then Casardi called Dirk Stikker, the former Dutch confirmed to him what Reinhardt had told him a few hours Foreign Minister who had been appointed Secretary General before.
No, … I would not say so…”. him if he intended to summon an extraordinary meeting of Fanfani wanted to send someone to Washington immediately the Atlantic Council—even our best ambassador at the time to recommend, to exhort, to motivate… “No, I cannot, I have had not been informed about the ultimatum.
Time went by, the meetings here…” Fanfani insisted, said that otherwise he spent in disappointing efforts to show ourselves that we were would send Russo, together with Fornari, who was Director not completely reduced to impotence, until the wife of the General for Political Affairs.
Then Brosio looking for a flight to Rome, while Russo and Fornari were called to tell us that De Gaulle, after having received the snorting.
There was one bound to Congo which was making American Ambassador, had let the word spread around that a stopover in Rome, leaving at six am.
Piccioni decided that France would stick together with President Kennedy, followthis was the one that the two should catch, and told them ing its loyal duty as an ally.
The Belgians had not much to say, so by spreading his arms, as if to signify that as far as he was their Council of Ministers had been summoned for the next concerned it was totally useless.
We gathered we told him what little we had learned, and he assured us that around that technological wonder, which would reveal to us he would refer it immediately to the President, who was at his what was going to be our fate.
It was almost midnight, and desk in Palazzo Chigi. from the device came a sequence of whistles and booms, as After coffee, Piccioni told us he would have liked to play it always happens when one tries to tune in on a short wave a hand or two of bridge, which was his favorite game.
Something immense was happening, but outside The motivations that pushed the Soviet leaders to the Cuban of us and in the name of a logic which we could understand adventure probably have their roots in the fact that by 1962 as correct but from which we felt excluded.
To deploy IRBM launching pads next to the the reception, Casardi raised his questioning eyes towards the American territory.
Cuba seemed to offer the conditions required to adopt Russo and Fornari left after three hours of sleep; during the the second option.
If the initiative had succeeded, the Soviet rest of the day, others left Brussels as well.
Moscow had not replied to the bases in Cuba for a trade-off against Berlin in the next few ultimatum, the United States armed forces were being placed in a state months. of alert The critical mistake the Soviets made in their calculation The morning after, I went upstairs to the second floor of was about the American reaction, which turned out to be the Embassy, where Piccioni’s apartment was located.
In the much different and much sterner than they had foreseen. corridor I met to my great surprise Mr Pace, the minister’s The Russians realized immediately that an American air valet, who was carrying two large suitcases.
The fact that the Soviets gave in, however, must be interThe Italian Foreign Ministry assesses the preted as a withdrawal but not as a weakening or a substantial causes and consequences of the crisis change in their military posture or political intentions.
The situation of Soviet inferiority in terms of strategic Notes nuclear weapons, which was at the origin of the Cuban affair, has not been modified.
Crisis Meetings, October 18, 1962 afternoon meeting, The domestic consequences of the Cuban issue inside transcripts available in Timothy Naftali, Ernest May, and Russia seem to be rather modest, if there are any at all.
Coincidentally, the Garibaldi was in the US Centrale dello Stato, Fondo del Consigliere diplomatico della for testing at the time of the crisis.
Still, Prime Minister De Quay was not translated by van der Maar and Bastiaan satisfied, but he did not push the issue too hard.
Astonished, Bouwman he described the mood in his cabinet in his diary as “kind of indifferent” and that he would have liked to support Kennedy W ith regard to the Dutch perspective on the Cuban more strongly.
Naturally, his informative cables and lively letters sies in Havana and in Washington.
In fact, his messages became a NATO member and a strong supporter of close transatlantic source of information for State Department officials as well.
At relations, only reluctantly supported the United States during the height of the crisis, the Dutch ambassador to Washington the crisis.
Initially, Foreign Minister Joseph Luns refused to since 1950, J Herman van Roijen, reported that several State cut short his vacation on the French Riviera.
He told Prime Department staff members were very eager to learn more about Minister De Quay that he totally disagreed with the American what was actually going on in Cuba.
He requested The Hague policy towards Cuba and he did not intend to make a decto redirect all of Boissevain’s messages to the Dutch embassy in laration.
Being a former minister for Foreign Affairs and very critical of De Quay’s initial, hesitating statements on the senior negotiator during the 1945-1949 Indonesian revolumatter and probably alarmed by the threatening situation in tion, Van Roijen was highly respected and well-connected in Cuba, Luns returned to The Hague.
By then he had already American diplomatic and political circles and in October and accepted that an official communication would be issued, in November 1962 he visited the State Department many times. which the Dutch government would express its sympathy and In his search for information about the United States position, Van support for the United States position.
In In addition to the cables that included only the most the months preceding the crisis, the Dutch government had important topics and developments, Boissevain’s letters, already criticized the American embargo against Cuba, being which took a week to arrive in The Hague by air mail, offered afraid that supporting the United States on this subject would dambackground information about the internal political and age the credibility of Dutch maritime transport, especially economic situation in Cuba.
More importantly, in August 1962 the Netherlands part in finding a diplomatic solution, to espionage activities in had lost its last colony in Asia, New Guinea.
Luns especially the Dutch embassy by the Cuban Secret Service and the posheld a grudge against President Kennedy for failing to supsible construction of underground fortifications to hide offenport his country in its long conflict with Indonesia over sive weapons.
Besides, the Dutch foreign minister and some of his with Western European countries, including the Netherlands. colleagues reasoned that Cuba was outside of NATO terriHe repeatedly told the Dutch ambassador that he admired tory and therefore none of their concern.
Castro said that he felt obliged including those from American senators who speak of “bluff,” to pursue an agreement with the US, and he asked him to per“propaganda,” “no longer be browbeat,” and so forth. form as a mediator.
The Hague did not approve, however, and If the Cuban leaders earlier addressed the United States provocatively the ambassador received instructions to wait and see if Castro now they will be beside themselves.
In his reports, ent to the observer there is a risk of a conflict with nuclear Boissevain often described the impulsive Cuban leader with weapons. irony.
President Kennedy has summer of 1963, he witnessed Castro boasting to the Chinese stated that he has no intention of attacking Cuba (although, and Soviet ambassadors about his decision to nationalize the according to the Cuban press, he used the unfortunate expresformer building of the United States embassy.
In order to be prepared for anything the Cuban government is alleging that Washington intends to use legionnaires DOCUMENTS4 in its next attempt at invasion.
National Archive, The Hague, Archives of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, 2.05.118, inv.318.
Johan Maurits of Nassau TOP SECRET began to protect the Dutch shipping trade in the Mediterranean Sea against the arbitrariness of 2.
America and Cuba During the “drôle de guerre” Japan had increasingly come to regard the Yellow Sea and the coastal area of Northern In a meeting with the mayor of Berlin, Brandt, China and of course Manchuria and Korea as part of the Assistant Secretary Van Houten received Japanese sphere of influence.
World trade and the shipping some information relating to the former’s visit to president trade had resigned themselves to this and were limited to Kennedy.
He had the impression, that he [the president— China south of Shanghai.
When a Norwegian captain violated the unwritten rule by paying a commercial visit to northern trans.] was extremely nervous.
This was the result of informaports the navy of the land of the Rising Sun so impeded his tion regarding the numbers of Russian military technicians, journey—without shooting—that he returned to Shanghai who had arrived on Cuba, coupled with the pressure from without having accomplished his aim and complained to the public opinion and congress to do something against this.
Rotterdam Lloyd is having in an American port, inquires If the government of the United States would embark on the misbewhether Foreign Affairs has determined a standpoint regardgotten project of obstructing the shipping trade in any form ing shipping to Cuba.
Assistant secretary Van Houten replies, such as that proposed by the abovementioned senator the seathat in the NATO council the Americans have said, that if a faring countries would not tolerate this, N.A.T.O. would be ship transports weapons to Cuba the ports of the United States will be jeopardized and all this would pale in comparison to the abuse closed to all ships of that country.
Furthermore a ship that of accepted principles of the law of peoples which would carries other goods to Cuba will no longer be permitted to result in an enduring loss for mankind. enter American ports.
England, Italy, and a few The Ambassador, other countries have taken a similar standpoint.
The prime minister adds to this, that the Dutch government has no G.W.Boissevain. instruments of power to prevent Dutch ships from transporting goods to Cuba.
National Archive, The Hague, Archives of the Ministry ernment can only prevent these ships from loading weapons of Foreign Affairs, 2.05.118, inv.318.
I cannot believe it, that would mean destruction; yet a precarious matter if the West never says ‘Halt’, communism will always carry on.
Attempts made at important departments State to acquire at least an indiThe speeches of Dr.
Ernesto Guevara, Minister of Industry, cation of the issue at stake, Berlin, Cuba [Cuba is underlined are worth listening to because he does not mince words.
If the with pen—trans.] or India so far have been unsuccessful. hard truth needs to be told then “Che” will tell it.
On inquiry it became clear that neither British nor French In the past days he addressed the Cuban Youth Movement, embassy has any idea what is going on. since then changed by Fidel Castro into the “Union of Young Kennedy has convened both National Security Council Communists” , on the second and cabinet this afternoon and will make a statement at 19.00 birthday of this organization, with a speech that was only hours.” rarely interrupted by applause.
National Archives, The Hague, Archives of the pointed out weaknesses, amateurism and childish romantiDutch Legation in Cuba, 1955-1964, 2.05.169, cism and then the Argentine medic flogged their more than inv.9.
Obtained for CWIHP by Rimko van der Maar and mediocre labor performance.
In the succeeding sentences of translated for CWIHP by Bastiaan Bouwman.] his argumentation the word “trabajo” appeared six times.
Now we all know that the U.J.C. was drummed up to harvest the coffee berries.
Reflections on labor performance in general have by now become academic because of the general mobilization He totally disagrees proclaimed yesterday.
Moreover the airport is closed, one with the American step and does not want a communiqué. hopes temporarily, so that it is impossible to ascertain when these lines will reach Your Excellency.
Hague] Cable from Dutch Embassy, Havana , 23 CONFIDENTIAL October 1962 Provocative speech Fidel offers no news.
CONFIDENTIAL With this Rio touched the heart of the matter to prevent either fruitless name-calling or war.
General mobilization proclaimed, Fidel , who will speak today, probably waits for instructions Moscow.
An oral demarche by the French Ambassador and myself In the French Embassy this has led to a resolute demarche to the vice-minister of Foreign Relations followed which, by the Quai d’Orsay to the Cuban Ambassador who no doubt in the case of Burggraaf Du Gardier, has led to a tempestuwill have informed his government thereof.
Roa, the Minister of Foreign Relations, to complain about these practices on behalf of my colleagues (the nunciature had also voiced a complaint) and myself.
J Middelburg to announce the quarantine; apparently especially [French ambassador to the United States Hervé] Alphand pointed out 1.
The Cuban issue that the argument of the offensive nature of the Russian missile installations is not very strong since after all the question The prime minister—before proceeding to the actual subwhether a missile is defensive or offensive demands a purely ject of this meeting—raises the Cuban issue.
The previous subjective answer, while in fact strategic intentions determine day he had a telephone conversation with minister the nature of the weapons involved.
In the American reasonLuns, who will return to The Hague this evening. ing for example ICBMs are by definition offensive In the House of Representatives the chairman originally was to announce that the government could not yet make a statewhile those same missiles clearly play a defensive role in the ment about the Dutch standpoint, but he called the speaker Western strategy.
In the same way the Cubans can posit that shortly before the start of the meeting to ask if he would do the Soviet MRBMs and IRBMs are of a purely retaliatory so himself. nature and therefore in fact form a deterrent and not a threat.
Minister Toxopeus also feels that Consequently in the group it was said that the United States would have the statement is too long.
Minister Spaak, a much stronger position if they would make the disturbance after a meeting with the ministers of foreign affairs of the Six, of the strategic equilibrium and therefore the status quo the made a statement.
Whatever one’s opinion of the American centrepiece, in other words if they focus the attention on the action toward Cuba may be, the unity of the West demands, unprecedented element brought into the international stratethat it is supported. gic relations by the Soviets.
The prime minister agrees with minister Toxopeus, that even if the government would not agree with the American Van Roijen 907. government, it would still be obliged to be in solidarity.
National Archive, The Hague, Archives of the Ministry Speaker concludes, that the introduction should be greatly of Foreign Affairs, 2.05.118, inv.913.
Speaker has in a letter sent the previous day repeated his earlier request of 4 October to the ship owners to abstain from transporting weapons to Cuba.
American government took the measures with no prior knowledge of the NATO Council.
Minister [of the Treasury Jelle] Zijlstra remarks, that Cuba might not be in NATO territory, but that if a crisis were to ensue there, it would have repercussions for the Berlin issue.
Minister [of Social Work Marga] Klompé inquires as to what was discussed in The attitude is kind of indifthe NATO Council.
I American representative in NATO has said, that there is no would like to support him more strongly. doubt, that offensive military bases have been constructed in Cuba.
State Archives, Den Bosch, archive J.E. de Quay, diary tries would be kept informed about the continuation of the 48, no.98, 98, 25 October 1962.
From other NATO countries’ by Rimko van der Maar and translated for CWIHP by Rimko side it has been stated, that Cuba falls outside of NATO’s tervan der Maar.] ritory, but that all countries are politically very interested in this action.
In the other NATO countries only a few special measures have been taken.
As I have noted in previous reports, in the speeches of Cuban government persons often what is not said is of greater importance than what is.
This denial has Reference my 907. in fact been heard from Khrushchev these days.
The impresDuring a talk with Stone, deputy director [of sion these statements to and fro give is that they are probably the State Department’s Bureau of ] Western European Affairs, building installations in Cuba which from the air look like the he gave a more detailed overview of the recent developments. batteries of dangerous long-range “ground to ground” missiles which could possibly be fitted with nuclear warheads.
The United States firstly Halfway through the summer it had become clear however also knows that their full equipment will take some to Washington that Khrushchev was out to realize Russian more time and therefore intends to prevent the supply of any objectives with regard to Berlin as soon as possible.
In and in this vein had even specified the range of the weapons diplomatic circles the question is being considered whether which were being delivered.
For instance TASS had in early these are defensive or offensive weapons.
Incidentally the statement by [Soviet foreign minister Andrei] Gromyko on weapons delivered to Cuba referenced The Ambassador, by Kennedy in his address on the twenty-second of this month had been read from paper by the former.
Boissevain. fourthly In a departure from what had previously been State Stone stated that of Foreign Affairs, 2.05.118, inv.487.
National Archive, The Hague, Archives of the Ministry After returning from vacation I took note of this letter of Foreign Affairs, 2.05.118, inv.913.
Obtained for CWIHP today the 26th of this month upon which I sent the following by Rimko van der Maar and translated for CWIHP by Bastiaan reply to Lord Home via the British embassy here.
I agree with you that the government of the United States must be supported in its policy to prevent the Soviet Union from turning Cuba into an offensive military base.
At the same time I agree with you that developments must be watched closely on account of repercussions which Dutch Prime Minister Jan E de Quay, Diary, 26 October they might have elsewhere and of possible consequences for 1962 the North Atlantic alliance.
National Archive, The Hague, Archives of the Ministry [Source: State Archives, Den Bosch, archive J.E. de Quay, diary of Foreign Affairs, 2.05.118, inv.913.
This public about Cuba, and received a report of what passed in does not mean that there is not a very active effort to develop the North Atlantic Council.
I would be most grateful if you plans to also realize the second desideratum.
We shall, of course, do Secretary Rusk yesterday in an off-the-record what we can to give support to the United States in the press conference with a limited number of journalists very Security Council.
At the same time, there may be repercusemphatically stated that the dismantlement of the bases and sions not only in the Caribbean, but also in Europe and elsethe removal of the missiles are essential.
National Archive, The Hague, Archives of the Ministry part of a new approach to the Berlin issue, but that the acute of Foreign Affairs, 2.05.118, inv.913.
Obtained for CWIHP threat to the United States remains in existence and will weaken the by Rimko van der Maar and translated for CWIHP by Bastiaan negotiating position of the United States at the critical moment.
Meloy, director Western Europe , confirmed again that the construction of the bases is being continued at a frantic pace and that as time goes on the threat to the United States increases.
CONFIDENTIAL As a result of various circumstances Khrushchev sees himself forced to definitively address the Berlin issue in the Obviously State Department is showing great interest in short term,e. before the end of this year, of course with the messages from Havana about mood and developments over intention to make the Soviet position prevail.
If Boissevain still is necessary for him to strengthen his negotiating position has the opportunity to report in writing, would you approve through a military threat.
National Archives, The Hague, Archives of the Dutch does not possess enough ICBMs to achieve the stated goal, Legation in Cuba, 1955-1964, 2.05.169, the Soviet threat lacks the necessary credibility.
Obtained for CWIHP by Rimko van der Maar and will be filled by the installation of MRBM and IRBM bases translated for CWIHP by Rimko van der Maar.] in Cuba, where the missiles are “zeroed in” on the American retaliation bases.
The American action has struck the trump card of surprise from Cable from Dutch Embassy, Washington , 27 Khrushchev’s hands yet the much more important trump card October 1962 of the Cuban bases remains in existence and gains in significance the more those bases near their completion.
Secondly aid to anti’s and espionage The reason for this about-face can only be guessed at.
Thirdly pirate attacks from United States and Puerto Rico My informant put forward the possibility that those close Fourthly flights over Cuba to Khrushchev,g. the military, pressured him to withdraw Fifthly dissolving base Guantanamo his first offer.
National Archives, The Hague, Archives of the Dutch moved Khr to this new move.
It is possible that Legation in Cuba, 1955-1964, 2.05.169, inv. we are dealing with an attempt to create the greatest pos87.
Obtained for CWIHP by Rimko van der Maar and transsible confusion, not as much in Washington as among the lated for CWIHP by Rimko van der Maar.] allies and sympathizers.
Whether this fear will prove justified, or whether after Fidel’s grandiloquence his “people” will still be inclined to Raúl mentions in passing the decision taken by Khrushchev swallow everything he puts in front of them, remains an open to dismantle the missile sites as a run-up to new Cuban question.
The fact is that after the exuberance of the first days demands for guarantees, including those concerning the of mobilization a silence has set in among the ranks of his evacuation of the naval base of Guantánamo. supporters, an anxious silence that is shared by his enemies who live between hope and fear.
National Archive, The Hague, Archives of the Ministry of U Thant, who is coming to further arrange the supervision of Foreign Affairs, 2.05.118, inv.487.
A third possibility is that the points, the Brazilian answered that Cuba asked too much, he will inform Fidel about some deep game or another that after which the minister said that these points are negotiable. the Soviet Union is playing with the United States.
The rest is part of future settlement without accomplishing his aim, the blockade will probably be Cuban United States conflict resumed, and in Cayo Hueso there is the same military busyness as everywhere in Cuba.
National Archives, The Hague, Archives of the Dutch Legation in Cuba, 1955-1964, 2.05.169, inv.
The Indonesian CONFIDENTIAL president did have the occasion to do so, such as during a recent speech to students.
According to informant perSpeech Fidel about haps this wise forbearance from Sukarno’s side could be read conversations with Thant, of as a first indication of the salutary effect the firm and resolute which second confidential, shows that Cuba refuses inspeccourse of action of the Kennedy government regarding Cuba tion; if UN accepts American guarantee of non-aggression will have—according to expectations. then SU promise with regard to taking back strategic weaponry without inspection can be accepted.
Mentioned his 5 consecondly The United States government intends to point out to ditions for peace and declared Cuba prepared to cooperate to Jakarta, as they hope superfluously, the way in which the reach true peace.
Have impression Cuban governthat Sukarno would continue untiringly in his attempts to ment determined and solution conflict extremely difficult. play United States and SU off against one another.
Zain has lately devoted himself to procuring Legation in Cuba, 1955-1964, 2.05.169, inv. new economic support from the United States to his country.
According to informant the United States side is in principle willing to provide support in order to prevent Indonesia from slipping into chaos any further.
To this end for example the International Monetary Fund could according to informant be engaged.
Letter from Dutch Embassy, Havana , 2 Under no circumstances do they want to run the risk of later November 1962 finding out, as recently happened in the case of Brazil, that the support/money ended up in the wrong hands.
Obtained for CWIHP by Rimko van der Maar and translated for CWIHP by I could have written the speech made by Fidel Castro Bastiaan Bouwman.] last night to report to the Cuban people about his meeting with U Thant before it was delivered.
The interim Secretary General came to sound out the revolutionary govCable from Dutch Embassy, Havana , 2 ernment concerning a settlement of the burning issue which November 1962 threatened the world with war, namely the Russian missile bases and the American blockade.
Cable from Dutch Embassy, Washington , 2 The ensuing development is only too well known.
During the talk with director [of the State There is great disappointment that Fidel missed such an Department’s Bureau of ] Inter-American Regional Political Affairs I inquired as to further actions to be opportunity for blackmail and fussing.
Allen said that will have a hard time because the Cuban is as intransigent although intensive consultations are taking place on the level with the one side as he is with the other.
Trinidad today or tomorrow where the admiral, charged with Fidel called the inspection of the dismantling of the misthe execution of the quarantine, has set up his headquarters. sile bases an American attempt to humiliate Cuba.
On this Concerning the attitude of the various Latinos Allen in sole point Mikoyan could make a pacifying gesture by giving the first place mentioned Mexico whose standpoint of course Washington the solemn assurance that the “strategic weapons” enjoys great recognition.
About Brazil he remarked that the installed by Russia will indeed be removed.
This would allow impression is that the Brazilian government displays a differfor a return to the “status quo ante” the recent crisis. ent attitude towards other countries than it does domestically.
Fell, the reason why I cannot tell, United States standpoint, without having the assurance that his action but all the same I know full well, I do not like thee Dr.
It was apparent that Allen possessed very little information The Ambassador, concerning the situation in Cuba itself.
National Archive, The Hague, Archives of the Ministry Cable from Dutch Embassy, Washington , 2 of Foreign Affairs, 2.05.118, inv.913.
He stated that the notice CONFIDENTIAL in question had come from Venezuela where a message had been intercepted by the government.
In order to obtain more German embassy reports that in several places Russian insight into the content of the instructions and in order weapons are hidden in holes or under cement after which yards to ascertain on the basis of the text whether the instrucphotographed by helicopters probably for later identification. tion was clearly intended for all pro-Castro organizations With regard to conversation Fidel [Castro and in Latin America they had asked for the text through the Anastas] Mikoyan nothing new but Soviet day US embassy in Caracas, yet so far without avail.
Although celebrated with expressions of friendship and notification of 5 State therefore possesses nothing but points by ex-communist Rodriguez. the report from Caracas, Allen assumed it virtually certain that this was indeed an attempt by Castro to stir all Latino Boissevain countries.
National Archives, The Hague, Archives of the Dutch tern” of agitation and sabotage had in fact begun to emerge.
Obtained for CWIHP by Rimko van der Maar and transso immediately after the announcement of the quarantine, lated for CWIHP by Rimko van der Maar.] the size of the protests that occurred had been limited.
It was not clear to what extent these demonstrations which antedate the abovementioned Cuban instructions, should be ascribed to the independent initiative of local communist and other pro-Castro groups, or to instructions from Havana or from Moscow.
Obtained for CWIHP fight for their vital national interests, has drawn the necesby Rimko van der Maar and translated for CWIHP by Bastiaan sary lessons from this and in his further cold war policy will Bouwman.] proceed with the necessary prudence.
My colleague himself, and as he said his government as well, is inclined to believe that the Kremlin will not take any more major risks in the current circumstances and is more likely to operate in a circumspect fashion.
We had both established that at the time in government circles in Washington possible incidents involving “On a war footing” Russian ships and which through a chain reaction could have led to a nuclear war were very seriously reckoned with.
National Archives, The Hague, Archives of the Dutch “To arms” Legation in Cuba, 1955-1964, 2.05.169, inv.
Letter from Dutch Embassy, Havana , 21 The Ambassador, November 1962 G.W.Boissevain.17/585.
National Archive, The Hague, Archives of the C U B A: Ministry of Foreign Affairs, 2.05.118, inv.318.
Mario, Pedro, and Ramón are reading—as far as they are able to read—what they are supposed to be thinking.
Cable from Dutch Embassy, Havana , 20 Since Fidel has brought in the Spartan mothers (he had November 1962 read a book again) tensions have been rising because of the lack of a satisfactory settlement of the dispute.
National Archives, The Hague, Archives of the Dutch all shipping to Cuba which inevitably will result in hostilities.
Obtained for CWIHP by Rimko van der Maar and transin its struggle against imperialism and its love for world lated for CWIHP by Bastiaan Bouwman.] peace.
Time and again he covered himself with the mantle of Khrushchev’s name and he repeatedly mentioned Fidel Castro.
Cuba reserves the right to acquire any kind of weapons CONFIDENTIAL for its defense.
Unless the Soviet Union, which has abanernment—trans.] in which 5 points repeated, inspecdoned or been forced to abandon friends in the past, pressures tion turned down, and the United States provoked.
National Archives, The Hague, Archives of the Dutch Havana, 26 November 1962.
At 1 KM. distance right of the road, which leads from VIA AIR MAIL Bartolomé in southern direction to Zuluete there is another F 15445/62 hill of little height named “San Ramón,” where during the past days there has also been much activity.
These trucks were all carefully In this instance I have again chosen not to inform friendly covered, so that their cargo could not be ascertained; in the missions, leaving it to Your Excellency’s better judgment to proximity of the caves the Cuban drivers hand them to the pass this information on to the suitable foreign governments Russians, who drive them the remaining distance to the caves, and international institutions. where they are unloaded to subsequently be returned to the Cuban drivers.
During these days for the full 24 hours great activity was Cold war. observed near the hill of Viñas, located right of the road from Bartolomé to Central Adela, where work The current climate here with a decrease in temperature has already been going on for months.
On the 23rd, 14 large to 13° matches the political and economic condition.
Notwithstanding government promDirector UN political affairs State , ises of extra distribution of all kinds of tools and utensils, Sisco, while requesting utmost discretion informed toys and provisions, scarcity is all too apparent.
The Cubana me that State is currently proposing to let the Cuban affair maintains a precarious service to Mexico City quietly come to an end.
This would boil down to the US which is dogged by interruptions and delays, and the shipand the SU “agreeing to disagree,” which leaves the quesping trade from the West is limited to Cuban and Spanish tion whether such could be done while going around the v r merchant ships and vessels under flags of the Soviet Union . and satellite states.
Sisco affirmed again that, although it would have been It would surprise me however if this was all that is to come, important to make a communist country accept UN inspecsince such measures only herald a period of “attrition” which tions, the current situation is not unwelcome to the United States since could last a long time. on the one hand no promise of non-invasion has to be made [I assume that this is not disagreeable to Kennedy from the The Ambassador, point of view of domestic politics either] and on the other hand American surveillance can continue quietly.
According to Sisco this concerns eight of Foreign Affairs, 2.05.118, inv.318.
Obtained for CWIHP thousand men who primarily had the duty of “servicing” the by Rimko van der Maar and translated for CWIHP by Bastiaan various installations which have now been removed so that Bouwman.] their stay is of no further use.
During my talk with Rusk B The extreme militant wing of the Cuban communist Rusk, in relation to his remark on a possible party could overthrow Castro with the aid of the Russian reorientation of Cuba toward China, revealed that he was troops. factoring in new Chinese initiatives.
These could occur as a direct reaction to possible events taking place in Havana, C The moment could be seized for a revolution which g., by a military demonstration against the off-shore islands. would be directed not only against Castro but also against the He however also saw the possibility of Chinese action in Russians present.
North Korea and furthermore singled out North Vietnam as a possible area for Chinese activities, which could cause the Especially the latter possibility gives the United States much cause unstable situation in Laos to collapse.
Such a Chinese initiafor worry since it could lead to a situation as in Hungary tive would, according to your colleague, face Moscow with in 1956, with the difference that this time the United States [in my the highly difficult choice of abandoning an ally or getting opinion also for domestic political reasons] would have to involved in a war.
Therefore the relationship with Beijing is intervene. not only a “long-term worry” for Moscow but certainly also During a brief review of the Cuban crisis Rusk pointed a short-term worry. out that Kennedy although forceful had nevertheless acted Regarding the possibility of action in Korea Rusk made very prudently especially by always leaving Khrushchev a way clear that the United States would in case of emergency this time not out.
National Archive, The Hague, Archives of the Ministry struck immediately] only when the issue of the missiles had of Foreign Affairs, 2.05.169, inv.9.
Obtained for CWIHP been dealt with was withdrawal of the bombers demanded by Rimko van der Maar and translated for CWIHP by Bastiaan and only when the the IL-28 had been removed, had the Bouwman.] withdrawal of the Russian troops been tabled.
He confirmed that Khr had conceded withdrawal of the troops, albeit without committing himself to a definite time limit.
Havana Letter from Dutch Embassy, Havana , 19 ORIGINAL INITIALED BY: GWB March 1963 TO: NERECODI [Dutch Government Code Service, The Hague] 551/119 Havana, 19 March 1963.
With respect to my message sent via a different channel The presence in Cuba of a large number of military and and a note included in the “Brief Cuban Notices” of this week economic experts from the S.U. has aroused a I will allow myself a few more remarks. good deal of controversy.
Their number, their task, the fact The noon meal at the Embassy, where Dr.
Castro was that their presence could result in the outbreak of a world present as a guest of honor, was followed by his appearance war and so forth.
Although Currently the “question brûlante” is if and at what pace this may well be one of Fidel Castro’s whims, it seems more they are disappearing from Cuba.
I do not know what has probable this is a purposeful attempt at rapprochement with happened during my absence travelling on duty but am the West, bearing in mind that this may replace the United States in certain that during last weekend a thousand of them left the matters of economy.
Russe” into a closed economic region with high prices and an advanced form of mercantilism or autarky.
National Archives, The Hague, Archives of the Dutch that Cuban sugar, for which the Soviet Union pays 6 cents per Legation in Cuba, 1955-1964, 2.05.169, inv. lb., is sold to the Soviet people for 46 cents (what democratic 119.
Fidel Castro recounted that during his visit to the Soviet Union he had the opportunity to observe the effect of megaton of bombs.
This window had to be shut, who lived in that house, Cable from Dutch Embassy, Havana , 1 July where would Fidel Castro sit at the table, etc.
National Archives, The Hague, Archive of the Dutch My servants, who are all disgruntled about the current Legation in Cuba, 1955-1964, 2.05.169, inv. situation, were nevertheless very excited and when Fidel 120.
Obtained for CWIHP by Rimko van der Maar and transCastro before departing made his habitual visit to the kitchen, lated for CWIHP by Bastiaan Bouwman.] from the streets too there were “sounds of jubilation” from the public at large.
GWB Be noted that Fidel told my wife that Cuban TO: NERECODI too large debt to Soviet bloc, only the Hague] United States able to provide aid but nevertheless he was determined to continue revolution and this is the bottleneck.
National Archives, The Hague, Archives of the Dutch he feels obliged pursue agreement with United States yet would like Legation in Cuba, 1955-1964, 2.05.169, inv. use me as middle man.
Should Castro approach You how he has crossed an opponent. directly with similar proposal I should like to be informed.
National Archives, The Hague, Archive of the Dutch to our country to induce negotiations about such matters.
I Legation in Cuba, 1955-1964, 2.05.169, inv. repeat my request to be sent a magnificently illustrated work 120.
Obtained for CWIHP by Rimko van der Maar and transabout the Netherlands to present to Dr.
Castro, to ensure lated for CWIHP by Bastiaan Bouwman.] that his current appreciation of our country remains undiminished.
National Archives, The Hague, Archive of the Dutch Letter from Dutch Embassy, Havana Legation in Cuba, 1955-1964, 2.05.169, inv. , 24 July 1963 120.
From a conversation I had with a high-level official of the Ministry of Foreign Relations one could infer that Cuba’s foreign policy. especially the “new communists” have strong reservations about the agreement.
According to informant, who himself One does not get the impression that Havana’s foreign belongs to the group of the neo-communists, Havana intends policy has been subject to substantial change over the past to accede, although not soon.
The much discussed “politics of the smile” does party leadership, among whom are Fidel and Raul Castro as not seem more than a tactical maneuver by Castro which is well as Ernesto Guevara, apparently do not much like the principally aimed at improving economic relations with those idea of an agreement of which one of the most important “capitalist” countries here accredited and to soften Cuba’s authors, Washington, is obstinately resisting a modus vivendi political isolation.
According to informant sixty percent of the party manifested themselves in certain advances to the representaleadership shared this opinion.
The “new comrades” have tives of the Netherlands, England, Canada, France, and the criticized Khrushchev at party leadership meetings, openly Vatican.
As part of this Castro among other things accepted displayed their agreement with the position of Mao an invitation for a déjeuner at the home of my predecesand even ventured to praise the forcefully negative attitude of sor and by the British and Canadian Ambassadors while he de Gaulle against the agreement, made an appearance at a reception by the Temporary Envoy even if they did so half in jest.
It is known that the Cuban of many “new communists” and the fear of Soviet-American Embassies in the “capitalist” countries have received orders to agreements around Cuba analogous to the arrangement contract experts in the most far-flung technical and scientific between Moscow and Washington that brought a solution to areas.
Ambassador Maristany in The Hague has proven himthe October-crisis of 1962 seem to be the basis of said critiself active in such matters.
Nevertheless, taking into account the economic Guevara recently approached my first staff member with the dependency which marks Cuba’s relationship with Moscow, question whether the Netherlands would be willing to deliver it is doubtful whether Havana will in the long term be able goods of non-Dutch patent to Cuba.
Clearly this referred to withstand Soviet Russian pressure to accede to the agreeto American-produced goods.
Furthermore it does not seem unlikely that Havana, minister of said Ministry asked me if the company Tomassen apart from certain ideological and political objections, will in De Steeg would be willing and able to supply a 3000 horsepower gasturbine for the ESSO oil refinery that was nased gladly let Moscow entreat it in the hope of making a positive in 1960.
National Archives, The Hague, Archives of the Dutch the National Institute of Agrarian Reform, Jaime Enrique Legation in Cuba, 1955-1964, 2.05.169, inv.
This at least according to an announcement by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs here.
National Archives, The Hague, Archive of the Dutch Letter from Dutch Embassy, Havana , 11 November Legation in Cuba, 1955-1964, 2.05.169, inv.63 120.
November 1963 Today the gardener of the Embassy, Mario HERNANDEZ, reported to Dr.
Washington interrogation which was the subject of aforementioned letter SECRET of 24 October.
Two of the passengers belonged, according to Hernández, to the white race while the other two were During my meeting with Rusk this morning he on being mulattos. asked informed me that currently no military Soviet units In contrast to the first time Hernández said this time he remain in Cuba.
There are still some technicians and instrucwas not taken to a secret service office.
During a ride through tors but the United States believes that all combat units have departed. town Hernández was, according to him, urged to render Over the past forty days two thousand Russians have left certain services for Cuba and his revolution in his capacity Cuba and the expectation is that the instructors will likewise as gardener of the Embassy.
Thereupon they nature of the statements set out in the first paragraph of this had offered him money for such services but Hernández said message and I would request you to use these with utmost he did not accept this offer either.
Finally they had urged discretion. him not to let the Embassy know of this conversation.
If he would nevertheless do so—and they claimed to have means to Van Roijen 698. discover this—he would come to regret this.
Reinink he had then made clear to his interrogators that of Foreign Affairs, 2.05.118, inv.913.
After the sentries had recognized Vallejo For the record it is to be noted that the conversation they raised the barrier and a short while later we stopped in related above took place in the garden of the Embassy. front of an apartment building the entrance of which likewise was guarded by soldiers.
National Archives, The Hague, Archive of the Dutch ously inhabited by someone from the upper-middle class.
Obtained for CWIHP by Rimko van der Maar and transconsiderations he never stays at the same address for long.
As lated for CWIHP by Bastiaan Bouwman.] such he is someone with no regular place of [illegible, presumably “work”] or residence.
Without removing the pipe from his mouth Fidel greeted me with an “hola” , slapped Letter from Dutch Embassy, Havana , 17 March 1964 me on the back, and explained that he was undertaking an attempt to make ice cream.
The young woman who was also present in the Havana, 17 March 1964. kitchen looked rather more groomed but I was not introduced to her.
Dressed in a fashionable red dress and scuttling Meeting with Castro. about on sharp spike heels she let herself be commanded by Castro and helped him, as far as her attire permitted, with With reference to earlier notice from our side through the stirring and mixing.
Occasionally Fidel took a draft of his a different channel, below a note from Dr.Reinink [First brew and asked me to do the same.
After it had been finished Secretary of the Embassy] containing some particulars of his and put in the refrigerator the prime minister took me to the recent meeting with Fidel Castro. living room, offered me a chair, and himself sat down in a rocking chair.
The Ambassador, While he laboriously filled his pipe I had the opportunity to look around.
There was a rowing machine and weights; in one of the corners stood a buck, Note attached to letter no.3/122-GS.21. and opposite hung a skip rope.
Here and there a submachine gun and some heavy caliber handguns were scatOn 11 March around half past two René Vallejo, Fidel’s tered about.
The doors to some of the bedrooms were open. personal physician, had called me to say that Castro wanted A number of them contained camp beds, clearly intended to talk to me and would receive me at four o’clock.
A few minutes before the located on the side of the street, any opposite neighbors did agreed time Castro’s sphinx-like physician appeared in front not have a view of it as this was obstructed by about six closed of the Embassy behind the wheel of an Oldsmobile and invitcubicles which looked like little dressing rooms but probably ed me to sit next to him.
In the back was a soldier with a subwere also intended as sleeping space for Castro’s bodyguards. machine gun resting on his knee.
We slowed down in front of Rocking back and forth vigorously Castro began to speak the entrance to a street in the same district that contains the and started with an account of his economic policy.
Although Fidel did not delve into this subject mistakes which included neglect of the traditional Cuban any further it was clear that he meant that countries, especultures in favor of an industrialization for which the councially Czechoslovakia, Poland, East Germany, and Hungary try was not yet ripe or for which it did not possess the raw would only be able to obtain sugar if they were prepared to materials.
This misconception however now belonged to the pay the world market price in United States dollars.
No country could develop properly without taking into a concession to Bulgaria by enabling this country to buy account and making an appeal to the international division of approximately 250,000 tons against a price of 0.06 USD for labor.
Cuba possessed excellent products which were unique its canning industry. and which given the necessary rationalization and mechaCastro said he did not intend to save the foreign currencies nization would for example in the area of sugar production he had acquired or to let them flow back to Moscow, in the make it second to none.
The USSR-designed machines for way countries such as Japan saw their dollars disappear back the cutting and loading of cane were most satisfactory and to Washington.
He planned to spend the money on capital would more than counterbalance the shortage of professional goods.
Through additional scientific methods and good vertible assets had already been and would also in the future soil nutrition it would easily be possible to harvest ten million be spent in Western Europe, next to the United States the tons of sugar in 1970. 1970 was even a conservative estimate. most strongly industrially developed part of the world.
They Most likely this amount would already be reached earlier, were already doing good business with England, Canada, possibly even already in 1968.
As far as England was concerned, he recwas rising steadily so that Cuba would for the time being be ollected the recently signed Leyland contract.
Cuba would assured of high prices on the international market; in any case order future industrial equipment there, such as chemical such would be the case until approximately 1965.
In France they had placed orders for trucks—Berliot— year prices would probably go down.
Spain would supply this could never be a disaster because it had assured sales to freight and fishing ships, for the time being amounting to a the USSR of 5,000,000 tons for the years 1968, 1969, and total of 400,000,000 USD, of course if Madrid would remain 1970, at a price of 0.06 USD per pound.
I asked him if this firm in maintaining its commercial relations with Havana. contract did not mean he had become very bound and if To help it resist the pressure it was presently receiving from perhaps it would not have been better to reserve large quantiWashington Havana was prepared to let a certain percentage ties of sugar for the international market, especially since he of the payment for its sugar shipments to Spain run via the was so sure of rising demand.
The USSR would always continue to Relations of Cuba with the countries of Western Europe supply high-quality products such as oil and oil derivatives at are currently being cleared of the obstacles that for the most a price lower than that of western oil companies; tractors and part had been brought into existence by the Revolution itself. other agricultural machinery, chemicals, trucks, and so forth.
Especially during the first years the Cubans had in a sort Certain risks just had to be taken.
As far as he was concerned of hubris and inexperience oftentimes needlessly offended he was prepared to immediately come to a like agreement Western Europe, among other things by way of a nationalwith the Netherlands for example for the period 1965–1967. ization policy that eventually could not but cause a negative Cuba would of course not remain an agrarian state. effect.
The Cuban Government understood this perfectly Based on its sugar it would gradually build a sucro-chemical well and already began making a serious effort to pay its industry and also develop other sectors of its economy.
Yet old, pre-revolutionary debts while also offering compensathis required money and technical expertise.
Financially the tion to Western European companies for the branches that outlook was considerably more positive than at the time of his were nationalized here, such as Shell.
They possessed currency reserves of about not say whether or not Shell had responded positively to this 100,000,000 USD and this amount would increase signifiprobing.
He did add that he was also willing to indemnify cantly as a result of sugar sales in the international market.
They had no great obligations of supply to the Asian “socialResponding to my question why he had not brought this to ist” sphere.
The Chinese People’s Republic would receive only the attention of the interested parties themselves he remarked 600,000 tons in 1964, equal to the amount of the previous that he wanted to wait until after the [November 1964 year.
With the exception of the Soviet Union, Cuban trade presidential] elections in the United States before making a with the Eastern European countries had now been dramaticoncrete proposal.
After that perhaps the conThe impression the prime minister made on me during versation could become more pleasant.
In any case he would this long meeting was that of a dynamic, indefatigable man have to come to an agreement with the United States sooner or later. who is not only aware of his great power but also wishes to A solution of what he referred to as the “only small remainexercise it even in areas that would normally belong to the ing problem” with the United States was vital to secure for competencies of ministers.
For this reason it was ence and the bureaucratic disposition of a large number of convenient for Cuba to lay the material foundations for such his technical institutions.
Incidentally it did have to be taken into account send any possible communications not via the “bureaucratic that, as more time went by, Cuba’s interest in a resumption apparatus” of Foreign Relations [i.e., the foreign ministry— of commercial ties with America would decrease.
It is hard to avoid the Eastern Europe had now been reasonably well consolidated impression that one is dealing with a restless, almost chaotic and Western Europe would also take an increasingly imporman.
He hates regularity, fixed working hours. and a fixed tant position in Cuban foreign trade.
The meain his dressing gown making ice cream and then takes out sures against the shipping of the United States’ allies would almost three hours for a conversation with a foreign diplomat come to backfire both for Washington and for its allies.
After certainly does not seem to attach much value to a normal all, it forced Cuba to build a trading fleet of its own and schedule.
Nor can one ascribe to Fidel Castro an exaggerthereby would make it less and less dependent on foreign ated interest in protocol and etiquette; he is more boorish tonnage for its overseas connections. than informal, more roughly jovial than amiable.
Yet he is Not only Cuban sugar cultivation but also agriculture and by no means naïve but rather a cunning Galician who, when cattle breeding had to be thoroughly modernized.
Especially necessary, displays a tough tenacity and is prepared to use any dairy production presented a serious problem.
Thus from the the West, at least too little to form a proper image of it.
His perspective of the abovementioned international division of convictions about the “capitalist society” come across as antilabor the Netherlands could take an interesting position here. quated.
Incidentally he also seems to have only a superficial Castro said that one should not take too literally his remarks impression of the reality of the communist world, primarily viz. that Cuba would in a certain amount of time surpass the shaped by tendentious literature and information from his Netherlands in the area of dairy production.
He does now seem to have to take the Netherlands as an example, as a model of an agriwoken up to the fact that that the one-sided economic orienculturally highly developed country that, although small in tation of his country toward the “socialist” camp has serious surface area, had managed to secure an important position in drawbacks and that the trading practices of these countries the world both in the areas of agriculture and cattle breeding cannot always be reconciled with the so loudly proclaimed and the area of industry.
The Cuban economic advances are now also directed at As part of the modernization of the sugar industry and the the Netherlands.
By formulating the abovementioned desidplans to come to a production of ten million tons of sugar erata personally Castro wanted to take the shortest route Castro explained that here too he would like to appeal to and prevent the Cuban propositions from being treated or Dutch goods. dismissed as not being very serious.
Next the prime minister suggested that Philips would From this point of view some of them seem attractive, resume its transactions with Cuba, particularly in the area particularly the suggestions regarding the purchase of Dutch of radio, television and electronics.
I reminded Castro that cattle, veterinary medical supplies, and installations for the this company had for many years had a good market here as preparation of dairy products.
The execution of large projwell as some commercial and technical branches the latter of ects, such as the supply of sugar plants, seem to be of a more which had however been nationalized by his regime in March complicated nature because these may involve more than only of 1961.
Yet according to Castro, this belonged not only to commercial and financial factors.
The proposals concerning the past, but it was simply part of the “socialist” system.
All Philips, especially those regarding the question of indemnifithe same, he said, this did not mean that Philips should not cation, seem to merit serious consideration, as do those which be indemnified for the losses suffered here. aim to bring about a resumption of trade transactions in nonstrategic products and goods.
He did not want would be expediently taken cognizance of by the competent whisky but tea because the evening before, with the British, Dutch authorities. he had drunk enough alcohol.
Obtained for CWIHP by Rimko van der Maar and transof agriculture and cattle breeding.
Yet a serious conversation lated for CWIHP by Bastiaan Bouwman.] had not proven possible at those times, because of the heterogeneous company present and not least due to the inseparability of Aleksandr Alekseyev, the Soviet Ambassador, who is in the habit of not losing Fidel from his sight for an instant, as if he were his aide.
NERECODI [Dutch Government Code Service, The the Netherlands, especially because perhaps by now a remedy Hague] had been found for the ailment in question and therefore BY COURIER. the problem need not be acute anymore.
It had by no means been his intention to make offensive remarks with respect SECRET to the Netherlands, which he esteemed highly because of its achievements in the areas of agriculture and industry.
The Regarding the visit by Fidel Castro, vide my 30, the following Netherlands were an example for Cuba to follow.
I tried should still be relayed. to ease the prime minister’s mind by assuring him that the Netherlands were not offended and that his remarks at the The prime minister arrived unannounced.
The streets British Embassy would in no way be considered negative in the vicinity of my house had been cordoned off for his criticism.
Castro’s car was followed by four others filled with possible of the current state of affairs regarding the disease soldiers armed with submachine guns.
He would then make the necessary corwas seated also contained a four-man bodyguard.
When they rections in public and announce those pieces of information reached the front door Fidel jumped out of his Oldsmobile from the Netherlands that could also be of importance to and kept his finger on the bell until the girl who was on duty his cattle breeders.
They could and would learn much from and had been dozing in the noon heat opened the door.
Any cattle imported from the Netherlands entered and asked if I were at home.
The girl confirmed this would, he had decided, be brought to Isla de Pinos [Isle but said I had just a short while ago gone to take some rest. of Pines], an island near the south coast of Cuba.
Fidel asked, and, when he heard this was about an would be easier to control it and isolate any possible cases of hour ago remarked that this was long enough and instructed foot-and-mouth disease.
In Cuba there was great anxiety for her to call me. this illness and thus his institutions kept stubbornly resisting Usually the prime minister is accompanied by René the import of sperm from the Netherlands for the artificial Vallejo, his personal physician and confidant.
I got even by offering the prime minister two Edammer ate Dutch exporters would display cheeses.
Fidel drove away, followed by his bodyguard, amidst the requisite activity.
It is clear that he, to put the case but that was the result of there being only few prime it graphically, is fighting a losing battle, drowning in the ministers who, like him, had so few experts at their disposal. countless problems which his internal and external policies Therefore it was necessary for him to busy himself with all have caused.
As he had done during the first meeting, this aspects of the national economy and read the necessary books. time he again complained about the inexperience of staff He would like to take on a large number of experts from members and technical and official institutions.
He does the Netherlands both in the areas of agriculture and cattlenot only want to be the spiritus rector [a Latin expression breeding as in the area of industry.
Perhaps it would also be meaning “guiding spirit”—trans.] in the most divergent of possible to have a number of Cuban agricultural engineers areas of his society but also thinks he must gain in-depth take a course in the Netherlands. knowledge of all related technical and scientific aspects.
He Fidel requested an extensive briefing about the Dutch does not only want to bring his agriculture and cattle-breedreaction to our talk of March this year.
I pointed out that ing to a higher level but also master the specialized knowthe Netherlands does not have state trade and that the govledge of agronomists, phytopathologists, and veterinarians. ernment therefore plays a much more passive role in regular In the same way that Khrushchev was for a long time—and trade than for example in the communist world.
The contents perhaps still is—obsessed with the growing of corn, Castro of the mentioned talk had immediately been brought to the is possessed by agriculture and cattle-breeding.
A few days attention of the Dutch Government which, as I explained, ago he even had a complicated book about certain agriculhad so far as possible informed potentially interested commertural questions distributed to his ministers and other high cial circles.
This had essentially meant the end of the governofficials which they, as the vice-minister of Foreign Relations ment’s task.
Fidel immediately scented something politically told me, are now diligently studying because they know that suspicious.
He said he understood very well that the Dutch Castro can subject them to a sort of examination at any authorities in most cases could do little more than publicize moment. information they possessed.
He, from his side, wanted to Castro also made the impression of a restless fairly lonely trade with the Netherlands “without noise and publicity,” man who enjoys the occasional company of others than his analogously to the trade with Spain.
There seemed to tracts with Spain for the purchase of sheep for a total of be no immediate, concrete reason for his visit this Saturday 60,000,000 USD and not a letter had appeared in the press. afternoon.
He could have summoned me at any time that The case of the Leyland-contract had been mishandled by suited him.
It had been written and talked about in England of his confidants know that I had no important notifications from the outset which had needlessly politicized the issue.
I had then informed said confidant of far as relations with the Netherlands were concerned this had the Dutch position in the same way as I now explained it to to be avoided, especially that The Hague would be Castro himself. subjected to pressure from Washington.
It is also clear that the prime minister realizes that in He again extensively discussed the desiderata regarding matters of economy he cannot expect more from the USSR trade with the Netherlands formulated earlier.
There was and the other communist powers than what they are curan urgent need for dairy installations, equipment for the rently willing and able to do for Cuba.
I repeated that his wishes were known in the likely with full consent and support from Moscow, for a Netherlands yet Castro insisted that I again present his sugsubstantial improvement of economic and political relations gestions to the Dutch Government and personally keep him with Western Europe and even seems to want to force such informed of all that could interest him with regard to Dutchan improvement.
After an hour Fidel Castro said goodbye and left his copy audacity bordering on recklessness, willpower and an almost of Voisin’s treatment about pathological symptoms in cattle as maniacal doggedness and tenacity.
Reinink, First Secretary of the Dutch Embassy in Havana, 1963-1965. of our cows and his impatience to apologize for this.
National Archives, The Hague, Archives of the Dutch terms for the release of Cubans taken prisoner during the Bay of Pigs Legation in Cuba, 1955-1964, 2.05.169, invasion—ed. inv.0.
Together with Hans Meijer , he is currently writing a biography of J.Herman van Roijen, a long-time Dutch diplomat and ambassador to the United States, forthcoming in 2013.
According to the Danish service, as it is called in Danish literature—was at its most the Danes had provided 35 per cent of pictures in one secret acute in late October 1962, the Danish Defense NATO book about the Soviet navy.
The reason for this was Intelligence Service delivered its contribution to Denmark’s geographic location. give a sound and clear picture of the conflict and the Soviet threat.
And it was because of two main factors that Denmark The Role of Danish Intelligence played no small role.
First of all, the geographical position of Denmark made it possible to follow the Soviet vessels to The Danish Defense Intelligence Service delivered daily, and from Cuba very closely.
Secondly, the DDIS had made weekly, and monthly intelligence briefs on the situation.
More a name for itself among its Western colleagues as a service comprehensive reports were delivered every three, six, and that was able to deliver excellent intelligence, sometimes on twelve months.
Signals intelligence was the Danish specialdemand. ity, but “legal travellers” were also used to collect intelligence behind the Iron Curtain.
Whenever the Warsaw Pact held Gatekeeper of the Baltic Sea exercises, Danish intelligence would follow them closely and afterwards produce reports on these exercises.
And whenever For several centuries Denmark has been the gatekeeper of the there was an observation of new planes at a Polish military Baltic Sea.
During the Cold War it was the Danish Defense airfield or new SAM sites near an East German port, it was Intelligence Service that kept NATO informed about the scrutinized and published in the Danish intelligence briefs. latest developments in the German Democratic Republic The intelligence service was able to create a “status of , Poland, and parts of the Soviet Union.
Denmark had normality” which showed whenever it was “business as an important geographical position.
And the situation geographical location—only a few-minutes flight from East behind the Iron Curtain was followed closely.
As a front line Germany and Poland—and the fact that large ships on their state, Denmark had a natural interest in being able to put way into and out of the Baltic Sea are forced to pass through its defense on alert as soon as possible, and the intelligence the Sound or the Great Belt, meant not only that Denmark service therefore would use great portions of its capabilities to was extremely vulnerable in case of attack, but also that study and follow the Warsaw Pact countries and their military Denmark had a unique opportunity to monitor any training activities.
Within NATO Denmark was given the or change in political, economic, and military affairs were responsibility to keep eyes and ears open regarding enemy analyzed by the Danish service.
The Danes were asked to follow all the Soviet leadership were recurring topics in the Danish kinds of activities in the air and at sea.
When Nikita Khrushchev returned to the Soviet Union Soviet, Polish, and East German ships passed through the in May 1962 after his first trip abroad in about a year, the Danish straits when they left or entered the Baltic Sea.
The Danish intelligence service made a comprehensive analysis rules about the Danish sounds and straits dictated that subof his stay at the Black, his health, and his officially known marines had to be on the surface when passing through.
This illnesses. provided several opportunities to take good photographs of If the Cold War turned into a confrontation, Danish new Soviet submarines on their way to, for example, the waters were secured with underwater microphones and Atlantic Ocean.
Vessels and planes from the Danish navy hydrophones, which made the intelligence service able to and air force followed them closely.
Merchant ships and follow all naval activities in and out of the Baltic Sea.
This took place around the clock through the use of Soviet merchant vessels carefully and photographed them ships, aircraft, radar-stations, lookout-stations, and under-waevery time they passed through Danish waters.
The Danish ter stations that located and identified any individual passing Air Force used RF-84F Thunderflash planes to capture the ships.
Along the coasts, several observation posts from which Soviet ships on film.
Warsaw Pact vessels could be followed, photographed, and On 31 July, the pilot L Poulsen flew over the Soviet cargo tape-recorded.
Denmark had its own small version of the ship Sovetskaya Gavan in his RF-84F Thunderflash and phoAmerican SOSUS (Sound Surveillance System, underwater tographed four crates on the deck.
Danish submarines and shape of the crates indicated that they were holding would sneak their way into the deepest corners of the Baltic torpedo boats of the KOMAR-class.
United States planes later photoSea and record the sound of the propellers and engines.
But the In UO 41/62 a delivery of 12 missile motorboats to Cuba sound of the engines and propellers would give the vessels is noted.
It can now be established with certainty that these away and reveal that they were just in fact old ships which the boats have been delivered from the BALTIC SEA area.
The Russians had tried to disguise to confuse NATO. boats were carefully covered.
It has hitherto been established that the boats were build at the PETROVSKIJ shipyard in Tracking the Enemy Leningrad at a fairly limited pace.
It is worth noting, that CUBA is the first country outside of Danish pilots were often sent on assignments over the Baltic the Soviet Union, which have received this type of boats.
Before, Sea for the purpose of capturing Warsaw Pact ships on film. the SOVIET UNION, Northern Fleet, delivered patrol-craft Patrolling the Baltic Sea area was not only a matter of “markof the KRONSTADT-class and MTB’s of the P-6 class. ing one’s territory” but indeed also a matter of collecting intelligence about the Eastern bloc navies and air forces.
Here the On 2 August, a Danish plane taking pictures overflew Danes quickly developed a solid reputation within the NATO another Soviet ship.
The Danes delivered a vast number of photographs P-6 torpedo boats on the deck. of Soviet, Polish, and East German planesm and naval vessels The Danish pilots had reported everything during the throughout the Cold War.
Nobody had told them anything about the use for the gathering of intelligence in the Baltic area, have a of the collected intelligence. magnificent collection of photographs of the latest Soviet The delivery of intelligence from the Danes has been menaircraft, including various versions of the Tupolev Backfire tioned in United States sources.
On 29 August 1962, the same day the bomber. first Soviet SA-2 SAM’s were discovered on Cuba, a meeting was held of the United States Intelligence Board on Soviet ships on Danish pilots would now and then act a bit aggressive their way to Cuba.
General Marshall Carter and Ray Cline, towards their Eastern counterparts and go very close to the both deputy directors of central intelligence , raised enemy airplanes.
A few episodes got a bit more exciting the question about receiving information and pictures from than necessary and would later on lead to that the Danish Denmark and Turkey quicker.
It was of course surveillance on pilots got a reminder of the existing rules of interception and Soviet vessels in the Baltic Sea and the Black Sea that the two engagement. were interested in and hoped to have delivered more quickly.
The Summer of ‘62 The Crisis Emerges The Danes followed Soviet ships long before anyone ever The Danish surveillance service in October 1962 was normal. knew that a crisis would arise.
From outposts along the During the summer and fall of 1962, several Soviet ships Danish coast, from navy vessels, and from radar stations, passed through Danish waters on their way to Cuba.
Months before the Cuban standard procedure to send out Danish planes to photograph Missile Crisis in late 1962, the Danish air force followed the the passing ships.
Prior to the Cuban Missile Weekly Brief Crisis several dozen Soviet ships passed Denmark on their 25 October 1962 way to Cuba but it wasn’t until the last half of October that the Cuban situation found its way into the weekly intelligence briefs.
From then on and through the rest of the year, Cuba was mentioned almost every week, just as the struggle for Political Berlin had been all through the Cold War.
The first M/S Krasnograd and M/S Kasimov—were observed on days in the reported period proceeded “normally” and their way out from the Baltic Sea through Danish waters. without any important derivations from the usual foreignThe ships were loaded with military equipment destined for political routine.
The between 22 and 23 October [i.e., 7m., Washington time, televised speech in which President Kennedy announced, that after midnight, European time—ed.] did not provoke any the United States had “irrefutable evidence, that the Soviet immediate reaction from the Eastern Bloc; the content was Union has constructed nuclear-rocket bases on Cuba” had briefly mentioned in the early hours the following day and not yet been aired. only a couple of comments were added.
It was not until Early in the morning on 24 October the crew at an obserTuesday, 14.00 hours Danish time, that the vation post at the Danish naval fortress Langelandsfort made Soviet Government released a lengthy statement, which was an interesting observation.
Early in the morning the crew subsequently broadcast every hour on Moscow radio and reported, that M/S Krasnograd had turned around and was later in the people’s-democratic radio-stations.
The statement passing by the observation post on its way back to the Baltic was characterized by general phrases without any concrete Sea.
What these Otto Krag and both were relieved by the Soviet reaction. “necessary precautions” actually entail is unknown.
However, Both observations were immediately reported to NATO. the Soviet Union has on its own accord asked the UN Security The report on the M/S Krasnograd was one of the first pieces Council to take up the issue, which could possibly be interof evidence that the Soviet Union had understood Kennedy’s preted as a wish for negotiations.
It was seen as a sign that Nikita Khrushchev was anything concrete about the attitude of the Eastern Bloc.
More willingness to “mediate” in the conflict between India and observations were made through November and December.
China could possibly be seen as a sign that Moscow, under the Afterwards the DDIS chief in 1962, Col.
Hans M Lunding, prevailing conditions, wishes to avoid any warlike complicarevealed in his memoirs “when it was discovered that certain tions.
On the 26th of July the 27-year old lawyer Fidel Castro leads a revolt against the dictatorial regime of Batista.
He is already pardoned in 1955, after which he and a group of followers flee to Mexico.
Danish Defense Intelligence Service Weekly Brief Here he founds the revolutionary “26th of July Movement.” , 25 October 1962 Approximately one year later , Fidel Castro along with his brother Raul and 80 of their supportDanish Defense Intelligence Service ers, land illegally in Cuba, were they establish a partisan unit.
Manuel Urrutia as President and takes control of the armed forces himself.
The Communists have in the “...we will do anything to support meantime occupied the key positions in the trade-unions Cuba in its struggle.
These returned emigrants support Castro, United States begins an embargo against Cuba.
In December but without any enthusiasm for his movement; they wish to the same year, a Soviet-Cuban agreement is made concerning be able to act independently.
Castro himself declared in an expanded trade and increased technical aid.
In January 1961 Castro demands a in April 1959, he adds in a TV interview that “...if there by drastic reduction of the American embassy personnel, which chance should be any Communists in my government, there is in turn answered by the United States with the cutting of is exactly zero...” all diplomatic connections.
President Urrutia is forced to abdicate, with Dorticos becoming the new President.
The Communists To this, President Kennedy replied on the 3rd of April by is now under the leadership of the describing Cuba as a dangerous bridgehead for international general secretary Blas Roca, who in August 1959 in the intercommunism.
On the 17th the “invasion” (Bay national communist organ “Problems of Peace and Socialism” of Pigs) begins.
In the meantime the relations between the USA and In May that same year during a victory parade, Castro Cuba are deteriorating on a monthly basis.
In June 1959 a proclaims Cuba to be a socialist state, and the country is land-reform is adopted, which heralds the confiscation of all mentioned in the communist may-paroles immediately after American-owned land without compensation.
The United the list of people’s-democracies, as a state on its way toward States protests; Cuba responds by claiming that the United socialism.
Subsequently, the establishment of a totalitarian States is supporting an anti-Castro-revolution.
The communists along with the “26th of 1960 Mikoyan arrives in Cuba in order to open a July Movement” create a unified party, and Castro professes Soviet exhibition.
On the 4th of February, President Kennedy United States. broadcast the provisions for the import and export embargo However, it is apparent in Kennedy’s speech on the 22nd, of Cuba—excluding medical supplies.
It is therefore decided to take precautions, as another communist a couple of days earlier.
The new developments the 9th March, a politburo is established for the unified party are at the current time very unclear and (the communists and the 26th of July Movement was unified vague, and the world press is furthermore shedding light on to a single party in August 1961), consisting of 25 persons, it from all angles, so that one can only get the background including 10 professed communists.
These try to take power information from these sources. from the inside, pushing Castro in the background.
He fights back, after which Escalante, the general secretary for the unified party, flees to Czechoslovakia on the 26th of March.
This is regarded by the United States as a threat, Confidential and President Kennedy is given the authority to call in 150,000 reservists in case of a crisis.
This is perceived as a Minister of Defence, marshal MALINOVSKIY, war-threat by the Soviet Union, and it is added that an attack issued the order on the 23rd of October 1962 to cancel all leave on Cuba will be answered by the Soviet Union with, among for the armed forces.
Furthermore, the impending returning other things, a counter-attack with rockets.
On the 20th of home of the personnel of the rocket forces, the air defence and September, Congress gives Kennedy the authority to use milisubmarine fleet is suspended.
Subsequently, the Soviet Union signs quick response to the American actions around Cuba. a “fishery-agreement” with Cuba on the 25th of September.
It is therefore not a case of a general extension of the The agreement includes the construction of a Soviet fishery service-time of the armed forces; it only concerns the forces harbor in Cuba. which—also under normal circumstances—are under maxiThe decision to establish a Soviet “fishery-base” on Cuba mum readiness. provoke a strong reaction in the United States.
During Thus, it seems that the demobilization order issued by the his campaign for re-election [sic; actually the mid-term Minister of Defence on the 7th of September 1962 is still Congressional elections—ed.], President Kennedy is repeatstanding for all other personnel of the armed forces. edly urged to “act” and is accused of being “soft” on the Cuban issue.
The American request to the Western merchant B WARSAW PACT shipping companies not to ship weapons to Cuba, is referred to in the Soviet press as “anti-Cuban hysteria,” and [the Readiness.
The foreign minister of the Soviet Soviet Minister of Defense, the chief of the Warsaw-Pact uniUnion, Gromyko, assures President Kennedy durfied command, Marshal GRECHKO, gave the order ing their talks on the 17th that the to increase the level of readiness for all Warsaw Pact forces.
Soviet weapons deliveries only consist of weapons for selfThe increased state of readiness can be seen as a result of defense.
This assurance apparently prompts the President’s the increased readiness of the American forces.
A heightened military advisors with the Soviet Union, China, Poland, state of readiness has been seen before during periods of politCzechoslovakia, and East Germany. ical tension.
It can FIDEL CASTRO’s brother, RAOUL CASTRO, is now be established with certainty that these boats have chief of the Cuban armed forces. been delivered from the BALTIC SEA area.
Combined communist weapons aid is estiIt is worth noting, that CUBA is the first country mated to be about $100,000,000. outside of the Soviet Union, which has received this type January 1962: Combined communist weapons aid is estiof boats.
Combined communist weapons aid is MTBs of the P-6 class. estimated to be about $225,000,000.
Miscellaneous Many of the 5-6,000 Soviet technicians have manned the 2.
Other Russians are manning the large radar-installations, A lot of American materiel exists from before the revolution. from which they can “eavesdrop” on Cape Canaveral.
It is also 65,000 new Belgian FN-rifles. from here Soviet cosmonauts are directed.
Frigate “CUBA” launched in 1911 Multiple barrel rocket launchers . in the United States, modernized in 1936-37 and 1956. 1,000 pieces of field artillery.
Patrol-vessel “BAIRE” 80,000 soldiers have received two months of ex USN PC-type training and discipline with the help of Czech, Russian, 4 coastguard-motorboats “HABANA”, “LAS VILLAS”, East German, and Chinese military advisers.
It is possible that CUBA in 1961 received Camaguey two Soviet destroyers, for the time being crewed by Russians, Santiago de Cuba until a Cuban crew has been trained.
The two destroyers Varadero . might be a mistake, however, and it could just be two coastal patrol vessels.
There is furthermore the airfield at PLAYO SALADO (possibly one of the above mentioned, which has its location 3.
In May 1962, work on the lengthThe Navy might be unreliable, since it was not put into ening of the take-off strips was observed. action during the rebel invasion in 1961.
Miscellaneous the radar of the air defence missile-battery. (arrived on the Agreement with POLAND for deliveries.
If any of these deliveries has ever arrived in CUBA is QUIEBRA HACHA unknown. 2,000 men in a Soviet military base.
Danish State Archive, Copenhagen, Archives of ammunition depots, and then landed in the USA. the Danish Defense Intelligence Service.
The reported Danish Defense Intelligence Service Weekly Brief time period is marked by the Cuban-American-Soviet conflict , 1 November 1962 concerning the bases on Cuba.
Perhaps as a consequence of the crisis, the Soviet Union has furthermore taken a friendlier Danish Defense Intelligence Service stance in the Indian-Chinese conflict.
Khrushchev sends a non-publiThe only conclusion which can be made with any certaincized message to President Kennedy, in which he supposedly ty at the moment following the Cuba-crisis, is that the Soviet warns the United States and remarks, that the blockade could Union does not wish a Third World War.
He simultaneously answers Bertrand world dominance, has not been abandoned.
This is amply Russell and declares that the Soviet Union does not intend to illustrated by the fact that the Soviets have given up Cuba as act unpremeditated and is willing to participate in a summit a military base, but seek to keep it as a political base.
A Soviet tanker is stopped, but is then allowed The cancellation of the sales of weapons and material to to continue, after it had been ascertained that it did not India by the Soviet Union, must, in the light of the Chinesecontain any offensive weapons.
Indian border dispute, be regarded as a wish not to worsen Khrushchev accepts U Thant’s plea.
Kennedy declares that Soviet-Chinese relations. the United States is ready to negotiate.
However, according Both the Cuban and the India-China crisis will probably to a United States spokesman the quarantine is to be maintained, as make it more difficult for the Soviet Union to penetrate into long as the construction of the rocket bases continues.
UN Security Council asks U Thant to mediate in the matFour more nuclear test detonations have been conducted ter.
According to unconfirmed messages, Kennedy has sent in the Soviet Union.
Khrushchev an extremely serious warning and assured him, An expansion of certain roads in East Germany may have that the United States will act, if the construction of the bases a military purpose. is not stopped immediately.
Stevenson in the UN Security Council. as well as internal security forces in the Warsaw Pact countries.
Polish radio and press thank both Khrushchev in order to maintain internal order. and Kennedy for their positive attitude to U Thant’s request, An intensified patrolling of the western and eastern parts and there is talk about “judicial” consequences in the evenof the Baltic Sea can be observed. tual boarding of a Polish ship.
East German radio mentions Apart from this, no abnormal dispositions can be observed.
Khrushchev agrees that Soviet Only limited training activity has yet been observed in ships must stay away from the forbidden zone.
Kennedy the newly discovered areas, which have been sealed off for promises that the United States will try to avoid direct military purposes. confrontation with the ships for a couple of days.
Here the Soviet Union, maybe because they dominated by declarations about how Khrushchev is unwilldid not want to deepen the antagonism towards China, took ing to let himself be provoked into making rash actions.
In the Cuba-United States con3 PM Danish time, Khrushchev sends his third message to flict, the politics used by the Soviet Union was not exactly Kennedy that the Soviet Union is prepared to dismantle and in harmony with the wishes of Castro.
Confronted with a ship home the Soviet Rockets, which are in the care of Soviet grave situation, Moscow chose to preserve its friendship with officers on Cuba.
If Cuba will allow it, this removal could be communist countries, at the expense of the non-communist done under the supervision by the UN. countries India and Cuba.
Soviet press and radio hail Khrushchev as all hardly be regarded as being definitively over yet.
Therefore, a “champion of peace”; also the “sensible” approach by the views presented here must only be seen as an attempt on Kennedy is mentioned.
U Thant declares that he, accompaa preliminary assessment. nied by military and political advisers, will travel to Cuba on the 30th to negotiate about the UN-supervised removal of the Soviet rockets.
The United States suspends the quarantine and aerial reconnaissance during the time U Thant is staying A Soviet Union on Cuba.
U Thant arrives on Cuba along with 17 advisers, Readiness. including several officers.
During the afternoon at 4:00 PM Danish time, cellation of leave, has only been observed in certain regions, the negotiations are continued.
The Western powers have especially those in the South and South East of the European given the United States diplomatic and moral support during part of the SOVIET UNION (CAUCASUS and the BLACK the action and the Organization of American States SEA region). has approved Kennedy’s steps and denounced both Cuba and the Soviet Union.
It is unknown, if the above state of readiness still matter and has only uttered general statements, whereas Cuba exists following president Khrushchev’s radio-broadcast at has supported China in the conflict with India.:00 hours on 28 October.
The concern barter trade for the rocket-bases in TURKEY. that the blockade and in the event of a United States invasion of Cuba, Soviet classified information about missiles and their propul717 C Miscellaneous.
There has in the period in question been observed a great Foreign policy this week has been marked by the negotiadeal of Soviet trawlers in the waters around SKAGEN. tions about the inspection of the dismantling and shipment About three fishery-motherships are also present in the of the Soviet missiles and bombers on and from Cuba.
The area, and it is therefore probable that just like the previous negotiations have apparently reached their conclusion at the years there will be established a fishery base here. closing of this period.
KRASNOGRAD On the Berlin/Germany issue, it is noteworthy that the Northbound 22 October word “separate peace” has, at least for the time being, disapSouthbound 24 October peared from official East European vocabulary.
The Soviet Union has during the week conducted 6 nucleKASIMOV ar-weapons test explosions, including two in high altitude.
Southbound 25 October The heightened state of readiness inside the Warsaw Pact, introduced because of the Cuban crisis, has been lifted.
The KISLOVOPSK East German army, however, is keeping up a certain level of Northbound 15 October combat readiness, and the Soviet, Polish, and East German Southbound 29 October established patrolling in the western part of the Baltic Sea, including regular circumnavigations of Zealand, continues.
BOLSHEVIK SUKHANOV Some of the Soviet merchant-ships that were on the way Northbound 17 October to Cuba, have after a very short stay in Baltic Sea ports conSouthbound 30 October tinued their journey toward Cuba.
METALLURG KURAKO In the reported period an increased Eastern Bloc trawler Northbound 16 October activity in the waters east of Skagen.
The activity is deemed normal for the time of year. the Danish Defense Intelligence Service.
U Thant’s negotiations with Castro ends without Danish Defense Intelligence Service Weekly Brief results, as Cuba stands firm and refuses to allow any inspection , 8 November 1962 on Cuban soil.
Mikoyan leaves for Cuba via New After the conference, Stevenson declares that the talks have York, where he negotiates with the United States and reprenot produced any concrete results.
At the same time the Eastern Bloc once sance, the United States announces that 20 IL-28 again attacks the “reactionary anti-Cuban propaganda, which are still operational, and that there is evidence that more are tries to sow doubts about the gravity of president Kennedy’s being assembled.
The pro-Cuban campaign in China continues, Soviet technicians have stopped assembling the remaining and the Chinese foreign minister Chen Yi gives the Cuban IL-28s.
Cuba agrees to let the Red Cross do the inspections Chargé d’affaires a note with support for “the great leader of ships en route to Cuba for the duration of one month.
The United States initiates once again their Thant negotiates the technicalities of the inspection with the blockade, which had been lifted during U Thant’s visit in Red Cross.
Castro once again sharply rejects any form the IL-28 planes, 3) control of the of inspection as a violation of Cuban sovereignty.
Kennedy ships, which leave Cuba, 4) Castro’s “5 points” and 5) the informs in an address to the nation, that the dismantling of duration of the control.
How these issues are to be solved the rocket bases is progressing with great speed, but promises can not be seen at the moment; there are signs, however, that that the situation will be watched closely, until an inspection Moscow—presumably with the promise of increased financial on site has been made.
At the same time, the Soviet Union is aid and/or the threats of cutting it—will make the attempt to reminded through a grave warning, that the “dismantling and “persuade” Castro to give in.
It is complicated, however, by return” must also include all the IL-28 bomber planes, which strong support by the Chinese, which can probably increase are present on Cuba.
The Red Cross in principle agrees to inspect Khrushchev’s position of power: Both the information about the ships bound for Cuba.
Mikoyan continues his negotiations with who presumably had not been consulted.
This procedure Castro, but any practical results are still kept in the dark.
The must have produced tension between Moscow and the capiUnited States continue its inspection flights over Cuba and tals of the people’s-democracies , making firmly sticks to its demand for inspections of the sites themit necessary for Khrushchev to explain the situation for selves, whether by the UN or the Red Cross. his—somewhat disoriented—allies.
By this unusual is thought to have provided the Secretary-General form of East Bloc-consultation, Khrushchev has probably with an overview over the negotiations between Mikoyan tried to avoid any “group formations” that a combined and Fidel Castro.
Over 1 million Chinese demonstrate in East-conference might have produced.
Most of the people’sBeijing in support for Castro (and thereby indirectly against democracies leaders seem to have accepted his policy.
Stevenson negostatements the other leading Communists gave during the tiates for 5 hours with Kuznetsov and hands him a written Cuban crisis.
However, the statements from East Germany note with the demand to withdraw all IL-28 bombers. and Czechoslovakia showed some reticence.
On underlining of Khrushchev’s position as leader in the Eastern the contrary, the relations between the representatives of the Bloc, since the ousted party-leaders all belonged to the government and the staff of the American embassy remained Stalinist wing of the party.
The press and was already removed from the party a couple of weeks ago. the propaganda apparatus limited itself to only demand for a Stalinist elements can therefore only be found in the parties peaceful solution to the crisis.
The usual reliable sources tell of Czechoslovakia and East Germany; these countries’ someabout open demonstrations against the Soviet rocket-bases what “lukewarm” attitudes toward Khrushchev’s Cuba-policy on Cuba, and in several businesses there were even notes of seem to reflect the influence of the Stalinists.
However, the sympathy toward the United States; one case saw students coming congresses in both countries could—as was the case openly express their opinions.
Also Yugoslavia It was therefore greeted with great relief, when the news of has given absolute support during the crisis period, whereas Khrushchev’s decision to back off was received, also because a China, North Vietnam, and North Korea (but not Outer continuation of the crisis would have caused trouble because Mongolia) have taken a decidedly anti-Khrushchev attitude. of the overwhelming amount of hoarding among the population.
Inside the Soviet Union itself, Khrushchev has apparently won great popularity in the wider population with his swift decision to let the rocket-bases be dismantled (“he has saved ARMY the peace”), which can maybe counter potential opposition from the dogmatist-group’s side.
That such a wing A WARSAW PACT. probably exists can be seen in an article in “Pravda” from 4 , signed by Marshal Voroshilov.
The article can be a sign that Khrushchev with the help been gradually stepped down for all forces; only the East of Voroshilov, whose name resounds well in military circles, German army is retaining a certain level of readiness. will seek support among officers and old Bolsheviks against potential, China-supported, opponents.
As far as it Confidential known, he was contrary to the other leaders alone and he left an article in “Pravda”, which strongly supports Khrushchev’s 1.
It also contains sharp During the first half of the year the United States received attacks against the United States. several reports about heavy military construction activity on CUBA, including digging, construction of bunkers, It seems it was very important for Gomulka to make as clear roads and the extension of runways on airfields.
At the as possible to underline Poland’s stand on the same time, a close watch was kept on the supply of issue of the time, first and foremost to the Soviet Union, but weapons and personnel from the SOVIET UNION and also to the opposition at home.
Competent sources say that other Eastern Bloc countries. that the Polish government had not been notified about the Soviet rocket-bases on Cuba.
When the situation had been But it was not until in September 1962 that reports solved, the government acted very cautious and with restraint. about major fortification works both above and below The American notes were not rejected, no restrictions were ground in isolated areas, where only Soviet personnel was put on the American diplomatic corps, and no demonstraallowed, suggested, that something special was going on.
At the same time, information was CUBA in connection with the establishment of the bases. received about large truck convoys to the aforementioned closed-off areas.
Only Soviet personnel were occupied with the unloading and transportation, which was shrouded in secrecy and often protected by jeeps with civilian Soviet 3.
The following Soviet merchant-ships have during the personnel armed with rifles.
The photo-reconnaissance missions. passed out from the BALTIC SEA 13 October Soon the picture became more clear.
The reconnaissance flights also revealed, that 3 November BOLSHEVIK SUKHANOV the many Soviet technicians which had been reported passed into the BALTIC SEA 29 October about earlier, were in fact for the most part regular Soviet 5 November POLTAVA troops.
Danish State Archive, Copenhagen, Archives of the Danish Defense Intelligence Service.
Translated by Henrik Marked on the following map are the bases for medium Brandt.] range missiles that were revealed by reconnaissance flights.
SAGUALA GRANDE Danish Defense Intelligence Service Weekly Brief , 15 November 1962 GUAN AJAY Danish Defense Intelligence Service Weekly Brief REMEDIOS 15 November 1962 3.
The dismantling of the missile-bases The missile equipment is now being dismantled by Soviet personnel, but there has still not been reached POLITICAL any agreement on a control of this dismantlement and the shipping of the equipment.
The period 13 November: Mikoyan delivers a speech at Havana univercovered in the report has once again been marked by Cubansity, in which he strongly supports the Cuban point of view problems.
Heated negotiations are taking place, partly being made with the Soviet Union concerning the inspecbetween Stevenson and Kuznetsov, and partly between U tion of the Soviet ships that are leaving Cuba on their way Thant, Kuznetsov, Zorin back with the dismantled rockets.
Continued disagreement and the Cuban delegate, Carlos Lechuga on the other. between Stevenson and After the negotiations Stevenson declare, that his talk with Kuznetsov conKuznetsov has been “constructive,” and a spokesman for U Thant says that the Soviet Union and Cuba in unison has cerning the inspection of ships sailing to Cuba. proposed a solution to the Cuban-situation.
The first Soviet vessel is stopped and inspected ping to Cuba by the Red Cross.
The inspection is conducted in a an arrest of an American agent, it is supposedly the leading friendly atmosphere. man of the American intelligence on Cuba, who was arrested during a sabotage action.
The concentration of naval forces in the however, as being a mere propaganda stunt.
The American-Soviet negotiations territory; Khrushchev sends a new letter to Kennedy, but are expected to continue.
To date, 35 ships have passed the nothing is divulged about its content, however; furthermore, American line of blockade on their way to Cuba.
The naval it is reported that also the Soviet technicians are on their way units who enforce the blockade are joined by two destroyers home.
American inspections on high seas continue. from Venezuela as well as several other ships from Argentina and the Dominican Republic.
After staying for a week in Havana, Mikoyan has still not achieved any noteworthy results.
The Soviet Union still haven’t agreed to the rent moment have reached on an agreement about the inspecdemand by the United States, that the control inspection perition of the transports to Cuba, two issues are left unsolved, od of the Red Cross should last for 30 days.
At the same time that is, the issue of an inspection on Cuba itself and the it is reported that the United States might have to abandon removal of the IL-28 planes.
With regards to the inspection its demand for an inspection on Cuban soil.
To the American on Cuban territory, it seems like the negotiation efforts of demand for the removal of the IL-28 planes, Kuznetsov argues Mikoyan have been in vain.
And as for the removal of the Soviet planes, Moscow has expressed itself very negatively, that these planes are of an obsolete model, and that they have since the planes now are regarded as Cuban property. already been taken over by the Cuban air force.
Danish State Archive, Copenhagen, Archives of the 12 November: Vice Defense Minister [i.e., Deputy Danish Defense Intelligence Service.
Translated by Henrik Defense Secretary Roswell] Gilpatric reports, that 42 of the Brandt.] rockets have been removed , but that the American aerial reconnaissance over Cuba will continue; simultaneously, security work on the Guantanamo base continues.
For the second day in a row, the Cuban newspaDanish Defense Intelligence Service Weekly Brief pers are quiet about the negotiations between Mikoyan and , 22 November 1962 Castro.
Stevenson negotiates with U Thant and com22 November 1962 mented after the meeting, that the Cuban-issue must be concluded in the Security Council, where it had started.
Cuba sends a message to U Thant, wherein he threatens to shoot down American reconnaissance planes over Cuban territory.
One of the dominating foreign-political features has been the gradual lessening of the tensions of the Cuban-crisis.
As an answer to Castro’s threats, Washington contours of a more general period of détente can be faintly answers that the aerial-reconnaissance will be continued, and discerned. that the planes if necessary will be protected by fighters.
Any Another remarkable feature has been the development in fire will be returned.
The negotiations concerning Cuba are once It is however to hasty to talk about any real détente in this again at a stalemate. area yet.
In order to keep the airspace above Cuba open Asia, probably the last of the series. for military flying and to counter the American reconnaisThe period covered by the report exhibits the normal sance, Castro orders the suspension of all civilian air traffic activity and the normal amount of training activities for the over Cuba.
Washington makes it apparent, that Kennedy, season of the year. if Khrushchev does not declare himself willing to full-fill The readiness measures prompted by the Cuban-crisis are his obligations with regards to the withdrawal of the IL-28 still active.
However, among the East German forces, a degree bombers from Cuba, will give the order for initiating harsher of easing up of the tension can be traced. measures.
This will probably mean a strengthening of the The reinforced patroland surveillance-service in the blockade with the objective to cut Castro off from further fuel western Baltic Sea, including the occasional circumnavigation deliveries to the aforementioned bomber-planes. of Zealand, has continued unabated, but is expected to be cancelled.
The threat to shoot down American reconnaisOn the 21st of November, sance planes is repeated by the Cubans.
Of the foreign airMarshal Malinovskiy received instructions to call lines, only the routes to Prague and Mexico City will be kept off the readiness measures taken. going.
The latter is a member of the property of the Soviet government,” back to the Soviet Union.
It is furthermore said in the letter, that Cuba does not accept a “unilateral” inspection of Cuban territory.
Minister-president Khrushchev informs President Kennedy in a brief, that all IL-28 bombers POLITICAL will be withdrawn inside the next 30 days, and that it will be allowed to put the removal of the planes under surveillance, For official use as they are leaving Cuba.
The press and radio of the Eastern Bloc intelligence relations, see Peer Henrik Hansen, Second to None – US refers to the events such, that they have “forced the USA to Intelligence Activities in Northern Europe 1943-1946, Dordrecht lift the aggressive blockade,” and they celebrate Castro’s deci. sion to send back the bombers.
The Americans inform that 5 When Nikita Khrushchev visited Denmark in 1964 the there will be a military maneuver named “Sunscreen” in order Danish intelligence service went quite far in order to confirm or deny to discern how fast paratroopers can be transported to places the rumor that Khrushchev suffered from bad kidneys.
The service where their military deployment is needed. had altered the plumbing at the hotel where the Soviet leader stayed and was thereby able to secure his urine and feces and analyze them.
According to a former Danish chief of on the 20th would make a proclamation conintelligence the Soviet Union would rebuild some of its ships in an cerning Cuba, one which would probably be about an active attempt to deceive the Western intelligence services.
The sound of intervention on the part of the United States, if the IL-28 the propeller and engine would disclose that it was in fact an old bombers were not removed.
Karup , problems after the definitive conclusion of the Cuban-crisis 51.
Notes edu/~nsarchiv/nsa/cuba_mis_cri/chron.htm 14 See telegram number 49 dated 24 October 1962 and 1 PhD., Head of the Cold War Museum Langelandsfort. telegram number 53 dated 25 October 1962.
In December 1962 M/S Kasimov returned from Cuba carrying 3 Søren Nørby, Danske ubåde 1909-2004 , 186.
It was photographed when it Thede Palm, Några studier till T-kontorets historia passed through Danish waters.
When a Local Danish Newspaper was Able to Report from Cuba by Peer Henrik Hansen1 O n the 28th of October 1962, Danish journalist around in the city.
The Cubans were frustrated about the Jørgen E Petersen took off by plane from the outcome of the conflict.
Three of the Swedish journalists were expelled and they Together with four Swedish colleagues, he hoped to be able to smuggled out a tape that Jørgen E Petersen had recorded report from Cuba and work as a free journalist.
But as soon while observing the streets of Havana from his hotel room. as the plane had arrived, the Scandinavian journalists were Shortly after it arrived in Copenhagen, the tape was played arrested.
From the windows, the working permit and released from house arrest and was able journalists would follow movements on the streets below and to move around the city of Havana.
In the first ten days document them by writing articles, filming the activities, or of November, Petersen was able to send back home several taping radio programs. articles about the conditions in Cuba before he flew back Rumors said that Petersen and his Swedish friends were home on the 10th of November.
Among the articles which he was able to send home was an interview with member about to be expelled.
But he couldn’t get his articles back home.After a couple of days under house arrest, Petersen grabbed the phone and asked to be connected to a receiver in Denmark.
She forwarded him Deputy Foreign Minister states the views of the Castroto Denmark and he tried to establish contact with his editor government and to his story to the newspaper.
He tried several times to repeat the phone call but without HAVANA, Thursday, correspondent of The Democrat, Jørgen any luck.
He eventually got through to Danish national radio E Petersen and went on the air live for twenty seconds before the Cubans cut him off.
As the very first journalist since the outbreak of Swedish journalist Sven Öste reported how he had been the Cuban crisis, I have been received by a member of the jailed for 24 hours and spent time in a Cuban prison cell Cuban government, the 1stt Deputy Foreign Minister Dr. together with several others.
The Cubans claimed that Öste Pelegria Torras, a 49-year old former university professor. was an American spy and that his passport was forged.
All contact with the outside world was cut the Cuban government. off by the polite but rough prison guards.
Propaganda posters with slogans such as “ Soviet Union is behind us” and “We are Dr.
Union? Cuba has always pursued its own policy, a policy The Trade with the East Countries based on peace and peaceful co-existence.
We also wish to be among the countries who wish for peace because we are a There will surely have been trade-policy negotiations small country.
This policy has been clearly formulated by these days with Mikoyan and his people.
This policy is almost the same as in the Socialist countries. What are the terms for a Cuban reconciliation with the Our principle is the one of Socialism.
The Capitalist bloc is also opposed to But it would mean a major change in the foreign policy certain neutral countries.
In that case we would be willing bloc emphasizes, that it isn’t opposed to any bloc in any to discuss the differences.
Coincidence has brought us into unison under sovereignty and the wishes of our people.
But the reality these principles. is that the United States continues its aggression with the blockade, even though Kennedy has already admitted Fidel Castro said in his speech last Tuesday [actually that the rockets are on their way out.
But we appreciate that there is a difference between the politics of the Scandinavian countries and the Imperialist Then maybe we would allow the Red Cross to inspect the bloc. dismantling of the American base on Cuba.
Notes Might it not be possible to extend this, as a one-off event, 1 Ph.D., leader of Cold War Museum Langelandsfort.
Cuba prefers documentary “Cuba-krisen 1962” as part of the series Danmark i den negotiation and peace, but only in an atmosphere of kolde krig , aired 29 September 2000. mutual respect.
The Cuban people today therefore wait with weapon in hand for this right to live in peace.
While people generrisk exposing ourselves to reproach which has already ally love chocolate and cheese, not everyone likes been formulated – that we believe in the same values as ​​ neutrality.
The margin to maneuver will that was increasingly divided by the oncoming Cold War, he become increasingly narrow.
This does not mean that we will first is the voluntary act by which the Confederation renounce our neutrality – but it serves primarily to not let proclaimed its neutrality… Switzerland does not want to us participate in any political or military alliances on the be mixed up in foreign countries’ disputes.
Under Petitpierre’s auspices, Switzerland Europe, but of peace. became more involved internationally, while staying true to the principles of political and military neutrality.
Switzerland’s image before the world improved over the As a result of the London Declaration, Switzerland had years as a result of its redefined focus that emphasized solia duty to help where it could to promote peace.
In October 1960, when US-Cuban relations soured, Petitpierre advocated the nation’s role as a mediator.
In this the United States inquired from Switzerland if it would be willing manner, Switzerland provided its good offices in the conflict to take over United States interest in Cuba if need be.
Nations Supervisory Commission that was established at the On 27 October, the Swiss Foreign Ministry filed for authoend of the Korean War. rization from the Federal Council to inform Washington Referring to the threat posed by communism, Petitpierre of Switzerland’s readiness to provide its good offices and maintained that “we are now in a position where, if we remain represent the United States in Cuba.
The Foreign Ministry emphasized neutral, we, in fact, take side,” because this would play into that Switzerland customarily accepted such requests and the hands of the Communists.
At the time McKinney visited Micheli, the text day and granted the authorization.
When the United States of Kennedy’s speech had not even fully been decoded yet. withdrew its entire diplomatic corps from Cuba on 3 January, McKinney was, therefore, able to provide only the first part 1961, Switzerland took over United States interest as it had been agreed of the speech and he returned at 9:00m. with the rest.
Switzerland’s increased responsibility then, he had been specifically instructed to hold on to the in Cuba was the backdrop against which the Cuban Missile speech until one hour before Kennedy’s public appearance.
The Swiss historian Thomas Fischer has Like the ambassadors of other neutral nations, the Swiss authored two articles on this subject.
William Tyler, assistant secretary eager to help, Switzerland was “unavailable” and not willing of state for European affairs, asked Lindt to come half an hour to get involved.
His conclusion could be due to the fact that, early for a special session, in which Tyler wished to commuaccording to his own statement, Fischer was unable to draw nicate additional information.
Thus Lindt learned a number on pertinent sources from the Federal Archives in Switzerland, of important points.
Tyler, for instance, related that the misas these were still classified.
He, Fischer’s working paper of 2010, addresses Switzerland’s role furthermore, expressed uncertainty in regards to the nuclear as the US’s protecting power in Cuba.
In this more recent warheads but mentioned that, given the “great quantities of article, Fischer portrays Switzerland as more active and more Soviet cargo planes have landed in Cuba over the course involved than he did in his earlier piece.
Finally, Tyler mentioned the posand particularly from the Swiss Federal Archives in Berne and sibility of a meeting between the United States and Soviet heads of state, from DoDiS, an online collection of Swiss diplomatic docubut underscored that this was still undecided. ments, demonstrate that Switzerland’s neutrality of the 1950s At the end of the day, Switzerland had received a substanand 1960s did not imprison it in a state of isolation from tial amount of information on the crisis through different global affairs.
In accord with Petitpierre’s policy of “Neutrality channels and had enjoyed the United States’ special confiand Solidarity,” the Swiss realized that they had a responsibildence.
Swiss officials understood the seriousness of the situaity as a member of the world community and could no longer tion when the Federal Council met the following day.
The Swiss first learned about Friedrich Traugott Wahlen missed the meeting because he the crisis at 6:30m. on was attending an EFTA conference in Oslo15] and Chief 22 October when United States Ambassador Robert McKinney met Western Section Probst regard quarantine with Secretary General Pierre Micheli.
Compared to other measure as maximum course available short of risking nations this notification was relatively early.
United States action greeted as evidence United States not the Swiss were representing the United States diplomatically in Cuba merely reacting or readjusting to Soviet moves but is might explain this peculiar timing.
However, it seems more now taking initiative… Swiss obviously gratelikely that Switzerland was not intentionally briefed so early, ful our efforts keep them advised.
It related to quarantine; personally would be happy with world Stadelhofer the official Cuban position on the United States blockade ‘barrage’ against Communism.
But objective analysis as it had been explained to them by José Velasco, the Cuban must be that chances of accidental war now materiambassador to Switzerland.
I would think that with respect to Cuba Ministry highlighted which passage would be a particularly Soviets might lie low for a while, at least to see what United States fitting reference point for a conversation with Fidel Castro.
I ask appears that the Foreign Ministry was not disinclined to see myself, would they attempt counter action in Berlin, and such a meeting materialize. find I cannot answer.
Swiss Chief of Staff quoted as saying United States at the presidential palace.
Stadelhofer then asked him for an strong support for the United States.
The Swiss reaction, audience with Castro under the pretext of wanting to gain a moreover, demonstrated that military and political neutrality better understanding of Castro’s viewpoint and to improve did not automatically entail neutrality in spirit. his reporting to Berne.
After the briefing of the neutral relating to negotiations that Kennedy had allegedly made. ambassadors on 22 October, Rusk took Ambassador Lindt One has to wonder whether Stadelhofer did not inadvertently aside and clandestinely inquired about the possibility of show his hand when he brought up Kennedy’s apparent statehaving the Swiss Ambassador in Cuba, Emil Stadelhofer, ment and requested an audience with el líder maximo in the emphasize to Castro the danger Cuba was in and relate the same conversation. advantages of breaking away from the Soviet Union.
Lindt listened carefully, that the chief of protocol had been informed that he would but characteristically for a diplomat, refrained from taking a potentially be asked to pick Stadelhofer up and bring him to concrete position. the audience with Castro.
Stadelhofer’s frequent visits to the The Foreign Ministry in Switzerland was faced with a Foreign Ministry and particularly his conversation with Roa dilemma upon receiving Lindt’s report of this encounter on the 25th seem to have stirred some concern in Ambassador with Rusk.
Rumors and October, Lindt cabled the Foreign Ministry and suggested concerns had already emerged that the Swiss neutrality had that Rusk’s idea might already be outdated, since some condibeen impaired by its strong leaning towards the West in the tions had changed.
Swiss officials were aware that once be lured away from the Soviet Union.
He underscored that the nation’s neutrality and impartiality were blemished, it any initiative along these lines, like Stadelhofer had made, would be very hard to regain the world’s confidence.
Yet, on could ultimately be very dangerous. the other hand, Switzerland did not like to turn down an Lindt’s cable seems to have had a temporary effect on opportunity to help and potentially make a difference in the the Swiss Foreign Ministry.
The Foreign Ministry, therefore, reacted by Stadelhofer and told him not to push the issue further about expressing reservation, but at the same time, gave the ambasthe audience with Castro.
It did not, however, express any sador free rein to seize the opportunity to influence Castro serious or concrete opposition to a meeting.
To Stadelhofer tried to allay their concerns by explaining that, Stadelhofer’s dismay, there were too many people around to in any case, he did not expect a response from Castro until conduct a serious conversation.
He was particularly discomthe Cuban had learned of the reaction to the invitation he forted by the company of President Osvaldo Dorticós and had extended to U Thant.
The ambassador, as per his own Che Guevara, minister of industries, who, as Stadelhofer felt, statements, followed the orders and did not further pursue an were eavesdropping on his discussion with Castro.
The conaudience with Castro, that is, for a while at least. versation ended after five minutes without having achieved The Soviet Union did not make an overture to the Swiss much.
Castro did, however, tell Stadelhofer that he would as explicit as the one Rusk had made, but the Soviet Chargé like to speak to him some more “either immediately after D’Affaires in Berne, Sergej Loginov, did visit Foreign Minister the Soviet reception if it ended early or otherwise in the next Wahlen on 25 October.
Rusk’s initiative thus fizzled out and Switzerland as a potential mediator.
This nuance is significant as the former doing so, demonstrated Switzerland’s desire to contribute to a traditionally called for a slightly more active role than the latpeaceful resolution of the crisis. ter.
Wahlen’s response to Loginov was thus another manifestaRusk’s proposal is significant because it illustrated the tion of Switzerland’s redefined foreign policy.
The same day, the Swiss ambassador to Moscow, Max effort of the Kennedy administration to pursue a diplomatic Troendle, sent two letters to the Foreign Ministry.
A similar approach numbers 11 and 12 shed light on the Swiss interpretation of through the Brazilian government has been examined by hisKhrushchev’s Cuba policy and its evaluation of the situation torian James Hershberg.
In number 11, Troendle analyzed the of action that were available to Kennedy during the Cuban official declaration of the Soviet government and shared his Missile Crisis, Hershberg has pointed out that these plans understanding that Khrushchev wanted to focus on Berlin to influence Castro through foreign intermediaries have rather than Cuba.
The Khrushchev’s actions in Cuba and explored potential conseevidence presented here demonstrates that secret feelers were quences of the Soviet premier’s response to the United States blockade extended to Castro, not only through the Brazilians, but also in document number 12.
Over the Soviet ambassador to Washington, Anatoly Dobrynin, the course of the ensuing conflict, Switzerland, still trying to and offered him a secret Cuba-Turkey missiles swap.
The prove the worth of its neutrality, showed a disposition to lend following morning, on Sunday, 28 October, Khrushchev its good offices.
Another example was the question about the announced that he would withdraw the missiles from Cuba makeup of the UN’s inspection team that was to examine over Radio Moscow.
By 29 October, the Swedish had Missile Crisis had thus already abated when on 7 November, already been asked to help.
Neutral Switzerland would also the eager Ambassador Stadelhofer was invited to a reception have been a fitting match, but it had not yet been approached at the Soviet embassy in Havana.
Rössel, however, had also mentioned that and ultimately the UN asked the International Committee of it seemed to him like U Thant preferred the “UNEF” (the the Red Cross to take on this mission on 29 October.
Ernesto United Nations Emergency Force) or the “ONUC” (the Thalmann cabled Berne the following day that Chakravarthi United Nations Organization in the Congo) to participate Narasimhan, chef de cabinet at the UN, had informed him in the expedition.
Thalmann hoped to learn more details that Pier Spinelli, director-general of the United Nations about the makeup of the teams once U Thant returned from Office in Geneva, had approached Boissier and asked him for his trip to Cuba.
Accordingly, Thalmann merely related this the help of the ICRC in the Cuban crisis.
To this, Thalmann information without much additional comment on his part. related, Boissier responded with general acceptance, under the Later that same day, he followed up with another message.
At the the meantime, Thalmann had heard rumors that the inspectime, there was some confusion as to how this demarche to tion team was to be made up of Swedish, Mexican and Swiss the ICRC came about.
These rumors further claimed that the Swiss were media believed that the Soviets had made the initiative.
The hesitant to accept the entreaty due to the potential conflict of Soviets, however, emphasized that the UN had offered them interest as the diplomatic representative of the United States in Cuba.
A the choice between three alternative entities for this undertaknumber of delegates, likely spurred on by these speculations, ing.
The three options were the UN itself, neutral states or the went to Thalmann for verification of what they had heard.
Thalmann, himself completely ignorant about this potential The exact nature of the mission the ICRC was asked to mandate, inquired about the official Swiss position from the take on changed over the course of the next few days.
The first part of these duties zens in the inspection of the bases in Cuba.
It responded that would then allow for the ceasing of the United States quarantine around if Switzerland were to be asked to provide officers, it would Cuba.
U Thant’s visit to Cuba did not bear the expected fruits. second duty entailed in the ICRC mission, the inspection Castro was ardently set on denying any kind of inspection in of the missile bases, however, was undercut by Castro, who Cuba.
Hence the Swedes did not get to go to Cuba and the rejected all forms of on-site inspections in Cuba.
The Cuban UN never even requested Switzerland’s assistance. leader, moreover, opposed the examination of the Soviet ships While the Swiss government was not approached to that were leaving Cuba in Cuban ports.
Therefore, the UN take on any duties related to the inspection in Cuba, the initiated negotiations with the ICRC to also take on the task International Committee of the Red Cross was.
The UN was of boarding outgoing ships and examining their cargo to looking for an entity, acceptable to all parties involved, which determine if the Soviet Union was removing all the offensive would board ships coming into Cuba and examine them for weapons it had previously deployed to Cuba. offensive weapons, and also inspect the missile sites in Cuba Clearly, the nature of this proposed mission went to ensure the complete removal of offensive weapons that had beyond the humanitarian assistance that the ICRC was been brought to the island by the Soviet Union.
The ICRC, however, had adopted the was considering these points, the ICRC extended a general “Declaration of the Fundamental Principles of the Red Cross” offer to help.
The US, in sion and its officials were a little uncomfortable with their contrast, underscored that “no specific date for the terminapotential new role.
On 6 November, Paul Ruegger, a former tion of Red Cross system could be fixed at this time.
The Red Cross he advanced the termination date of the Red Cross mission underscored the need to comply with international law and to 10 November. accordingly declared it would not force the boarding of any An additional complicating factor was the ICRC’s insisships that did not voluntarily submit to inspection.
It insisttence on getting Castro’s approval for its mission, which he ed that all three parties affected, the United States, the Soviet did not grant until 9 November.
Ruegger explained that it Union and Cuba, had to agree to this mission.
Ruegger would probably take a week until the ICRC was logistically particularly emphasized the need for Castro’s approval. ready to assume its role in the Caribbean.
It quickly became Although the ICRC proceeded with great caution, it did evident that by the time the ICRC could begin the inspection, get to work and began planning the potential mission.
Hence representatives proclaimed that the ICRC exclusively would there was no reason to further pursue this plan and hence choose the corps that was to undertake the mission and stated ended the ICRC’s mission before it even began.
The ICRC, while being an independent, internaemphasized that “it would be necessary for general instructional organization, had strong historical ties to Switzerland tions to be given by the UN to this corps to be first commuand its headquarters are located in Geneva.
This is to ensure that ICRC members, including the officials involved in the Cuban such instructions are in accord with Red Cross principles.”57 mission, Boissier, Ruegger and Gallopin, were Swiss citizens, It was not long before the first challenges to the ICRC’s as were the people that were to be recruited for the inspecmission began to surface.
Accordingly, it is not surprising that the Swiss Federal Due to its refusal to take on the responsibility, U Thant felt Council discussed the matter and developed an opinion about that there was little reason to have the ICRC do the inspecthe mission. tion, since ultimately the UN would be responsible.
In response, the Soviet delegate Jakob Burckhard, chief of the Division for International at the UN merely commented that he would forward this to Organizations at the Foreign Ministry, believed that it was his home government. hardly possible for the ICRC to turn down the UN entreaty.
Foreign Minister Wahlen, however, held the view that the On 5 November, the Soviet Union highlighted in regard to Red Cross should not accept the mission and expressed conoutgoing ships that “dismantling will be completed and all cern about the ICRC’s venturing into the political sphere. offensive weapons will have been shipped out of Cuba by There was more to it though than Wahlen initially revealed.
To his colleagues, he expressed his regret that the negotiations with the Cubans about the details of Anderson’s ICRC was already involved.
However, as Stadelhofer opposed to the mission, but that he did not like that the Red explained, there were logistical issues that would have made Cross was the one undertaking it rather than the government this difficult, and, more importantly, Castro did not agree of Switzerland. with this plan, as he felt it was an affront to Cuba’s national Hans Schaffner, minister of economic affairs, who had honor.
In this To accomplish this, Ambassador Lindt organized a United States cargo manner he stated that “one should look to exercise an influplane and had it repainted so that it displayed the Swiss Cross. ence on the ICRC, through the mediation of Mr Petitpierre In the afternoon of 4 November, Stadelhofer went to Rancho for example.
We Boyeros airport, located outside Havana, to accept Anderson’s could say that Switzerland would be prepared, as necessary, remains.
Switzerland, on the other hand, Schaffner argued, would of Ministers of the Soviet Union, and five Soviet experts to be a much better match.
Schaffner’s blunt statement raises enter the United States, because they wished to stop in New the question whether the Federal Council might have been York on 10 November on their way back from Cuba to the piqued because the UN had asked the ICRC to lend its good Soviet Union.
The Secretary General had offered the Cuban ment as well as the population expressed its willingness to leader the selection of using a Cuban plane to bring Anderson become involved and lend its good offices where they may back or to submit it to the UN, the ICRC, Switzerland as the be of need.
Rusk’s initiative posed the first opportunity US representative, or just Switzerland, out of which Castro for the government to participate in the Crisis.
Switzerland accepted the mission on 1 cials in Berne were a little reluctant to grant authorization, November.
The Swiss Federal Chancellery for execution. government would also have been willing to consider helping with the inspection of the missile dismantling, as it related Verifying accuracy of excerpt, to Thalmann.
In accord with the policies put forward by Max Petitpierre, Switzerland did not turn down a single entreaty when asked and when it was not, it expressed sincere regret.
Even though the Americans do not want to take the of the United States of America’s interest initiative, a break in relations between the two states has to in Cuba be considered a possibility.
Currently, there are about 4,000 American citizens in the country, whereas in the case of a Foreign Ministry.
Petition of October 27, 1960 . break in relations, there would probably hardly be 1,000 left.
The majority of American companies have, by the way, Based on the petition of the Foreign Ministry, the Federal already been seized.
Traditionally, we have never turned down such mandates, even if they entailed – as was 1.
Inform the American State Department through our Department that it goes without saying that the Federal embassy in Washington that the Federal Council is willing to Council can, should the situation arise, only take on the take over the representation of American interests in Cuba in observation of American interests in Cuba, after the Cuban the case of a break in diplomatic relations between the United government has previously given its approval.
To simplify the matter it is agreed that Mister Blumberg will visit Federal Foreign Ministry. the signatory between 2300h and midnight to hand over the speech.
Handing over of dodis.ch, doc.974, Petition from the Ministry of Foreign the entire text.
Short oral commentary in accordance with Affairs to the Federal Council, 12/28/1962.
Ambassador Micheli briefs the President of the the United States Embassy in Berne, 24 October 1962 Federal Council on 23 October between 8 and 9h on the basis of the received texts and dispatches, FYI Hans Schmidlin so that he can report on this to the Federal Council at this p.B.73.
On Monday afternoon, 22 October, Ambassador and the signatory inform the Head of Department [trans.
From this it is already apparent that it 2 attachments relates to Cuba and the Soviet missile bases.
Regarding the – longer Probst – rest of the text, it was still being decoded.
It is agreed that the Ambassador will audition again at 2100h to hand over the rest.
Schweizerisches Bundesarchiv, 2001 : 1976/17, Politische Auswirkungen nach der Rede von Präsident Kennedy 2.
It is certain that Khrushchev fully realizes the regarding briefing by Assistant Secretary of State William challenge his Cuba policy represents to the United States and to Kennedy Tyler, 23 October 1962 personally.
Washington 23.10.61 Khrushchev possibly believed that the Americans would take 12.45 the affront without protest.
At any rate, it is a too calm a “Berliner” to not also have prepared itself 11 for the current reaction.
The possibility of a summit between Kennedy and briefing of the neutral ambassadors by United States Secretary of State Khrushchev has, today, not yet been eliminated, but neither Dean Rusk at 8m. on 22 October 1962], Tyler, has it consolidated.
Assistant Secretary for European Affairs, had asked me to come see him.
After he expressed thanks on behalf of the USA In his conversation with the American Ambassador Kohler, for what Switzerland has done, and will yet do in the future, Khrushchev hinted, in a convoluted manner, at the possibilfor the American interests in Cuba, he said that he wished to ity of a meeting with Kennedy, without, however, setting a inform me more extensively than Rusk would be able to do in place or time.
The conversation between Gromyko and the front of the assembled group of ambassadors.
All missiles stationed in Cuba are targeted north with an angle that would make it possible to hit most of the Embassy of Switzerland American cities.
We, however, do not know if the missiles have been mated with nuclear warheads.
Schweizerisches Bundesarchiv, 2001 : 1976/17, the last few days, it can be assumed that the “war heads” were Politische Auswirkungen nach der Rede von Präsident Kennedy brought to Cuba that way. vom 22.
The telegram that has just arrived from the American Ambassador to Moscow only mentions a radio text, which talks about an imminent American declaration of war on Cuba without mentioning a Russian reaction.
There are indications that the Soviets were informed Embassy, Havana ,23 October 1962 that the United States could detect the missiles.
This raises the question, why Moscow, if it in fact means war, warned the Americans by erecting the missile bases, which foils the surprise effect.
Cuba.o. – PO is so serious that your country could also become affected.
Secret. – For Ambassador Stadelhofer. with an independent communist Cuba possible and Your 34 and 35.
Yesterday, the Cuban Ambassador [José even wishes, insofar as Castro is still able, to break away from Ruiz Velasco] brought a written statement from his governRussia. ment concerning the United States blockade measures to the Head of Department.
Forwarding you this suggestion with considerable “Cuban government condemns the naval and aerial blockreservation.
We absolutely want to avoid the impression ade, it considers it a criminal act that infringes on human of an inappropriate and hasty demarche that could lead to rights and violates the charter of the United Nations.
But believe that we cannot keep Secretary you know that people are willing to give their life to defend of State Rusk’s thoughts from you just in case.
In you should not take a conspicuous initiative to strike up such these times, when the United States pose more than ever a a conversation.
If, however, the opportunity should arise to threat of war to Cuba, government solemnly declares that it desires peace and is always willing to negotiate any dispute by do so without causing a sensation, or if Castro, which cannot peaceful means as long as they do not damage its sovereignty. be ruled out completely, possibly brought up problems Paragraph.
Schweizerisches Bundesarchiv, 2001 : , 17 November 1962 1976/17, Geheim.
Mr Head of Department Embassy of Switzerland Havana, November 17, 1962 In Cuba B.44.
Havana, 25.10.1962. 12h45 In reference to the possibility that was mentioned on 22 Foreign Ministry October in the form of a question to Ambassador Lindt, I am Berne taking the liberty to supplementary report to the earlier quick Flash exchange of messages that I first went to the Foreign Ministry on the 24th of the previous month, without, however, being Today at 10h00 I had a conversation with [Cuban Foreign able to relay anything.
Everybody, who would have come into Minister Raúl] Roa, who promised to do everything to make consideration to arrange talks with Fidel Castro, was at the a meeting with Castro happen quickly.
The following day, cally that this was my own initiative with the goal to enhance on 25 October, I had the conversation with Foreign Minister and improve my reporting on Castro’s relevant explanations Roa that you already know about, where I, while noting that in public speeches to Berne and to, given the current situaI was acting on my own initiative, cautiously mentioned a tion, get an authentic interpretation.
Roa is not familiar with few points, which might be interesting to address if a meetKennedy’s statements that you mentioned.
Protocol, whom I had visited formally for a different matter, mentioned that he had been asked by Dr.
Roa to pick me up Embassy of Switzerland from the Embassy with his car and to bring me to the location of the talks, should the situation arise.
Afterwards, in accord Communicated over the phone to M Probst, 21.h30 BZ with your instructions, I took no further steps.
E.2474 On the occasion of a big reception that took place on 25.10.62. o 7 November at the Soviet Embassy, I was able to, after the 21h30 T.lo.
Russian Ambassador introduced me to First Deputy Chairman Mikoyan, talk for about 5 minutes with Fidel Castro.
Schweizerisches Bundesarchiv, 2001 : 1976/17, the conversation took place directly next to the table reserved Geheim.
Dorticós and Minister of Industries, Che Guevara, were listening in, I had to refrain from addressing issues of importance.
So far, no such visit has sible and, in terms of the policy of neutrality, dangerous – the occurred and until proven otherwise, I am not expecting one. separation of Cuba from the Soviet Union.
Unquote The Cuban Prime Minister was, meanwhile, extremely polite In the face of these new developments we recommend and made, like Mister Mikoyan had done before, you to act with the utmost caution.
Most of all, please refrain some very flattering remarks about our country. from soliciting an audience with Castro in case this takes a long time to materialize.
Schweizerisches Bundesarchiv, 2001 : 1976/17, you, which would have to be conducted with much restraint.
Politische Auswirkungen nach der Rede von Präsident Kennedy In any case, it were to be refrained from even hinting at an vom 22.
I absolutely share your government might start by some action calculated to awaken opinion.
Obvious place that Castro wants to await the reaction to the invitation to begin would be the severing of its multiple ties to the Soviet U-Thant to Havana, before he bloc.” takes a position on the prompting to receive me.
Cuban statements are following the Russian line completely, they even go beyond by denying the existence of Embassy of Switzerland nuclear bases.
It appears to me that Rusk’s initiative was made based on preconditions that have changed in the meantime.
B 2503 In this superpower confrontation, Cuba has more and more 28.10.1962 – 0900 lost its right of self-determination.
Schweizerisches Bundesarchiv, 2001 : 1976/17, Latin America, the opposition that manifests itself against the Politische Auswirkungen nach der Rede von Präsident Kennedy United States is but the consequence of the European policies. vom 22.
This B.12.1.. – AN/cm text is identical to the one already published by the press.
It should be noted that the Russian Mister Ambassador Pierre M I C H E L I declaration was already known to him and that he had given Secretary General of the Federal Foreign Ministry it his attention.
Berne The Chargé d’Affaires said that, given the seriousness of Cuba the situation, his government had found it necessary to give notice of this statement to the Federal Council.
Mister Ambassador, Mister Wahlen reminded him of Switzerland’s policy of peace.
This hopes that a solution will be I have the honor to herewith give you for your informafound between the two parties. tion, the text of the declaration of the Soviet government of The Chargé d’Affaires said that he was well aware of 23 October.
He hopes that the declaration In addition to the commentaries that I have already cabled will help to better underto you, I am adding that this declaration demands that the stand the Soviet point of view.
He alluded to the American Cuban crisis be submitted to the Security Council.
He mentions editorial of Pravda of 23 October is even more insistent on specifically those in Norway.
The question is, whether they will added that Cuba conquered its independence and that it did fulfill the mission that was given to them by the people and not pose a threat to the United States.
In return, the United whether they will justify it, otherwise they will suffer the fate States have threatened Cuba’s independence continuously.
In of the League of Nations and will face the widespread contempt of the peoples.
But it is after reading vitiated, since it keeps silent about the discovery of medium range missiles in Cuba, which was the cause of the American 1.
The population of Moscow is calm in the face decision. of the Cuban crisis. no signs of a It also seems, from the meager echoes of the public opinpanic, but worried faces everywhere. ion that I could gather, that the Soviet population does not The demonstrations in front of the American Embassy have understand why the crisis has suddenly worsened.
As a conseIn the big companies, the workers appear to have been quence it seems more depressed than exalted. asked, given the situation, to stick together and to increase * * * performance, without inflaming the national sentiments by I am under the impression, as I have already told you, that underscoring an imminent threat of war.
This allows for the the Caribbean is not a terrain favorable to the Soviet Union assumption that the Soviet government does not intend to and that it will refuse the fight.
This impression is shared by “march.” the majority of Western diplomats.
The attacks on the United States in the daily news are But on this point, the opinions of my colleagues differ much. published in a milder form in today’s editorial of the Pravda, Please accept, Mister Ambassador, the assurances of my which is probably due to the positive response that Premier distinguished consideration.
Schweizerisches Bundesarchiv, 2300 : 1000/716, blow against Berlin or against Turkey.
Political letter from Ambassador Max Troendle to Secretary b) Israel’s newly arrived ambassador, Joseph Tekoah, who is General of the Federal Foreign Ministry, Pierre Micheli, familiar with the conditions in Latin America from his 10/25/1962.
Troendle, 25 October 1962 c) For the sake of completeness, I am mentioning the not B.21.31.
From the Swedish Ambassador Roessel I brought to fall by an “imperialist” intervention rather have learned that the composition of the inspection team has than by its own failure. not yet been decided.
Since the Soviet government is keeping its ships out does not mean that the team will be made up solely of Swedes. of the danger zone to avoid incidents and Misses Roessel was welcomed first by the Secretary General it appears in principle to be willing to settle the dispute in the last night, because the team of 6 people that will accompany forum of the United Nations or might U Thant to Cuba tomorrow, includes a Swede, who, in this tend towards a summit meeting, it is possible that its yielding case, holds the position of a UN functionary.
Roessel does not will be interpreted as weakness by the opposite side and that exclude the possibility that the appeal could also be made to those will appear to have been correct, who advocate a policy us, he is, however, under the impression that U Thant seems of strength.
An aggravation of the situation could result out of to be thinking more in terms of consulting with observers this due to Moscow’s desire for prestige.
Schweizerisches Bundesarchiv, 2001 : 1976/17, e.91 Beteiligung Schweizer Offiziere am Ueberwachungsteam zur 26.10.1962 19h00 lo Aufhebung der Sovietischen Basen in Kuba.
Translated from Moskau, Politische Berichte und Briefe, Militärberichte, 1962.
I would appreciate it, if Mr Minister Burckhardt you could inform me of your position on this matter.
The definite composition of the team will not be decided until after U Thant has returned from Mr Jaeggi Havana.
Schweizerisches Bundesarchiv, 2001 : 1976/17, e.21 Beteiligung Schweizer Offiziere am Ueberwachungsteam zur ----------Aufhebung der Sovietischen Basen in Kuba.
Cable no.3, from 30.10.62 0800 lo Foreign Ministry to Thalmann, 10/30/1962.
Schweizerisches Bundesarchiv, 2001 : 1976/17, Beteiligung Schweizer Offiziere am Ueberwachungsteam zur Aufhebung der Sovietischen Basen in Kuba.
I have just learned from Berne 30.10.1962 Narasimhan that Spinelli 18h45lo. contacted Boissier last night cable no.3 and this morning to negotiate ICRC participation in Cuba.
The USA participation of Swiss officers in a surveillance team for the has proclaimed its agreement with this right away.
Although dismantling of the Soviet bases in Cuba, and if the conditions the initiative could set a precedent, Boissier expressed general of the mandate are acceptable, we will examine the request willingness, on condition that Castro agrees as well.
U Thant with benevolence in the framework of our constant policy of will negotiate with him about this today.
About 30 ICRC lending our services wherever they may be of use. representatives ,e. for the 5 ports of entry, would Ministry of Foreign Affairs be required to carry out this plan.
The mission was a matter that serves to In consultation with Misters Micheli and Burckhardt, uphold peace and from which the Committee could hardly Campiche will call B , so that we are withdraw, all the less so because the offer was evidence of the up to date.
He would, should the situation arise, inquire of Ambassador Rüegger or potentially Director Fröhlich if they e.26. would take on leading this mission.
Schweizerisches Bundesarchiv, 2001 : 1976/17, Wahlen and Ambassador Micheli.
Beteiligung Schweizer Offiziere am Ueberwachungsteam zur Aufhebung der Sovietischen Basen in Kuba.
Translated from German by Stephanie tends to think that the ICRC should reject the offer.
It could become the “arbiter” in a political situation, which could get more compromising than the exercise of its functions in a humanitarian sense.
I will call B again with the purpose of correcting the statement Note on the potential ICRC mission, 31 October 1962 of this morning and to inform him of Mister Federal Councilor Wahlen’s opinion, while emphatically remarking o.BJK/etc that the Head of Department does not want to intervene in October 31, 1962 the decision of the Committee.
Phone call with Mister L Boissier, President of the taken with all the necessary precautions and with emphasis ICRC. that this was an exception.
It Spinelli’s demarche to him regarding the potential accepwould be easier to reject than to accept, but the easier way was tance of the mission to inspect ships bound for Cuba.
After initial soundings the views of Mister Ambassador Micheli’s and my opinion it would be the members of the Committee were divided. difficult to reject the mission if it suits all interested powers.
The Department, however did not want to influence the Committee’s decision in any way.
BAR, 2001 : 1976/17, Inspizierung russischer B confirmed the information, as Thalmann had reported Schiffe die nach Kuba fahren durch Vertreter des IKRK. it to us.
Therefore – and that was also practically easiest – the transfer to the nearby American mainland was the only option.
Settling the matter required 8 audiences with the Foreign Ministry, three of which were Report from the Swiss Ambassador to Cuba with Dr.
Roa, plus one long phone conversation with him, to the Division of Political Affairs, Swiss Foreign Ministry, as well as six phone conversations with Washington.
He added that the Cuban In Cuba government preferred Switzerland’s appointment with the B.44.
USA. – Std/p repatriation modalities over the United Nations and the ICRC because of the high reputation that our country enjoys.
To be sure and to prevent unpleasant last-minute of the Swiss Foreign Ministry surprises if possible, I explicitly asked the question on Berne Saturday, 3 November, if the Cuban side desired to have a record of delivery drafted, I added that I would be happy to Transfer of the remains waive such a document, since some photographs would fulfill of Major Rudolf Anderson the same purpose.
Although the final drafting per se was planned for Sunday 10m., the Chief of Protocol could not inform me over the Following up on my quick report on the 5th of this month, phone of the amendment the Prime Minister required until I am taking the liberty to inform you further on details that 13.10.
It boiled down to the fact that the description of the seem important. cause of death should have been determined bilaterally,e.
Reason and sense of the engagement of this embassy covered by my signature.
In extraordinarily tough, but never is still not fully clear to me even after the termination of the hurtful negotiations that lasted almost an hour, I was able to mission.
There was probably, despite the apparent agreement achieve the version of the fourth paragraph that is known to between all the parties involved, a persistent misunderstanding. you.
It appears that Secretary General U Thant and the American entities viewed the acceptance of the coffin by the embassy 4.
Roa I did not for the transfer to Guantanamo base as the most practical arrive at the airport on Sunday, 4 November, until [UN solution.
The distance Havana – Santiago de Cuba airplane,e. at exactly 3 o’clock.
The Chief of Protocol, who is 1000 km and from there to the American naval base it is had to wait for the fair copy of the delivery record, arrived about another 80 km.
The transfer ceremony was simple, but fairly interrupted and the train connections between the capital and dignified.
Although, it was originally planned to allow either the Eastern province are complicated, it would have required the foreign correspondents also or no one from the press, a 1100 km long road trip, for which, besides the fact of the there were some Cuban journalists and photographers.
They enormous expenditure of time, there was not a single official were, however, not called up by the Foreign Ministry, but had car from the American inventory of the Foreign Interests gained access on their own initiative.
The fact that Ambassador Lindt managed, in the shortest time, to organize a cargo plane, contributed crucially During our discussion, Dr.
The point that the upper part of the federal police, mentioned the notifications the ICRC the plane was newly painted and endued with the Swiss Cross received, according to press releases, over the last weeks from made a strong impression on the Foreign numerous Swiss, who wanted to volunteer for the Cuba Ministry and moreover on the public. inspection.
Amstein’s opinion, it would be expedient if the ICRC would, in the event, forward the names of such candidates prior to appointment to the federal police for a The Swiss Ambassador “screening” either directly or through your division.
Conformation note of 3 November, 1962 moment, I wanted to inform you just in case of this thought 2.
Informally submitted questions which you probably have considered yourself already.
Note for the Division of International Organizations, 11/20/1962. doc.384, Report from Stadelhofer on the transfer of Major Anderson’s remains, 11/07/1962.
Swiss Foreign Ministry 7 Paragraph after DoDiS, doc.974, Request from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs to the Federal Council, 12/28/1962.
Die guten Dienste des IKRK und der Political Affairs Schweiz in der Kuba-Krise 1962.
BAR, 2001 : 1976/17, Politische from Thalmann to the Foreign Ministry, 11/05/1962.
Die guten Dienste des IKRK und der Ministry to Stadelhofer, 10/23/1962.
Conversation between Federal Meeting between United Nations, ICRC and American Officials, Councilor Friedrich Wahlen and the Soviet Chargé d’Affaires, Sergej 11/07/1962.
Meeting between United Nations, ICRC and Soviet Officials, 446, from Stadelhofer to Foreign Ministry, 11/05/1962.
At the same time, involved in the United States decision-making process, nor did it since the Americans only informed their European allies of facilitate the denouement of the crisis.
But the confrontation their decisions, instead of actively consulting with them, and in the Caribbean certainly did have an important long-run since the United States appeared hesitant to risk a nuclear impact on French foreign policy, and in particular on Francowar to defend Europe, this provided, in the General’s view, American relations. the best justification for his policy of independence and the While only a secondary player throughout the Cuban establishment of a national deterrent.
Missile Crisis, France did assist its American ally by providing important information thanks to its diplomatic and intelligence presence in Cuba.
As pointed out by Maurice Vaïsse, the French intelligence services were among the first to provide DOCUMENTS hints of the arrival of nuclear missiles in Cuba to the United States.
The French authorities then contacted the US Air Force, which overcame its doubts and decided to send Meeting between General Charles de Gaulle and Dean spy planes to investigate the claim.
He also hands over the first part of the speech Washington did maintain consultations with Paris.
The rest of the speech will be sent to Gaulle about the presence of nuclear missiles in Cuba and the the Elysee once the embassy receives it. initial American response.
Kennedy’s national security M Acheson first indicated, in line with M Kennedy’s desires, adviser, McGeorge Bundy, also met soon after the end of the the importance that the latter attaches to the final passage crisis with the French ambassador to Washington, Hervé of his letter in regard to the close contacts that should be Alphand, to share their analyses of the confrontation in the maintained between Washington and Paris, and the interest Caribbean . he attaches to General de Gaulle’s viewpoints.
In particular, no nuclear warStates to pay elsewhere for a favorable evolution of the situaheads have been spotted on any photography.
Many pictures have been taken since then, and the blockade comes into force.
It is more likely that the Russians will try to force the Acheson said with the same attention.
France cannot object, since it is normal for a country to defend itself, Moreover, the Russians will not fail to launch a massive even with preventive measures, once it is threatened and it has propaganda campaign, especially towards the neutral counthe means to defend itself. tries – Africans or Asians – in order to push their public The planned measure is a blockade.
In It is with this perspective in mind that the Secretary of any case, it should prevent any new weapons from arriving.
It is normal in any case that the United governments have been warned about the risks that riots States consult them. could break out in their countries, and they have been promAs for the Security Council, a referral is in line with ised that American forces could be put at their disposal to put American policy.
For his part, the General sees no practical down these riots. value as there will be debates, discussions, and nothing else.
In addition, M Stevenson will refer matters The only positive fact remains the blockade. to the United Nations Security Council in order to pass a If there is a blockade – and once again France is not objectresolution condemning Soviet policy in Cuba.
M Acheson ing as the United States are threatened – the Soviets will react. pointed out that in his mind this was a “prophylactic” step, Maybe they will react in Cuba, more likely they will do so whose sole outcome could be to prevent the Russians from elsewhere and in particular in Berlin. taking the initiative.
If they blockade Berlin, the three responsible powers will In concrete terms, planning for a possible extension of have to take the needed measures.
Counter-measures have the operations in Cuba, the American air forces are in a state been planned.
First, it to clarify it through talks, and quite likely high level talks is likely that he is trying to use this affair to force the United between M Khrushchev and M Kennedy.
As for France, if a crisis breaks out in Berlin, it will act in concert with its partners, especially if there is a war.
It seems essential While announcing, in big headlines, that the nation is to maintain a close contact in Washington through [French ready for war, and that the Prime Minister will speak to the Ambassador in Washington] M Alphand, whom nation tonight, the morning newspapers have not published he trusts completely, and soon in Paris where [the new United States any in-depth commentary on the speech given last night by Ambassador] M Bohlen is expected.
I C B M are operaMixed with this, however, is a certain anxiety due to the tional the United States, the installation in likely harsh police measures or precautionary measures that Cuba could improve by 50% the arsenal aimed towards the will undoubtedly be taken against all of those who have not United States. taken an active part in the regime’s demonstrations.
This last point is underlined by M Acheson when the For the moment, the population remains calm as a whole meeting resumes. and traffic is normal in the capital.
This is a serious affair, since the United States had guaranteed Europe’s defense to prevent Europe from becoming an anti-American base, and now such a base exists in America.
German governments, General de Gaulle asked M Acheson, who is returning to Washington tomorrow, to transmit his Hervé Alphand, French Ambassador in Washington, to regards to the President of the United States.
Before examining in detail the possible consequences of that tomorrow the Soviet leaders will once again launch into a Cuban settlement, M Kennedy wants first to focus on their usual themes about the “free city of Berlin,” general and ending the current crisis, which in his view is not over yet. complete disarmament, a moratorium on nuclear tests, etc… It is likely that the Russians want to fulfill the promises made It is also possible that an era of real negotiation in a spirit of in M Khrushchev’s letter.
A Soviet general in Havana gave détente will emerge. guarantees to M Thant’s Indian military adviser [Gen.
In this case, the gap that separates Russia from China will 2 November.
China will try to present itself even more as the been able to prove these statements.
We do not know yet leader of the communist world, determined not to seek any whether the pictures made today will provide any decisive compromises with the Western imperialists.
Moreover, if Castro remains further evidence of its intransigence by pursuing its invasion intransigent, it will be very difficult to organize an inspection of India, and by supporting throughout the world, in Cuba as that could both allow to check the departure of the missiles in South-East Asia or Africa, the demands of the extremists. and the absence of offensive nuclear weapons on the island.
The Cuban adventure highlights the strategic concepts presents political and technical challenges. of the nuclear era.
It appears to M McGeorge Bundy that it has underlined the necessity of conventional weapons to 2.
It is clear that Castro is furious and he is very bitter with avoid a thermonuclear conflict.
It proves also that, despite his Russian friends for having abandoned him without what General Norstad claims, consultation.
M McGeorge Bundy thinks that M medium range missiles placed on the ground and easily Mikoyan is coming to Havana9 to try to make Castro detectable are of little use when facing an invulnerable nuclear understand the situation.
Malinovsky, pushed him to build nuclear bases in Cuba so as to try to catch up in the arms race.
Thus M Roger Robert du Gardier, French Ambassador in Havana, Khrushchev would, to a certain extent, have been victim of to Maurice Couve de Murville, French Foreign Minister, the carelessness of his generals.
France, I want to put to good use the few hours that remain The President is very conscious of this psychological problem before the departure of the diplomatic pouch to give the Department a general impression on the Cuban crisis up to 4.
The meetings of M Mikoyan11 are taking developing states and within the communist bloc itself.
Once again, they are announcing his departure for does seem, for many of my colleagues and myself, that the the end of the week – tomorrow even, for the most convinced rumors in question are too diverse and too numerous for us of the rumor spreaders – but there is no apparent reason for to ignore.
It is a fact, in any case, that we can hear, throughout this to be true, as there is no apparent reason for this to be the island, muted explosions that seem to be part of underfalse either. ground works.
This is the case, in particular, near my resiAs I signaled in several of my previous messages, the great dence which is on the north flank of a hill that is supposedly majority of the population is more apathetic than ever, despite full of labyrinths like those in the rock of Gibraltar. the kicks given periodically by the professional agitators of the The authorities, for their part, are very worried.
It seems that the sudden discovery of medium range of the General Secretary of the United Nations , Russian launchers stunned most Cubans, be they revolutionand then the one of M Mikoyan, did not lessen this obviaries or not, and that they are still in shock.
Fidel Castro and his team foreigners organized, on their own, important strategic bases do not seem to have a clear conscience, nor are they ready to on their soil must be particularly painful.
From various sources, us, indeed, to become exposed to accusations of spying which we are also hearing that soldiers and militias are continuing are quite recurrent here. to hide, with great caution, very large cement containers in Even though, since the start of the week, M Mikoyan and natural caves, or alternatively in man-made excavations that Fidel Castro have been shown side by side several times, pubare then covered with earth, sand, and vegetation.
It does not lic opinion continues to believe that discord persists between seem that they are trying to hide light infantry weapons, or both men, as it does between their governments.
It is a fact even coastal defense and anti-air canons, since such weapons that Dr.
Fidel Castro appears constantly worried and even are absolutely normal for the defense of any country; unless irritated while M Mikoyan, once he has finished smiling for these are part of an “excess’ supply of weapons that is put in the photographers, adopts the look of the severe mentor that reserve for the day where the Americans would have imposed he wants to project here. a new regime in Cuba, and Fidel’s supporters would need to The old guard or the strictly loyal communists – noticereclaim power. ably the Dr.
We can speculate, obvi“men of the Sierra” – those, at least, who have not joined the ously, that the key elements of the missiles – combustible liqopposition since their leader officially declared last December uids and launching devices – or even nuclear warheads – have that he was a “Marxist-Leninist”. remained on the island, and only frames have left.
This would In terms of the relations between the government and explain why, according to the same sources, the Russians so the Western embassies, the situation remains tense and my easily agreed to withdraw their famous missiles.
I would even mention cases of members of a) The decision to install medium range missiles in Cuba the famous “Committees for the Defense of the Revolution” cannot be solely explained by the desire to defend the who were friendly or helpful towards certain Westerners who island.
If one day we have to face a crowd that is anic) The Soviet installation in Cuba was not aiming, it seems, mated by hostile intentions towards us, it will only be, and to capture an opportunity to launch a devastating war; I am convinced of this, on the basis of precise orders from the missiles did not sufficiently change the balance of authorities… power to allow the destruction of the opponent without Lacking any serious information on the evolution of M any retaliation.
Mikoyan’s mission or on the eventual removal of the 42 d) The Soviet bases in Cuba seemed to aim, first and Illyushin 28 that are claimed to be here, I am giving these foremost, to improve the political and military situation indications to the Department, through this ‘summary of the of the USSR, either in view of a great debate with the general atmosphere,’ in response to the request that was made United States, or for a more precise objective, such as by its message on 2nd November.
Translation by Garret J Martin.] maneuver was ever planned, a case where the United States reacted.
One cannot understand why the very clear warnings of President Kennedy in September were ignored.
That essential fact, hidden by the You will find below some remarks from the Department on current amenable words of M Khrushchev, inspires the main aspects of the Cuban crisis. reflection.
Origins and meaning of the Crisis claiming to pursue a policy of peace, took an enormous risk in order to weaken American positions, and with Everyone admits that the Soviets miscalculated.
It remains that those of the West as a whole, in view of pursuing hard to define their real aim.
Many facts are still unknown. a new initiative, either in Europe, the Americas, or We ignore whether the Soviet military reinforcement to Cuba elsewhere.
To those who, for a long time, have claimed was in response to a Cuban demand or a Soviet initiative.
We that the Soviet Union has traded its old military threats do not know whether the works were kept hidden until early with political and economic challenges, the Cuban October and then hurriedly led into the open, or if they were crisis provided a strong rebuke.
It is not a discussions that could have taken place in the USSR, the only substitute.
As the crisis accelerated, it kept us in a) The decision of the American government to establish the loop.
It remains that, if as was feared for a while, the a blockade and to avoid, at least in the initial phase, a USSR had created even minor difficulties in Berlin, the direct confrontation with the USSR through a surprise Alliance would have faced far greater strains that it did.
It attack against the bases, is inspired by the strategic thus appears that political consultation among the fifteen doctrine of flexible response.
The blockade was merely members is a tool that does not work well at all. the symbol of American will.
The two key elements deterred from its actions, was careful not to hurt the pride of deterrence were combined in the American attitude either of the organization or of the non-aligned world. in Cuba, that is to say incrementalism and continuity.
It clearly showed that it considered the acting Secretary By taking calculated risks, the American leaders sent General a useful tool for communication and a clear ‘message’ to Moscow.
No doubt the current dialogue, as long as his action took place within a clearly administration will reach conclusions that reinforce defined framework. its belief that the nuclear game is only possible with a Giving U Thant this both secondary and useful minimum number of actors.
The USSR systematically applied to other situations or theaters. revealed how it views smaller countries.
These episodes b) The Soviet government clearly showed that, in a situation will have profound consequences which do not seem to where the other camp has the initiative and events are have been analyzed in Moscow. moving fast, it loses some of its confidence.
Consequences So M Zorin [Soviet permanent representative at the UN] was visibly surprised by the question of M a) The agreement is not complete.
The missiles are being sent Stevenson during the Security Council debate.
Khrushchev contradicted himself in his correspondence Soviet ships going to Cuba are inspected by the Red Cross, with M Kennedy.
This inspection had not informed his communist allies. will likely not last long.
As to the installations in Cuba, More importantly, the Russians proved incapable of the Cubans are opposed to their inspection, and we can ‘horse-trading’ their withdrawal.
The American promise imagine that M Mikoyan is butting heads not to invade, regardless of its value, is only a promise, with Castro on this point.
The United States will thus while the missiles are already on the boats.
At no time, maintain their aerial surveillance and their ‘quarantine.’ with the exception of the unexplainable Turkish episode15, New incidents can occur.
On is ending with a clear success for the United States; for the 11th of September, however, in the communique the Russians, this is a setback; as for the Cubans, this announcing the sending of weapons to Cuba, Berlin leaves them in a precarious situation. had been mentioned several times.
It is at this moment b) The Organization of the American States was that a delay of two months had been granted by M strengthened, the Atlantic Alliance was reassured, Khrushchev.
All of this indicates that between the 24 American prestige has increased, even though the legal and 28 of October, the Soviet leaders improvised when basis of the American action was greatly criticized at the facing the threat of nuclear war.
The telegram number beginning. 4244 of M de Courcel [French c) The ‘socialist’ camp, on the other hand, faces a new crisis.
In fact, he still seems to dispose of a great margin of action to withdraw.
See Charles de Gaulle-Roland Margerie meeting, 4 June d) Khrushchev’s situation in the USSR does not seem 1963, Ministère des Affaires Etrangères Français, Cabinet du weakened for the moment.
We noted no signs of discord Ministre, Couve De Murville, Vol.5; Maurice Couve de Murvilleduring the 7th November celebrations.
It is true that in Gerhard Schroeder meeting, 12 November 1965, Ministère des the USSR, internal crises only emerge slowly.
Without Affaires Etrangères Français, Cabinet du Ministre, Couve De more precise information, we can attribute little value to Murville, Vol.1. the explanations according to which Khrushchev became 3 Jean Lacouture.86.
It seems more realistic to us to leave Khrushchev secret mission to inform General de Gaulle in advance of the with his responsibilities in this affair and its outcome. measures that the United States was planning to take towards e) At the current time, the Soviet leaders do not seem to Cuba. want to start a new crisis.
On the 7th November, they 5 In this letter, President Kennedy explained that the spoke moderately on Berlin.
Indeed, it attempt to suddenly change the balance of power in order to seems that the Russians, during 1962, under-estimated gain compensation from Washington.
We must, moreover, be character, the United States’ determination to maintain conscious of the role that strategic considerations have bases in the world in the absence of a general disarmament played and play for the Soviet leaders.
The current period agreement, and of the essentially bilateral nature of Sovietshould be used to draw common conclusions from this American confrontation in Cuba.
The Foreign Office believed that the destination planned by the Cubans for the missiles and the Soviet diplomat had received instructions to convince military material that came from the bases that were being the British government to act as a mediator and propose a currently dismantled. meeting between Khrushchev and Kennedy.
Faced with the 13 This circular telegram was sent by courier to the posts attitudes of Douglas-Home, who had stuck to the question of in Abidjan, Bangui, Brazzaville, Buenos-Aires, Cotonou, the nuclear weapons in Cuba, his interlocutor had given up Fort-Lamy , Libreville, Luxembourg, New on fulfilling his instructions.
He did not believe that a summit conference was needed Supreme Soviet promoted a certain number of high officers for the moment. and created a title of admiral of the navy, awarded to Admiral 18 On 28th October, the letters essentially addressed the Sergei Gorghkov.
Like them, it was a post-colonial country and a late but relations between the two countries remained low key industrializer.
Nevertheless, it was in conflict with the Arab and trade ties negligible.
As a result, Prato had no contacts world – a powerful voting bloc in international forums such within the Cuban government and virtually his only source as the United Nations – and was therefore treated as a pariah by counof information was the Brazilian ambassador.
The budget of the it succeeded in creating adherents, information was plentiful; Israeli program was miniscule compared to Cold War aid when countries shunned Israeli aid, relations remained cool giants such as the US, the Soviet Union, and even China, but and domestic politics as well as the foreign policies of these it had a large impact.
Israel was a development success story, countries remained opaque, at least to Israeli eyes. it specialized in semi-arid agriculture and the advisors it sent were considered sturdy, efficient, hard-working and down to earth.
For all these reasons, several Third World countries welcomed Israeli technical advisors, and Israel was able to successfully use foreign aid as a vehicle to open new markets and DOCUMENTS establish diplomatic relations in Africa and Latin America.
This explains why some of the most revealing documents in this short section originated from contacts with Brazilian Report from Cultural Attaché, Israeli diplomats.
According to historian Edy Kaufman, already Embassy, Rio de Janeiro, “Brazil-Cuban“n 1961, the director general of the Israeli Ministry of Latin American Relations,” 18 January Agriculture, Itzhak Levi, studied the possibilities of technical 1962 assistance to Brazil.
In contrast to the abundance of information that Israel Cuba would agree to become a neutral country (“like received from the Brazilians, Israel knew very little about the Finland”) and OAS members would work with United States and internal Cuban deliberations in Havana.
This would Israel was an American ally, Castro seemed to have a soft spot ensure Cuba of non-interference in its internal affairs.
On the for the Jews, seeing them as the great victims of World War other hand, Cuba would commit to certain things regarding II while maintaining relations with Israel after taking power the sources of its weapons and propaganda in the continent.
Barbour told me later that he was impressed by the PM’s According to the ambassador, Cuba would fully accept the ability to focus on the crux of the matter… Brazilian proposal to create a committee that would examine Arad [Head, North America Desk, Foreign the possibility of a “modus vivendi” with the Cuban governMinistry] ment.
Minister proposing that the government together with other countries in Latin America take a position which would isolate Cuba by severing diplomatic relations.
It is interesting to note that the Foreign The Crisis in Cuba is causing public panic.
Yesterday until Minister responded by saying that this memo “showed unalate hours there were long lines in front of the stores.
Many nimity on the principle of non-interference.” products such as oil, sugar, salt, etc. were sold out.
Until I talked to him he did not know what A The Brazilian government had been making strenuthe Secretary General’s response was to Khrushchev’s offer… ous efforts to convince Castro to to accept observers [i.e., inspectors] from the United Nations or any other party which would Komey monitor the dismantlement of the bases.
In view of his refusal, several other proposals were aired which were not prepared in advance just to keep the negotiations going, but all for naught.
The content of the Bodrov met with the meeting on the 31st was secret and both sides promised not Foreign Minister and submitted to her to leak any details. the Soviet announcement on Cuba from the 23rd.
During the ensuing conversation, he said that Soviet ships were ordered C U Thant said that the Americans insisted on sending not to get into the crisis zone.
But Khrushchev in his last observers, and the Cubans did not fully understand this fact. letter to Kennedy pointed to the need to end the quarantine within a month at the latest… the Soviet government[, D On the night between the 27th and the 28th, the said Bodrov,] appealed to the Israeli government to use its President called the Brazilian influence to forestall a military holocaust.
The minister said ambassador to tell of an imminent United States attack within the next that Israel had a well-known position that supported peace 24 hours and asked for Brazil’s intervention.
Israel’s influence in the current circumstances night, the ambassador received a cable from Goulart repeatwas limited.
Following an instruction to approach the a United Nations member to encourage negotiations and avoid military Cubans, he asked them to accept observers as the only alternaconfrontation… tive to an American invasion, but the Cubans were not willing to agree.
So much for what the ambassador had Republic, Guatemala, Haiti, Honduras and Panama) issued said.
Castro’s rigid position possibly emanates a statement saying that they would be willing to help the US either from a sense of despair or a feeling of strength.
After blockade over Cuba by sending their navies as well as using he understood that the Soviets were unwilling to confront the other measures.
US over Cuba, he was trying to exploit their [i.e. the Although Brazil was not part of that group it did join the Soviets’] interest in reaching a compromise and extort them 23 October 1962 decision and by doing so put in doubt its by putting forward extreme former declarations regarding sovereignty etc.
One should positions which foil their plans. note that at that time a certain rumor had spread according to which the Brazilian ambassador to the OAS, who particiF The points Castro presented as a sufficient guarantee for pated in the council meeting on 23 October 1962, allegedly the security of his country against the United States attack were actually voted for the joint decision although he received no instrucdemands from Moscow that went behind his back and agreed tions from his government as to how to vote.
However this to dismantle the bases in exchange for the United States non-intervenrumor was quickly disproved when the Brazilian ambassador tion.
This was a propaganda victory for order to be reprimanded – and explained publically that he Castro.
The game is very dangerous right now because there had acted under instructions and in full coordination with is no way of telling Castro’s response. the government.
Moreover, sources close to the ambassador had explained that he would not have dared voting without Prato instructions from the prime minister and foreign minister.
Jerusalem, Israel; obtained and translated from Hebrew by Guy But if we look at the whole affair objectively we will see Laron.] that there is no contradiction.
The Brazilians said what they said in early October when the issue that was discussed had only regional implications.
During the next three weeks events developed in a completely different fashion and Cuba became a Cold War issue… In these circumstances Brazil had Letter from Arie Meyron, Counselor, Israeli to stand with the rest of Latin America to support the West.
Embassy in Rio de Janeiro, to the Head of It was no longer a question of different shades of neutralthe Latin American Desk, Israeli Foreign ity… That said, Brazil is still looking for ways, essentially for Ministry, “Brazil-Cuba”, 7 November 1962 domestic reasons, to sweeten the pill and create the impression that there was continuity … I am most interested in your query regarding Brazil’s from early October … initiative to create a nuclear-free-zone in Latin America.
President Kennedy’s declaration regarding a blockade over I had a meeting today with ambassador Cuba.
In addition to that decision, several Latin American Bernardes deputy minister of foreign affairs.
This pulls the rug under the according to which all Latin American countries would agree idea of Brazil conducting “an independent foreign policy.” to create a nuclear free zone including an effective inspection American aid money would, from now on, be conditioned regime.
Such an arrangement would allow Castro to admit upon Brazilian compliance with American wishes. inspectors without losing face.
MFA 3394\19, Israel State Archive , Jerusalem, to lift the veil of secrecy that currently surrounded the discusIsrael; obtained and translated from Hebrew by Guy Laron.] sions between the Soviet and the Cubans.
He also said that they planned to pass a resolution at the Security Council Notes declaring Latin America, Africa and the Middle East nuclear free zones but were unable to do so due to French opposi1 Jacob Abadi, Israel’s Quest for Recognition and Acceptance in tion.
Besides these various Union and several of the Kremlin’s Warsaw Pact allies international issues, bilateral Soviet-Cuban discussions also in Eastern Europe.
The journey came at a sensitive moment had now perennial subjects to cover—the parlous state of the in both the communist world Cuban economy and the level and nature of Soviet-bloc aid, and in the broader Cold War.
In Moscow, it was still a time and the continuing rift between Havana and Moscow over of transition following the October 1964 overthrow of Nikita the best means to promote revolution in Latin America (and Khrushchev, and this was the most senior Cuban figure to by extension the Third World), with the Cubans favoring come to meet the new leadership since then.
However, the pened, the deepening Sino-Soviet schism coincided with a CWIHP Bulletin is pleased to present translated records of plunge in Sino-Cuban relations, burying Havana’s hopes of exchanges with the Cuban defense minister from three of not only improving their own bilateral relations with Mao Moscow’s Warsaw Pact allies—the Poles, the Bulgarians, and but even, perhaps, trying to mediate between Mao and the the Czechoslovaks.
These records, procured from communist post-Khrushchev Soviet leadership in Moscow—in early party files in archives in Warsaw, Sofia, and Prague, offer February , Ernesto “Che” considerable fresh evidence both on Cuba’s relations with Guevara had visited Beijing, but had disappointing talks the Soviet bloc—political, economic, and military—and that failed to surmount differences, and unlike his prior visit on Cuban views of the international , he was not received personally by the situation at a time of global and communist-world turbulence.
In particular, in February figure Carlos Rafael Rodriguez and a top Czechoslovak party and March 1965—following communist guerrilla assaults official.
We did not have a clear picture as decades after the events recounted here, when he formally to your position regarding the controversy 6 within the succeeded his ailing brother in 2008 as Cuba’s president.-international workers’ movement.
When this dispute maniJ.H. fested itself in the harshest ways, it seemed to us that you were positioning yourselves somewhere in the middle and that you were not declaring yourself clearly.
This speech Cuban Defense Minister Raúl Castro was directed against the aggression of the United States imperialists and Polish Leader Władysław Gomułka, towards Vietnam.
It was not difficult for us to decipher to Warsaw, 20 March 1965 whom it was addressed.
It contains a sharp criticism of the CPC’s position towards Present Vietnam, as well as its position toward the international workers’ movement.
Czesak building a party which, as we know, is in the process of being built.
You surely must have some ideas regarding these matFrom the Cuban side ters.
Carlos Olivares Sanchez – Cuba’s ambassador in Moscow Raul Castro Fernando L Flores Ibarra – Cuba’s ambassador in Warsaw The news about the divergences 7 After exchanging a few remarks on the subject of the destrucreached us in 1960.
We saw how they were developing and tion in Warsaw and its reconstruction, and about a number how the polemics were sharpening, how it turned into a heatof Polish citizens who died in the last war, Cde.
R Castro ed 8 struggle and what damage it caused to the unity of wishes to express his thanks one more time for the invitation the socialist camp and the international workers’ movement. to Poland extended by Cde.
We could not he highly values cooperation with the Polish delegation, with assume any position at that time, as not everything was clear which he had a few conversations at a meeting in Moscow. to us.
Cuba’s position is undoubtedly known to us, but he would Some were leaning to one side while others to another.
At that be willing to inform or explain what may be of interest to us. time our main task was the consolidation and protection of our revolution.
Gomułka We cannot help but appreciate the activities of counterrevolutionaries in the United States of America as well as We are delighted with your visit.
Kliszko invited you on those in countries of Latin America which are conducting behalf of our Political Bureau – he consulted with us on this intensive training for counter-revolutionaries.
We advised that he take advantage of this opportunity in their countries is very weak for their activities.
It was difficult for us to distinguish 9 within We had already realized a little earlier that the Americans the polemics which were conducted; the positions taken were up to something.
Our intelligence informed us about by the CPSU and the CPC on the same issue were a sudden meeting in Washington and the fact that senators extremely different.
We did not possess sufficient knowledge had been brought down by planes and helicopters.
We were in order to take any position. convinced that this had to do with us.
After a meeting we Given the abovementioned reasons we could not drag the decided to announce mobilization.
After lunch, on the same day [22 workers’ movement and the socialist camp.
We understood October 1962], Fidel decided to announce the mobilization. that placing missiles in Cuba was in the interest of the I wanted to postpone it for a few hours since such a mobilizasocialist camp as well as that of Cuba.
If it were only for tion is very costly, but Fidel did not consent to it and he was Cuba we would have never agreed to it.
After a few hours Kennedy gave his speech and this is installation since we believed that it was in the interest of how a crisis in the Caribbean Gulf began.
How could it have been possible when of peace, its defender, and we instead became advocates of the thermonuclear war.
Rusk has recently stated that We agreed in absolute confidence without demanding nothing like this exists. any detailed definition of its causes.
Here we demonstrated We had never placed and will not place our national intera total lack of experience.
After signing the agreement with ests before general interests; that is, the interests of the socialthe USSR regarding this issue, Khrushchev was to visit Cuba ist camp.
We are separated from you by 6 thousand km; we do within 6 months and to disclose, to legalize this fact publicly, not have any alliance of a broader nature, or even a bilateral as this was to assume an official nature.
Our security is contingent on an oral agreement with a I went to Moscow at that time in order to president who is already dead. clear up the matter.
We were convinced that we could not A big misunderstanding arose when our nation found out hide this fact from foreign intelligence, which was conductabout the withdrawal of the Soviet troops.
At that time the ing activities on our soil, and that this fact would be known necessity arose to reveal before the nation the fact of a diverbefore it was officially announced.
The Soviet ours was not met with any understanding either, but if we did Union is surrounded by United States military bases and if Americans not do this, it could have been worse.
After all we could not start acting up we will send in the entire Baltic fleet to your cover the sun with one finger. rescue.
We then came to the conclusion that the crux of the Since this time we have not had any points of misundermatter was surely the bases and thus creation of a pretext for a standing, except perhaps a letter from Khrushchev which discussion with the United States regarding the liquidation of their bases alluded to the necessity of stating our position towards the surrounding the USSR. divergence within the international workers’ movement.
The fact of the missile installation could not be hidden, In connection with this, we sent Cde. since in order to transport them to certain places roads Dorticos to Moscow , but at the same time had to be built.
Besides, this was a very visible transport, a Khrushchev was removed from power.
This fact was explained line of trucks whose cargo reached 20 meters in length.
Dorticos with regards to health; we demanded that an agreement with regard to this matter be were not told anything else.
We took offence at that; we did announced officially at an earlier date.
This matter was explained to denly found out at breakfast from the us at a later time.
American press about the decision of the USSR to withdraw We do not want to talk about Khrushchev.
We have much the missiles as well as about Khrushchev’s proposition with respect for him, and we are much indebted to him.
However, he made many mistakes, and because After this meeting we decided to dispatch our own delegahe was directing the party, thus the party also made mistakes. tion.
Both sides This had been already overcome, but some issues remained maintained their own point of view.
Mao did not receive as to which we did not persuade the Soviet comrades nor Cde.
Guevara despite the fact that up until this point he did they persuade us.
The received all Cubans who possessed authority to a larger or a experience, however, tells us to be cautious and not to trust lesser degree. anyone blindly.
After this, the Albanians published an article in which We could not be influenced by information flowing from they called the meeting of the parties from Latin America this or that source.
We did not take any position due to all in Havana the Soviet Union’s stratagem.
They stated that these reasons. revisionist parties want to take advantage of the Cuban revoIn the presence of the existing situation, we began [the lution, but that they were convinced that the Cuban party talks] with the parties in Latin America where there were also would not allow itself to be dragged into this. specific divergences; some which were our fault and some We did not agree with the nature of the previous meeting which were not.
We have our own opinion regarding the proin Moscow and we did not intend to go.
We decided to go cess of revolutionary struggle and tactics, but each party has when we were informed about the change.
These justificathe revolutionary movement, the position with regard to the tions11 influenced the change of our position. divergence as well as bilateral relations.
A series of divergences still exist in the relations between As a result of the meeting we cleared up a series of contenthe USSR and Cuba, but they are indeed bigger with China. tious issues.
Some differences still remained as far as some Nobody, until now, could persuade us as to the benefits flowother matters are concerned, but we established norms of ing from the hitherto polemics as well as to the fractional mutual relations which would preclude deepening of difactivity.
We also decided to dispatch a delegation [headed ing underground devoting most of their work to fighting the by Carlos Rafael Rodriguez] to Moscow and Beijing, which fractional activity. consisted of representatives from nine parties, in order to Here, Raul Castro refers to the details of foreign student present our position with regard to the divergence within the demonstrations in front of the United States Embassy in Moscow, statinternational workers’ movement. ing that he sees this incident as a planned provocation.
Our delegation was very well received in Moscow and All these Chinese actions are taking place at a time when they agreed with our position.
In Beijing, however, as soon North Vietnam is being continuously bombed by the US. as they sat at the table after preliminary niceties, the assaults In this situation, difficulties are being made for the Soviet and accusations began, directed at both present and absent Union in sending aid and the refusal to allow passage of the parties.
This unhealthy attitude of Cuban people. the Chinese as to polemics points to the fact that it will be He asked Cde.
There will be more of you. unconditional surrender of all parties, including the CPSU, He asked how can parties in Latin America develop withand until this takes place, unity is impossible. out any leadership.
After all, We are interested in the active operation of the CPSU. the comrades said, we are working, we are fighting, etc.
Yes, Just as other parties, we cannot help but appreciate the role yes, but you need leadership.
He stated that polemics have to and the position of the CPSU in the international movement. be public, that one can wait for resolving the dispute for eight The new Soviet leadership had already done much good.
One could not discuss anything had undertaken a series of steps which we highly approve of. in light of such arguments.
At that time [i.e., the summer767 autumn of 1964] we expressed our negative opinion regarding war and the territory of the retaliation of imperialism.
We also conveyed our remarks with regard to a decided to make preparations for such a possibility.
These are series of other issues and we will continue to do so. very expensive undertakings.
The majority of facilities have to At the moment the Chinese evoke xenophobia and nationbe built and hidden underground.
Even though our country al hatred through their activities; we saw this among foreign is small we cannot be strong everywhere.
They strive towards a hegemonic role the designed program we were forced to stop a series of works within the workers’ movement.
On the other hand, a series of steps underentirely cut off relations with the socialist camp.
This tion precludes all conversations. is the situation in which we currently find ourselves.
The divergences could be resolved through a series of We asked that it not be withdrawn since this may cause conferences.
A mutual line of struggle against imperialism will mistaken calculations on the part of the imperialists, and this contribute towards overcoming the divergences.
We are convinced of brigade serves as a symbolic force, but it is important psychothat.
I am talking about all this in ence of designating a place and time for the conference, and order to facilitate the understanding of our position. we suggested the necessity of creating a friendly atmosphere.
We did not sign the treaty banning exercises using nuclear We are particularly interested in the parties which are weapons since the United States base exists on our soil.
There are such Asian parties with which one can This is how our cause and our position present themselves. cooperate.
W Gomułka We are very concerned about the situation in Vietnam, since the imperialists are attacking it by using new elements.
The Chinese talk so much about a paper tiger, some matters differently,g. the issue of the missiles.
It is difbut they have an example in Vietnam of what this paper tiger ficult for us to know all the details of this issue.
The American imperialists are incessantly weapons, it does not have to use nuclear weapons.
From the time of the that the socialist camp and the USSR cannot defend Cuba in crisis we counted five thousand provocations of a different any other way but by using nuclear weapons.
If a conflict is meant to be, then it will shot through a small window in a fortification with a precibe a nuclear conflict, there is no other way. sion rifle.
If one makes a mistake, then small, we cannot push up-country, as in the end we would one needs to do one’s best in order to minimize the consefall into the sea. quences.
The withdrawal did not strengthen, but weakened The aggressiveness of the enemy intensifies with the degree the socialist camp.
But what could be done if not doing one’s of the increase of divergences within the international workbest to turn around this setback to one’s benefit and to that of ers’ movement and within the socialist camp.
The evidence that this is a peaceful policy matter, we conducted a detailed analysis of the enemy’s capaof the USSR was enhanced by influences within the world bilities and we concluded that we need to revise our plans.
Everyone is aware today that if this fact12 did not accepted the fact that we could become an object of a local exist then things would be better.
The party and the government ism and to the bombing. of a country are responsible for that country’s policy.
I am Our Chinese comrades did not take up this problem. convinced that if there were no divergences then one would They did not want to discuss this subject.
It became clear not even have the Soviet propositions regarding the missiles. to us that the existing situation suits them.
Besides, this is Here, perhaps, exists the seed of Cuba’s misunderstanding of in accord with the line of an interview which Mao Zedong the situation.
It seemed as if in the that the withdrawal of the missiles took place without any interview Mao Zedong was inviting Americans to take aggresconsultation.
One can feel resentful or feel sive actions by stating that the People’s Republic of China offended by the fact that Khrushchev did not consult with will not undertake any steps that would involve it in the you prior to that, but on the other hand, this attests to the Vietnam conflict and that they would react only then when assessment of the situation by the Soviet comrades.
The situthey are attacked and when the Chinese border is crossed. ation at the time was very tense.
One should not exclude the fact Republic of Vietnam by stating that if they took the entire that such a situation may arise, but as long as one can avoid North Vietnam, then they would have 30 million Vietnamese it then one should avoid it.
In a real situation, Cuba would have to the fact that the situation which exists in Vietnam suits the be the first one to face the consequences of nuclear repression.
If the Chinese reasoned ing peculiar about the fact that they refused to agree to let according to the categories of Fidel and the Cuban leaderthe Soviet planes fly to Vietnam.
Neither the Chinese party ship, then perhaps their position could have been right.
But nor the Chinese government want to take a single step which they reason according to other categories.
We also had some would give the United States an excuse to attack them. illusion as to our Chinese comrades.
Nevertheless, we tried Imperialism cannot help but decipher the policy which to understand them and to get to the core of their argument attacks the Soviet Union for not providing aid in the situaby following the principles of proletarian internationalism. tion when one himself does not do anything.
One can draw Afterwards, based on the evidence, we concluded that the various conclusions from such a policy.
Chinese comrades are subordinating their international policy The party as well as the government of China are afraid to that of their narrowly understood national interests, or of United States imperialism.
The basic premise of the Chinese policy more specifically, to their great-power tendencies.
We do not is not to let United States imperialism attack China directly.
Even the official Chinese statements regarding the are typical of all nationalistic countries.
We also did not praise incident in the Gulf of Tonkin corroborate this.
The first one the arguments which were used in the polemics between the was already mild, and in the recent ones the expression that CPSU and the CPC, and in our publications and speeches we “they would give aid” even disappeared.
We stated at our congress what we think of They say more and more that the Vietnamese nation does the policy conducted by them.
It seems to us that our assessnot need help and that it will take care of itself.
Besides, this confirms a series of later events. that it will conquer American imperialism on its own.
Only October Revolution , we talked twice through a unity with the USSR and the socialist camp.
Not to Chinese comrades and, while over there, we also preonly are they not thinking about it, but they are doing everysented twice the situation in Vietnam as a central issue which thing in order not to create any impressions that they would required an agreement and establishing some kind of a line of go for such a unity.
This was an act of outright provocaother side, then one cannot dream of some military solution. tion.
They now put forth such conditions that one can only England is in solidarity with the United States in its actions against hold talks if the Americans withdraw, and when they do Vietnam due to its own interests.
They could have made such withdraw, then the talks can occur only with the National a demonstration in Beijing, and to vent all their hatred.
But Liberation Front and not with the North Vietnamese governnot only did they not do anything in their own country, but ment.
At one wants to do so, then one needs to place the enemy in a time when they are aware of the USSR’s official request for such a situation that one has to destroy and crush the enemy help, and after the refusal for the passage of the Soviet planes. as was done with Hitler in Berlin in order to be able to place It is clear that they want to turn the world opinion and that conditions for absolute capitulation.
I am not inclined to of their own nation in a different direction; that is to portray believe that this fight suits the United States.
We have several the USSR as a partner of the US, and themselves as the only grounds on which to base our assumption that they would advocates of the struggle against imperialism.
In these conditions, howligence that these 4 students got on the plane in a normal ever, they cannot do so.
As for now they are conducting a manner in Moscow, and in Beijing one of them had forgotten policy of harassment, exacerbating the situation and bombing his part and started climbing down the steps.
It is a dead-end street that they are stepping dragged him inside and got him out on the stretcher along into.
These may be amusing facts, but they testify to ner as to strive for a world conflict.
But this can last for a few what methods Chinese propaganda is clinging to. years.
The bombings may be meaningWe had certain illusions, but also many reservations, as less from a military point of view, but they will exhaust the to the policy conducted by Khrushchev.
From a strategic point of view this has repeatedly and we did not hold it inside.
If this were to last for 2-4 years, then one that what Khrushchev was doing gave the Chinese excelcould easily imagine the consequences, as not only a military lent reasons, but he was right on one thing, and that is, that problem, but also an economic problem would arise.
At the time when the Chinese party went comrades said themselves that before the liberation they were for the aggressive and street polemics, it was already being eating rice once a day and now they eat it twice a day.
This is guided by the policy which is being conducted today in a difa great progress.
I am afraid that our Vietnamese comrades may miss the One should see it as certain means of pressuring the United States in current opportunity.
I am afraid that in 2-3 years there will the fight for their interests as a great power.
And this is how they accord with the Chinese line since one would be able to attack present the issue.
This is how it currently looks. the USSR for not wanting to help, for conducting a revisionWe talked with V.[sic; ist policy, and so on.
V Dong during the visit in Moscow . cially at a time when people are badly off.
When Khrushchev At the time he suggested that we look for a way, that we take withdrew the missiles such slogans were also catchy in your advantage of our capabilities towards the facilitation and country.
Not so long ago there were good possibilities for demonstrated even in Moscow, and they beat our students.” such a solution of this issue, and as we see it, the United States would The Albanians are already writing that the United States have gone for it.
Today, the Vietnamese government, informed the USSR that they would be bombing North being under the influence of the Chinese position, refuses a Vietnam.
In other words, it is counting on a military informed about this an hour before.
We talked with him by stating that if they see a they were not starting a war.
The Albanians did not write, possibility of co-opting the South Vietnamese Army, then however, that the Chinese had also been informed about perhaps one could count on such a solution.
The Albanians did not know that the USSR had been US and the South Vietnamese government can organize an informed; the Chinese told them.
The British if it were only for the purpose of examining their reaction.
Ambassador in Warsaw told us about Mao says that a war would unite us and that it would this referring to an Albanian letter .14 The notificreate conditions conducive to unity.
Such statements are not cation was simultaneous in Moscow and in Beijing. serious.
What I am can avoid the war, but in order to do this one needs unity. saying here may seem brutal, far away from the principles of We realize that your country is like an outpost.
Some time ago we had are different countries and different conditions; nevertheless put forth before the Soviet Union that one had to indispensfundamental and mutual matters exist.
Armed forces are very ably come into an understanding with the Chinese and to important to the fight against the internal, and also external, establish a mutual line and in this way protect Cuba.
We do not conditions in which one could not, under any circumstances, have any strategy for such an eventuality.
If we presented this restore a capitalist system. issue to the Chinese today, they would refuse all discussions.
I read somewhere about an estimate that Cuba, based on I don’t know if an attack would not be in their interest.
Two systems exist and one thereby becoming an example for the entire Latin America should think and plan according to these categories.
This country is attacked, this means that the entire system is being is more than any propaganda.
The Chinese do not want to think of it by following well-being with a revolution will not go back to an old [syssuch a framework.
Looking at your conditions, this is not comparable, even In my opinion, many communists in Cuba also did not, and despite the fact that although we are not most advanced relastill do not, understand this.
We are in a difficult situation. tive to our neighbors, there is no possibility in our country We cannot even publicly state that China does not allow the to go back to capitalism under any conditions.
There are no passage for the planes and they know about this. people, there is no one worker, who would say that a factory We are divided by a large precipice; we have no chances for which was either made into a public property or built by him unity.
If such a situaduct such a policy that would take advantage of its reserves tion arose in which out of 81 parties, 80 or 79 parties would to the maximum.
Such a course of industrialization during come to the conference while 2 or 3 parties, including China, the first years, while neglecting agriculture, was false.
One would not participate, this would force the CPC into changalso has to industrialize a country.
Politics is not a free-art type of issue, it has to is agriculture, and it is good that Cuba is following such a be adjusted to the situation.
We know how much of an effort this takes, but perhaps These are wise and experienced people.
They think that as long as they can unless appeasing the need of the people is resolved, then there continue this line, they will do so. will be opportunities for a counterrevolution.
A revolution can only be you say, and that is, that a joint conference with the Chinese is carried out under a great emotional impulse, but even under not realistic.
This is an opposite pole of their policy. such emotionalism which characterizes Cubans and in genI understand you.
I read the most recent speech by Fidel eral the nations of Latin America, it is not an inexhaustible Castro in which he states that one has to give all the assistance source.
As a matter of fact, the Chinese are saying In 1960 a Cde. came to the same thing on the outside.
It could even let in some bourgeoisie party. that we want to impose our prestige.
One can work out In a letter to the US, Khrushchev proposes an internaa plan and guarantee Fidel Castro’s rule,g. following the tional inspection in Cuba.
One has to legalize the we were not asked for our opinion, but also because this revolution.
It is necessary both for the people and for external would be a precedent which would be very dangerous for us. necessities.
If he had written that the inspection was previously agreed to Currently the conditions are worse.
Today you would not gain upon consultation with Cuba, then everything would be fine. 90% of votes.
At the time, Cde. answered that this was not necessary, and that in your country, as well as in other Gomułka countries in Latin America, there is no parliamentary tradition, that there were still bribes, corruption, and that these were complex issues, etc.
This was our first conversation with I do not have any reservations on this issue. someone from your side.
Clearly, each party decides on its own as to its policy and it R Castro learns from its own mistakes.
After all it is known that every country has The Americans reacted to our refusal in such a way that they its own specificity.
Nevertheless, this poses a problem and the conducted their own inspection from the air.
This is why strengthening of a revolution, internally and externally, is not there are all these U2 planes.
All our reservations are with without any meaning. regard to a group of methods with which we do not agree.
The Chinese reactions taught us I personally agree with most of your views.
In addition, your experiences offer a and still are, comrades in Cuba who either had or still have a great help to us.
It may be that perhaps they had undergone although the CP had existed for 30 years. an evolution after recent events.
It is good, however, that when a party makes a decision then everyone is in agreement.
I regret When an old party comes to power it then confronts entirely that we cannot discuss longer. new problems.
Of all things that are valuable within it, only one remains, namely a valuable discipline.
Castro I consider continuing this type of contacts, either in Warsaw The point here is not our time, but the fact that your program or in Havana, as indispensable. does not allow it.
He has done much to patch it up, especially during Fidel Castro’s visit in the USSR [in May We will further discuss with comrades and Cde.
In this context he recalled a vote of the Polish delegation in the UN against the project of denuclearizing Latin America which was aimed at manifesting a position of solidarity with Cuba, even though From a Conversation between the 2nd Poland was the first champion of the idea of denuclearization.
Raul not participate in any meeting aimed at the consolidation of Castro and Zenon Kliszko conducted a conversation, with the international movement.
The Matter of a Former Member of the National the Italian policy from the side of the PUWP, for which he Leadership UPSR – J Ordoqui received an answer that the program of this party is not clear for the Polish side, particularly with regard to the question Cde.
R Castro, on his own initiative, explained the situation of establishing a uniform workers’ party.
Both interlocutors of the suspension of the activities of J Ordoqui, a agreed that unity can be solely hewn 16 based on the former member of the Nationwide Leadership of the UPSR activity of the lower organizations on the subject of concrete and the former vice-president of the Armed Forces.
Assessment of the position of the Romanian Workers’ presidential palace in Havana in 1957.
The Mexican intelligence was also said to be become the new First Secretary of the Romanian Workers’ involved in this issue.
March 1965] and he was asking how a new Romanian policy After the former had been arrested, Ordoqui made the inquiwould be shaped under new conditions.
When, after a long inquiry, Rodriguez admitted agreed that in recent years the RWP17 had been employing to the crime, which he committed, he also revealed the fact a policy characterized by nationalism.
Z Kliszko emphasized the fact forced the Cuban leaders to undertake special cautionary that sometimes the need arises when one has to give up one’s steps.
This caused very seriasked that the materials be handed to him directly or ous complications and it created an ambiguous and unclear through Cuba’s ambassador in Moscow, C Illivares situation for many comrades.
It was also at that time that the Sanchez, through the ambassador [Edmund Cuban leadership acquired evidence in Mexico which testiPszczolkowski] of the PPR fied to the ties of Ordoqui with foreign intelligence.
Relations between the UPSR and the PUWP tape of a conversation which he had with Cuba’s minister of construction, O Cienfuegos, with Cde.
Castro, Ordoqui would have confessed to his guilt if his ment of this crisis, the Cuban leadership concluded that life were spared.
Other comrades from the leadership, howeach new step in the field of inter-party relations must be the ever, rejected such a suggestion through the justification that result of an independent thought process based on concrete adopting different criteria towards members of the former facts and evidence; a result of comprehensive discussions.
Ordoqui’s case is complicated by the fact for the discovery of an existing convergent position of both that it was suitably used by reactionary elements in Latin parties with regard to a series of essential matters.
Some other America and, in the United States an interest with regard problems remained to be discussed.
They are, however, not to the weakening of confidence within the Cuban leadership. fundamental matters.
Drafted by R Czyżycki The Cuban leaders conclude that the current leadership of Prepared in 5 copies the CPSU is assuming a more cautious and proper position with regard to the controversy 20 within the international movement.
Raul Castro Ruz, and a member of the PB CC PUWP, The Cuban specificity contributed to the fact that the Cde.
Zenon Kliszko, on 23 March 1965 leadership of the UPSR does not have to21 attach such great importance to the issue of elections.
Castro, one should not talk about the legalization of the The conversation took place on the initiative of Cde.
R revolution, since it is a legal act if the situation as a whole is Castro, who wished to return to certain matters which were taken into consideration.
It is true, however, that the lack of not exhaustively discussed during the meeting in the CC firm local authority is palpable, thereby causing additional PUWP with the participation of the 1st Secretary of the CC troubles for the revolution.
Władysław Gomułka. change only after the process of establishing a new party has been completed.
R Castro asks that copies of notes of revolutionary forces in Cuba had materialized in the years prepared by the Polish side from the abovementioned 1959-1960, it would have to be carried out based on a multimeeting be delivered to him.
R Castro presented a maneuver of United States imperialism; that it is striving to persuade Cde.
The leaderVietnam by American imperialism as evidence of losing ship of the CPSU, however, did a proper thing by consulting control over the situation in the South, with the comrades from the CP of Venezuela regarding the c) Whether the Polish side believes that the United States would matter.
As a result, the Soviet government will not establish withdraw from Vietnam if it could do so with saving face, relations with Venezuela. d) Whether and, possibly how, will the PPR react to the The guest announced that Cuba was providing aid to the situation in Vietnam.
The guerillas were trained in Cuba and the Cuban comrades were sending weapons to Venezuela.
R Castro agreed that the lack of readiness of both result of carelessness of the Venezuelan guerrillas, part of these sides regarding a political solution of the problems must lead weapons found itself in the hands of the Venezuelan authorito a complicated situation and to the intensification of the ties.
This fact served as a base for putting forth a well-known danger of deepening the feeling of impunity on the side of the accusation against Cuba.
However, these weapons were, in US imperialism, which, in the face of the above, could aim at their entirety, American, and were introduced in great quanexpanding further military actions in this region.
R Castro stated, will never withdraw its moral support psychological and economic (with all implications resulting for the Venezuelan guerillas. from it), which would have to result in long-lasting military actions against North Vietnam.
The position of the PUWP with regard to the conference interest to the fact that the PPR has reasons to believe that the of 81 parties US would withdraw from Vietnam if it were possible to do so with saving face.
R Castro asked, once more, for the explicitness of the the view that the setback of the United States in South Vietnam is more position of the PUWP regarding this matter.
Following the of a political, and not military, nature as well as that the US’s reply of Cde.
R Castro confirmed the fact that the excerpt of the last speech of Fidel Castro, in which he talked about compreCde.
W Gomułka had in hensive aid which Cuba would give to Vietnam had it been mind when, during the meeting in the CC PUWP, when he neighbors with this country, was directed against the PRC. talked about the lack of a mutually-worked-out policy of the socialist camp regarding Cuba’s defense.
Cuba and the Current Situation in Latin America The answer was that the lack of a mutual political position between the CPSU and the CPC, which is due to divergences, Cde.
R Castro, a referral was made to the position assumed by the Minister of Industry Meeting in Cuba, Ernesto Guevara, at the economic seminar of AfroOf comrade Todor Zhivkov – First Secretary of the Central Asian countries in Algeria in February this year.
On behalf of the Central Committee of our party, 24 to the developing countries.
On behalf of the leaders of our country I would One of the biggest merits of the UPSR leadership is like to express our gratitude for the attention paid to me by freedom of discussion and an unrestricted atmosphere inviting the current delegation.
As far as I am concerned, this which enables one to state his individual views.
However, visit is an longstanding obligation of mine which I had to a decision that was once made is observed without perform. exception by all comrades who comprise the Nationwide When we were at the meeting in Moscow, we received Leadership of the UPSR. invitations from the Polish and Hungarian parties.
We wanted to make a visit and exchange opinions with the leaders of these parties.
This seems clear judging by the fact that the time we have at our disposal here, in Bulgaria, is limited.
It Drafted by R Czyżycki has been exactly one month today since I left my country.
The Prepared in 5 copies situation in the world does not allow a person to be outside his country for long.
On another conFrenchmen and Englishmen mean the same to them as we do. venient occasion I will have to come back to Bulgaria again Of course, these are the tendencies. so that I can make a tour of the country and see more things.
Yet Obviously the program that has been worked out now aims practically they aren’t. at enabling me to see many things.
As you know, the Chinese accuse us of being modern As far as our visit to exchange opinions with the Bulgarian revisionists.
Of course, I’m not aware of the exact nature of the questions that would all of this is not true.
Both the Turks and the Greeks know our interest you regarding our country.
We conditions created in Vietnam now. cannot respond to it, cannot disprove it.
But the Algerian Our country’s stand on the international communist friends and /Ahmed/ Ben Bella know well whether or not we movement is, to a certain extent, known.
The headquarters for supplying er the comrades would like me to elaborate more on it.
It was our organization evident that our party is interested in our Bulgarian comrades’ that was in charge of procurement for the Algerian army.
We would be extremely glad to listen to some socialist countries, for the Algerian army. information on the situation in Cuba.
Probably we could first supplies for the nationalliberation movement in that country. of all state our opinion.
I will briefly opportunity has arisen and we haven’t responded by helpwant to dwell on some problems concerning our internal ing with weapons and staff.
The Chinese have still said nothing on the help on the spur of the moment.
And I must admit that Romanian problem. thanks to our party’s great underground experience, we have had almost no failures when transferring arms.
The Chinese with arms to arrive in Algeria during the blockade was a are seriously courting the Romanians now.
As soon as the events in Cyprus started, they this is the fact that the leader of their delegation at [former asked us for arms.
The people of Cyprus armed themselves Romanian communist party leader Gheorghe] Gheorghiuwith our own, Bulgarian arms.
It is more convenient to get arms from us as well as the previous ones headed by Gheorghiu-Dej, do instead of the Soviet Union.
We can say that regarding on these issues. the principles of international development they firmly stand on the basis of the Moscow declaration.
We would not say anything on this matter, and low a policy of cooperation and balance with all.
But we are worried about what’s going on now in the international communist movement, in the socialist countries.
In the past our party used to have great public speakers, We discussed these issues in the Politburo and in the Central traditions in public speaking.
We had public speakers that Committee after the Moscow meeting and we came to the would start speaking in the morning and continue in the conclusion that the existing discord cannot be overcome.
There is a comrade of ours who is still alive but is we do have to make efforts. ill now.
Once he started speaking, fainted, was poured with water, raised to his feet and continued speaking.
The Soviet comrades are much more patient than the Chinese who were famous for their patience.
Of course, the international communist movefact becomes evident exactly in these disputes in the internament will not yield to and take the Chinese stand, this is tional communist movement.
Hence we can say that our relaimpossible, but there are and will be difficulties.
The intertions with the Soviet Union are the same as are our relations national communist movement, which has a rich experience with the other socialist countries.
Many times we have declared in public that we agree and tradition, is diverse and cannot be characterized by a to argue with the Americans, of course, on the basis of a single political platform as the Chinese leaders propose.
If they want to is most important and most dangerous in our opinion is not establish diplomatic and trade relations we also agree on the the ideological dispute, although it is of great importance. same basis––on that of total equality.
Secondly, we they will be closer to us if we break our ties with the socialmake it possible for the American imperialists to become even ist community countries.
Our response is that they would more aggressive. have to wait for 10 thousand years and moreover we have no intentions of making deviations from the road we’re folNow, after being granted this loan we can say we are relylowing.
This shall I put it, sometimes our relations with Cuba are depenmeans killing a small people like the Vietnamese.
The aggresdent on certain bodies which frequently view things from siveness of the Americans is increasing, that’s what concerns their own viewpoint, have a quite constricted outlook.
This is a precedent and we are worried about the way the probably at a summit meeting in the future we will be able to problem will be solved.
My personal opinion is, since I haven’t clarify some issues and to better determine the directions and taken my party’s opinion, that the problem cannot be solved rate of our cooperation. by wanting South Vietnam to fight against imperialism.
You took up the whole time, so that none is left attacked, we would rather be attacked but let South Vietnam for me now. continue the struggle.
There probably are such weapons tive conditions for us to win the peasants, it was not until one there because there are nuclear submarines there.
That is why year had passed that such conditions were created––when the we cannot sign such an agreement while there are such weapstruggle became more acute. ons on our territory.
The authority of the party of Venezuela in Latin America On the other hand the war in Latin America continues, is great.
Although some accused it of adventurism not long in Venezuela, Columbia, Guatemala, and Honduras.
It has penare greater or lesser difficulties in some places, the extent to etrated most deeply into Venezuela’s armed forces; it has full which the communists participate in some places is differcontrol of the students.
Our party thinks that there is developing. are conditions for a revolutionary, armed struggle; there is a We provide the appropriate assistance with regard to revolutionary situation in Latin America––in Mexico, Costa our own situation.
There are about 40,000 people in the Rica, Uruguay, Chile and all other Latin American counVenezuelan army.
We think that the only way to seize power is via armed guard the petroleum shelves in Venezuela.
It is an enormous struggle, the massive struggle of the people, the way things country—800,000 km, one of the richest countries in Latin are now in Venezuela.
Recently, petroleum fields have been discovered has the right to solve these problems.
We don’t think and do there that can satisfy the world’s needs for 40 years.
They even not delude ourselves that the bourgeoisie with the imperialhave a well-developed heavy industry, metallurgy, plants that ists together in these countries will easily give up power. were created in [former Venezuelan President Gen.Marcos The bourgeoisie and the imperialists together did their best Perez] Jimenez’s time so that he could plunder [the country’s to win the elections.
Now these plants are closed, they do not function. had won, there would have been a coup d’état.
Yet we considered the line of struggle in these four countries, nothing is used.
There are mountains of ore, for which there including Chile, appropriate. is no need to go underground, they only have to be loaded.
For instance, [Brazilian communist party leader Luis Every ton of ore that the imperialists take from Venezuela is Carlos] Prestes assured us that a coup d’état was impossible in bought at a very low price.
We told him we thought the same, we even told him The imperialists, the monopolists, have a plan to use these that a coup d’état was possible in the USA, although they riches.
They have an Alliance for Progress in Latin America have other methods there—they kill one president and put and send their overstock there.
Less than six months had passed there would be less bread today, more tomorrow.
Even only after we talked with Prestes before a coup d’état took place. what the Americans plunder in Venezuela is enough to cover This surprised the party, it was not prepared for the coup what they give to the Alliance for Progress. d’état.
And Venezuela is the most important party now in We also have an organization to help other countries, of Latin America.
Imperialism cannot do the same things in which comrade T Zhivkov already spoke, but having in mind Venezuela as it did in Vietnam – send some people there your experience, we have made some mistakes in this respect. and rely on puppet governments.
Because Venezuela’s present We prepared partisans and the enemy knew that.
We have a army would not like to fight against the partisans, as was the full right to do this but they are preparing counter-revolutioncase in Cuba.
Because what happens then is the following— aries against us in all these countries.
To tell you in private, when a military unit is sent there to fight, the general remains we sent a huge quantity of weapons at a convenient time to in a given town while the soldiers are in another, so that Venezuela, but it was not from the socialist countries.
It is clear were weapons left in Cuba and we sent them into Venezuela. that the National Liberation Front had no support among the The weapons were American-made.
We have hundreds of tons of weapons that Let us recall the fact that after the ex-dictator we have thus leased.
Betancourt yielded power, he won the elections relying on the The struggle in Venezuela is becoming more acute.
We peasants and lost the elections because the peasants, living in have not discussed this issue in the party, but having in hope of an agricultural reform, promised by Betancourt, did mind the latest events in Vietnam, I think that when the not support him.
Moreover, the persecution and repressions struggle in Venezuela becomes more acute, they same thing of the government against the peasants makes them unite that is happening now in North Vietnam, will happen to with the partisan movement.
That is why we are even more interested in the artillery from Czechoslovakia, but we couldn’t.
However, way the problem is solved in South and North Vietnam. we managed to buy some quantities from China.
A few Under the chairmanship of comrade Fidel, the main months later exactly this incident in the gulf took place after General Staff leaders, some members of our party’s secretariat which we started preparing our defense more intensely. started checking our defense plans, our defense strategy someYou already know how the process developed, under what where around the middle of last year.
We started analyzing the pretext they bombarded us and they may reach the canals. extent to which an enemy attack was possible and reached the This can happen in Cuba at any moment, we expect it to following conclusion. happen.
From Regarding the counter-revolution—the internal one and the October crisis onwards, till February this year, the one that has been exported from Cuba.
In spite of there have been about 5,000 provocations of various nature the existence of 1,000 dens where it could be prepared, a against Cuba,. counter-revolution would be crushed, since our country is an For instance, one or two airplanes are circulating above island and it would be difficult for the contra revolutionaries Cuba’s territory.
We cannot take them down due to varito come to our country without the interference and support ous considerations; they fly at a low altitude.
This is a our security organs we have been fighting with greater succonsequence of Khrushchev’s declaration that each territory cess.
Attacks, such as the ones at Playa Giron are should be inspected but we cannot allow our country to be possible.
The Yankees say they have the right to fly over a number of simultaneous attacks with the help of the Soviet our country in order to check whether it has nuclear weapUnion, of Bulgaria and some other socialist countries.
You can imagine what this could mean to a country’s must admit that when the attack at Playa Giron took place defense—to have airplanes fly over the country and inspect it. , the tanks had just arrived and we didn’t have Of course, we could take these airplanes down and thus not people to use them.
There were tankers and artillerymen, allow them to make such inspections, but Khrushchev has who learned how to maneuver with these weapons on their told us not to do it, otherwise he wouldn’t give us anti-aircraft way from Havana to Playa Giron.
We have to reach an agreement as to whether or not enced leadership of comrade Fidel.
This should happen at an the heroism of the workers and peasants who fought there. appropriate moment.
Lately they took a whole brigade as captives but we suffered heavy losses. have taken the form of people hiding near the border at the Attacks such as those at Playa Giron are not possible now.
Two of An American invasion against us I think is possible but very our people have been wounded and one has been killed.
For instance they enter our measures in our plans, each of which costs 30 million pesos. territory through customs and set it on fire, while the posts We had to stop construction of many sites, roads etc.
The latter fact time when we condemn these provocations, the Yankees say is difficulty for us, since we are a small, long island.
Their that we have instigated them. planes fly at low altitudes, take off from their different miliThe Yankees pass near the border and approach our posts tary bases, including Miami––shoot and leave.
Earlier only two or three people did throw flammable materials, which can cover the plantations that sort of thing while now it is done by 15 to 20 people. and on the next day everything will be burning.
They have Those provocations have become more frequent after the missiles.
We had to make a big purchase for such an antievents that took place in Vietnam.
The time will come when quantity of anti-aircraft missiles, but we have to add three the Yankee entering our territory will approach our posts. batteries to each group of such missiles, so that the antiOur country is small, narrow and if we continue to retreat aircraft defense can act.
We know we have the duty to avoid that they had been attacked and beaten at a demonstration complications in the international relations, we all know in front of the United States Embassy.
At some places we let trained was even not permitted by the authorities.
That was also dogs kill people. not due to the fact that the students had been refused the All the points I’ve made so far make us think lately that hall that they had been traditionally given to celebrate their what has happened in Vietnam could happen to us as well, anniversary.
Our delegation, which was in Moscow on 7 November This is the case with North Vietnam that is bombarded in , met with the Romanian delegation led by comrade... different places, under different pretexts.
Comrade…[name missing in record—trans.] posed the question that these At present the situation in the country is normal although problems should be solved and the Soviet Union should be we do not underestimate the enemy’s activity.
They said it was a matter of prestige, of ideological is 2,500 meters long.
There are 250,000 people in Cuba who do not by severely attacking the Soviet Union and having ever closer agree with the revolution’s principles.
They have been given their relations with the Western capitalist world.
These are usually paracontradictions become obvious—they accuse all parties that sites, ex-bourgeois. do not think the same way as they do of revisionist views.
But We have had success in agriculture in several respects. the Romanians have not told us anything in this respect yet.
We are already experiRecently there was a meeting of the enced; we do not make as many mistakes.
This meeting was very good in prospects to be very good in the latter respect. all its aspects.
A 9–member delegation that insisted on stopRegarding the state of the international communist moveping the disputes in public was sent to Moscow.
Our comment and relations with other parties. rades from the CPSU understood these issues well and agreed We completely share T Zhivkov’s opinion regarding with us.
At the end of 1959 when we knew that the enemy to the end when the issues were discussed.
Rather, [the Cuban was preparing an attack against Cuba we wanted to buy weapdelegation heard] criticism against all parties and hysteric fits ons from wherever possible.
We bought rifles from Belgium, phrases regarding the other parties were abundant.
There were but the imperialist circles interfered and the supply failed. many cases of tactlessness and insults.
Uruguay has 2. million inhabitants, but Yugoslavia to buy mine-throwers.
You do not cause us great problems with the Americans, so that the deal deserve to live on your own.
We insist on stopping the public discussion. in their theoretical journals, but we hadn’t interfered in them Although there was one delegate from our country among since we had thought that it would not be to the benefit of these 9 delegates, some things against our party were also said. the communist movement.
We share the opinion that was Later on, we sent a 3-member delegation on behalf of our expressed here.
We have just withdrawn all our students party to discuss these issues again.
Since then our relations have been improving. them and they are kept in a good state.
We We are extremely grateful to the Soviet party, to the Soviet needed anti-aircraft defense and some other things, which we government.
Afterwards, the Albanian press published an elaborate article, It knows that the revolution may continue thanks to the help attacking all Latin American parties as revisionist. of the socialist countries, but above all thanks to the support We have had personal contacts with the Chinese party; or help of the Soviet Union.
We must admit that they were we have had talks regarding the problem of the internaextremely patient with us. tional communist movement.
We are convinced that they would not agree to a conference; they disagree with unity in general.
The ing to us, even some of the problems you posed are worth direction that the discussion itself had taken, the insults etc. thinking over.
But we must emphasize that our views on that appeared everywhere, the untruthfulness of many facts. international problems, on the problems relating to the unity All this made it seem to us, on the one hand, that everyof the socialist countries, of the international communist thing is really that way, on the other—that not everything movement coincide. is the way it seems to be.
On this basis we were not able to As far as the situation in your country is concerned, we are make a concrete, correct analysis.
Now we are witnessing aware of the difficulties, the difficult conditions in which you the attack against the American Embassy , the work and that is why I will once again take advantage of this aim of which is to challenge the Soviet Union.
Many Cuban meeting to declare that we will be on your side now, tomorstudents participated in this demonstration.
I have direct row, under any conditions and circumstances, even if a war information from them.
Chinese and some Vietnamese stubecomes necessary, if a defense of Cuba is necessary.
This is dents have invited Cuban students to sign a letter—a protest not a disputable question in our country, this is a firm stand. and to send it to the Soviet government.
We already know of your decision. the Beijing newspapers, radio etc. started spreading these things, the way each of them grasped them.
You should never doubt that we will always informed about the obstacles created by the Chinese to the be together with you, even under the most difficult circumquick arrival of Soviet airplanes with arms for Vietnam.
We do not doubt the fact that it is hard for you not Soviet comrades never deal with this question, to go and to yield to these provocations.
Even if these provocations spread propaganda in the way the Chinese were not present, it would have been surprising if they do.
Fidel Castro’s last speech mentioned something about weren’t there. that.
If they would like to argue with us on these issues, we will argue with them as many times as they want.
It is clear that they are no longer victims of Khrushchev’s typical earlier ferocity.
There are a lot more facts such as these that contribute to bringing us closer, to strengthening our relations.
We have always told the Soviet comrades that there are certain differences between us and that we cannot argue on these issues.
Resolution Information about a friendly visit of the Czechoslovak military delegation in Cua on the issue Information about a friendly visit of the Czechoslovak military delegation in Cuba From 30.3-9. 1965, a delegation of the Czechoslovak Resolved: Peoples Army visited Cuba; the delegation submits a brief report The CPCZ CC Presidium accepts the information of about the stay and talks with leading Lomsky about the friendly visit of the Cs. military delegation representatives of Cuba. in Cuba.
The visit occurred at the time of heightened acts of aggresATTACHMENT I sion of the USA against the Democratic Republic of Vietnam, and thus it was regarded as highly important in Cuba.
It Attachment I contributed to strengthening of Cs.-Cuban friendship and to strengthening of the friendship in arms of our armies.
I Stage – before arrival of Raul Castro from a trip in Attachment III Europe and a visit of the Cuban provinces outside of Havana.
Stage – after return of Raul Castro, and the stay in Havana Attachment IV The delegation held a number of cordial and unofficial meetings with troops of the Cuban Revolutionary Armed 1.
Report of important conversations in connection with Forces and with workers.
During the visit, the delegation met with number of Soviet advisors and with the main advisor General Colonel Shkadov.
A T T A C H M E N T IV A general draft is in effect in Cuban armed forces for the first year.
The Army is the only highly organized force in Cuba – it is underpinning the Government.
A meeting of the Cs. delegation’s leader was initially affected Apparent shortage of educated cadres.
Officers trained in the CSSR hold remained at the level of the 1st Deputy Juan Almeida who important positions of regiment commanders, lieutenants takes over the function of Minister of Armed Forces in the and higher.
A visit at the Joint Staff in the absence of Raul Castro The main goals will be achieved but other results will be less remarkable.
The Cuban side emphasized that the current situation warranted strengthening of the Before the departure, Fidel Castro authorized an imporanti-aircraft defense.
There was no concrete discussion about tant discussion with Raul Castro and the Joint Chief of Staff conditions for delivery of these weapons, especially payment Sergio de Valle.
At a dinner with the Joint Staff, where R Castro The friendly visit accomplished its objective. was not present, C Langer asked Almeida about delivery conAccording to the CPCZ CC resolution of November 10, ditions but the Cuban side did not specify these conditions, 1964, Raul Castro with a delegation of the Revolutionary and did not do so later either.
The PRR has of these weapons under the most favorable conditions within gone as far as Yugoslavia, if not farther and that our capabilities.
He emphasized that Cuba’s strong this issue is still unresolved and will require close attention. friendship with socialist camp countries did not keep her from having her own policy, appropriate for the objective condi2.
Regarding this, he pointed out the current development in Latin America where inflation and economic difficulties The conversation was very cordial, even though rather offiare increasing exponentially and making the situation much cial.
It turns out that the policy of the IMF [International on behalf of the delegation about the stay of the delegaMonetary Fund] and the Alliance for Progress is a complete tion and its impressions and findings.
That destabilizes the situation in Central America and ings of the leading representatives of the CPCZ and the in majority of other LA countries where Government, above all of Novotny, which greetrevolutionary struggle is again intensifying.
Information mutually interesting tion and revolutionary forces made serious mistakes in Brazil to both parties was shared.
It was information regarding the , also Jagan in British Guyana, economic development of the both countries, and various and others.
The big problem is that revolutionary movements current political issues in connection with the USA aggresadvertise ahead their agenda and objectives, instead of consion in Vietnam, West German militarism and its efforts to fronting imperialism with hard reality.
He pointed out the acquire nuclear weapons, and the Moscow consultations of need for the correct tactics.
Both sides emphasized because it has not yet nationalized French oil concessions.
It the need for unity of the ICM [International Communist is all right to continue with such a policy as long as consoliMovement] and joint actions of socialist countries against dation of the revolution requires it, which is the first priority. imperialism and aggression.
The Cuban side pointed out that He has exchanged opinions about it with the situation in Vietnam creates a precedent that could be Ben Bella.
The group around Brizzola, who unlike repeated in other places, namely in Cuba, if the aggressors are Goulart always showed not decisively condemned by countries of the socialist camp, revolutionary decisiveness, is considered an authentic revoluwhich is partially hampered by a disarray among countries of tionary force in Brazil.
The last guerilla activity in Brazil is the socialist camp, especially the current policy of the Chinese his accomplishment, with which Cuba is helping him within leadership.
The cordial manner of the talks, in which Raul its limited capabilities.
It appears that the development in Castro took part as well, reflects a very friendly atmosphere Chile could also lead either to adoption of truly revolutionary formed around the visit of Minister Lomsky and the milireforms or to a new, even deeper crisis. tary delegation.
Imperialism has considerable difficulty in Africa with national liberation movements in Congo, Angola, 3.
A visit of Fidel Castro at a reception in the Ambassador’s Mozambique, etc.
Cuba also may provide some The most important meeting was that of Fidel Castro at the assistance for example, it intends to be active in Congo due Ambassador’s residence.
This visit is so important because to the fact that the population has experience and the Cuban Prime Minister did not visit a residence of any is ethnically tied to Africa.
The visit in the Impressions and experiences of the Cs. delegation from the Cs.
Ambassador’s residence on the occasion of a reception in stay in Cuba were shared in the conversation.
Beijing’s approach prevents effective assisshared high appreciation of the importance of Fidel’s visit. tance of the socialist camp countries, and also blocks the posAlexeyev also praised the current conduct and sibility of negotiations.
Beijing’s conduct is unprincipled and policy of the Prime Minister, which are gaining a considerinconsistent.
Its objective is to damage the Soviet prestige and able prestige in Latin America and elsewhere for the revoluto promote at all costs its own selfish interests.
He said that he never had serious doubts that Beijing undermines the unity of the ICM only to assume about Fidel Castro’s opinion on the issue of ICM unity and a leading role.
It is willing to sacrifice everything to this goal the Chinese position.
This situation now became even more even Cuba, which it does not care about and whose very clear.
However, he believes of the situation and main problems, which allows him to find that even in the PRC, there are reasonable people who dissolutions appropriate to the situation, conditions, and status agree with this narrow nationalistic policy, whose main proof Cuba whose political and economic consolidation are still tagonist is Mao Zedong.
He believes that after his departure, undergoing significant progress. these factions will be more able to gain prominence.
On the other hand, he emphasized the wide and selfless assistance provided by the USSR, without which the revolutionary and socialist Cuba could not even exist.
He 5490/ 7 mentioned that the USSR has and always had a very friendly IV/2 attitude towards and understanding for the situation and needs of the Cuban revolution.
It appears to him that the current political leadership of the USSR, particuOn 9 April 1965, Cde.
Raul Castro asked for a meeting with larly Brezhnev and Kosygin, applies the Minister of National Defense of the CSSR Cde.
Army a sophisticated and scientific approach to tackling important General B Lomsky, and with the Joint Director of issues.
Their approach to issues such as the unity of the ICM the Main Technical Administration of the Ministry of Foreign is much more constructive.
The talks took place in the villa tons was harvested in the last days, there was where the Cs. delegation was staying, in the morning from a real possibility of reaching 6 million tons harvested this year. 8:50 till 9:45.
Raul Castro, focus on increasing citrus and livestock production for export.
Deputy Chairman of the Government and Minster of the We stated in the conversation that we shared their opinRevolutionary Armed Forces ion, particularly regarding the need for unity of the ICM and Cde.
Last declarations of the Cs. government and positions of the CPCZ CC on the results of the Moscow Cde.
Army General B Lomsky, Minister of National Defense he expects that negotiations can be successfully concluded as Cde.
They are takMTA) ing them while fully aware that even their completion cannot Cde.
Military Attaché in Havana guarantee Cuba a permanent capability to resist, to repel permanently any aggression from the USA or their minions.
Minister Raul Castro opened the talks with an extenHowever, they want any aggressors to find out that Cuba is a sive presentation about the military situation in Cuba.
A conclusion followed ion, events in the DRV [Democratic of Vietnam,e., North from this analysis that internal danger has been eliminated, Vietnam] fully confirm that this approach is correct.
They and contra-revolutionary and anti-government groups operthink that things can start happening in Cuba in a similar ating directly in Cuba have been broken up and practically way.
The analysis at the same time stated that external master in finding pretenses, then many more attacks without danger still fully persisted, that is, the danger from the USA any reason. and their minions, the danger of direct aggression.
That’s why, after the first events in Vietnam, they were At that, Cuba is not a member of the Warsaw Pact and speeding up all projects – that was also the reason why they does not have a bilateral treaty with the USSR either; there in 1964 asked the USSR and the CSSR for anti-aircraft weapis only a “moral obligation of the USSR to help Cuba in case ons, and later they turned to the PRC with a similar request. of an attack,” which follows from several declarations of the They originally approached the CSSR with a plea for a USSR government about this matter.
They are, of course, aware that at USA is known to willfully violate even written promises, let the time, a payment in convertible currencies was expected. alone the oral ones.
The current situation, however (especially the situaried out number of changes.
They decided to concentrate tion in the DRV), is forcing them to ask for 30 mm cannons forces into individual strategic locations instead of dispersing again.
However, they don’t want them for free; they Considering that they are within reach of not only tactical would not want and even consider it right that the CSSR but also intercept air forces of the USA, they decided to stashould wait 15 years for a repayment. tion critical equipment in underground bunkers.
The cost C Castro said they were aware that they were very much of this plan is about 30 million pesos.
A number of civilian in debt to us because thanks to our kindness, payments in construction projects, some of them under construction, had convertible currencies were changed to payments in Cuban to be stopped in order to free the necessary resources.
He said he was ashamed that they were not able to to Cuba’s dependency on imports of fuel for its air force and military equipment, they are also building, for instance, large fulfill their obligations better.
The above-mentioned shipunderground storage facilities for fuel. ments, including ammunition and priced the same as the first They have built quite good anti-aircraft defense.
Beside shipments, would cost about 6 million pesos, and they could modern equipped air force, they also have surface-to-air misstart making payments from 1966 by 1 million pesos a year siles; however, these weapons are effective especially from in goods. 1000 meters up.
Raul Castro that Since the USA focused on airspace violations and attacks he would pass the submitted request to the Cs.
Government, from lower altitudes, their anti-aircraft defense was augand explained that we shared like brothers with the Cuban mented last year against low-flying aircraft.
At the same time, army even the first shipments of these cannons, and if the measures to defend the missile batteries against low-flying now requested cannons are delivered, the Cuban army will aircraft had to be taken. have more of them then the Cs. army.
Czech National Archive, Prague, CPCz CC collection. originally planned numbers.
The weapons considered for senior Cuban communist Carlos Rafael delivery to Cuba are practically new and will only have to be Rodriguez and Czechoslovak Communist checked, not refurbished.
However, we fully understand the requests of the Cuban Revolutionary Government, and will pass them to the Cs.
Minister Castro’s remark that the refurbished For Information cannons were sold at a discount in the past, Cde.
Langer 5781/ 7 explained that this time, a delivery of practically new cannons is being considered, as Cde.
Langer also said that our government at that time Carlos Rafael Rodriguez first said he was pleased to be did not assess the delivery from the credit point of view.
It able to talk with comrade Koucky confidentially and to confollowed from previous, quite open talks about these questribute to the elimination of misunderstandings that could tions, which let us assume that should the Cuban side ask for possibly arise because the reasons were not explained for credit, it would also state its repayment capabilities, much Cuba’s positions on issues of the international communist like Cde.
The movement, and for speeches and statements of some leading original request was assessed like number of other requests in Cuban comrades.
At that he emphasized that Fidel Castro was return for immediate repayment, which were negotiated and happy to accept an invitation for a UPSR delegation to visit realized in the past.
Czechoslovakia, because he as well is very much interested in As for the future, Cde.
Langer conveyed a request that better and more frequent relations of our two parties.
He also important questions, above all payment conditions, be openly keenly agreed with Koucky’s remark that due to extensive discussed from the very beginning, so that the capabilities economic and state cooperation of our two countries, contact of the Cuban side can be considered during talks.
That will between the parties is insufficient. expedite negotiations and solutions of all problems.
He further said that the UPSR strives for better conIn his response to Cde.
In have time to discuss. order to improve relations with fraternal parties and to inform C Minister Lomsky then repeated an invitation for the UPSR leadership better, the apparatus of the UPSR Castro and his military delegation to visit the CSSR, and national leadership will be augmented by a Secretariat for expressed an opinion that the visit should occur as soon as International Affairs.
The head of this international departpossible, so that other issues regarding development of relament will be the current Minister of Construction Osmany tions between the armies can be discussed.
The need to build this department is felt more He returned on the occasion of the death of his brother, Cesar and more urgently.
Personally, Carlos Rafael tant issues of relations among parties and of international Rodriguez believes that Anibal Escalante should not stay in politics.
The case of Anibal not mention that Anibal Escalante would be put in a position Escalante, who was dismissed from the leadership of the of responsibility in the State Bank, as it follows from some UPSR for sectarian methods , was a serious reports.) setback.
He is To Koucky’s question what he thought about the case of convinced that the Communists are old friends of his, but he Joaquín Ordoqui, Carlos Rafael replied that this was a comalso knows that this friendship is not personal but is based on plex and not yet fully clarified issue.
Moreover, it was found that only Ordoqui knew Fidel’s knowledge, already in the mountains of Sierra Maestra. about some of the things that were leaked.
Ordoqui denies This finding greatly strengthened Fidel’s distrust. guilt, but does not react well; responds in an unclear, unconAround Fidel Castro, there is a group of capable and vincing manner.
Non-critical closest personnel believes that Ordoqui’s guilt will not be proved but neither and Fidel’s popularity sometimes become a negative factor. does he prove his innocence.
He interferes Carlos Rafael further said that the Ordoqui case was water with the competence of personnel who are responsible for to the mill of anti-communist elements. assigned sections.
Differences By contrast, the influence of counter-revolutionary elements and disagreements were thus happening between him and still persists in the state administration and especially in Fidel, which some people were taking advantage of.
The Chinese attacks and slanders against three times. the USSR were a platform for these elements from which to Comrade Koucky commented that the report of Rodriguez spread their anti-Sovietism with impunity. leaving the Institute for Agricultural Reform was not immeEven many honest people sympathized or still sympathize diately clear to us.
As contradictions untenable situation in the management of this important in the international communist movement develop, these office, which was created by Fidel’s interventions.
He said he honest and mostly young people lose illusions and their feelbelieved that Fidel really always wanted to take full control ings about China are cooling down.
The only obstacle was that he did not want sugar plants minister and former deputy of Ernesto to offend Carlos Rafael.
The Chinese, however, use various ways and let their management of the Institute for Agricultural Reform, which people speak at meetings.
Beijing featured a Haitian immigrant, or rather a man who To Comrade Koucky’s question whether Anibal Escalante posed as one.
It is definitely an Asian; even his physiognomy remains now in Cuba, Carlos Rafael Rodriguez said that is typical of an Asian, not of a Latin American.
On his own, he organized in Argentina Chomon ’s current attitude, Carlos Rafael guerrilla units, which were easily destroyed.
He also sent there Rodriguez replied that still from his college times, Chomon is with this mission Masseti, his personal literally surrounded by a group of negative people with whom protégé and former director of Prensa Latina, Massetti (who he is closely linked.
Chomon has a revolutionary past; he is known as a former Peronist). participated as one of the commanders in the second guerilla The Ministry of Industry is currently managed by a group section in Escambray , and led terrorof young professionals.
They are fully aware of the depth ist actions against the people of the Batista regime in Havana. of and relations among economic problems.
Thanks to the Carlos Rafael believes that it is possible to influence Chomon Soviet ambassador, they found out that in Cuba, there is $200 because he understands many things well.
He talks especially million worth of various uninstalled and partial or complete well about the Soviet Union, where he was an ambassador. investments, delivered from socialist countries.
Che Guevara However, it is necessarily to keep him away from the group was simply doing whatever he wanted.
His positive development would surely time to correct the consequences.
He said it was initially very difficult However, Carlos Rafael said that despite all these diffor him to work, and he could not adapt to Fidel’s style for a ficulties, the first positive results are already appearing.
It is true that Fidel’s perseverance and his extraorproduction this year will reach almost 6 million tons.
On the dinary ability can correct many mistakes but it cannot prevent other hand, however, a decrease in world prices of sugar will undisciplined acts of some individuals.
Also, volume of industrial production will Guevara as an example. not increase in 1965.
To Koucky’s remark that Guevara’s Algerian speech was Carlos Rafael did not give even an approximate date incomprehensible to us, and left a very uncomfortable impreswhen the founding congress of the UPSR of Cuba would sion, Carlos Rafael said that President convene.
He again expressed hope that the visit of the Cuban Dorticos and he were also very surprised.
Raul Castro, who party delegation in Czechoslovakia would be very beneficial. was in Moscow , emphatically rejected this Fidel Castro’s visit in the CSSR would be beneficial as well. speech.
Fidel Castro said that he agrees with some parts of the However, it is absolutely necessary to act directly with Fidel, speech, however, neither the form of the speech nor the place without any diplomatic protocol. where Guevara delivered it was appropriate.
Czech National Archives, Prague, Kuba files, CPCz CC because only that has a meaning for workers.
Only then can collection; obtained by James Hershberg, translated for CWIHP an example of a socialist state be attractive for workers in by Adolf Kotlik.] advanced capitalist countries.
Carlos Rafael replied that he fully understands the complexity of our problems.
Collective leadership would certainly Notes help to eliminate errors like Guevara’s speech in Algiers.
When asked how Guevara’s absence in May Day celebra1 Cuban President Osvaldo Dorticos had actually been in the Soviet tions in Havana is explained, and what Guevara is doing now, capital when the Kremlin coup occurred, but he was not able to Carlos Rafael Rodriguez said that Guevara does not want to meet those who had ousted Khrushchev, or even learn fully what had go back to the Ministry anymore or to lead any administrative occurred, before he left the city. or economic department.
However, they are not sure how to 2 On Sino-Soviet tensions at this juncture, and the February 1965 arrange his departure.
Kosygin-Mao conversations in particular, see Lorenz M Luthi, The There are also other kinds of difficulties with him.
The spór refers to the Sinothough he may have been alluding to the August 1964 Gulf of Soviet split or rift.
The name is missing at the shorthand record; however, the 9 Rozeznać się could also refer to recognize, discern, or Romanian delegation was led by Prime Minister Ion Gheorghe discriminate.
Most important, it is defend Cuba in the event of a United States attack.
They believed, in clear that the main purpose of Kosygin’s trip was to deliver a Che Guevara’s famous phrase, that creating “two, three, many stern message to the Cuban leadership that the Soviets would Vietnams” would overextend the United States and diminish no longer tolerate Cuba’s support for armed struggle against its will to engage Cuba in a protracted guerrilla war.
At the recognized governments in Latin America and Africa. same time, if the struggles were successful, Cuba would have This was not a minor difference of opinion between Cuba helped to build a network of like-minded third world countries and the Soviet Union.
Each viewed the other country’s posiwith which it could trade and engage in south-south develoption as a threat to its fundamental interests.
The Soviet goal ment, thereby reducing its dependence on the Soviet Union.
Cuban Prime Minister Fidel Castro viewed “peaceful coexiswas “peaceful coexistence,” which would provide the leadertence” as nothing less than capitulation to United States imperialism. ship with a domestic justification for directing resources to The documents do not quite capture the tension in the internal development instead of military spending while meetings between Kosygin and the Cubans, though there enabling the military to claim an enhanced status as proare hints throughout.
At one point in his Budapest report, tectors of a superpower with equal standing to that of the Kosygin notes he told Castro that “conducting revolution United States.
Kosygin’s blood must have been boiling, in a telephone conversation that very evening with former because this was precisely the posture he was sent to Cuba to President Dwight D Eisenhower, saying he told Kosygin that re-adjust.
The “Bolivians” to there were 6 or 7 hot spots, that they are using Soviet whom the Soviet leader was referring was Mario Monge, head material—Cuba was—that we caught a bunch of them of Bolivia’s communist party.
Monge had complained to the the other day in Venezuela, that they were giving us hell in Soviets about Che’s expedition.
Indeed, it is evident from Castro’s that we thought this was very serious and we were going “necessary introduction” to Che’s Bolivian Diary, that the to have to take action.
Cuban leader believed Monge was responsible for Che’s death by revealing his location to the Central Intelligence Agency Notably, according to Kosygin’s own report to Communist or Bolivian military.
According to conventional wisdom, Castro had abruptly lowered the level of Cuba’s delegation the break was avoided by Castro’s supposed capitulation in to the celebrations in Moscow of the 40th anniversary of the his August 1968 speech in response to the Soviet invasion 1917 Bolshevik Revolution, and it was the only party not to of Czechoslovakia.
In fact, far from being an endorsement of the Soviet The conversation with Kosygin, combined with the subseinvasion as the speech is often misinterpreted to be, it lays quent downturn in relations, may have led Castro to believe, as down exactly the kind of challenge to the Soviet Union and well, that the Soviets would try to oust him.
Not the slightest trace of munist party in pre-1959 Cuba, including PSP head Aníbal legality exists.
Having established what he considered the Moscow that Havana would resist Moscow’s pressure.
Will the Warsaw Pact divisions Another irritating way in which Cuba had displayed its also be sent to Vietnam if the Yankee imperialists step independence from Soviet strictures was its response to the up their aggression against that country if the people of Arab-Israeli Six-Day War in June 1967.
Will they send the divisions of diplomatic relations with Israel and demanded that the the Warsaw Pact to the Democratic People’s Republic of other countries in the Soviet bloc follow suit.
Cuba also maintained diplomatic relations with they send the divisions of the Warsaw Pact to Cuba if the Israel, and Kosygin’s visit came two weeks after the war ended.
Cuban sources leaked a story while Kosygin was in Havana that the Russians had pressed Castro Of course, these were rhetorical questions with an implied to break relations with Israel.
Castro reporting Kosygin’s report, we now know that the Soviet leadership edly also had an emotional affinity with Israel.
Both countries also must have understood Castro’s remarks to be as much placed an emphasis on educating its population and developdenunciation as endorsement.
Castro also may have seen a not reward Cuba with a significant increase in aid following parallel between Israel’s situation—surrounded by enemies— Castro’s speech.
In this regard, Kosygin expressed the A Report from the Mexican Embassy in Havana, 4 July total disapproval of his government with what Cuba had 1967 done, and warned Mr Castro of the risks of persisting in such a policy for relations in Moscow and Havana.
Nothing, indeed, has emerged up to treaties allow it to attain. now concerning what was discussed with the leaders of the Fourth—political operation in Cuba.
Castro Ruz suffer more and more from the horrific shortage of all kinds when they took photos of him and the visitor, have all stirred of nutritional items, clothing, etc.
Until then, the island will continue to be Minutes in an environment of uncertainty and expectation.
To bid farewell to the visitor, we as chiefs of mission were from a conference of the Communist and Workers’ parties invited to the airport and were able to observe a demonstraand chiefs of tion by workers and students along the road that connects the governments of the socialist countries on the situation in the airport to the city with a few thousand people.
This demonMiddle East stration was the only act of public importance carried out in honor of Mr Kosygin.
Lastly, and because it is of interest, I wish to state that ________________________ this morning the representative of the Associated Press in Cuba, Mr Miller, came to visit me, and told me that when The conference was held on 11 July, from 3 to 9m. and on he wanted to notify his organization of the visit, his mes12 July from 10m. to 1m. sage was rejected by Western Union on Friday morning, but The reporting group met on 12 July, from 8:30 to 10:00. surprisingly that same afternoon, governmental authorization for his dispatch was granted.
The fact is important since Mr The conference was convened on the initiative of the Miller noticed the coldness of Mr Kosygin’s reception and the Soviet Union. almost mysterious circumstances in which his trip took shape.
It should be asked, then, why the Cuban censor opposed the dispatch of the cable on Friday morning, then accepted it unchanged in the afternoon.
He either did this on his own impulse, or perhaps received instructions from higher up to Information by com.
These are questions with difficult ________________________ answers, but ones that give way to new issues.
The Ambassador Fernando Pámanes Escobedo Before my departure from Moscow the Politburo discusses the situation in Cuba.
Source: Archivo de Concentraciones , Castro on behalf of the Politburo.
It dealt with all international problems document included in National Security Archive Electronic and relations with the socialist countries, set out our position.
We argued that we could not agree Christopher Dunlap.] with its policy of exporting revolution to the countries of Latin America.
We also said that if this would complicate the situation and lead to a military conflict—they take responsibility on themselves.
In the car Fidel was explaining me that they on purpose Dorticos supported me.
While I am glad, we have come here to talk and I am grateful that from our side it was only me and two comrades, and from it was done without an official protocol.
He ordered a recess for two hours, and but we drove to sightsee Havana—Dorticos, Fidel and me.
Only in out the whole night, almost to 4m. we traveled about Cuba. this conversation Fidel started to talk in more detail on some He showed me everything. questions.
From that cattle there was neither meat, nor the countries of Latin America.
Most of the commuof cattle, cows are giving already 20 liters of milk per day.
In a nist parties in Latin America are not parties—said Fidel—but word, they have wonderfully set about this question.
There is called them traitors, saying that communist parties have a rationing system with very low norms of rice, butter, meat become bureaucratized, lost their revolutionary character , which in general are not sold in total. and interest in leading their nations to a revolution.
Children get believe—he said—in a military coup and in the formation 2 bananas per week.
A lack of industrial products, allocation of popular-revolutionary parties, which in Bolivia are created of fabrics 8 m per person annually, shoes—1 pair annually, by Che Guevara.
But all the time (we chatqueues, though Fidel gave instructions that on the day of our ted the whole night) he was repeatedly raising this subject. arrival there should be no queues.
The whole Politburo activity in other countries, there will be conflicts and you will of the Cuban party came in.
Thus, you learned that I gave information on the situation in the Middle East, on we were under threat and you sent out to us such letter to Vietnam, on the economic situation of the Soviet Union wash your hands of this matter. and came up to the question of our mutual relations.
Comrade Fidel (there were three of it , Fidel asked: them), yesterday you offended our country and our party.
Otherwise, to explain particular issues, as the letter had been sent long why should we need this cooperation.
When I expanded on thoughts contained in the letter help you politically and materially, and you offend us.
Even colleges have some consecutively the Cuban ambassador in Moscow [perhaps Carlos Olivares scheduled breaks in teaching.
The ambassador writes that on the basis of vacation in a year, which they devote to work.
Everybody says And here those two documents coincide—our letter and of him well, approach him, worry that he doesn’t look well, a cable from the Cuban ambassador.
In That cable was an absolute provocation from their ambasRussia in the first years after the revolution we were wearing sador.
It’s good that I have learned from you about this bad if they didn’t have it on them.
Then Fidel put forward his ago I was in Moscow and I know all state documents.
He explained to us why he maintains diplomatic relations I asked for the name of that informer, the more so that the with Spain, Portugal, has not broken relations with Israel.
So many have broken diplomatic relations Soviet leadership and holding an important position.
He said he would ask him and if A serious problem for them is a permanent emigration to he agrees, then he will give his name.
These departures are not Here you see how cautiously one should treat different being restrained.
It is mostly intelligentsia that is leaving, and information transmitted by third persons. in the recent period also skilled workers.
They were convinced dissatisfaction about some socialist countries, among them that the cable from their ambassador was correct and was Poland, that she is grabbing his sugar markets.
The Czechs have built a shoe facbegan to be more interested in our policy, our successes, probtory in Cuba, which is idle, because they lack skins.
We should after a sharp exchange of views, everything began to go well. think of injecting some live stream into the Cuban economy.
For the Cubans, the main question right now is agriculThe Cubans will return.
Before the evening we went to look at grubbing out the but they will develop agricultural production and will return jungle.
They clear up at a time I reproached Fidel for coming out against the social50-60 meters of brushwood and bushes, they are followed by ist camp.
He promised not to do it openly either against French bulldozers, and then again tractors with discs, which the socialist countries, or the Soviet Union.
They approaching these questions more prudently, trying to prechose the right people—enthusiasts. vent such divergences among us.
They also created opinions in detail on questions dealt with in your letter and orchards.
They estimate that in 1970 they will have at least 1 have explained some problems, we will not respond to this million tons of citrus fruits.
We will assume that the matter has been closed by our are going to do with all this.
They lack processing plants, they conversation. are not going to sell such quantities.
They have many new I have to say that Raul was trying to help us and somehow pastures.
Thus, there is going on a huge work and with great smooth the situation.
CP of Cuba, Carlos Rafael Rodriguez Johnson told me in the course of our conversation that he was worried because our arms find their way from Cuba to At the very beginning of his visit with V Koucky, Carlos other countries in Latin America.
He said that our rifles and Rafael Rodriguez indicated that he had also other worries motor boats had gotten into American hands.
Americans captures several Cubans and in celebration of the 50th anniversary of the Great October this way got these weapons.
I did this in According to Carlos Rafael, Castro holds Kosygin my talk with de Gaulle.
He thanked for a gift sent by was indeed apparent in the fact that much more attention Fidel.
And continued talking for a few more minutes about was given to Kosygin’s departure from Havana than to his Cuba.
I argued with de Gaulle that that is important for us to arrival. have in this area of the world a socialist country, which would Therefore, it was initially decided that the President of the reflect some European problems.
Republic of Cuba Osvaldo Dorticos would lead the delegaI am glad, that I could talk frankly with Fidel.
Carlos Rafael Rodriguez was to join were sharp but amicable, party-like, friendly and have ended the delegation in Europe.
The whole of Moscow Pravda published articles of comrades [Chilean comHavana took to the streets.
The farewell, from the point of official protocol was very Ghioldi, in which the line of Cuba’s CP was indirectly critiwell organized. cized.
Carlos Rafael expressed regret that he was not in the homeOn behalf of all of us I thank you very much. land; he thought that he would have been able to persuade Fidel not to change the delegation.
Of course, the Chinese invited many people both sides should suspend polemics between Cuba and and achieved a great turnout.
Despite this, one Embassy of a socialist country That’s why it currently does not publish principles govCarlos Rafael said that it was not ours considered the erning the build-up of the economy.
It wants to avoid conreception as evidence of deepening Cuban-Chinese relations. troversy about problems that Cuba is solving in a completely The Consul of the Soviet Embassy himself allegedly refuted different way than other socialist countries.
For this reason, such a view. economic and party workers are being instructed internally.
The result of distorted information is the more reserved Comrade Koucky responded that we have a sincere interest in attitude on our side, which was reflected, Cuban friends being able to avoid mistakes and errors that we according to Carlos Rafael, after Ernesto Guevara’s and other fraternal countries had to overcome.
He said that Italian comrades had many meetings with approved and sent to him, and a report was published about Cuban leaders, saw many things up close, and their whole stay it.
It is common practice in cases involving similar events, was focused on a fruitful exchange of views.
Carlos Rafael said such informal discussions and contacts between important that Cuban officials considered our attention to the death of parties can be very beneficial.
At the same time, he offered for Che Guevara to be inadequate, and he himself did, too.
He also said that our workers have an ongoing keen fraternal parties of the Latin American continent, he said that interest in events of the national liberation movement and in they worsened in many ways, mainly due to a lack of underproblems of the international communist movement, are askstanding.
Lack of contacts does not help either because views ing about Cuba’s position, and we have to explain. are often spread that do not contribute constructively to the To that Carlos Rafael replied that the response to Guevara’s common cause, and can even be exploited by some people. death was much more vivid in the Western press than in ours.
Similarly, in the apparatus of the Central Committee of He mentioned the Italian press as an example.
To the remark the CP of Cuba, especially in the Committee on International that our press has a different mission and character, Carlos Relations, there is a group of young people who lack erudition Rafael said that, for example, the Bulgarian press devoted or experience and are damaging the relations of the Cuba’s much more space to the event than ours.
He said that since Prague Comrade Koucky noted that we have had these relations is an important crossroads, many people are passing through, with the CP of Venezuela even at the time when its leaders, and not all of them inform objectively.
We thought this was the affair As an example, he mentioned false information about of only Venezuelan comrades.
If the CP of Venezuela now the relationship of the Cuban leadership with China.
Gallegos Mancera swayed the Cuban side to interfere with development in Venezuela; they promised a fight, received a The accused comrades of the “micro faction” who are lot of help, but did not fulfill promises; instead began attackto take responsibility before a revolutionary tribunal ing Fidel Castro when he stood up for those who continued have, according to the report of Comrade Raul Castro, to fight. criticized the policy of the CPC, specifically Fidel Castro’s In the next part of the interview in connection with the attitude and his ideological-political ideas.
This undisguised and up to now most intense attack He did not even mention the latest development in the CP of against the CPSU, our party, and other fraternal parties, Cuba, and did not indicate, whom Fidel Castro meant by the presented by these party-internal measures of the CPC, alleged “micro fraction” that he spoke in the closing speech is a provocation against the unity of the international at the OLAS communist movement.
It is being openly demonstrated that any opinion that deviates from the views of the Cuban party leadership or any attempt at a Marxist critique of its attitude is to be qualified as counter-revolutionary and persecuted criminally.
Additional publications have been SED CC Department of International Relations, announced.
Assessment Plenum the decision of the Politburo of the CC was announced not to participate in the consultative meeting 1.
Fidel Castro gave a 12-hour long speech, of Cuba served the consolidation and the expansion which has not yet been published. of the un-Marxist, anti-Soviet, and petit-bourgeoisieadventurist political line of the Cuban leadership The main subject of the 3rd Plenum of the CC was the internally and externally. uncovering of a so-called micro faction within the party.
It is being openly demonstrated that any opinion that Commission for the Armed Forces and Security Questions, deviates from the views of the Cuban party leadership Comrade Raoul Castro, dealt with this issue in an or any attempt at a Marxist critique of its views is to be extensive presentation.
The head of this “micro facto” is qualified as counter-revolutionary and persecuted as a said to be Anibal Escalante, who previously belonged to crime.
The internal wards had been the Organization Secretary of the “United opposition evidently reaches beyond the 36 identified Revolutionary Organizations of Cuba” until 1962. persons.
According to Western news international communist movement and in its general they were sentenced to long prison sentences. line antagonistic is newly and openly demonstrated at the 3rd plenum of the CC of the CP of Cuba.
These measures are the sharpest public attacks yet against It spread the claim “that a strong anti-Soviet current the CPSU, the SED, and other fraternal parties.
Intellectual Congress” in Havana as well as in the attacks “They welcomed the departure of Cmdte Ernesto on the fraternal parties of Latin America.
Guevara Serna as they were of the opinion that Cmdte Guevara was one of the most vehement opponents of The severe splittist provocation of the 3rd Plenum of Soviet policy and a proponent of Chinese positions.” the CC of the CP of Cuba is aimed directly against the “They were of the opinion that the small bourgeoisie consultative meeting in Budapest and the successful was the predominant force within the policy of the preparation of the world conference.
The Cuban ambassador in the GDR is to be invited by that the imperialist would not attack.” the head of the International Relations Department of the “They opposed the armed struggle in general, using the CC for a discussion.
It should be attempted to convey lack of objective or subjective conditions as a pretext. to the CC of the CP of Cuba the deep sense of reservation of They were of the opinion that war, such as it is being the SED CC over these actions.
This is necesIn foreign policy terms, Castro adopted the course to sary to guarantee the proper work of GDR citizens in Cuba “push” revolution in the countries of Africa and, especially, in the interest of both countries.
In fact, Castro comes out against any constructive over to the SED CC the materials allegedly incriminating the steps and proposals of socialist states aimed at the relaxation GDR citizens. of international tensions.
In connection with this, are keeping quiet about or openly criticizing our most important 2.
It is necessary to consult with the comrades in the foreign policy activities, sharply limiting cooperation with us CPSU leadership immediately. in international organizations.
The fraternal parties of the CSSR in order to overcome negative manifestations in the policy of , Poland, Hungary, Bulgaria, Korea, the Cuban leadership.
The CC CPSU devotes much attention Vietnam, France, Italy, Spain, Finland, Chile, Uruguay, to helping the Cuban revolution to follow the truly socialist Argentina, Columbia,, and Venezuela are to be given internal path. information.
You know, comrades, about the great support which the USSR and other socialist countries give Cuba in strengthening its defense capability, in developing economy, in preparing cadres for the Cuban economy.
Cuban comrades also in making them understand the fallacy of their conceptions.
Our representatives stressed that the most Leonid I Brezhnev, “About Current Problems of the weighty contribution by Cuba in the revolutionary movement International Situation and the Struggle of the CPSU for of Latin America and the task of spreading socialist ideas the Cohesion of the World Communist Movement,” secret there, would be the successful construction of socialism in speech to the CPSU CC Plenum, 9 April 1968 (Excerpt on Cuba itself, her successes in the development of the economy Cuba) and further cultural advance.
The in particular, said, “In the conditions when Cuba, on many Politburo considers it necessary to inform the pleinternational problems, has begun to adopt a position differnum that in recent times the actions of the Cuban leadership ent from other socialist countries, the question arises before have aggravated Soviet-Cuban relations even further.
How we and other friends of Cuba should struggle for to say, that special conceptions on questions of the building of the strengthening of its international position, communism, ways of development of the world revolutionhow to counteract the ploys of the imperialist forces which ary process, which are currently actively counter-posed to the are striving to isolate your country, to compromise its foreign views of the CPSU and other fraternal parties, were advanced policy in the eyes of the world public, including progressive by Fidel Castro several years ago.
We don’t want to idea about the possibility of implementing the construction of hide from you that in our efforts to hammer together a wide socialist and even communist society on an expedited tempo, front of states and democratic forces in support of Cuba basing oneself merely on revolutionary enthusiasm. against the anti-Cuban actions by the USA, we more and more often have to face difficulties.
It is not pleasant In response to the Cuban memorandum, we sent a letter for us to say that, but Cuba’s own interests in our conviction in which, on the basis of facts, showed the reproaches require this.” of the Cuban side to not have any basis.
Having remarked We, of course, understood that such a frank conversation that our policy in relation to Cuba has always been built may not be to comrade Fidel Comrade Castro’s liking.
But we on the basis of internationalism, fraternity, and comradely considered it necessary to explain our principled position to cooperation, we pointed out that the extent of Soviet supplies separate ourselves from the policy which is going against the to Cuba should be considered in connection with our real interests of peace and socialism. capabilities and our obligations in relation to other socialist In June 1967, in accordance with the decision of the countries.
Then randum go far beyond the framework of trade relations, we , in the course of the conversations, all main invited Castro to come to the USSR for the questions of Soviet-Cuban relations were discussed.
What is discussion of these questions. more, Cuban comrades seemingly leaned to the understandIn his letter of response, Fidel Castro in reality repeated ing of the necessity of putting an end to the aggravation of the claims contained in the memorandum and in a sharp relations with the Soviet Union. form rejected the proposal to discuss the aforementioned However, subsequent actions by the Cuban leadership questions at a high level.
As you see, comrades, there are may difficulties between in a different direction.
One should think, however, that the criticism of the main tenets of the economic policy and one should not hurry with final conclusions.
Emotions are foreign policy course determined by the 23rd Congress of the a bad advisor in politics.
It would be incorrect to condition the support of the CC CPSU in connection with the 50th anniversary of [the victories of the Cuban revolution, of the task of socialism in 1917] October . this country , on even very serious misThis was followed by events connected to the January takes and twists of the Cuban leaders.
For this, it seems, it would be useful to hold a meeting in the internal affairs of Cuba. of our party-government delegations.
Of course, we have no In February of this year, our ministry of external trade intention to adjust our policy to the pseudo-revolutionary received a memorandum from the government trade delegaCuban conceptions.
And if we come to such negotiations, we tion of Cuba about Soviet-Cuban trade relations.
Written in a will base ourselves on our principled Marxist-Leninist line. sharp tone, this memorandum advances an absurd accusation against the Soviet Union in “constraining” the development of the Cuban economy.
Russian State Archive on Modern History , Soviet supplies to Cuba of various categories of goods: Moscow, fond 2, opis 3, delo 95, ll.-69.
Obtained and transfuel, metallurgical products, fertilizers, agricultural machines, lated by Sergey Radchenko.] building materials, etc.
Moreover, difficulties with which the Cuban comrades are faced in the implementations of plans of expanding the production of sugar are unambiguously ascribed to the fact that allegedly the Soviet Union “insufficiently” meets the requests of the Cuban side.
Here you can already see a direct calculation to put the blame for the difficult economic situation of Cuba on the Soviet Union.
It was important to CPSU CC, 10 April 1968 that we close ranks more closely.
Comrade Verner underlined that it was particularly important to strengthen the relations between the socialist countries and to strengthen the entire socialist community.
As is known, on a series of military-political questions, a Specifically it was important to strengthen the international special position is also advanced by the leaders of Cuba, who, communist movement. in the sphere of foreign policy, show clear elements of political In the international arena, several new problems had adventurism. emerged which had to be analyzed and mastered.
That was We provide all-sided aid to Cuba, including considerable particularly the case with regard to the necessity to develop military aid.
Thousands of Soviet military specialists,e., offiand implement a common strategy of the communist parties cers, sergeants, and soldiers, are stationed in Cuba, protecting against the global strategy of imperialism. its security, training its forces.
However, all of this does not There were also new problems in the development of meet with appropriate recognition on the part of the Cuban socialism and in the struggle against state-monopolistic capileaders. talism.
In particular it was necessary to carry out the struggle Our officers, sergeants, soldiers, despite the anti-Soviet against revisionism in the international workers movement. splittist activity of the leaders of Cuba, steadfastly and selfFor these reasons and several others already mentioned sacrificingly carry out their service, honestly carry out their our party favors holding a world council of communist and duty, of envoys of the Soviet country. workers’ parties.
Comrade Castro explained that the division of the international communist movement was an unfortunate occurrence which had weakened the movement.
The countries that were directly confronted with imperialism were particularly affected, they were hurt the most by the schism.
Imperialism had “Note on the Final Talk [of an East German/SED managed to penetrate Yugoslavia and to turn the League of Delegation] with the CP Cuba Delegation on 21 November Communists of Yugoslavia into its puppet.
They had played up the problem of protection The conversation began at first with a brief exchange of against an alleged aggression by the Soviet Union opinions about the provocation carried out by the Venezuelan and dramatized the problems after the events in the CSSR. government against a Cuban ship.
Comrade [SED Politburo For all practical purposes they have slid into the imperialist Member Paul] Verner expressed full support for the Cuban camp.
Never before had they gone as far as in the context of note and the attitude of the Cuban government.
The events in the CSSR had unfolded he responded to the question by Comrade Castro about in the exact same manner save for the intervention by the his impressions from the trip.
He expressed his thanks for socialist countries. the well-organized trip, which allowed for a comprehensive overview over the entire and enormous development of the The problem is how we get to unity.
It became particularly clear that great strides were The differences in opinions have sharpened.
Comrade of resentments have formed which can only be eliminated Verner asked that the delegation’s gratitude be conveyed to the with difficulty.
Ii is surely leaderships of the provincial committees. necessary to analyze the experiences in this area and to draw Comrade Tisch emphasized that the conclusions in order to advance to the common goals.
Everybody had the duty to fight, even if it was had become more aggressive, it had not become stronger. difficult.
It was important to increase the increased. fighting spirit of the parties, although, as Comrade Castro Comrade Verner declared that the views of Comrade emphasized, the Cuban CP was not in fact a bellicose party.
The It was far away from adventurism and only interested in problem was that we had a joint point of view, one we also supporting truly revolutionary spirit.
The task of the parties which had opposed all tendencies of revolutionary impatience, that is, a correct and positive point of view was to fight against false, it opposed adventurist tendencies as well as excessive conrevisionist, and other faulty assumptions.
It was critical to could be clarified at a consultation of the communist and act realistically, decisively, and firmly, to consider the realities workers’ parties.
Therefore we have to participate in it, this and correctly assess the dangers.
In doing will help to have the correct positions prevail. [handwritten so it is important to proceed in a very principled manner corrected from “The more we are part of it, the better it is for within the communist movement.
It was particularly imporour correct positions to prevail.”] tant to deepen the consciousness within the revolutionary Comrade Tisch interjected that the struggle of revolutionmovement.
The changing situation constantly posed new ary Cuba was very much present in our country and had problems.
Numerous brigades in the socialist experiences of the international communist movement have enterprises carried the name of Comrade Castro a o become more complex.
The forms and methods differ from country to country. why no representatives of the CP Cuba had participated in But they are not the basic problem.
We have understood that some have not common objectives, the construction of a communist society, attended our party plenum but we could not sufficiently the transformation of society, the fights against exploitation, explain the absence of the Cuban comrades. the fight against the oppression of peoples, and the struggle Comrade Castro declared that the CP Cuba had no probagainst imperialist domination.
There had been a few incidents after the be separated from the struggle for peace.
It forms the same common line and is part of the cleared up now. determined policy of the revolutionary forces.
One can argue about what is betFidel Castro elaborated that the struggle for peace could ter, either to participate and raise problems or to participate not be separated from the struggle for the revolution. out of courtesy.
Our experiences have shown that participaTherefore certain risks had to be taken.
Sometimes concestion in such party plenums always led to frictions with other sions were necessary, sometimes they were not possible. parties.
This general attitude of the communist party of Cuba During the events in the CSSR two positions were evident. has nothing to do with its attitude toward the SED specifiOne was the lax position of laisse-faire and the other the cally.
No one can doubt the solidarity of Cuba with the GDR. determined position, even if certain risks had to be taken.
For example the assumption of diplomatic relations with Certainly the intervention of the socialist countries had the GDR was associated with abandoning certain economic heightened tensions in a certain sense and the imperialist interests on the part of Cuba.
Opening relations with Algeria forces were very angry because developments had not gone led to certain decline in relations with Morocco, which had their way.
They now speak a more aggressive language. been one of Cuba’s most important sugar buyers.
They understand especially the GDR’s attitude towards West German imperialism.
SED CC Department of International Relations, “Note on The disagreements which Cuba had with the Soviet Union a Conversation with Com.
The Cuban party is quite capable Director of International Relations, SED CC] aside and of differentiating in this respect.
Not all the socialist countries asked if the delegation was satisfied with the communique. took the same attitude as the GDR, which is steadfast and firm the communique was good in the questions of its struggle.
It is significant particularly for our people as it not accuse the GDR technical personnel; instead the accusademonstrates after all that we are moving closer to the socialist tions were directed at the respective Cubans.
Fidel Castro had explained the position towards intrigues and subversion against the party leadership, and the Soviet Union, he continued, in the ring [the meaning of they influenced the technicians from other countries who had ring is unclear—trans.] of Havana.
That’s after all why the foreign party leadership had intended to criticize the fraternal parties trade minister and other delegations had gone to the USSR. it would have addressed them directly.
In response to the question whether Cuba would send a Comrade Verner emphasized that this matter between our delegation to the USSR at the highest level in the foreseeable parties had meanwhile been resolved and was not impairing future, Gen.
Rodriguez responded that they expected that our relations, even though we had to take the treatment of a high Soviet delegation would come to Cuba since this issue on the part of Cuba as an attack against our party Fidel Castro had already been to the USSR several times. and in fact viewed is as such.
Rodriguez emphasized Comrade Castro stated that his party, moreover, did in this context that he very much appreciated our position not have internal documents attacking other parties.
Cuban CP considered the USSR as an important guarantor He preferred public criticism.
But the best thing is when it is for the maintenance of peace. not necessary to criticize at all.
Rodriguez Comrade Castro explained that there were still certain said that this question was difficult to answer.
Up to now they tensions with the Soviet Union at this time but recently relahad not attended as they feared strong attacks by the fratertions had improved.
At the last party plenum of the to overcome the differences, which surely was in everyone’s Bulgarian CP,g., Cuba had been attacked vehemently from interest. this direction.
As the relations with the socialist countries improved a change of the situation would certainly be possible, he contended.
Cuba’s Foreign Policy (Cambridge, MA: Harvard [Source: Bundesarchiv Berlin, DY 30, IV A 2/20/265.
Cuba’s Kaufman, “The Tail Without a Dog,” Davar , June 10, Struggle with the Superpowers after the Missile Crisis , and 1992.
He is a member of Missile Crisis, translated and introduced by Guy Laron, elsewhere in the advisory board of the National Security Archive. this issue of the CWIHP Bulletin—ed.
For Castro’s 23 August 1968 speech, see also Blight and Brenner, Soviet Union , Sad and Luminous Days, Appendix C —ed.
For an analysis, see,g., R Salloch, thank Mark Kramer for supplying this information.
