Actor-producer Kevin Costner arrived here Monday afternoon to present Cuban audiences with the film ""Thirteen Days,"" which tells of how the crisis pushed the world to the brink of nuclear war.
Costner was accompanied by fellow producers Armyan Bernstein, Beacon Pictures chairman, as well as Peter Almond, along with several others.
They also hope to show the film to Cuban government officials who were involved in the Cuban missile crisis of October 1962, known here as the Crisis of October.
The change of heart meant that the U.S.-Soviet understandings that resolved the 1962 crisis never were made permanent.
In a Nov., 1962, telephone conversation with George Ball, the State Department's thirdranking official, Kennedy said he was worried about how a no-invasion pledge would affect the United States ability to respond if Cuba undertook a major arms buildup, shot down United States planes or attacked a proUnited States country, such as Guatemala.
Ball said the United States had a right to take action under the Rio Pact, the common defense treaty of the Western Hemisphere.
The exhibit also includes rooms of period furniture, complete with a kitchen and knotty-pine cabinets, and a tabletop radio tuned to the civil-defense frequency.
Pupils of the era often were encouraged to duck under their decks during civil-defense drills.
The soundtrack of the exhibit features the eerie sound of an air-raid siren.
A vintage black-and-white TV set is tuned to President John F Kennedy addressing the nation about a possibility of a nuclear attack.
A jukebox playing hits of the era, and authentic yellow-and-black ""Fallout Shelter"" signs place museum patrons back in time.
Newspapers and magazines, displayed throughout the exhibit, feature news stories of the time.
Posters, headlined ""When the Cold War Got Hot"" and ""What Would You Do if You Suddenly Realized Your World Could End Tomorrow,"" dot exhibit walls.
Adjacent to the Missile Crisis exhibit is the Kennedy Collection, another permanent display at the museum.
Full-size re-creations of the Oval Office (including one of two rocking chairs used by JFK in the White House), the Rose Garden and other famous scenes are on display.
Hundreds of artifacts are set up, including one of first lady Jackie Kennedy's cocktail dresses.
The museum is about five miles north of the Sunshine Skyway Bridge, east of Interstate 275.
In an interview last week with the Cuban news agency Prensa Latina, two-star Division General Sergio del Valle gave previously undisclosed military details of the crisis, which brought the United States and the Soviet Union to the brink of nuclear war.
Two missiles were fired, one of which hit the United States plane, which came down on Cuban soil, killing the pilot, he said.
A total of 24 SAM anti-aircraft missile batteries were deployed to protect the 42 medium-range R-12 Soviet nuclear missiles shipped to Cuba.
Del Valle said Cuban forces had helped to escort the huge Soviet nuclear missile transporters to the designated launch sites around the island.
He added that a total of 43,000 Soviet military personnel were also deployed in Cuba to operate and protect the nuclear missiles.
The missiles were eventually removed by the Soviets beginning on Oct., 1962 after United States President John Kennedy pledged that his country would not attack Cuba.
Del Valle repeated the Cuban position that the missiles were originally deployed to deter an expected United States attack against the island.
The general said 270,000 Cubans had been armed and mobilized to confront a possible United States attack in the last 10 days of October.
He said the United States had prepared up to six divisions of ground troops as well as combat aircraft.
Cuba's Communist government has said that it is willing to reveal previously secret details about the 1962 missile crisis and has called on the Soviet Union and the United Staes to do the same.
Lo uis P o s t-Dis patch Cit at ion @1990, Reuters News Service, 'Missile Crisis Details RevealedSoviet Crew Show Down Spy Plane Without Direct Order, Cuban Says', St.
The compilation of documents includes notes taken by then-agency director John McCone during White House meetings, estimates by the intelligence community, reports from Cuban agents, and memoranda coded Ironbark -meaning they were based on information from one of the most valuable Soviet spies of the Cold War, Col.
If the CIA could do it over, Studeman said, it would pay more attention to the informants' reported sightings of Soviet missiles in Cuba and analyze better how the Soviets viewed deployment of missiles outside their borders.
The documents and reminiscences highlight how the United States missed the deployment of the SS-4 medium-range missiles in Cuba until it was almost too late.
As it was, the deployment became known only when a U-2 spy plane photographed the launch pads in the western third of Cuba on Oct., at least a month after the first batch got to the island.
Warren Frank, then with the agency's foreign intelligence branch, said much of the Cuban agents' reporting was collected in Miami at what became the largest CIA station in the world.
A landmark analysis on Sept., 1962 -also declassified Monday -said the Soviets were deploying anti-aircraft missiles in Cuba only to deter a possible United States invasion effort in the wake of the botched Bay of Pigs landing the year before.
At the same time, U-2 reconnaissance planes and lower-flying spy aircraft were providing photos of Soviet ships laden with crates of military material.
Government papers released under a 30-year secrecy rule showed that thenPrime Minister Harold Macmillan was skeptical about Kennedy's decision to blockade Cuba to prevent the Soviet Union stationing nuclear weapons there.
The Cuban crisis brought the world close to a nuclear conflict, but was resolved when Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev agreed to dismantle Soviet missiles in Cuba under international supervision.
Macmillan indicated he was ready to use Britain's international status to try to resolve the crisis.
The letters between Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev and President John F Kennedy dated from Oct. to Dec., 1962 showed the superpowers setting the stage for a slightly less confrontational phase of the Cold War.
They contain no major revelations but make poignant reading, especially in the context of the collapse of the Soviet Union and end of the Cold War.
After two tense weeks during which it seemed as though nuclear war was inevitable, Khrushchev agreed to remove the missiles while Kennedy promised not to invade Cuba and to remove a naval blockade he had imposed around the island.
Kennedy was seen as the winner, an impression Khrushchev seemed anxious to dispel.
Khrushchev addressed Kennedy in long, rambling letters with frequent personal touches and occasional joking, while Kennedy kept his letters rather short and strictly formal and businesslike.
In one poignant comment in a letter of Dec., Khrushchev told Kennedy that the Soviet Union wanted him to win the 1964 presidential election.
Khrushchev was removed as Soviet leader in 1964 because of his domestic and international failures and died in 1971.
The special , anchored by Peter Jennings, talks to Soviet, Cuban and United States officials whose actions and reactions ratcheted up tensions until one false move could have meant nuclear war.
Communist Cuba has been a thorn in the United States side ever since Fidel Castro took power and kicked out the United States corporations.
Newly elected President John F Kennedy, who'd campaigned on a ``missile gap'' with the Soviet Union, knows the United States nuclear arsenal greatly outnumbers the Soviets', but fears the gap is closing.
Kennedy signs onto the Eisenhower CIA plan to invade Cuba with exiled Cuban nationals and oust Castro.
This Cold War adventure provides Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev with a golden opportunity to close his real missile gap by putting Soviet missiles and nuclear warheads in Cuba.
On Oct., 1962, Kennedy learns of the Cuban missile sites and that every state except Washington and Oregon are vulnerable.
You see the excellent still photos of White House photographer Jacques Lowe and hear the calm voice of Kennedy's defense secretary, Robert McNamara, outlining the option of an air strike to take out the missile sites.
The documentary interviews Excom members who retrace the evolution of the United States ``quarantine'' -an act of war -and the raising of the United States military to DEFCON 2, one level below actual conflict.
First, Kennedy and his advisers did not believe there were warheads in place for the Soviet missiles.
Yet there were 36 live missiles on the island, and each had a one-megaton warhead.
TACTICAL WEAPONS Second, United States officials believed they could bring a 180,000-man invasion force against Cuba.
Yet they did not know that the Soviets had 12 tactical nuclear missiles -short-range battlefield missiles -to use against United States invaders.
Writer-producer Sherry Jones, executive producer Lionel Chapman and director Foster Wiley have made a fascinating piece of television history.
What will bring the sweat to your palms is the realization that the situation wasn't really under control, despite the reassurances from the White House and the Kremlin.
These Americans, Soviets and Cubans were operating in the dark, ignorant of their opponents' plans and intentions, with virtually nonexistent communications with the opposing side.
NEWS 1040 Words Page: A1 OpenURL Link Moscow United States officials considering an invasion of Cuba at the height of the 1962 missile crisis vastly underestimated Soviet troop strength and the number of Cubans under arms, it was revealed at an extraordinary seminar here yesterday.
A Soviet participant in the seminar of Soviet, United States and Cuban experts on the missile crisis, a man described as having ""definitive"" knowledge on the subject, reportedly said that two days before the crisis peaked, Cuban leader Fidel Castro sent a message to Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev urging that the missiles be fired.
According to this account, that message convinced Khrushchev that matters had gone too far and he decided to agree to United States demands that the missiles be withdrawn.
General Dmitry Volkogonov, head of the Moscow Military History Archive Institute, reportedly told the conference on Saturday that at the time the Soviet Union had only ""about 20"" intercontinental ballistic missiles capable of reaching the United States from its own territory.
It meant that the 42 intermediate-range Soviet missiles either installed or in transit to Cuba by October would have represented more than two-thirds of Moscow's ability to deliver a nuclear attack on American territory.
The existence of such a cabled plea from Castro could not be corroborated from Soviets and Cubans attending the meeting, but three conference delegates confirmedthat they had heard a knowledgeable Soviet participant give the account during a break in the session.
Instead, Cuban and Soviet officials disclosed, there were more than 40,000 Soviet troops on the island and 270,000 armed Cubans.
HEAVY CASUALTIES He told reporters that Cuba had expected to lose as many as 800,000 people if the United States attacked.
Although several conference participants credited the common sense of President John F Kennedy and Khrushchev for avoiding a nuclear conflict that seemed dangerously near, Theodore Sorensen, former special counsel to Kennedy, offered a different view yesterday.
Sorensen said he had drawn up a list of 10 mistaken assumptions by parties to the crisis that were revealed during three days of formal and informal meetings here.
FEAR OF ATTACK McNamara recalled in a closing statement that a Soviet participant had confided his decision to send his family to the countryside at the height of the 1962 crisis for fear of a United States nuclear attack on Moscow.
It would require ""a leap of imagination for us to conceive of our national roles in a world not dominated by the struggle between East and West,"" but both nations need such a vision, McNamara said.
CONTINUED CONFLICTS ""Conflicts within and conflicts between nations will not disappear,"" he stated.
The fact that such prominent personalities on all three sides of the 1962 crisis could for the first time sit down with one another to discuss it was hailed by all as a sign of significant progress.
But yesterday's news conference also showed that the scars still run deep.
Cuban delegation leader Risket repeatedly threw verbal jabs at the Americans for maintaining a hostile policy toward his country and, in a more surprising move, leveled rare public criticism at Cuba's Soviet allies over the fact that Havana was never consulted before Khrushchev finally pulled his missiles out of Cuba.
Former Soviet Ambassador to Washington Anatoly Dobrynin defended the Soviet action.
Before they broke up yesterday, American participants in the conference visited the Moscow graves of Khrushchev and Anastas Mikoyan, who was first deputy premier in 1962.
They were guided by Sergei Khrushchev and Sergo Mikoyan, sons of the two leaders, who had also participated in the meeting.
McNamara's comments came in the wake of a Soviet-U.S.-Cuban conference held in Moscow to remember the crisis, the nearest the world has come to nuclear war.
Communists expected `invasion' Co pyrig ht 19 8 9 , 19 9 6 Ganne tt Co ., Inc.
William E Gibson Washington Bureau Chief Section: NATIONAL 1506 Words Page: 1A OpenURL Link Forty years ago today , an American U-2 spy plane secretly swooped over western Cuba and shot photographs that revealed the first hard evidence of Soviet ballistic missile sites in close range of the United States.
This story had a happy ending, a worldwide cry of relief when the two superpowers pulled back from the brink of war.
Some experts on U.S.-Soviet relations trace detente -a policy marked by reduced tensions and arms-control agreements of the 1970s and '80s -to the peaceful resolution of the missile crisis.
Yet this suspenseful episode, perhaps the most dangerous moment in world history, cemented an antagonistic relationship between the United States and Cuba that outlasted the Cold War and stubbornly persists today.
When Cuban dictator Fidel Castro talks about the United States ""blockade"" of Cuba, he is comparing the U.S. trade embargo to the monthlong naval phalanx that put the Caribbean island under quarantine four decades ago.
When the Bush administration today calls Cuba a sponsor of terrorism and a potential bioterrorist threat, its suspicions reflect a Cold War mentality and a constant stream of alienation that goes back to the missile crisis and before.
It did lead to a hotline between Washington and Moscow and much more willingness of both sides (Soviet and American) to engage in arms-control discussions,"" said William LeoGrande, a professor of political science and expert on Cuba and Central America.
The effect was to confirm Cuba as the enemy of the United States yet also constrain the United States from direct military force against Cuba,"" LeoGrande said.
In October 1962, at the height of the Cold War, the immediate task before Kennedy, Khrushchev and their advisers was to prevent nuclear war.
Recently uncovered documents indicate the risks of annihilation were even greater than the participants had imagined.
Tension mounts Military convoys rumbled down South Florida's highways and many Americans around the country were digging bomb shelters even before Kennedy disclosed the U-2's photographs and warned the Soviets that any nuclear missile launched from Cuba would be regarded as an attack on the United States.
In Washington, Kennedy met with his Executive Committee of top advisers and after seven days of intense debate ordered a naval quarantine around Cuba -approved on Oct., 1962, and announced two days later -to prevent delivery of Soviet offensive weapons.
Robert McNamara, defense secretary at the time, later recalled going to these meetings wondering if the world would come to an end.
They knew there were missiles and missile sites and they just had to assume there were some nuclear warheads.
Kennedy faced a decision on whether to launch a pre-emptive strike to destroy the missile sites, similar to the decision President Bush faces today on whether to invade Iraq to block acquisition of nuclear weapons.
Castro's `secret speech' With warheads already ensconced in Cuba in various places, ""the chances of some kind of nuclear exchange, if only by accident, was even greater than was known at the time,"" Blanton said.
The United States also underestimated the extent of Castro's anger toward the Soviet Union in the wake of the crisis.
Furious that the Soviets had struck a deal with Kennedy behind his back, Castro scorned his ally for leaving Cuba to stand alone against the wrath of the North American colossus.
The full force of Castro's sense of betrayal and vulnerability was revealed in a recently uncovered text of a ""secret speech"" he delivered to his Soviet comrades in 1968.
The ""secret speech,"" Brenner said, debunks the long assumption that by the mid-1960s Cuba was merely an agent of the Soviets spreading monolithic communism to other parts of Latin America.
The Soviets actually were trying to curb Castro's foreign adventures, the speech indicates, because they feared it would undermine Soviet leadership in the Third World and enflame relations with the United States.
Weeks after the missile crisis, Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev expressed worries that an ""irrational"" Castro would renew tensions and possibly provoke war, newly released documents show.
Cuba ""wants practically to drag us behind it with a leash, and wants to pull us into a war with America by its actions,"" Khrushchev warned in a letter dated Nov., 1962, to diplomatic aides in Cuba.
United States officials had always assumed that Cuba was a puppet of the Soviet Union and they didn't need to deal directly with the Cubans, Brenner said.
Some evidence indicates that Kennedy had some knowledge of Castro's bitterness and tried to exploit it by exploring back-channel discussions that might pull Cuba away from the Soviet orbit.
According to Brenner and other scholars, an unofficial emissary, a French journalist, was actually meeting with Castro on Kennedy's behalf in Havana when Cuba got word that Kennedy had been assassinated.
Lasting impact Castro gradually patched up relations with his Soviet patrons, and the United States settled into a hardline policy toward Cuba that continues today.
Both sides abided by the agreements that were made in an exchange of letters between Kennedy and Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev, setting the course of U.S.-Cuba relations through the Cold War and beyond.
Kennedy had forced the Soviets to back down and withdraw their missiles, but in exchange he agreed to discretely remove United States missiles based in Turkey.
More important for this hemisphere, Kennedy also promised the Soviets that the United States would never invade Cuba, a bitter pill for many CubanAmericans.
Brenner contends that the missile crisis nevertheless left Castro feeling more vulnerable than before, betrayed by the Soviets and constantly fearful that the United States would violate its agreement and try to overthrow him.
This fear, further fueled by U.S.-instigated assassination plots and the tightening embargo, prompted a mania for security and suppression of any signs of political opposition within Cuba.
Echoes of the missile crisis still resound today, more than a decade after the demise of the Soviet empire.
Though Castro abandoned his foreign interventions and the Pentagon long ago concluded that Cuba posed no security threat to the United States, the Bush administration continues to list it as one of the states that sponsors terrorism, with the capacity to develop bio-chemical weapons.
The confrontational relationship has taken many forms over the past 40 years, spanning the terms of nine United States presidents, yet its underpinnings remain firmly in place.
Key actors in the 1962 Cuban missile crisis meeting here Saturday have learned that fast-moving events 40 years ago nearly spun out of control and brought them closer to nuclear disaster than they ever imagined.
Television news marked the 25th anniversary of the resulting season of crisis by interviewing Robert McNamara, President Kennedy's secretary of defense, who shared his memories of the tense period in the nation's command center.
As he spun his grim tale, Carolyn and I relived the anxieties that engulfed all of us living in south Florida while Krushchev and JFK stood eyeball to eyeball.
Our sense of peril was so real that we prepared for the catastrophe, just as we did when a hurricane was heading our way.
Our son, Michael, was 9 years old, a pupil at Pinecrest Elementary School on Red Road, halfway between our house on S.W. 112th St. and south Miami.
He and each of his cohorts were required to stash under their desks a blanket, two large cans of fruit juice and a gallon jug of water.
Parents were instructed not to rush to the schoolhouse when we came under attack; the roads must be kept open for emergency vehicles and the movement of troops.
Other orders were to top off the car's gas tank each day, to load the trunk with enough water and dry groceries for five days, and to have on hand extra batteries for the flashlight and portable radio.
Acceding to these precautionary measures didn't really relieve the tension, nor did the flat cars carrying American Nike missiles that showed up on the railroad tracks alongside Dixie Highway south of Miami.
It was white-knuckle time when the first Army detail set up a Nike battery to do business out of our neighborhood.
As a consultant to the meat industry, I was at a client's plant in Boston during the week that the Army moved troops into South Florida.
The deployment was inconspicuous, the men travelling in civilian clothes aboard Hertz and Avis rented cars and commercial aircraft.
Suddenly, there were no civilian seats; I was bumped from my Friday afternoon flight back to Miami, stuck in Boston's Parker House to worry over my family until Tuesday.
By then, Carolyn heard from her folks in Pulaski, N.Y., that her naval officer brother Tracy had been plucked from his house painting in Norfolk, Va., splattered blue jeans and all, to urgent duty aboard the USS Stickle, the radar picket ship of which he was skipper.
Tracy took the Stickle to sea, to join, as we later learned, the fleet enforcing the quarantine around Cuba.
Carolyn's telephone call told her that her parents were not in dire straits, so we deciphered the message from the fleet to be the warning that the danger to Florida was real, and imminent.
With no debate, we emptied the car's trunk comestibles, filled it with suitcases and evacuated the battle zone.
Later, Michael's third grade class was asked to report its reactions to the scary period.
Michael, deep in the clarinet at that time, submitted a musical score to express his feelings.
Michael said it was too bad she didn't understand about music, but there was no way he could explain his Cuban missile crisis with words.
The best way for Michael's parents to communicate how they felt in 1962 is to let you know that 25 years later, every time we break bread at our houe we ask God to help Ronald Reagan and Mikhail Gorbachev stop the threat of nuclear war.
Fyodor Burlatski, who was a member of Khrushchev's inner circle, and Sergo Mikoyan, who is the son of Mikoyan and is an expert of Soviet-Cuban relations.
Garthoff also quoted a number of unidentified Soviet officials whom he said are well-placed but not ready to step into the spotlight.
Anatoly Gribkov, who supervised the deployment of the weapons, describing how Soviet missile experts flew the length of the island scouting out places to hide them.
Urbelino Betancourt Cruces, charged with defending the island, detailing preparations to shoot down attacking United States aircraft.
And over by the concrete nuclear bunker was former White House aide Theodore Sorenson, who wrote the speech in which President Kennedy demanded that Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev withdraw the weapons, talking about visiting the base for the first time.
The rare reunion capped an anniversary conference in which such erstwhile adversaries as Cuban President Fidel Castro and former United States Defense Secretary Robert McNamara discussed thousands of pages of newly declassified documents on the standoff.
It was 40 years ago today that an American U-2 spy plane first photographed Soviet R-12 medium range ballistic missiles at this base in the leafy jungle at the foot of the Cordillera de Guaniguanico mountain range.
Kennedy announced the discovery in a televised address on Oct., 1962, ordered a blockade of the island and mobilized troops for an attack.
The most striking information released during the conference detailed events on Oct., widely considered the most dangerous day of the crisis.
It had long been known that one U-2 strayed into Soviet airspace that afternoon, and a second was shot down over Cuba.
Surveillance photographs had disclosed that Soviet missiles had been placed on their launchers, and the Joint Chiefs of Staff recommended an airstrike and invasion to start within 48 hours.
But also that day, conference participants learned, a Soviet submarine commander who thought that a war had begun readied a nuclear strike on a United States destroyer, an attack that almost certainly would have provoked a massive retaliation.
The White House, meanwhile, sent its only message to Castro, a cloaked communique, ostensibly from the Brazilian government, saying Khrushchev was about to withdraw the weapons in exchange for NATO concessions.
The next day, Khrushchev agreed to withdraw the weapons in exchange for a public pledge by Kennedy not to invade Cuba, and a secret commitment to remove United States missiles from Turkey.
For 24 years, as Moscow's chief representative to the US, his mastery of backstairs diplomacy helped to defuse a series of other East-West crises throughout the Cold War, leading to an era of détente and an end to the nuclear arms race.
Dobrynin, as Soviet Ambassador to Washington from 1962 to 1986, served six Soviet leaders and worked with six American presidents.
A suave and affable diplomat with an easygoing manner who spoke fluent English, Dobrynin made himself much at home in the United States and became a Washington celebrity and the doyen of the diplomatic corps.
Seven months after being appointed Ambassador at the age of 42, Dobrynin found himself immersed in the missile crisis after American spy planes detected Soviet nuclear missiles in Cuba in October 1962.
As Soviet ships carrying more missiles moved towards Cuba, President John F Kennedy ordered a naval blockade of the island in a tense 13-day stand-off that almost led to a nuclear war.
As pressure on Kennedy to bomb or invade Cuba mounted, the President's brother, the AttorneyGeneral Robert F Kennedy, met Dobrynin secretly three times.
These backstairs meetings enabled the President and Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev to negotiate a secret deal for the withdrawal of Soviet missiles in exchange for the pullout of American missiles from Turkey, ending the threat of world war.
Robert Kennnedy later stated that Dobrynin had remained calm and analytical throughout the crisis.
This established for the next quarter of a century his special role as a trusted go-between in US-Soviet relations, and his diplomatic presence was felt in every Cold War issue including Vietnam, the Middle East and nuclear disarmament negotiations.
He had a private phone line to President Lyndon Johnson, later a hotline to Henry Kissinger and a private parking space in the underground garage of the State Department which he could enter and leave unobserved.
His gregarious manner and his westernised ways led some to believe that he was a liberal with proWestern sympathies.
In reality he was a hard man, dedicated to Soviet interests who showed no interest in the denial of human rights in the Soviet Union or the repression of satellite states in the Soviet empire.
He was educated at a Moscow aviation institute and helped to design fighter aircraft before being chosen for training for the diplomatic service.
This he entered in 1944 when Josef Stalin was leader and was sent to Washington as an Embassy counsellor in 1952.
In 1960 he became head of the Soviet foreign ministry's United States and Latin American Department.
Dobrynin, while committed to the ideals of communism, also strongly believed that the two superpower adversaries could coexist in peace.
He cultivated a wide network of Americans which included Presidents, congressmen and journalists and he had an especially close relationship with Kissinger.
His private meetings with the National Security Adviser and Secretary of State led to the 1972 antiballistic missile treaty, which essentially ended the US-Soviet nuclear arms race.
Moscow's Ambassador to America's Six Cold War Presidents Dobrynin said that the Soviet leader Leonid Brezhnev sympathised with President Nixon over his torments during the Watergate scandal.
At a 1973 meeting at Nixon's home in San Clemente, California, Brezhnev had too much to drink and started making scandalous remarks about his Kremlin predecessors and rivals.
Anatoly Dobrynin, Soviet Ambassador to Washington 1962-86, was born on November 16, 1919.
It was only the intervention of a third officer that stopped an attack that almost certainly would have led to an annihilating retaliation by United States forces.
The little-known incident, detailed publicly Friday at a conference of U.S., Soviet and Cuban officials who were involved in the 1962 crisis, offered a chilling glimpse of how close the superpowers came to a nuclear exchange during the most dangerous confrontation of the Cold War.
The Oct., 1962, discovery of Soviet missile bases on this Caribbean island 90 miles from Florida triggered a two-week standoff between the United States and the Soviet Union that brought the world to the edge of disaster.
President Kennedy ordered a naval blockade, readied forces for an attack, and demanded that Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev withdraw the missiles.
The world watched and waited as Soviet ships steamed toward the United States line.
On Oct., United States destroyers came upon a Soviet B-59 submarine, one of four in the area, and began dropping signal charges to force it to surface.
Ships' logs from the USS Beale and the USS Cony released Friday confirmed the bombardment.
After a hit by a ""practical depth bomb,"" Orlov said, submarine commander Valentin Grigorievich Savitsky thought a war might have begun.
Unable to communicate with the Soviet general staff, he ordered the officer assigned to the nuclear-tipped torpedo to assemble it and prepare it to be fired.
Vasili Alexandrovich Arkhipov intervened, telling Savitsky that the conditions for firing the torpedo -a rupture of the hull -had not been achieved.
Peterson, who kept the log aboard the Beale, said the ship's officers did not know the submarine they were bombarding was armed with a nuclear weapon.
The missile crisis was defused the next day when Khrushchev agreed to withdraw the Soviet weapons from Cuba in exchange for a public pledge by Kennedy not to invade the island and a secret promise to pull United States missiles out of Turkey.
Defense Secretary Robert McNamara and former Soviet KGB agent Nikolai Leonov, gathered in Havana on Friday to open a two-day conference and release several declassified documents.
Conference organizers said understanding the crisis could help future leaders avoid nuclear war.
McNamara credited Castro, Kennedy and Khrushchev with averting a nuclear disaster.
McNamara said he didn't know how many of the former officials, most of them now in their 70s or 80s, would make the next one.
