The Soviet Union secretly placed missiles in Cuba in 1962 to support Fidel Castro’s administration against the United States.
Castro and his rebels had overthrown the American-backed president and military dictator, Fulgencio Batista, in 1959.
After a failed invasion by Cuban exiles and the Central Intelligence Agency under the United States at Bay of Pigs in 1961, U.S.S.R. started to offer more military and economic support to Cuba.
During the Cold War, United States and U.S.S.R. had many proxy conflicts in places like Berlin, Vietnam, and Korea, but the Missile Crisis was the first time nuclear weapons were involved and citizens of the United States were in serious danger.
President John F Kennedy of the United States and Nikita Khrushchev, the Prime Minister of U.S.S.R. wrote several letters over the thirteen days after the discovery of the missiles on October 16, 1962.
Surprisingly, Khrushchev was willing to negotiate and make an agreement with Kennedy to promise no further invasions of Cuba and to remove the missiles in Cuba if the United States removes the missiles in Turkey and Italy.
Both sides understood what was at risk, and both men acknowledged that war had to be prevented any way possible.
Khrushchev was writing the truth; Castro had asked for shipments of larger arms in the fall of 1961.
According to Major Problems in American History Since 1945, written by Robert Griffith and Paula C Baker, Khrushchev did not agree at first, but later did because it was vital to not lose Cuba to China or the United States As explained by Griffith and Baker, Cuba was U.S.S.R.’s “prime example” of how successful they were able to undermine capitalism through the liberation of less developed countries.
Therefore, in order to keep Cuba in their camp, Khrushchev approved the delivery of the missiles on April 12.
In the same letter Khrushchev also tried to clear up what he thought were President Kennedy’s and the U.S.’ misunderstanding about the missiles and in general, Communism.
Even though Khrushchev criticized the United States policy and blamed it for invading Cuba in the first place, he still used this chance to explain the similarities between capitalism and Communism.
Khrushchev could not risk starting a war with the U.S., when the U.S.S.R. was not on good terms with China, the second largest Communist country.
Concluding his letter, Khrushchev called for a negotiation to cease the tension and ask for Kennedy’s agreement.
Khrushchev wanted to use the missiles to make the United States back away from Cuba.
However, Kennedy and the United States saw the missiles as an offense weapons and warned Khrushchev that the United States was ready to take action if nothing was done about the missiles.
Thus, Khrushchev, who also wants to prevent a nuclear war, started to see the need to call for an agreement.
It is possible that Khrushchev also used the missiles to trigger the United States to make an agreement to leave Cuba alone, but the agreement was made based on the common goal between the United States and U.S.S.R., which was to prevent a nuclear war in any way possible.
