President John F Kennedy is seen with his brother and closest confidant Robert F Kennedy at the White House before the crisis began in October 1962 'My fellow Americans, with a heavy heart, and in necessary fulfillment of my oath of office, I have ordered and the United States Air Force has now carried out military operations with conventional weapons only, to remove a major nuclear weapons build-up from the soil of Cuba,' read a draft speech JFK planned to read.
Those remarks were among the many private thoughts revealed in new papers released by the estate of Robert F Kennedy, who served as Attorney General and his brother's closest confidant during the missile crisis.
This is the missile base the United States military planned to strike Brink of war: The National Security Council provided JFK's key advice during the missile crisis, though RFK said only his brother was able to lead the world away from the edge of disaster RFK scribbled notes during a meeting about a possible airstrike on Cuba.
Strategic nuclear weapons are used to attack, as their name suggests, particular strategic targets, such as military installations, missile command centers or cities.Tactical nuclear weapons tend to be smaller devices that are used on the battlefield.
Professor Allison believes that the Russians would have responded to an invasion with tactical nuclear rockets striking American ships and troops.Americans had no knowledge that these smaller nuclear weapons were already on the island.
The Americans would have likely used nuclear weapons of their own, almost certainly drawing in a further Soviet nuclear response.
RFK's papers reveal that outcome didn't happen only because JFK and Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev both realized the severity of what was coming.
The Soviet ships carrying missiles to Cuba turned back thanks to a series of public, private and secret concessions including the withdrawal of NATO missiles from Turkey.
KILLING CASTRO AND DOODLES OF THE LIBERTY BELLThough the documents, released just shy of the 50th anniversary of the Cuban missile crisis, don't rewrite Cold War history, they do provide insight into the personal thoughts of the era's key figures, historians say.
Kennedy advised John F Kennedy during the Bay of Pigs invasion and the missile crisis, key moments during his brother's presidency.
Robert Kennedy doodled the Liberty Bell and wrote down a quote from a Polish World War II memorial in Italy ‘It gives you a sort of insight into what was on his mind, what he doodled,’ Dobbs said.
We the Soldiers of Poland for your liberty and ours give our souls to god, our bodies to Italy and our hearts to Poland,’ Kennedy wrote in pencil.
The 1961 botched invasion sought to oust communists with the help of anti-Castro Cuban exiles and veiled United States support.
Another outlines plans to assassinate Castro, including a 1964 plan with connections to the Mafia.
Another prominent thread throughout the documents is the 13-day crisis over Soviet missiles in Cuba.
It's interesting to see in his handwriting who's on which side,’ Dobbs said.
View all The views expressed in the contents above are those of our users and do not necessarily reflect the views of MailOnline.
