This study proceeds from the premise that For thirteen days of October 1962, there was a marked improvement in our understanding of higher probability that more human lives would such events depends critically on more self-conend suddenly than ever before in history.
The principal purpose of this essay which President Kennedy estimated as ""beis to explore some of the fundamental assumptween 1 out of 3 and even""—our escape seems tions and categories employed by analysts in awesome.
This event symbolizes a central, if thinking about problems of governmental beonly partially thinkable, fact about our exishavior, especially in foreign and military affairs. tence.
Analysts think about problems of foreign and pants in governance to think hard about these military policy in terms of largely implicit concepproblems. tual models that have significant consequences for Improved understanding of this crisis dethe content of their thought. pends in part on more information and more probing analyses of available evidence.
To conThough the present product of foreign policy tribute to these efforts is part of the purpose of analysis is neither systematic nor powerful, if this study.
But here the missile crisis serves prione carefully examines explanations produced by marily as grist for a more general investigation. analysts, a number of fundamental similarities * A longer version of this paper was presented at emerge.
Explanations produced by particular the Annual Meeting of the American Political Scianalysts display quite regular, predictable feaence Association, September, 1968 (reproduced by tures.
For supered, the types of evidence that are relevant, port in various stages of this work I am indebted and the determinants of occurrences.
The logic of viet Union, given Soviet strategic objectives. explanation requires that he single out the rele3.
Two ""alternative"" conceptual models, here lavant, important determinants of the occurbeled an Organizational Process Model rence.
Moreover, as the logic of prediction and a Bureaucratic Politics Model underscores, the analyst must summarize the provide a base for improved explanation and prevarious determinants as they bear on the event diction, •r*' in question.
Conceptual models both fix the mesh of the nets that the analyst drags through Although the standard frame of reference has the material in order to explain a particular acproved useful for many purposes, there is powtion or decision and direct him to cast his net in erful evidence that it must be supplemented, if select ponds, at certain depths, in order to catch not supplanted, by frames of reference which the fish he is after. focus upon the large organizations and political 2.
For these analysts, the point of an explaquences of innumerable and often conflicting nation is to show how the nation or government smaller actions by individuals at various levels 3 of bureaucratic organizations in the service of a In arguing that explanations proceed in terms variety of only partially compatible conceptions of implicit conceptual models, this essay makes no of national goals, organizational goals, and politclaim that foreign policy analysts have developed ical objectives.
Recent developments in the field any satisfactory, empirically tested theory.
In this of organization theory provide the foundation essay, the use of the term ""model"" without qualifor the second model.
By tional behavior from which this action emerged. pointing this out, the argument shows that, given The third model focuses on the internal politics the particular circumstances and the laws in quesof a government.
Aspects of Scientific Explanation comes of various overlapping bargaining games , 337.
While various patterns among players arranged hierarchically in the naof explanation can be distinguished, viz., Ernest tional government.
Consequently prediction is the converse of players from which the outcome emerged. explanation.
To choose names from ordinary lantions of national governments,e., the sum of acguage is to court confusion, as well as familiarity. tivities of all individuals employed by a governPerhaps it is best to think of these models as I, ment relevant to an issue.
Rather, the sections that follow simbeen compared to moves, sequences of moves, ply sketch each conceptual model, articulate it and games of chess.
If one were limited to obas an analytic paradigm, and apply it to produce servations on a screen upon which moves in the an explanation.
These ""alternative explanaassume—as Model I does—that an individual tions"" of the same happening illustrate differchess player was moving the pieces with references among the models—at work.
A crisis deence to plans and maneuvers toward the goal of cision, by a small group of men in the context of winning the game.
But a pattern of moves can ultimate threat, this is a case of the rational polbe imagined that would lead the serious obicy model par excellence.
The dimensions and server, after watching several games, to consider factors that Models I I and I I I uncover in this the hypothesis that the chess player was not a case are therefore particularly suggestive.
The single individual but rather a loose alliance of concluding section of this paper suggests how semi-independent organizations, each of which the three models may be related and how they moved its set of pieces according to standard can be extended to generate predictions. operating procedures.
RATIONAL POLICY each according to a routine, the king's rook, RATIONAL POLICY MODEL ILLUSTRATED bishop, and their pawns repeatedly attacking the Where is the pinch of the puzzle raised by the opponent according to a fixed plan.
This distinction is stated clearly by Harold Soviet actions towards detente, when juxtaposed and Margaret Sprout, ""Environmental Factors on in our implicit model, produce a question.
With the Study of International Politics,"" in James Rosreference to what objective could the Soviet govenau , International Politics and Foreign ernment have rationally chosen the simultaneous Policy , 116.
This striction excludes explanations offered principally question arises only when the analyst attempts to in terms of international systems theories.
Neverstructure events as purposive choices of consistheless, this restriction is not severe, since few intent actors. teresting explanations of occurrences in foreign 'For further development and support of these policy have been produced at that level of analarguments see the author's larger study, Bureaucysis.
In its abbreviis clearly the traditional focus among Western stuated form, the argument must, at some points, apdents and is the one which dominates all of the pear overly stark.
David Singer, ""The Level-of-Analysis 8 Each of the three ""case snapshots"" displays the Problem in International Relations,"" Klaus Knorr work of a conceptual model as it is applied to exand Sidney Verba , The International Sysplain the VS. blockade of Cuba.
Similarly, Richard Brody's cuts are primarily exercises in hypothesis generareview of contemporary trends in the study of intion rather than hypothesis testing.
Especially ternational relations finds that ""scholars have come when separated from the larger study, these acincreasingly to focus on acts of nations.
The sources for these they all focus on the behavior of nations in some reaccounts include the full public record plus a large spect.
Only secondarily does he constyle, they seize several salient characteristics of sider decisions.
But when explaining particular this action and use these features as criteria occurrences, though emphasizing relevant conagainst which to test alternative hypotheses straints, he focuses on the choices of nations. about Soviet objectives.
According to Hans MorgenDeterrence is the cardinal problem of the thau, ""the first World War had its origin contemporary strategic literature.
Thomas exclusively in the fear of a disturbance of Schelling's Strategy of Conflict formulates a the European balance of power.
In the penumber of propositions focused upon the dyriod preceding AVorld War I, the Triple Alliance namics of deterrence in the nuclear age.
This proposition was , 191. formulated earlier by A Wohlstetter, ""The Deli""Ibid., 192. cate Balance of Terror,"" Foreign Affairs (January, ""Ibid., 5.
To prove that most strategic thinking is driven implicitly by the analysts think largely in terms of the rational motor upon which this calculation depends, policy model is not possible.
In this limited Schelling explicitly recognizes that strategic space it is not even possible to illustrate the theory does assume a model.
Systematic statement of basic asvarious styles when they are called upon to prosumptions, concepts, and propositions employed duce explanations.
Each assumes that what by Model I analysts highlights the distinctive must be explained is an action,e., the realizathrust of this style of analysis.
Each assumes largely implicit framework is of necessity to carthat the actor is the national government.
But caricature can be instructive. assumes that the action is chosen as a calculated response to a strategic problem.
Policy as National ment was pursuing in committing the act and Choice how this action was a reasonable choice, given the nation's objectives.
This set of assumptions Happenings in foreign affairs are conceived as characterizes the rational policy model.
The asactions chosen by the nation or national sertion that Model I is the standard frame of reference implies no denial of highly visible *'The larger study examines several exceptions differences among the interests of Sovietologists, to this generalization.
Sidney Verba's excellent diplomatic historians, international relations essay ""Assumptions of Rationality and Non-Ratheorists, and strategists.
Indeed, in most retionality in Models of the International System"" is spects, differences among the work of Hans less an exception than it is an approach to a someMorgenthau, Stanley Hoffmann, and Thomas what different problem.
Considerably weaker than lem solving;"" family resemblances among Mora satisfactory theoretical model, paradigms nevergenthau's ""rational statesman,"" Hoffmann's ""routheless represent a short step in that direction lette player,"" and Schelling's ""game theorist."" 23 from looser, implicit conceptual models.
Neither Most contemporary analysts (as well as laythe concepts nor the relations among the variables men) proceed predominantly—albeit most often are sufficiently specified to yield propositions deimplicitly—in terms of this model when attemptductively.
Inhas considerable promise for clarifying and codifydeed, that occurrences in foreign affairs are the ing styles of analysis in political science.
Each of acts of nations seems so fundamental to thinkthe paradigms stated here can be represented rigorously in mathematical terms.
The relevant consequences constithat will maximize strategic goals and objectute benefits and costs in terms of strategic tives.
These ""solutions"" to strategic problems goals and objectives. are the fundamental categories in terms of 4.
Rational choice is value-maximizwhich the analyst perceives what is to be exing.
The rational agent selects the alternative plained. whose consequences rank highest in terms of his goals and objectives.
Dominant Inference Pattern ment, conceived as a rational, unitary decisionThis paradigm leads analysts to rely on the maker, is the agent.
The rational policy follow from each alternative. model's explanatory power stems from this B The Problem.
Puzzlement is relieved by reto the strategic problem which the nation faces. vealing the purposive pattern within which the Threats and opportunities arising in the ""interoccurrence can be located as a value-maximizing national strategic market place"" move the nameans. tion to act.
National security cludes several. and national interests are the principal catThe basic assumption of value-maximizing egories in which strategic goals are conceived. behavior produces propositions central to most Nations seek security and a range of further obexplanations.
Various courses of action relewill follow from each alternative), and net vant to a strategic problem provide the specvaluation of each set of consequences.
Enactment of each alternaA An increase in the cost of an alternative, tive course of action will produce a series of e., a reduction in the value of the set of conse20 quences which will follow from that action, or a Though a variant of this model could easily be reduction in the probability of attaining fixed stochastic, this paradigm is stated in non-probabilconsequences, reduces the likelihood of that alistic terms.
Collingwood, Wilthat action being chosen. liam Dray, and other ""revisionists"" among philoso27 phers concerned with the critical philosophy of This model is an analogue of the theory of the history are not accidental.
The likelihood of any particuanalysts to further constrain the goals, alternalar attack results from the factors specified in tives, and consequences considered.
Combined with factual national propensities or personality traits reassertions, this general proposition yields the flected in an ""operational code,"" concern propositions of the sub-theory of deterrence. with certain objectives, or special principles A stable nuclear balance reduces the likeof action, narrow the ""goals"" or ""alternatives"" lihood of nuclear attack.
Or a particular Soviet acing the likelihood and the costs of one particution is explained as an instance of a special rule lar set of consequences which might follow from of action in the Bolshevik operational code.
A attack—namely, retaliation. second, related, cluster of variants focuses on A stable nuclear balance increases the the individual leader or leadership group as the probability of limited war.
This proposition is actor whose preference function is maximized derived from the general proposition plus the asand whose personal characteristics serted fact that though increasing the costs of a are allowed to modify the alternatives, consenuclear exchange, a stable nuclear balance nevquences, and rules of choice.
Explanations of the ertheless produces a more significant reduction United States involvement in Vietnam as a natural consein the probability that such consequences would quence of the Kennedy-Johnson Administrabe chosen in response to a limited war.
Thus this tion's axioms of foreign policy rely on this varset of consequences weighs less heavily in the iant.
A third, more complex variant of the basic calculus. model recognizes the existence of several actors within a government, for example, Hawks and B Soviet Force Posture.
The Soviet Union Doves or military and civilians, but attempts to chooses its force posture (i.e., its weapons and explain an occurrence by reference their deployment) as a value-maximizing means to the objectives of the victorious actor.
Thus, of implementing Soviet strategic objectives and for example, some revisionist histories of the Cold military doctrine.
In the transition from implicit conceptual model to explicit paradigm This paradigm exhibits the characteristics of much of the richness of the best employments of the most refined version of the rational model. this model has been lost.
But the purpose in The modern literature of strategy employs a raising loose, implicit conceptual models to an model of this sort.
Problems and pressures in explicit level is to reveal the basic logic of anathe ""international strategic marketplace"" yield lysts' activity.
The international artificiality that surrounds the statement of the actor, which could be any national actor, is simparadigm can be erased by noting a number of ply a value-maximizing mechanism for getting from the strategic problem to the logical soluthe standard additions and modifications emtion.
But the explanations and predictions proployed by analysts who proceed predominantly duced by most analysts of foreign affairs depend within the rational policy model.
Nevertheless, it may be of a situation which are logically incompatible helpful to identify several variants, each of with the basic model.
Second, in the course of which might be exhibited similarly as a paraexplaining a number of occurrences, analysts digm.
The first focuses upon the national actor sometimes pause over a particular event about which they have a great deal of information and specification of additional general propositions byunfold it in such detail that an impression of translating from the economic theory is straight20 forward.
Six major categories of action were from the basic model has failed—the notion of a considered. ""mistake"" is invoked.
United States vulnerability to Soviet prediction of a ""missile gap"" is written off as a missiles was no new thing.
Since the United States alSoviet mistake in not taking advantage of their ready lived under the gun of missiles based in opportunity.
Both these and other modifications Russia, a Soviet capability to strike from Cuba permit Model I analysts considerably more varitoo made little real difference.
But such stemmed from the possibility of United States over-reacaccommodations are essentially appendages to tion.
The United States response to the Soviet Union's emThis argument fails on two counts.
First, it placement of missiles in Cuba must be undergrossly underestimates the military importance stood in strategic terms as simple value-maxiof the Soviet move.
American nuclear superiority Union's missile capability be doubled and the could be counted on to paralyze Soviet nuclear United States early warning system outflanked.
The Sopower; Soviet transgression of the nuclear viet Union would have an opportunity to rethreshold in response to an American use of verse the strategic balance by further installalower levels of violence would be wildly irrations, and indeed, in the longer run, to invest in tional since it would mean virtual destruction of cheaper, shorter-range rather than more expenthe Soviet Communist system and Russian nasive longer-range missiles.
American local superiority was overwhelmimportance of this move was undeniable.
If the U.S. sequence of steps short of the nuclear threshold. failed to respond, no American commitment All that was required was for the United States would be credible. to bring to bear its strategic and local superior2.
The United The naval blackade—euphemistically named a States would demand that the missiles be re""quarantine"" in order to circumvent the niceties moved, but the final settlement might include of international law—did just that. neutralization of Cuba, United States withdrawal from The United States government's selection of the blockthe Guantanamo base, and withdrawal of U.S. ade followed this logic.
Apprised of the presence Jupiter missiles from Turkey or Italy. of Soviet missiles in Cuba, the President assemEach form of the diplomatic approach had its bled an Executive Committee of the own drawbacks.
To arraign the Soviet Union before the United Nations Security Council held little 80 promise since the Russians could veto any proAs stated in the introduction, this ""ease snapposed action.
While the diplomats argued, the shot"" presents, without editorial commentary, a missiles would become operational.
To send a seModel I analyst's explanation of the United States blockcret emissary to Khrushchev demanding that ade.
The purpose is to illustrate a strong, characteristic rational policy model account.
This account "" Theodore Sorensen, op. cit., 675. 52 is consistent with prevailing explanations /bid., 679. of these events.
This was the effective counter-action would invite Khrushchev to seize the diplomatic which the attempted deception deserved.
A surinitiative, perhaps committing himself to strategical strike would remove the missiles and thus gic retaliation in response to an attack on Cuba. eliminate both the danger that the missiles On the other hand, this would tender an ultimight become operational and the fear that the matum that no great power could accept.
To Soviets would discover the American discovery confront Khrushchev at a summit would guarand act first. antee demands for United States concessions, and the The initial attractiveness of this alternative analogy between United States missiles in Turkey and was dulled by several difficulties.
The Air Force But why not trade United States Jupiters in Turkey could not guarantee destruction of all the and Italy, which the President had previously missiles.
The offer of such a deal might sugwould of course kill Russians at the missile sites. gest to the Soviets that the West would yield Pressures on the Soviet Union to retaliate would and thus tempt them to demand more.
It would be so strong that an attack on Berlin or Turkey certainly confirm European suspicions about was highly probable.
Third, the key problem American willingness to sacrifice European inwith this program was that of advance warning. terests when the chips were down.
Finally, the Could the President of the United States, with basic issue should be kept clear.
But Soviet troops transAn embargo on military shipments to Cuba enported, constructed, guarded, and controlled the forced by a naval blockade was not without missiles.
The United States could take likely solution to joint blockades would be the this occasion not only to remove the missiles but lifting of both blockades, restoring the new staalso to rid itself of Castro.
A Navy exercise had tus quo, and allowing the Soviets additional long been scheduled in which Marines, ferried time to complete the missiles.
Second, the possifrom Florida in naval vessels, would liberate the ble consequences of the blockade resembled the imaginary island of Vieques.
Such brinksmanship courted nuclear disaster, practically guaranM Sorensen, op. cit., 684. teeing an equivalent Soviet move against Berlin.
The missile sites should of the argument, the facts are not strictly accurate.
A more as outputs of large organizations functionblockade offered the Soviets a spectrum of deing according to standard patterns of behavior. laying tactics with which to buy time to comTo be responsive to a broad spectrum of plete the missile installations.
It attends to a special set of problems and acts in was a middle course between inaction and atquasi-independence on these problems.
But few tack, aggressive enough to communicate firmimportant problems fall exclusively within the ness of intention, but nevertheless not so precipdomain of a single organization.
I t placed on Khrushchev ment behavior relevant to any important probthe burden of choice concerning the next step. lem reflects the independent output of several He could avoid a direct military clash by keeporganizations, partially coordinated by governing his ships away.
No possible military confrontation tially disturb, but not substantially control, the could be more acceptable to the United States than a behavior of these organizations. naval engagement in the Caribbean.
This To perform complex routines, the behavior of move permitted the U.S., by flexing its convenlarge numbers of individuals must be coorditional muscle, to exploit the threat of subsequent nated.
Rather, each Above all, while defending our own vital interplayer must perform the maneuvers specified by ests, nuclear powers must avert those confrontaa previously established play which the quartertions which bring an adversary to a choice of either back has simply called in this situation. a humiliating retreat or a nuclear war.
To adopt that kind of course in the nuclear age would be At any given time, a government consists of evidence only of the bankruptcy of our policy—of existing organizations, each with a fixed set of a collective death wish for the world. standard operating procedures and programs.
Learning occurs gradually, can be usefully summarized as action chosen by over time.
Both learning trolled, completely informed, and value maxiand change are influenced by existing organizamizing.
But this simplification must not be altional capabilities. lowed to conceal the fact that a ""government"" Borrowed from studies of organizations, these consists of a conglomerate of semi-feudal, loosely formulated propositions amount simply loosely allied organizations, each with a substanto tendencies.
But this ernments define alternatives and estimate conseis as it should be.
Government behavior can therefore be about ""solids,"" they achieved similar results.
On the ing against enemy troops, and firing according other hand, the behavior of particular organizato fixed routines of the Chinese Army.
Governtions seems considerably more complex than the ment leaders' decisions trigger organizational behavior of solids.
Government leaders can trim the edges a particular organization is required for further of this output and exercise some choice in comspecification of the tendency statements.
But the mass of behavior is deof these two caveats, the characterization of termined by previously established procedures. government action as organizational output difSecond, existing organizational routines for emfers distinctly from Model I Attempts to underploying present physical capabilities constitute stand problems of foreign affairs in terms of this the effective options open to government leaders frame of reference should produce quite differconfronted with any problem.
The fact that tional Output fixed programs (equipment, men, and routines which exist at the particular time) exhaust the The happenings of international politics are, range of buttons that leaders can push is not alin three critical senses, outputs of organizational ways perceived by these leaders.
First, the actual occurrences are orgacase it is critical for an understanding of what is nizational outputs.
Third, organizational outputs into the Korean War—that is, the fact that structure the situation within the narrow conChinese soldiers were firing at United Nations soldiers straints of which leaders must contribute their south of the Yalu in 1950—is an organizational ""decision"" concerning an issue.
The basic decisions, which conSpecialists in international politics are not students fine their choices, have all too often been of organization theory.
It seems unlikely, quently anti-climactic. however, that these gaps will remain unfilled much longer.
Organizing Concepts in the study of the business firm as an organizaA Organizational Actors.
Scholars have begun applying these insights a monolithic ""nation"" or ""government"" but to government organizations, and interest in an orrather a constellation of loosely allied organizaganizational perspective is spreading among institions on top of which government leaders sit. tutions and individuals concerned with actual govThis constellation acts only as component orgaernment operations.
The ""decisionmaking"" apnizations perform routines. proach represented by Richard Snyder, R Bruck, B Factored Problems and Fractionated and B Sapin, Foreign Policy Decision-Making Power.
Surveillance of the multiple facets of for, incorporates a number of insights from organization theory.
Simon and to the behavioral model of the firm *2 Organizations are not monolithic.
The proper stated by Richard Cyert and James March, A Belevel of disaggregation depends upon the objectives havioral Theory of the Firm (Englewood Cliffs, of a piece of analysis.
Here, however, one is forced to grapple with with reference to the major organizations that conthe less routine, less quantified functions of the stitute the United States government.
Generalization to the less differentiated elements in government organimajor components of each department and agency zations. should be relatively straightforward.
But conflict among alavoid paralysis, primary power must accompany ternative goals is always latent; hence, it is a primary responsibility.
Typically, the constraints are permitted to do anything, a large part of what formulated as imperatives to avoid roughly they do will be determined within the organizaspecified discomforts and disasters. tion.
Factored probAs a problem arises, the subunits of the organilems and fractionated power are two edges of zation most concerned with that problem deal the same sword.
Factoring permits more specialwith it in terms of the constraints they take to ized attention to particular facets of problems be most important.
When the next problem than would be possible if government leaders arises, another cluster of subunits deals with it, tried to cope with these problems by themselves. focusing on a different set of constraints.
Orgathe coin of discretion for what an organization nizations perform their ""higher"" functions, such attends to, and how organizational responses are as attending to problem areas, monitoring inforprogrammed. mation, and preparing relevant responses for C Parochial Priorities, Perceptions, and Islikely contingencies, by doing ""lower"" tasks, for sues.
Primary responsibility for a narrow set of example, preparing budgets, producing reports, problems encourages organizational parochialand developing hardware.
Since procedures are available to the organization, recruitment of ""standard"" they do not change quickly or easily. personnel into the organization, tenure of Without these standard procedures, it would not individuals in the organization, small group be possible to perform certain concerted tasks. pressures within the organization, and disBut because of standard procedures, organizatribution of rewards by the organization.
Clients tional behavior in particular instances often ap, government allies (e.g., pears unduly formalized, sluggish, or inappropriCongressional committees), and extra-national ate. counterparts (e.g., the British Ministry of De4.
Organizations fense for the Department of Defense, ISA, or must be capable of performing actions in which the British Foreign Office for the Department the behavior of large numbers of individuals is of State, EUR) galvanize this parochialism. carefully coordinated.
Assured performance Thus organizations develop relatively stable prorequires clusters of rehearsed SOPs for producpensities concerning operational priorities, pering specific actions,g., fighting enemy units or ceptions, and issues. answering an embassy's cable.
The list of behavior in any particular case is an enactment programs relevant to a type of activity,g., of preestablished routines.
Constraints Defining Acceptable ganizations execute programs; programs cannot Performance.
The operational goals of an orgabe substantially changed in a particular situanization are seldom revealed by formal mantion.
Rather, each organization's operational greater the number of individuals involved, the goals emerge as a set of constraints defining acmore important are programs and repertoires as ceptable performance.
Central among these condeterminants of organizational behavior. straints is organizational health, defined usually 5.
Organizations do in terms of bodies assigned and dollars appronot attempt to estimate the probability distribupriated.
Rather, organizations mix of expectations and demands of other orga41 nizations in the government, statutory authorThe stability of these constraints is dependent ity, demands from citizens and special interest on such factors as rules for promotion and reward, groups, and bargaining within the organization. budgeting and accounting procedures, and munThese constraints represent a quasi-resolution of dane operating procedurps.
By arranging a negotiated results in few changes in organizational strucenvironment, organizations regularize the reacture but a loss of effectiveness in performing tions of other actors with whom they have to some programs, prolonged famine forces major deal.
Dramatic performance failother organizations that comprise the governures.
Dramatic change occurs in rement, is stabilized by such arrangements as sponse to major disasters.
Confronted with an agreed budgetary splits, accepted areas of reundeniable failure of procedures and repertoires, sponsibility, and established conventional pracauthorities outside the organization demand tices.
The secondary environment, relations change, existing personnel are less resistant to with the international world, is stabilized bechange, and critical members of the organization tween allies by the establishment of contracts are replaced by individuals committed to and ""club relations"" ( United States State and change.
Foreign Office or United States Treasury and E Central Coordination and Control.
Between enemies, contracts and requires decentralization of responsibility and accepted conventional practices perform a simipower.
But problems lap over the jurisdictions of lar function, for example, the rules of the ""preseveral organizations.
Thus the necessity for decarious status quo"" which President Kennedy centralization runs headlong into the requirereferred to in the missile crisis.
Both the necessity for Air Command of the United States Air Force involves coordination and the centrality of foreign policy combat with enemy aircraft.
Planes are designed to national welfare guarantee the involvement of and pilots trained to meet this problem.
That government leaders in the procedures of the orthese preparations are less relevant to more ganizations among which problems are divided probable contingencies,g., provision of close-in and power shared.
Each organization's propensiground support in limited wars like Vietnam, ties and routines can be disturbed by governhas had little impact on the scenario. ment leaders' intervention.
Where situations persistent control of organizational activity, cannot be construed as standard, organizations however, is not possible.
The style of search and the soganizations, and between organizations and the lution are largely determined by existing rougovernment leaders depends critically on a numtines.
Patwhich human and material resources get comterns of search reveal biases which in turn remitted.
For example, to the extent that rewards flect such factors as specialized training or exand punishments for the members of an organiperience and patterns of communication. zation are distributed by higher authorities, 7.
Organizational Learning and Change. these authorities can exercise some control by The parameters of organizational behavior specifying criteria in terms of which organizamostly persist.
These criteria problems, organizations search and routines become constraints within which organizational evolve, assimilating new situations.
But constraint is a crude inand change follow in large part from existing strument of control. procedures.
But marked changes in organizaIntervention by government leaders does tions do sometimes occur.
As Franklin tions devour budgetary feasts by purchasing adRoosevelt, the master manipulator of governditional items on the existing shopping list.
Periods of prolonged budgetarygrained in its practices that I find it is almost imfamine.
You should go through the exA number of general propositions have been perience of trying to get any changes in the thinkstated above.
In order to illustrate clearly the ing, policy, and action of the career diplomats and type of proposition employed by Model II anathen you'd know what a real problem was.
Activity according change anything in the Na-a-vy is like punching a to SOPs and programs does not constitute feather bed.
Detail and nuhausted, and then you find the damn bed just as it ance of actions by organizations are determined was before you started punching. predominantly by organizational routines, not government leaders' directions.
If the SOPs are appropriate, average F Decisions of Government Leaders.
Orgaperformance,e., performance averaged over the nizational persistence does not exclude shifts in range of cases, is better than it would be if each governmental behavior.
Many important issues of governmental action But specific instances, particularly critical inrequire that these leaders decide what organizastances that typically do not have ""standard"" tions will play out which programs where.
Thus characteristics, are often handled sluggishly or stability in the parochialisms and SOPs of ininappropriately. dividual organizations is consistent with some 2.
A program,e., a complex action chosen important shifts in the behavior of governments. from a short list of programs in a repertoire, is The range of these shifts is defined by existing rarely tailored to the specific situation in which organizational programs. it is executed.
Since repertoires are developed by paroday, its organizational components must yesterchial organizations for standard scenarios deday have been performing (or have had estabfined by that organization, programs available lished routines for performing) an action only for dealing with a particular situation are often marginally different from this action.
At any speill-suited. cific point in time, a government consists of an B Limited Flexibility and Incremental established conglomerate of organizations, each Change.
Major lines of organizational action are with existing goals, programs, and repertoires. straight,e., behavior at one time is marginally The characteristics of a government's action in different from that behavior at t — 1.
Behavior at t + 1 tines, and from the choice of government leaders will be marginally different from behavior at the —on the basis of information and estimates propresent time. vided by existing routines—among existing pro1.
The best explanation of an organization's tally—both with respect to totals and with rebehavior at t is t — 1; the prediction of t + 1 spect to intra-organizational splits.
Though oris Model II's explanatory power is achieved by ganizations could divide the money available uncovering the organizational routines and repereach year by carving up the pie anew (in the toires that produced the outputs that comprise light of changes in objectives or environment), the puzzling occurrence. in practice, organizations take last year's budget as a base and adjust incrementally.
Predictions 44 Marriner Eccles, Beckoning Frontiers (New that require large budgetary shifts in a single York, 1951), 336. year between organizations or between units 45 Arthur Schlesinger, A Thousand Days (Boston, within an organization should be hedged.
Organizational chessboard, the training and deployment of stakes in adopted projects carry them quite troops and nuclear weapons is crucial.
Given beyond the loss point. that the outbreak of hostilities in Berlin is more C Administrative Feasibility.
Adequate exprobable than most scenarios for nuclear war, planation, analysis, and prediction must include facts about deployment, training, and tactical administrative feasibility as a major dimension. nuclear equipment of Soviet troops stationed in A considerable gap separates what leaders East Germany—which will influence the face of choose and the issue seen by Soviet leaders at the outbreak what organizations implement. of hostilities and the manner in which choice is 1.
Projimplemented—are as critical as the question of ects that require several organizations to act ""balance."" with high degrees of precision and coordination 2.
Soviet force posture, are not likely to succeed. e., the fact that certain weapons rather than 2.
Projects that demand that existing organiothers are procured and deployed, is determined zational units depart from their accustomed by organizational factors such as the goals and functions and perform previously unproprocedures of existing military services and the grammed tasks are rarely accomplished in their goals and processes of research and design labs, designed.form. within budgetary constraints that emerge from 3.
Government leaders can expect that each the government leader's choices.
The frailty of organization will do its ""part"" in terms of what the Soviet Air Force within the Soviet military the organization knows how to do. establishment seems to have been a crucial ele4.
Government leaders can expect incomplete ment in the Soviet failure to acquire a large and distorted information from each organizabomber force in the 1950s (thereby faulting tion concerning its part of the problem.
The fact that missiles were controlled contrary to the existing goals of an organization, until 1960 in the Soviet Union by the Soviet resistance to implementation of that piece will Ground Forces, whose goals and procedures rebe encountered. flected no interest in an intercontinental mission, was not irrelevant to the slow Soviet buildup of V Specific Propositions.
These organizatack is less sensitive to balance and imbalance, tional factors (Soviet Ground Forces' control of or stability and instability (as these concepts missiles and that service's fixation with Euroare employed by Model I strategists) than it is pean scenarios) make the Soviet deployment of to a number of organizational factors.
Except so many MRBMs that European targets could for the special case in which the Soviet Union be destroyed three times over, more understandacquires a credible capability to destroy the United States able.
The enemy's Soviet leaders to acquire a first strike weapon control system,e., physical mechanisms and system.
Careful attention to the organizational standard procedures which determine who can components of the Soviet military establishment launch rockets when, is critical.
Second, the ene(Strategic Rocket Forces, Navy, Air Force, my's programs for bringing his strategic forces Ground Forces, and National Air Defense), the to alert status determine probabilities of accimissions and weapons systems to which each dental firing and momentum.
At the outbreak of component is wedded (an independent weapon World War I, if the Russian Tsar had undersystem assists survival as an independent serstood the organizational processes which his vice), and existing budgetary splits (which order of full mobilization triggered, he would probably are relatively stable in the Soviet have realized that he had chosen war.
Third, orUnion as they tend to be everywhere) offer poganizational repertoires fix the range of effective tential improvements in medium and longer choice open to enemy leaders.
What initiated that preriding high in the water; refugee reports of cious week were photographs of Soviet missile countless sightings of missiles, but also a report sites in Cuba taken on October 14.
What desnowing the construction of a number of SAM termined the context in which American leaders sites and other defensive missiles.
Not all of came to choose the blockade was the discovery this information was on the desk of the estimaof missiles on October 14. tors, however.
These facts were carefully included in defenders have neglected is the fact that the disthe catalogue of intelligence concerning shipping. covery took place on October 14, rather than For experts sensitive to the Soviets' shortage of three weeks earlier or a week later, as a conseships, however, these facts carried no special sigquence of the established routines and procenal.
The refugee report of Castro's private pidures of the organizations which constitute the lot's remark had been received at Opa Locka, United States intelligence community.
These organizaFlorida, along with vast reams of inaccurate retions were neither more nor less successful than ports generated by the refugee community.
This they had been the previous month or were to be report and a thousand others had to be checked in the months to follow. and compared before being sent to Washington.
The notorious ""September estimate,"" approved The two weeks required for initial processing by the United States Intelligence Board could have been shortened by a large increase in on September 19, concluded that the Soviet resources, but the yield of this source was alUnion wouldnot introduce offensive missiles ready quite marginal.
This asIntelligence,"" The Reporter , 48sertion is based on information from ""Depart50; Roberta Wohlstetter, ""Cuba and Pearl Harment of Defense Briefing by the Honorable R S. bor,"" Foreign Affairs , 706.
A mittee on Appropriations, Subcommittee on Deverbatim transcript of a presentation actually partment of Defense Appropriations, Hearings, made by General Carroll's assistant, John Hughes; 88th Congress, 1st Session, 1963, 25 ff. and Hilsman's statement, op. cit., 186.
In the face of well-founded suspicions munication networks. concerning offensive Soviet missiles in Cuba that On the information available, the intelliposed a critical threat to the United States' gence chiefs who predicted that the Soviet most vital interest, squabbling between organiUnion would not introduce offensive missiles zations whose job it is to produce this informainto Cuba made a reasonable and defensible tion seems entirely inappropriate.
Moreover, the gence not only about Cuba but about potential issue was not simply, which organization would occurrences in all parts of the world, the inforcontrol U-2 flights over Cuba, but rather the mational base available to the estimators inbroader issue of ownership of U-2 intelligence volved nothing out of the ordinary.
Nor, from activities—a very long standing territorial disan organizational perspective, is there anything pute.
At ers in ExCom meetings produced broad outthe October 4 meeting, the Defense Departlines of alternatives.
Details of these alternatives ment took the opportunity to raise an issue imand blueprints for their implementation had to portant to its concerns.
Given the increased be specified by the organizations that would perdanger that a U-2 would be downed, it would be form these tasks.
Five days passed while Harbor in reverse""; the belief that a ""surgithe State Department pressed for less risky alcal"" air strike was impossible.
Whether the ternatives such as drones and the Air Force (in United States might strike first was a question Department of Defense guise) and CIA engaged not of capability but of morality.
On October 9 a flight United States could perform the surgical strike plan over San Cristobal was approved by was a factual question concerning capabilities.
COMOR, but to the CIA's dismay, Air Force piThe majority of the members of the ExCom, inlots rather than CIA agents would take charge cluding the President, initially preferred the air of the mission.
What effectively foreclosed this option, sketchy, but several members of the intelligence however, was the fact that the air strike they community have speculated that an Air Force wanted could not be chosen with high confidence pilot in an Air Force U-2 attempted a high altiof success.
After having tentatively chosen the tude overflight on October 9 that ""flamed course of prudence—given that the surgical air out"",e., lost power, and thus had to descend in strike was not an option—Kennedy reconsidorder to restart its engine.
British Ambassador, Ormsby-Gore, after havThe air strike alternative provides a classic ing attended a briefing on the details of the case of military estimates.
Specification of the details of this alterof Cuban jets did not facilitate Khrushchev's native was delegated to the Air Force.
According to the public aclike a response to a Soviet Berlin grab), Air count and the recollection of a number of indiForce estimators produced an attack to guaranviduals involved, Kennedy ""agreed immediately, tee success.
Members of the ExCom repeatNavy's plan for the blockade was thus changed edly expressed bewilderment at military estiby drawing the blockade much closer to Cuba. mates of the number of sorties required, likely A serious organizational orientation makes casualties, and collateral damage.
More careful exgical"" air strike that the political leaders had in amination of the available evidence confirms mind was never carefully examined during the these suspicions, though alternative accounts first week of the crisis.
According to the simply excluded on the grounds that since the Sopublic chronology, a quarantine drawn close to viet MRBM's in Cuba were classified ""mobile"" in Cuba became effective on Wednesday morning, United States manuals, extensive bombing was required. the first Soviet ship was contacted on Thursday During the second week of the crisis, careful exmorning, and the first boarding of a ship ocamination revealed that the missiles were mobile, curred on Friday.
Simple calculations suggest that the Pierce must Organizational Implementation.
But the ""details"" of the operaordered, and the accounts report. tion were left to the Navy.
One announced the blockade on Monday evening, can be certain, however, that Soviet ships passed the first stage of the Navy's blueprint was in through the line along which American destroymotion, and a problem loomed on the horizon. ers had posted themselves before the official The Navy had a detailed plan for the blockade. ""first contact"" with the Soviet ship.
On OcThe President had several less precise but tober 26 a Soviet tanker arrived in Havana and equally determined notions concerning what was honored by a dockside rally for ""running should be done, when, and how.
Photographs of this vessel show the issue was one of effective implementation of the name Vinnitsa on the side of the vessel in the Navy's blockade—without the meddling and interference of political leaders.
For the Presim dent, the problem was to pace and manage Schlcsinger, op. cit., 818.
Rather, each is, in United States position, the first tanker to pass through his own right, a player in a central, competitive the blockade was the Bucharest, which was game.
Again simple mathematical calculation examong players positioned hierarchically within cludes the possibility that the Bucharest and the the government.
It seems probable be understood according to a third conceptual that the Navy's resistance to the President's model not as organizational outputs, but as outorder that the blockade be drawn in closer to comes of bargaining games.
In contrast with Cuba forced him to allow one or several Soviet Model I, the bureaucratic politics model sees no ships to pass through the blockade after it was unitary actor but rather many actors as players, officially operative. who focus not on a single strategic issue but on This attempt to leash the Navy's blockade many diverse intra-national problems as well, in had a price.
On Wednesday morning, Octoterms of no consistent set of strategic objectives ber 24, what the President had been awaiting but rather according to various conceptions of occurred.
The ships had simply constitutes a complex arena for the intra-nastopped to pick up Soviet submarine escorts. tional game.
Political leaders at the top of this The President became quite concerned lest the apparatus plus the men who occupy positions on Navy—already riled because of Presidential top of the critical organizations form the circle meddling in its affairs—blunder into an incident. of central players.
Ascendancy to this circle asSensing the President's fears, McNamara besures some independent standing.
The necessary came suspicious of the Navy's procedures and decentralization of decisions required for action routines for making the first interception.
Callon the broad range of foreign policy problems ing on the Chief of Naval Operations in the guarantees that each player has considerable Navy's inner sanctum, the Navy Flag Plot, discretion.
Sepmara asked Anderson what he would do if a Soarate responsibilities laid on the shoulders of inviet ship's captain refused to answer questions dividual personalities encourage differences in about his cargo.
But the issues are of Regulations the Navy man waved it in McNafirst order importance.
A wrong choice could mean irwhich McNamara replied, ""I don't give a damn reparable damage.
Men differ concerning Mr Secretary, if you and your Deputy will go what must be done.
This back to your office the Navy will run the blockmilieu necessitates that policy be resolved by ade."" 77 politics.
See Hilsman, op. tit., power and skill of proponents and opponents of 45. the action in question.
But most ""issues,""g., outcomes in ""the sense that what happens is not Vietnam or the proliferation of nuclear weapons, chosen as a solution to a problem but rather reemerge piecemeal, over time, one lump in one sults from compromise, coalition, competition, context, a second in another.
Hundreds of issues and confusion among government officials who compete for players' attention every day.
Each see different faces of an issue; political in the player is forced to fix upon his issues for that sense that the activity from which the outcomes day, fight them on their own terms, and rush on emerge is best characterized as bargaining.
Thus the character of emerging islowing Wittgenstein's use of the concept of a sues and the pace at which the game is played ""game,"" national behavior in international afconverge to yield government ""decisions"" and fairs can be conceived as outcomes of intricate ""actions"" as collages.
Choices by one player, and subtle, simultaneous, overlapping games outcomes of minor games, outcomes of central among players located in positions, the hierargames, and ""foul-ups""—these pieces, when stuck chical arrangement of which constitutes the to the same canvas, constitute government begovernment.
These games proceed neither at havior relevant to an issue. random nor at leisure.
Regular channels strucThe concept of national security policy as poture the game.
Deadlines force issues to the atlitical outcome contradicts both public imagery tention of busy players.
They must be ""above"" equal power over particular pieces and with seppolitics.
To accuse someone of ""playing politics arable objectives in distinguishable subgames. with national security"" is a most serious charge.
The actor is neither ternal politics is messy; moreover, according to a unitary nation, nor a conglomerate of organiprevailing doctrine, politicking lacks intellectual zations, but rather a number of individual playcontent.
As such, it constitutes gossip for jourSamuel Huntington's characterization of the pronalists rather than a subject for serious investicess as ""legislative"" overemphasizes the equality gation.
Occasional memoirs, anecdotes in hisof participants as opposed to the hierarchy which torical accounts, and several detailed case studstructures the game.
Moreover, whereas for Hunties to the contrary, most of the literature of forington, foreign policy (in contrast to military poleign policy avoids bureaucratic politics.
The gap icy) is set by the executive, this paradigm mainbetween academic literature and the experience tains that the activities which he describes as legof participants in government is nowhere wider islative are characteristic of the process by which than at this point. foreign policy is made.
Policy as actors is more common than this metaphor of Political Outcome games, positions, and players.
My prigames, positions, and players more useful for this mary source is the model implicit in the work of analysis of active participants in the determination Richard E Neustadt, though his concentration on of national policy.
Objections to the terminology presidential action has been generalized to a conon the grounds that ""game"" connotes non-serious cern with policy as the outcome of political barplay overlook the concept's application to most gaining among a number of independent players, serious problems both in Wittgenstein's philosophy the President amounting to no more than a ""suand in contemporary game theory.
Game theory perpower"" among many lesser but considerable typically treats more precisely structured games, powers.
As Warner Schilling argues, the substantive but Wittgenstein's examination of the ""language problems are of such inordinate difficulty that ungame"" wherein men use words to communicate is certainties and differences with regard to goals, alquite analogous to this analysis of the less speciternatives, and consequences are inevitable.
See Ludwig necessitates what Roger Hilsman describes as the Wittgenstein, Philosophical Investigations, and process of conflict and consensus building.
All curity policy game by occupying a critical posiof these obligations are his simultaneously.
When he defers to the Secretary of sional Influentials""), members of the press, Defense rather than fighting for his departspokesmen for important interest groups (espement's position—as he often must—he strains cially the ""bipartisan foreign policy establishthe loyalty of his officialdom.
The Secretary's ment"" in and out of Congress), and surrogates resolution of these conflicts depends not only for each of these groups.
Other members of upon the position, but also upon the player who the Congress, press, interest groups, and public occupies the position. form concentric circles around the central arena For players are also people.
Men's metabo—circles which demarcate the permissive limits lisms differ.
The core of the bureaucratic politics within which the game is played. mix is personality.
How each man manages to Positions define what players both may and stand the heat in his kitchen, each player's basic must do.
The advantages and handicaps with operating style, and the complementarity or which each player can enter and play in various contradiction among personalities and styles in games stems from his position.
So does a cluster the inner circles are irreducible pieces of the polof obligations for the performance of certain icy blend.
The two sides of this coin are illustrated position with baggage in tow, including sensitiviby the position of the modern Secretary of ties to certain issues, commitments to various State.
First, in form and usually in fact, he is programs, and personal standing and debts with the primary repository of political judgment on groups in the society. the political-military issues that are the stuff of B Parochial Priorities, Perceptions and Iscontemporary foreign policy; consequently, he is sues.
For the factors which encourage oricy, the Secretaries of Defense and Treasury, ganizational parochialism also influence the and the Special Assistant for National Security players who occupy positions on top of (or Affairs.
Third, he is the ranking United States diplomat within) these organizations.
Fourth, he serves as an bers of his organization, a player must be sensiAdministration voice to Congress, the country, tive to the organization's orientation.
Finally, he is ""Mr State Departinto which the player can enter and the advanment"" or ""Mr Foreign Office,"" ""leader of tages with which he plays enhance these pressures.
Thus propensities of perception stemming 80 Inclusion of the President's Special Assistant from position permit reliable prediction about a for National Security Affairs in the tier of ""Chiefs"" player's stances in many cases.
But these prorather than among the ""Staffers"" involves a depensities are filtered through the baggage which batable choice.
His position has no statutory authe pressures and the baggage is thus required thority.
He is especially dependent upon good for many predictions. relations with the President and the Secretaries of 81 Defense and State.
Nevertheless, he stands astride Richard E Neustadt, Testimony, United States a genuine action-channel.
Games are assistance all the time, concerning operations played to determine outcomes.
But outcomes during war) are composed by the military in advance and impede each player's conception of consultation with the Office of the Secretary of the national interest, specific programs to which Defense, State, and White House; crisis rehe is committed, the welfare of his friends, and sponses are debated among White House, State, his personal interests.
These overlapping interDefense, CIA, and Ad Hoc players; major politests constitute the stakes for which games are ical speeches, especially by the President but played.
Each player's ability to play successfully also by other Chiefs, are cleared through estabdepends upon his power.
Power,e., effective inlished channels. fluence on policy outcomes, is an elusive blend F Action as Politics.
Power wisely inmines that politics is the mechanism of choice. vested yields an enhanced reputation for effecNote the environment in which the game is tiveness.
Thus be done, the necessity that something be done, each player must pick the issues on which he and crucial consequences of whatever is done. can play with a reasonable probability of sucThese features force responsible men to become cess.
Each player's needs dreds of issues, numerous games, and multiple and fears run to many other players.
What enchannels—compels players to fight to ""get othsues is the most intricate and subtle of games er's attention,"" to make them ""see the facts,"" to known to man. assure that they ""take the time to think seriD The Problem and the Problems.
The structure of tions"" to strategic problems are not derived by the game—power shared by individuals with detached analysts focusing coolly on the probseparate responsibilities—validates each player's lem.
The rules of The problems for the players are both narrower the game—he who hesitates loses his chance to and broader than the strategic problem.
For play at that point, and he who is uncertain each player focuses not on the total strategic about his recommendation is overpowered by problem but rather on the decision that must be others who are sure—pressures players to come made now.
The quences not only for the strategic problem but rewards of the game—effectiveness,e., impact for each player's organizational, reputational, on outcomes, as the immediate measure of perand personal stakes.
The strategies and tactics emwide. ployed are quite similar to those formalized by theorists of international relations.
Important govized ways of producing action concerning types ernment decisions or actions emerge as collages of issues, structure the game by pre-selecting composed of individual acts, outcomes of minor the major players, determining their points of and major games, and foul-ups.
Outcomes entrance into the game, and distributing particwhich could never have been chosen by an actor ular advantages and disadvantages for each and would never have emerged from bargaining game.
Most critically, channels determine in a single game over the issue are fabricated ""who's got the action,"" that is, which departpiece by piece.
Understanding of the outcome ment's Indians actually do whatever is chosen. requires that it be disaggregated.
Dominant Inference Pattern mands for action cables are answered according If a nation performed an action, that action to routines of consultation and clearance from was the outcome of bargaining among individuState to Defense and White House; requests for als and groups within the government.
They must ""give the President confiwith quite different positions and foul-ups. dence"" in the right course of action.
The sum of behavior of get the attention of Chiefs, how to get an issue representatives of a government relevant to an decided, how to get the government ""to do what issue was rarely intended by any individual or is right."" group.
For large classes of issues,g., budgets aphrase one of Neustadt's assertions which can and procurement decisions, the stance of a parbe applied down the length of the ladder, the esticular player can be predicted with high relisence of a responsible official's task is to induce ability from information concerning his seat.
In others to see that what needs to be done is what the notorious B-36 controversy, no one was surtheir own appraisal of their own responsibilities prised by Admiral Radford's testimony that requires them to do in their own interests. ""the B-36 under any theory of war, is a bad gamble with national security,"" as opposed to V Specific Propositions Air Force Secretary Symington's claim that ""a 1.
The probability of nuclear atB-36 with an A-bomb can destroy distant objectack depends primarily on the probability of tives which might require ground armies years attack emerging as an outcome of the bureauto take."" 83 cratic politics of the attacking government.
Vertically, trolled by an individual, a minor game, or the the demands upon the President, Chiefs, Stafcentral game is critical.
The major difference between a stable balance of terror and 82 This aphorism was stated first, I think, by Don a questionable balance may simply be that in K Price. the first case most members of the government 81 Paul Y Hammond, ""Super Carriers and B-36 Bombers,"" in Harold Stein , American Civil''Roberta Wohlstetter, Pearl Harbor (Stanford.
The day before the flight of the the United States government had been sensitive to the U-2 which discovered the missiles, he camstream of decisions from which the Japanese atpaigned in Capehart's Indiana against those tack on Pearl Harbor emerged, they would have ""self-appointed generals and admirals who want been aware of a considerable probability of that to send someone else's sons to war."" 92 attack.
A series of overlapping bargaining games determined both the In this campaign to puncture the critics' date of the discovery of the Soviet missiles and charges, the Administration discovered that the the impact of this discovery on the Administrapublic needed positive slogans.
An explanation of the politics of the disfell into a tenuous semantic distinction between covery is consequently a considerable piece of ""offensive"" and ""defensive"" weapons.
In statements What the President least wanted to hear, the on the floor of the House and Senate, campaign CIA was most hesitant to say plainly.
On Auspeeches across the country, and interviews and gust 22 John McCone met privately with the articles carried by national news media, Cuba— President and voiced suspicions that the Soviets particularly the Soviet program of increased were preparing to introduce offensive missiles arms aid—served as a stick for stirring the into Cuba.
Fretting at Cap Ferrat, he bombarded his suspicious by the CIA on September 29 and cerdeputy, General Marshall Carter, with teletified top priority on October 3.
By October grams, but Carter, knowing that McCone had 4 McCone had the evidence required to raise the informed the President of his suspicions and reissue officially.
Loss of another U-2 might presented incontrovertible evidence of Soviet ofincite world opinion to demand cancellation of fensive missiles in Cuba.
The President's campaign against upon politicized players in a complex context.
As those who asserted that the Soviets were acting one high official recalled, Khrushchev had provocatively in Cuba had begun.
What each of ing a U-2 over Cuba was to risk chopping off the central participants saw, and what each the limb on which the President was sitting. did to cover both his own and the AdministraThat meeting decided to shy away from the tion's nakedness, created the spectrum of issues western end of Cuba (where SAMs were becomand answers. ing operational) and modify the flight pattern of At approximately 9:00 A.M., Tuesday mornthe U-2s in order to reduce the probability that ing, October 16, McGeorge Bundy went to the a U-2 would be lost.
The October 4 COMOR decision to direct Moreover, Khrushchev had assured the Presia flight over the western end of Cuba in efdent through the most direct and personal chanfect ""overturned"" the September estimate, but nels that he was aware of the President's domeswithout officially raising that issue.
The decision tic political problem and that nothing would be represented McCone's victory for which he had done to exacerbate this problem.
The Chairman lobbied with the President before the September had lied to the President.
Kennedy's initial reac10 decision, in telegrams before the September tion entailed action.
The missiles must be 19 estimate, and in person after his return to removed.
Though the politics of the intellior ""taking a diplomatic approach"" could not gence community is closely guarded, several have been less relevant to his problem. pieces of the story can be told.
By September These two tracks—doing nothing and taking 27, Colonel Wright and others in DIA believed 1M that the Soviet Union was placing missiles in the Department of Defense Appropriations, Hearings, 71.
For Secsen feared lest the shock and disgrace lead to disretary of Defense McNamara, the missiles aster. raised the spectre of nuclear war.
He first To the Joint Chiefs of Staff the issue was framed the issue as a straightforward strategic clear.
To understand the issue, one had to they had prepared contingency plans.
The missiles provided the occasion to deal with narrowing of the missile gap.
They wanted to do one-to-seven missile 'inferiority'—the three posthis.
The United States should not The time for an air strike was now.4 initiate a crisis with the Soviet Union, risking a significant probability of nuclear war over an The Politics of Choice.
The process by which occurrence which had such small strategic implithe blockade emerged is a story of the most subcations. tle and intricate probing, pulling, and hauling; leading, guiding, and spurring.
Reconstruction of The perceptions of McGeorge Bundy, the this process can only be tentative.
Initially the President's Assistant for National Security AfPresident and most of his advisers wanted the fairs, are the most difficult of• all to reconstruct. clean, surgical air strike.
On the first day of There is no question that he initially argued for the crisis, when informing Stevenson of the misa diplomatic track.
His initial atternative that would prevent the air strike. tempt to frame the issue in strategic terms The initial reaction of Theodore Sorensen, the struck Kennedy as particularly inappropriate.
President's Special Counsel and ""alter ego,"" fell Once McNamara realized that the name of the somewhere between that of the President and game was a strong response, however, he and his his brother.
Like the President, Sorensen felt the deputy Gilpatric chose the blockade as a fallpoignancy of betrayal.
When the Secretary of Defense—whose the architect of the policy which the missiles department had the action, whose reputation in punctured, Sorensen was the draftsman. the Cabinet was unequaled, in whom the PresiKhrushchev's deceitful move demanded a strong dent demonstrated full confidence—marshalled ITO 1,3 Hilsman, op. cit., 195.
His arguments against emerged from the President's initial decision the air strike on moral grounds struck a chord that something had to be done; McNamara, Robin the President.
Moreover, once his brother had ert Kennedy, and Sorensen's resistance to the air stated these arguments so forcefully, the Presistrike; incompatibility between the President dent could not have chosen his initially preand the air strike advocates; and an inaccurate ferred course without, in effect, agreeing to bepiece of information.1 come what RFK had condemned.
On Wednesday morning, in This essay has obviously bitten off more than order to mask our discovery from the Russians, it has chewed.
For further developments and the President flew to Connecticut to keep a synthesis of these arguments the reader is recampaign commitment, leaving RFK as the unferred to the larger study.
By the time the its of space, however, it would be inappropriate President returned on Wednesday evening, a to stop without spelling out several implications critical third piece had been added to the picof the argument and addressing the question of ture.
McNamara had presented his argument relations among the models and extensions of for the blockade.
Robert Kennedy and Sorensen them to activity beyond explanation. had joined McNamara.
A powerful coalition of At a minimum, the intended implications of the advisers in whom the President had the the argument presented here are four.
First, forgreatest confidence, and with whom his style mulation of alternative frames of reference and was most compatible, had emerged. demonstration that different analysts, relying Fourth, the coalition that had formed behind predominantly on different models, produce the President's initial preference gave him reaquite different explanations should encourage son to pause.
Who supported the air strike—the the analyst's self-consciousness about the nets he Chiefs, McCone, Rusk, Nitze, and Acheson—as employs.
The effect of these ""spectacles"" in senmuch as how they supported it, counted.
Fifth, sitizing him to particular aspects of what is a piece of inaccurate information, which no one going on—framing the puzzle in one way rather probed, permitted the blockade advocates to than another, encouraging him to examine the fuel uncertainties in the President's problem in terms of certain categories rather mind.
When the President returned to Washingthan others, directing him to particular kinds of ton Wednesday evening, RFK and Sorensen met evidence, and relieving puzzlement by one him at the airport.
Sorensen gave the President procedure rather than another—must be recoga four-page memorandum outlining the areas of nized and explored. agreement and disagreement.
After a day of prodding and cepting the commonplace characterization of the questioning, the Air Force had asserted that it present condition of foreign policy analysis— could not guarantee the success of a surgical air personalistic, non-cumulative, and sometimes instrike limited to the missiles alone. sightful—this essay rejects both the counsel of Thursday evening, the President convened despair's justification of this condition as a the ExCom at the White House.
He declared his consequence of the character of the enterprise, tentative choice of the blockade and directed and the ""new frontiersmen's"" demand for a that preparations be made to put it into effect priori theorizing on the frontiers and ad hoc apby Monday morning.
Kennedy, 686. poles in the recent ""great debate"" about interna1,8 /bin!., 691. tional relations.
From a logic of the various intellectual enterprises, and Model II vantage point, the existence of an onreflection on the questions being asked.
Though going Soviet ABM program, the strength of the it is difficult to overemphasize the need for more organization that consystematic processing of more data, these pretrols ABMs, and the fact that an agreement to liminary matters of formulating questions with stop ABM deployment would force the virtual clarity and sensitivity to categories and assumpdismantling of this organization, make a viable tions so that fruitful acquisition of large quanagreement of this sort much less likely.
A Model tities of data is possible are still a major hurdle in III cut suggests that there must be significonsidering most important problems. cant differences among perceptions and priorities Third, the preliminary, partial paradigms preof Soviet leaders over strategic negotiations, sented here provide a basis for serious reexamiany agreement will affect some players' power nation of many problems of foreign and military bases, and agreements that do not require policy.
Model II and Model I I I cuts at problems extensive cuts in the sources of some major typically treated in Model I terms can permit players' power will prove easier to negotiate and significant improvements in explanation and more viable. prediction.
Full Model II and I I I analyses reFourth, the present formulation of paradigms quire large amounts of information.
As such it leaves a long cases where the information base is severely limlist of critical questions unanswered.
Consider the action, an imaginative analyst should always be problem of predicting Soviet strategic forces.
In able to construct some rationale for the governthe mid-1950s, Model I style calculations led to ment's choice.
By imposing, and relaxing, conpredictions that the Soviets would rapidly destraints on the parameters of rational choice (as ploy large numbers of long-range bombers. in variants of Model I) analysts can construct a From a Model II perspective, both the frailty of large number of accounts of any act as a rathe Air Force within the Soviet military estabtional choice.
But does a statement of reasons lishment and the budgetary implications of such why a rational actor would choose an action a buildup, would have led anafysts to hedge this constitute an explanation of the occurrence of prediction.
In the late 1950s Model II's explanation of t in terms of t 1 is and early 1960s, Model I calculations led to the explanation.
But govprediction of immediate, massive Soviet deployernments sometimes make sharp departures. ment of ICBMs.
Attention to period, strategic rockets were controlled by the organizational change should afford greater unSoviet Ground Forces rather than an independerstanding of why particular programs and dent Service, and in the later period, this would SOPs are maintained by identifiable types of have necessitated massive shifts in budgetary organizations and also how a manager can improve organizational performance.
But its complexity is adopt the second, this third posture is relatively enormous, the information requirements are neutral with respect to whatever is in substantive often overwhelming, and many of the details of dispute.
Indeed, the paradigms highlight the ternational Relations,"" World Politics (October, partial emphasis of the framework—what each 1966). emphasizes and what it leaves out.
Each concen124 A number of problems are now being examined trates on one class of variables, in effect, relein these terms both in the Bureaucracy Study gating other important factors to a ceteris paraGroup on Bureaucracy and Policy of the Institute bus clause.
Government behavModels II and I I I focus upon the government ior is but one cluster of factors relevant to ocmachine through which this fact about the incurrences in foreign affairs.
Most students of ternational strategic marketplace must be filtered foreign policy adopt this focus (at least when to produce a surrender.
Nevertheless, the disiderably less sanguine about the possibility of mensions of the chess board, the character of surrender at the point that the cost-benefit calthe pieces, and the rules of the game—factors culus turns negative.
Never in history (i.e., in considered by international systems theorists— none of the five cases I have examined) have constitute the context in which the pieces are nations surrendered at that point.
Moreover, the efsynthesis of the models, and a sketch of their fects of the victorious power's action upon the uses in activities other than explanation can be surrendering nation cannot be adequately sumsuggested by generating predictions in terms of marized as increasing or decreasing strategic each.
Imposing additional costs by bombing a lem of international relations and diplomatic nation may increase the probability of surrenhistory.
For more implicit in explanations or more explicit in analprecise prediction, Models II and I I I require ysis, diplomatic historians and strategists rely considerably more information about the organiupon propositions which can be turned forward zations and politics of North Vietnam than is to produce predictions.
First, In a nutshell, analysis according to Model I to have lost is not sufficient.
But neither the categories, nor realizes ""that continued fighting can only generthe indicators, of strategic costs and benefits are ate additional costs without hope of compensatclear.
Military evaluation of crease or decrease Hanoi's strategic costs. military performance, military estimates of facBombing North Vietnam increases the pain and tors like ""enemy morale,"" and military predicthus increases the probability of surrender.
This tions concerning when ""the tide will turn"" or proposition and prediction are not without ""the corner will have been turned"" are typically meaning.
In cases of highly decentralized guertions are more likely to surrender when the rilla operations, like Vietnam, these problems are exacerbated.
Thus strategic costs will be un123 In response to several readers' recommendaderestimated.
Only highly visible costs can tions, what follows is reproduced verbatim from the have direct impact on leaders without being filpaper delivered at the September, 1968 Associatered through organizational channels.
The discussion is since organizations define the details of options heavily indebted to Ernest R May. and execute actions, surrender """"Richard Snyder, Deterrence and Defense is likely to entail considerable bungling in the , 11.
Fourth, the Model III suggests that surrender will not course of the war, particularly actions of the come at the point that strategic costs outweigh victor, can influence the advantages and disadbenefits, but that it will not wait until the leadvantages of players in the loser's government. ership group concludes that the war is lost.
Thus, North Vietnam will surrender not when Rather the problem is better understood in its leaders have a change of heart, but when terms of four additional propositions.
How are closely identified with the war, rarely come United States bombing , threats, promises, or to the conclusion that costs outweigh benefits. action in the South affect the game in Hanoi is Second, quite often from the outset of a war, a subtle but nonetheless crucial. number of members of the government (particThat these three models could be applied to ularly those whose responsibilities sensitize them the surrender of governments other than North to problems other than war,g., economic planVietnam should be obvious.
But that exercise is ners or intelligence experts) are convinced that left for the reader. the war effort is futile.
