These assignments comprise sources, questions and mark schemes which will enable your pupils to fulfil the coursework requirements in history for Edexcel Foundation specifications for first examination in summer 2003.
Assistance may be given in class to aid the comprehension of the sources.
However, if you wish to make changes you should submit these to the Edexcel Foundation for approval to ensure that revised sources or questions give candidates appropriate opportunity to meet the targets specified at the appropriate level.
The assignment has been designed to accommodate some flexibility of classroom practice.
The timing of individual questions within an assignment may be staggered over a period of time and integrated into the programme of study.
The historical content listed below should be familiar to candidates before they attempt to answer the questions.
Cuban Missiles Crisis This assignment should arise from a teaching programme designed to occupy approximately half a term.
Introduction In the autumn of 1962, the Superpowers came closer to a ‘Hot War’ than at any other time.
In fact the crisis subsided very quickly and the leaders of the USA and USSR soon made it clear they intended that such a crisis would not happen again.
These are some of the issues that you will be asked to consider as you tackle this assessment.
From the book ‘13 days’, written by Robert Kennedy and published in 1968 On Tuesday morning, 16 October 1962, shortly after 9 o’clock, President Kennedy called and asked me to come to the White House.
He told me that a U-2 had just finished a photographic mission and that he was convinced that Russia was placing missiles and atomic weapons in Cuba.
A map showing Cuba and the USA SOURCE C: From the book ’13 days’, written by Robert Kennedy and published in 1968 The general feeling in the beginning was that some form of action was required.
Most felt at that stage that an air strike against the missile sites could be the only course.
It was during the afternoon and evening of 16 October that we began to discuss the idea of a blockade.
On Wednesday a photograph showed that the missiles were being directed at American cities.
The estimate was that within a few minutes of their being fired 80,000,000 Americans would be dead.
The B52 bomber force was ordered into the air fully loaded with atomic weapons.
From a broadcast made by President Kennedy on United States radio and television on 22 October 1962 All ships bound for Cuba will, if found to contain cargoes of offensive weapons, be turned back.
Any missile launched from Cuba against any nation in the Western hemisphere will be regarded as an attack by the Soviet Union on the United States.
I call upon Chairman Khrushchev to halt this reckless and provocative threat to world peace.
From the memoirs of Gromyko, the Soviet Foreign Minister at the time of the Cuban Missiles Crisis.
These memoirs were published in 1989 I put the Soviet position to the President.
It should be noted that three months after the crisis, the United States removed all its missiles from Turkey and Italy.
We sent the Americans a note saying that we agreed to remove our missiles on condition that the President gave us his assurance that there would be no invasion of Cuba.
Describe how relations between the superpowers worsened between 1959 and the summer of 1962.
Study Sources B and C Use these sources, and your own knowledge, to explain why Kennedy decided to blockade Cuba.
Study Sources F and G These sources give two different views about who won in the end.
Use the sources and your own knowledge to explain which view you think is more accurate.
Coursework Assignments Mark scheme Cuban Missiles Crisis Assignment One Assessment Objective 1 1.
Key features affecting change / recall of knowledge Level 1: Simple statements supported by some knowledge of how relations changed,g.
Developed statements showing how relations worsened supported by relevant knowledge,g. details of events in Cuba, Berlin, effects of Khrushchev’s policies etc.
Explores the implications of a range of ways in which superpower relations worsened supported by appropriately selected knowledge,g.
Khrushchev wanted to take advantage of the weakness of the USA, how U2 incident antagonised USSR, Kennedy’s inexperience etc.
Causation / recall of knowledge Level 1: Simple statements giving reasons for the Crisis supported by some knowledge,g.
Castro seized power and nationalised US property, there was an United States exodus, Soviet missiles placed in Cuba, etc.
Change/making a judgement on the importance of a key feature/recall of knowledge Level 1: Simple statements giving changes supported by some knowledge g. it led to détente, it made the superpowers realise the dangers of nuclear war etc.
Developed statements giving changes supported by relevant knowledge g. the development of détente in the 1960s and 1970s, etc Level 3: Developed explanation supported by appropriately selected knowledge showing understanding of the situation before 1962 and the situation after,g. it reduced the degree of rivalry in armed conflict and the first instance of détente is in Khrushchev’s letter agreeing to the deal etc.
Sustained argument supported by precisely selected knowledge showing clear understanding of the nature and extent of change, g. argues whether new relationship between the two countries and between their leaders developed, evaluates the significance of détente in the 1960s.
Coursework Assignments Mark scheme Cuban Missiles Crisis Assignment Two Assessment Objectives 2 and 3 1.
Comprehension of and inference from a source Level 1: Information taken from Source A at face value,g. he was taking the threat seriously, examples of the dangers to the USA Level 2: Inference from the source,g. details of how seriously Kennedy took the photographs, this was a major threat to the USA, it undermined US defences, etc.
Use these Sources, and your own knowledge, to explain why Kennedy decided to blockade Cuba.
Analysis of sources / recall of knowledge to explain cause Level 1: Simple statements using the sources as information at face value and/or some contextual knowledge,g. the USA was threatened, missiles were directed at United States etc.
Developed statements using the sources and relevant own knowledge, g. refers to the dangers to the United States cities and population; this was the first time that the United States had been threatened in this way etc.
Developed explanation of the reasons for Kennedy’s decision using the sources as evidence and selected knowledge, g. the President clearly believed that the missiles posed a very serious threat; not only did he consult his brother but also went on TV, Kennedy knew he could rely on public support etc.
Sustained argument using the sources as evidence and supported by precisely selected knowledge,g. sets into context of events of the Cold War 1958 to 1962, considers Kennedy’s motives for opposing Khrushchev on this occasion etc.
Evaluation of sources for utility Level 1: Makes simple statements about value based on content or nature of sourcesg.
Source E shows that United States and USSR have different views about Cuba.
Developed statements about usefulness drawing inferences from nature, origin and purpose of sourcesg. sources come from each side so they may give slanted view.
Developed analysis of strengths and weaknesses of the sources in explaining reasons for conflict crisis using nature and content of the sources,g.
Source E gives Soviet perspective; includes direct quote from Kennedy but written after the event, so may have elements of hindsight.
Developed statements making inferences from the sources OR referring to the tone of the sources,g.
Developed explanation using the sources as evidence, g. making positive use of the sources and contextual knowledge to explain different points of view 5.
Study Sources F and G These sources give two very different views on who won in the end.
Use all the sources, and your own knowledge, to explain which view you think is more accurate.
Analysis of interpretations of events Level 1: Simple statements offering points in support using sources or own knowledge, g. the USA said one thing, the USSR said the opposite etc.
Developed statements offering points in support of choice using sources and supported by relevant knowledge, g. both sides could claim victory as both gave way etc.
Developed statement giving a judgement about view making confident use of sources and supported by appropriately selected knowledge, g.
United States seems to have won but may have had to agree to remove its own missiles Level 4: Sustained argument giving reasoned explanation using the sources as evidence and supported by precisely selected knowledge, which critically evaluates the sources, g.
Khrushchev now out of office is trying to present his own role in Crisis as a triumph, he needed to explain why he appeared to have given way, Source F gives victory to Kennedy but generally a more balanced view of United States actions and is able to include references to the removal of missiles from Turkey and Italy etc.
