Although the crisis itself was short, it was so intense that it absorbed the entire attention of President Kennedy and his closest advisers.
The Cuban missile crisis, the “sixteen days in October,” ending with the Kennedy-Khrushchev “agreement” of October 28, 1962.
The countries that were closely involved were Cuba , USSR , USA and Turkey.
Cuba’s original government was corrupted and overthrown by a group of rebels led by a young lawyer called Fidel Castro.
He had ideas closer to communism thus relations between Cuba and USA worsened.
Castro’s communist ideas USA then found out that the Soviet Union had missiles in Cuba, which could hit most of the major American cities.
USSR also had 40,000 troops in Cuba, and Soviet submarines armed with nuclear warhead on the way to Cuba.
The United States missiles were there because of a formal alliance with Turkey.
An unsecure USSR due to United States missiles in Turkey According to Nikita Khrushchev’s memoirs, he conceived the idea of placing nuclear missiles in Cuba as a means of countering an emerging lead of the United States in developing and deploying strategic missiles and protecting Cuba from another United States-sponsored invasion, such as the failed attempt at the Bay of Pigs in 1961.
The Bay of Pigs invasion by exiled Cuban rebels trained by USA also failed.
A paranoid USA wanting to invade Cuba On October 16, President John Kennedy was shown photographs of Soviet missile installations under construction in Cuba.
More than 100,000 United States soldiers were sent to Florida, the part of the United States mainland nearest to Cuba, so that they would be ready to carry out an invasion of Cuba.
United States planes were also loaded with nuclear bombs and United States forces around the world were placed on high alert.
After seven days of debate, President Kennedy announced the discovery of the installations and proclaimed that any nuclear missile attack from Cuba on October 22 and that it would be regarded as an attack by the Soviet Union and would be responded to accordingly.
That was one of the 4 ways of dealing with the Soviet missiles in Cuba, thought up by United States President Kennedy and a group of advisors.
Do nothing and wait for USSR to make a move Bomb the places where the missiles were kept Invade Cuba On October 23 1962, USA warned that if the missiles were not removed, it would invade Cuba.
Khrushchev ordered the Soviet ships that arrived at the blockade not to move any closer to Cuba.
Subsequently he sent a letter to USA and said that he would remove the missiles in Cuba if USA promised not to invade Cuba.
The crisis ended as Khrushchev announced on Radio Moscow that the USSR would remove its missiles from Cuba.
The USA announced that it had promised the USSR that it would not invade Cuba.
A second dangerous crisis emerged over the removal of Soviet IL-28 bombers from Cuba, which the United States insisted were “offensive weapons” and thus subject to the October 28 agreement.
Their removal entailed further diplomatic negotiations that were not concluded successfully until November 20.
The return of these bombers to the Soviet Union was checked as carefully as that of the missiles.
Email Name Website You are commenting using your WordPress.com account.
