Variations m sound quality and in the aural acuity of ^ n te "" e ""„ h Ca "" and do Produce wide variations in what is heard.
Even though transcripts may be prepared at great effort and with great care, many points of ambiguity are inevitable, and erroneous interpretations from transcripts are always possible.
McGeorge Bundy Special Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs.
U Alexis Johnson Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs.
Llewellyn Thompson Ambassador at Large and Special Advisor on Soviet Affairs to the Secretary of State.
There are 13 pages of transcript representing 55. minutes of recorded conversation.
Meeting Item 40.3, Reference Reel 1 Cuba Tape (This is a transcription of tapes recorded in the Cabinet Room on Saturday, October 27, 1962.
The tape begins with an inconclusive discussion of current tactical questions, including plans to stop a ship and a proposal for two daylight surveillance missions, morning and afternoon.
It creates a pattern of increasing intensity of surveillance, Mr President.
And I would also recommend, although we don't have to decide now, that we conduct a night surveillance mission tonight.
There appears increasing evidence that they're working night and day on these sites, two in daylight and one at night.
This is why I would recanmend the two daylight and the one night missions, and I fully agree we ought to put out an announcement that we are going to send the night mission over.
I think we ought to go ahead if they want it, so it's all right with me.
I think we might have one more conversation about it, however, at about six o'clock just in case during the day we get something.
Hare says this is absolutely anathema, and as a matter of prestige and politics.
Ball; Yeah, we have a report from Finletter, and we've also got a report from Rome on the Italians which indicates that that would be relatively easy.
It's very odd, Mr President, if he's changed his terms from a long letter to you and an urgent appeal from the Counselor only last night, set in a purely Cuban context, it seems to me we're well within our — there's nothing wrong with our posture in sticking to that line.
Rusk ; JFK; A special message appeared to call for negotiations and both nations, Cuba and Turkey, should give their consent to the United Nations to visit their territories.
Khrushchev said the Security Council of the Soviet Union was solemnly pledged not to use its territory as a bridgehead for an attack on Turkey, called for a similar pledge from the United States not to let its territory be used as a bridgehead for an attack on Cuba.
Broadcast it was out of the question for the U S. to abandon its Turkish military bases.
Rusk ; We've asked Finletter and Hare to give us their judgments on it.
JFK ; Well this is unsettling now George, because he's got us in a pretty good spot here, because most people will regard this as not an unreasonable proposal, I'll just tell you that.
B undy ; I don't see why we pick that track when he's offered us the other track, within the last twenty-four hours.
Sorensen ; As between the two I think it clear tliat practically everyone here would favor the private proposal.
Rusk ; We're not being offered the choice — we may_ not be offered the choice.
But in any case this is now his official , and we can release Ms other one, and it's different, but this is the one tliat the Soviet government obviously is going on.
Rusk ; I think, yes, I think that the — uh — NATO-Warsaw Pact arms problem is a separate problem and ought to be discussed between NATO and Warsaw Pact.
The Cuba thing is a Western Hemisphere problem, an intrusion in the Western Hemisphere.
Nitze ; I think we ought to stand as much as we can on the separate stages.
Voice ; Absolutely, Nitze ; Fight the Turkish one with the best arguments we can.
Bundy ; The other way, it seems to me — if we accept the notion of a trade at this stage, our position will come apart very fast.
Ball ; Because immediately the Soviet Union would know that this tiling was being discussed.
It seems to me we ought to get word to Stevenson that if this is put up up there he should immediately say we will not discuss — discuss the Turkish bases.
Besides he must guarantee not to intervene in Turkey and we must do the same in Cuba, Well, we know what the problem is there.
He's put this out in a way that's caused maximum tension and embarrassment.
It's not as if it was a private proposal, which would give us an opportunity to negotiate with the Turks.
It may be preparations for counteraction against those particular bases that we — uh — Cuba could be that.
Governor Stevenson also recommends that we not consider the Turkish, offer as reported in the attached Eeuters dispatch as an alternative or an addition to the Khrushchev proposal in his letter.
I think that — uh — we ought to go at — we ought to get a statement ready which will — uh — I'm not sure that — wide** would — uh — these references to last night's — back on that, number one.
Khrushchev may have picked up the statement which Kreisky, the Austrian Foreign Minister, made day before yesterday — has made and which he may think was inspired by us, in which he raised the question of Turkish. . . low Voice ;0f course maybe the Russians got Kreisky to do it, too.
Uh — we would — uh — obviously consider negotiating the giving up of bases in — uh — Turkey if we can assure the — uh.-— Turks and the other European countries for whom these bases were emplaced that there can be some assurances given to them for their own security.
This will entail inspection as we anticipate that there will be some inspection in Cuba and in the United States — uh — at the time that these bases are withdrawn from Cuba and we give assurances that we are not going to invade Cuba.
No — uh — unless the Soviet Union is also going to give up their — uh — Voices : weapons.
We think that's a very good point made by the Russians, and we would be glad to — and we finally feel that tlds is a major breakthrough and we would be glad to discuss that.
In the meantime tlds is a threat to the United States and not just that — to all of Latin America and let's get that done.
Well, Khrushchev's statement to U Thant is absolutely contradictory to Ids statement to the President.
The reel of tape ends here, [End Meeting Item 40.3, Reference Reel 1, continued on Reference Reel 2] Meeting Item 40.3, Reference Reel 2 and the next reel begins with low voices and side conversations, not clear ~ President not present.
The gathering cares to order after about five minutes as Rusk begins to read from the Khrushchev public letter.
What does Tommy say? Bob, we've got three positions, i a long letter last night he wrote himself.
McNamara ; It completely changes the character of the deal we're likely to be able to make, and also therefore our action in the interim.
A private — let me suggest this scenario — we knock this down publicly in the way we've just described, separating the issues, keeping attention on Cuba, and the four-point reply that Bob has framed.
Privately we say to Khrushchev, ""Look — uh — your public statement is a very dangerous one because — uh — it makes impossible immediate discussion of your private proposals and requires us to proceed urgently with the things that we have in mind.
I guess we say we are reluctant to release this letter Which would display the inconsistency in your position, but we don't have very mud* time.
I don't know what — where you are in twenty-four hours from now — uh — so we win that argument but what twenty-four hours. . . voices McNamara ; We incorporate a new deal in our letter.
KFK t now the problem is going to be — uh — not just this fact that we have this exchange with him and but the fact that he's going to have a ploy publicly that's going to look rather satisfactory at present.
How are we going to have him do anything but take the ball away from us publicly, if we don't — if we just write him a letter.
We have an exchange with him and say he's double-crossed us, and we don't know which deal to accept, and then he writes back, and in the meantime he's got all the play throughout the world, and the fact that he McNamarai Just turn it down publicly.
McCone ; I don't think you can turn that down publicly without — uh -referring publicly to his letter of yesterday.
He's offered this deal — uh ~ that he will withdraw the bases in Cuba for assurances that we don't intend to invade.
This is a question of all the Latin American countries, which have all joined together in this effort.
We will withdraw the bases frcm Turkey if — uh — and allow inspection of Turkey to make sure we've done that, and you withdraw your invasion bases of — uh — of the Soviet Union and permit inspection there.
JFK ; Wait, just, it seems to me the first thing we ought to try to do is not let the Turks issue some statement that's wholly unacceptable.
Then whatever we do in Turkey — in Cuba — it seems to me he has set the groundwork to do something in Turkey.
So I tiujik we ought to have the Turks — we ought to have a talk with the Turks because I think they've got to understand the peril that they're going to move in the next week.
When we take seme action in Cuba, the chances are that he'll take seme action in Turkey, and they ought to understand that.
And in fact he may even cone out and say that once he's tried to be fair and if we do any more about Cuba then he's going to do it to Turkey.
So I think the Turks ought to tl»ink a little . we ought to try to get them not to respond to this till we've had a chance to consider what action we'll take.
They ought to — they can certainly make a statement disassociating themselves.
If anyone pulls their in, it'll be us, and they can't be expected to do that.
They belong to Turkey and are manned by Turks, but the warheads are in U S. custody.
They all are complicated matters that involve some discussion to get their true meaning, we cannot permit ourselves to be impaled on a long negotiating hook while the work goes on at these bases.
I therefore suggest that — uh — work -that the United Nations immediately, with the cooperation of the Soviet Union, take steps with regard to the cessation of the work, and then we can talk about all these matters, which are very complicated.
I think it would be very important to say at least that the current threat to peace is not restricted to Cuba.
There's no pain in saying that if you think you're going to make a trade later on.
I think also that we ought to — uh — say that we have an immediate threat — what is going on in Cuba, and that is what has got to stop.
That being so — uh — until we find out what is really being suggested and what can really be discussed, we have to get something on work — the main weakness here is the work's going on.
While you were out of the room, Mr President, we readied an informal consensus — I don't know whether Tanny agrees — that this — last night's message was Khrushchev and this one is his own hard-nosed people overruling him — this public one ~ that they didn't like what he said to you last night.
The only tiling is, Tanny, why wouldn't they say it privately if ti^ey were serious.
JFKT"" Now let's — uh — I would think the first tiling we have to do is to""— as I say, rather than get into the details — the fact that work is going on is the one defensible public position we've got.
These are all the tilings that — uh — why this is a pretty good play of his.
That — uh — being so — uh — I think that we — the only tiling we've got him on is the fact that now they've put forward varying proposals in short periods of time, all of wliich are complicated, and under that shield this work goes on.
Until we can get some un — agreement on the cessation of work, how can we possibly negotiate with proposals coming as fast as the wires can carry them.
Sndyt 9 I%self would send back word, by Fcmin, for «gj» *f ^ HSht's stuff was pretty good; this is impossible, at this stage of the game, and that time is getting very short.
He certainly doesn't have the text but he knew when he heard the broadcast.
Well — uh — well, Governor we'd be — I think your message — uh — you know the letter that I received last night was different than this.
Yeah, that's what it presented us I think we've been around and around too much of that.
Let's get it out of this problem, then we might as well I mean just decide on sand in his gears for a few minutes.
I'm just trying to cope with what the public problem is about — because everybody's going to think tl*at this is very reasonable.
This Turkish tiling has got to be tlorown — you're quite right, Mr President — into the overall European context, and you can bring in Berlin; I think it's fine.
Because it's not only going to be Turks that are going to be answering here, but the Germans are going to be making statements in the next few hours, as well as other people about this when they're asked, and they're going to take a very strong position.
No Rusk: The Prime Minister talked to our delegation to — uh — to — uh Dillon : I would say that you say that the Turkish proposal opens the way to a major discussion of a lot of tensions in Europe, including Berlin.
Oh no no no no no no Voice: I don't think you — if you mention that, you've lost the Germans.
They turned away from their targets and returned to base, "" Taylor ; they run into resistance Rusk : Mr President, it looks like we'll have to make a statement today as to what we do about that as far as surveillance is concerned.
JFK ; Well we better wait till we hear more about why they aborted, McNamara ; Mr President I wonder if it wouldn't be wise to put the announcement about night surveillance whether we decide to carry it out tonight or not.
This is the announcement we would propose, Voice ; They've commonly referred to is — uh — different than the resolution.
Now just before the Foreign Ministers which isn't really very strong as decisions go.
JFK ; On this last paragraph, Mr Secretary, I think we ought to say ""As I was preparing this letter, which was prepared in response to your private letter of last night, I learned of your — this immediate crisis in Cuba, and so forth.
When we get action there I shall certainly be ready to discuss the matters you mentioned in your public message.
Dillon ; Be prepared to discuss our actions, the detailed thinking (voices unclear) JFK ; Well, be prepared to discuss the — uh ~ your public message — the matters in your public message, or the issues in your public message.
Tomorrow he'll come back and say the United States lias rejected this proposal we've made.
So I think we ought to be able to say that — uh — the matter of Turkey, and so on, in fact all these matters, ought to be ~ can be discussed if he'll cease work.
But until we get that — so I think we ought to put that in — just say, I read of your public message accepting bases in Cuba. — uh ~ contact as necessary.
You must realize that these other matters involving NATO and the Warsaw Pact countries will require time for discussion.
Unless we all agree, unless we all mean to announce that we've rejected it, I don't think we ought to do it today.
That's our only... it seems to me... defense against the appeal of his — uh — trade.
I think we (words unclear) glad to discuss this and other matters, we've got to get a suspension of work.
And the bases being observed and dismantled Voice : Mr Zorin has been to U Thant, and one of the people who was there came out and said that the position that Zorin had taken was that the first letter was confidential and it was designed to reduce tension but that as far as he was concerned the second letter contained the substantive proposal.
Yes, why don't we send that up to U Thant right now while we discuss these other matters which are complicated, involve other countries and which are bound to take time, and everybody will recognize that.
If we can get assurance from — which can be inspected that they will cease the work and then we'll discuss these matters.
Then I think we're on a much better ground, We ought to make it a formal request, I think, George.
Ball ; All right JFK; Well just let this go for just a second while we send a message to U Thant.
If we're going to discuss these we must have some assurances which can be verified that the Soviet Union will cease work on the missiles and that the missiles which are presently there have been made inoperable.
Would the Secretary General get from the Soviet Union these assurances.
In that case the United States would be prepared to discuss anv proposals of the Soviet Union.
Sorensen; The proposal made by the Soviet Union this morning involves a number of countries and issues unrelated to the existing threat to peace posed by Soviet planes and missile bases in Cuba.
The lengthy discussions required for any possible settlement of these matters cannot be undertaken by this country until it is assured that work on these bases is halted and the bases themselves are inoperable.
I wouldn't say ""lengthy'' because that sounds — uh — I have the Soviet Union, in its message of this morning has introduced issues which are directly — which are not directly related to the Cuban crisis.
The United States would be glad to discuss these matters with the Secretary General and the Soviet Union but they do involve the interests of the fifteen countries of NATO and obviously would take, therefore, some time.
I would like the Secretary General — I ask, therefore, the Secretary General whether he can get assurances from the Soviet Union — uh — assurances from the Soviet Union which can be verified by the United Nations that the missiles and so on and so on and about the missile bases that they have been rendered inoperable.
If this can be dene then the conversations can take place in an atmosphere which would be more suitable.
I would think — uh — Jack it would be well complication JFK : Yeah that's right, that's why we want to get it out tomorrow morning Bundy : I talked to Bohlen in Paris.
He said the knockdown of the trip to Cuba had been very well received there.
Probably needed for a revolt in NATO that Bundy : well I've also talked to Finletter and asked him to check the Permreps and say that the United States stands for this position but if the NATO countries should feel that it places them in unusual hazard, he is authorized to elicit their points of view stir them on that point, Taylor : we have some more information on the afternoon flight, Mr Secretary.
One developed mechanical trouble so a pair turned back, approach the Cuban coast in three flight plans.
Trie President asks what kind of fire was received and the answer is not clear.
There follows low and apparently less general conversation including a discussion, not very audible, by Rusk of possible public comment on the off-course U-2 over the Soviet Union.
JFK : I think we're better off not to do it if we can get away with not having some leak.
But I think -I think our problem is to maintain our credibility with Khrushchev.
Mr President, may I say in relation to that, I think if we haven't announced already, and I know we haven't we shouldn't now.
One is, do we want to have these conversations go on, on Turkey and these other matters while there's a sort of standstill in Cuba, or do we want to say that we won't talk about Turkey and these other matters until they've settled the Cuban crisis.
Otherwise — uh — what we're really saying is ""We won't discuss Turkey till they settle Cuba,"" and I think that he will then cane back and say the United States has refused his offer, and I don't think that's as good a position as saying we're glad to discuss Ms offer if we can get a standstill in Cuba.
That puts us in a much stronger world position because most people will think Ms offer is rati»er reasonable.
But I think that if we don't say that he's going to say we rejected Ms offer, and therefore he's going to have public opinion with him.
Now we don't think he'll do that, and therefore we're in much better shape to put our case on that than rattier that Turkey's irrelevant.
Ya, I think we ought to say ""if"" his proposal, The proposal made by the Soviet Union broadcast — tMs would be to the Secretary General — this morning involved a number of countries and complicated issues not directly related to the existing threat to peace posed by Soviet offensive missile bases in Cuba.
The United States would be glad to discuss tMs matter with you and others after consultation with the members of NATO, whose interests are also involved.
The discussions reauired for any peaceful settlement of these other matters, however, will require time for consultation with the countries whose interests — uh ~ with these countries and cannot be undertaken by this country until it is assured that work on these bases in Cuba has halted and the bases themselves are inoperable.
I therefore request with the utmost urgency that you seek such assurances from the Soviet Union in order that negotiations can 90 forward.
Bundy ; Well there are two different audiences here, Mr President, there really are, and I think that if we sound as if we wanted to make this trade, to our NATO people and to all the people who are tied to us by alliance, we are in real trouble.
I think that — we'll all join in doing this if it's the decision, but I think we should tell you that that's the universal assessment of everyone in the government that's connected wit}. these alliance problems.
Bundy ; That the knockdown in this White House statement this morning was well received.
JFK ; Yes, but I should say that also, as the situation is moving, Mac, if we don't for the next twenty-four or forty-eight hours, this trade las appeal.
Now the only thing we've got for which I would think we'd be able to hold general support would be — well let's try to word it so that we don't harm NATO — but the tiling that I think everybody would agree to — wldle these matters, which are complicated, are discussed, there should be a cessation of work.
McNamara ; Couldn't we just add in there, ""Inasmuch as they relate to -uhyou want to make it the entire issue of NATO, not just Turkey, That's clear, Inasmuch as they relate to the defense of NKK>, bases in Italy, Turkey, the UK and elsewhere — tl»en you go on.
So you link it all together and you — and you take away the attention from Turkey.
McNamara repeats his point, to get away from specific reference to Turkey.
Sometimes many voices at once but also further audible discussion not transcribed here because the President was not present.
He thinks that we ought to have a meeting of the NATO Council tomorrow morning to present this to them so that they all have a piece of it.
Otherwise no matter what we do — if we don't take it, we're blamed, if we do take it, we're just as blamed.
And I think the United States position ought to be that here it is, and we ought to have the — uh — if we don't take it what the prospects will be, as well as what we do.
We ought to get up a message to Finletter/ instructions, and he ought to call for a meeting at 9 or 10 in the morning.
Of getting an acceptance of the proposal that goes up in your letter now, which is has nothing to do with that I think that if they understand you have a meeting in NATO. , , Voice : That's the disadvantage of a Council meeting.
It's probably obvious that they made a suggestion about Turkey which the NATO Council would be interested in meeting about.
JFK ; The advantage of the meeting is that if we reject it, they participate in it, if we accept it, they participate in it.
The possibility is if you wait twenty-four hours and see if they accept this other tiling accept it yet.
We wrote him this letter that you've approved where we say that we won*t invade Cuba in return.
Then you send a query this afternoon as to whether they're willing to stop work.
Thompson ; If you have a NATO meeting, I gather frcm some word we ve heel frcm Italy, the Italians are likely to come up with a proposal to withdraw the bases there, the missiles there.
Voice ; Well I don't know. , Rusk ; Well now in view of that message just gone up to U Thant we wind up~this letter, As I was preparing this letter let me (words unclear) many countries and complicated issues not related to Cuba and the Western Hemisphere.
The United States would be glad to discuss these matters with you ana other governments concerned.
JFK ; In this language are you rejecting their proposal of this momma; I don't think so.
It's rejecting the immediate tie-in Now don't we just have to ask — we don't have to reject the If we're going to reject it we ought to have all of NATO reject it.
And I don't want them around saying — that's the essence of it — it's just a question of timing, isn't Ball ; I would suggest this, Mr President, if you have a NATO Council meeting in the morning, I think you're going to get a flat rejection of this, which then ties our hands.
If you have a Council meeting you'll probably get a strong reaction frcm a great many of the members of NATO against our taking any action in Cuba.
We might be able to either shift the area in which they would apply their militaiy force or give them no excuse to apply military force by taking out the Turkish Jupiters and the Italian Jupiters before we attack Cuba.
We would We've already detected three submarines off the U S. coast in the last forty-eight hours.
I think, 1 think we could, first place we can tell than (words unclear) ' JFK : If we took them out, we'd get the trade the Russians have offered us.
Bundy t It's one thing to stand them down, Mr President, in political terms, it's one thing to stand them down as a favor to the Turks while we hit Cuba, and it's quite another thing to trade them out.
We agree not to invade, you agree to take your McNamara ; Turkey is gone.
Bundy ; It could lead the Soviet Union to come back to the next problem.
KFK; If you made an offer — up there now — and you also ask U Thant to find an answer to this, now if U Thant should come back and say, 'number 1, that they're going to continue to work, in which case I suppose we have to move in some way, or they're going to say that they're going to discontinue the work on the bases.
Uh — if they say they're going to continue the work on the bases, I think then we've got to decide whether — if they have said by tomorrow morning they're going to continue the work on the basis — whether we should have a military strike.
I think if you have a meeting of NATO tomorrow morning — uh — I don't see that that's going to — I think it's going to shoot this other possibility which U Thant has suggested, of going forward with this letter and seeing if we can trade the non-invasion of Cuba for this, and I think we're keeping the pressure on, we don't look like we're weakening on the whole Turkey complex.
If tomorrow we don't have a favorable answer from U Thant or Khrushchev to this message that's going cut now, is it important to strike tomorrow or do we have some more time.
McNamara ; No, that's an excellent course of action which I don't believe he's going to accept.
RFK ; Yeah, but of course we're in — before the world we're in much better shape.
Thompson ; It would seem to me that we ought to surface all of this correspondence including this letter.
Rusk ; On the other hand, Mr President, if NATO seems solid on this, thi ; has a chance of shaking Khrushchev off this point.
Martin ; Suppose that we give him a letter which is addressed to his letter of yesterday and ask U Thant to release then both — he's the fellow to release them — and then he releases correspondence which consists really of an offer from Khrushchev and we — we core back and write N Bundy ; Thank you.
JFK; Well, I think that he'd probably just say that the work's going on, that we're not going to take these — that we're not interested in this deal, then I think we're going to have to do something — I don't think he has to say that it is — but the escalation is going to go on, and we think this is very likely, that there would be some reprisal against possibly Turkey and possibly against Berlin, and we should be aware of that.
Rusk ; Mr President, here's one other variation here that Mr Foster has given some thought to, and that is that we say that the missiles in Cuba and the missiles in Turkey be turned over to the UN for destruction and that the — uh — nuclear defense of NATO, including Turkey, is provided by other means.
An actual disarmament step, send them off for destruction on both sides.
I think that — uh — the real problem is what we do with the Turks first.
Yeah JFK : If we follow Secretary McNamara, what we're going to do is say to the Turks — which they're bound to think is — uh — under Soviet pressure, we want to get your missiles out of there.
If we get a negative answer to the message that's just gone up to U Thant, we really ought to consider whether in actually as low key as is possible although there'll be a tremendous flap about it ■— in order to provide — to give you the necessary authority to call up additional units beyond those provided by the 150,000 organization you'd declare a state of national emergency.
I think seme mobilization measures, not only here but in other -in NATO countries, might be very timely here in shaking Khrushchev off this position at this point.
His — his change of position, in a matter of hours here, means either that — uh — Ted points ait that his message of last night is not categorical about taking the missiles out.
Yeah, but our technicians and planes and guarantees would still exist for Turkey.
Today it sounds great to reject it, but it's not going to, after we do scmethino.
One of them is to tell that this is going to result in an attack by them some place even if you do.
I think we're in pretty good shape with this morning's message about the work ceasing, so I think if he feels that strongly.
Yesterday I had a meeting with the Four and brought them right up to the point of seeing how serious this was, and I think Dean talked to them about the alternatives they face.
His own advice is against having them in a group, but he may not be as shrewd as Norstad.
Norstad just feels that no matter what we do, there's going to be — we've got to have NATO have a hand on this tiling or otherwise we'll find no matter — if we take no action or if we take action — they're all going to be saying we should have done the reverse — and we've got to get them with us.
Now the question really is — two or three — two questions — first, whether we go immediately to the Turks and see if we can work out sane — see if they're receptive to the kind of deal which the Secretary talked about.
If you have that conviction, and you are yourself sure that — uh — this is the way we want — the best way out — then I would say that an immediate personal telegram was the best tiling to do.
What I think you'd have to do is get the Turks to agree — accepting it over their opposition and over NATO opposition I think would be — I'd rather go the total blockade route, which is a lesser step then the military action.
Sorensen ; I wonder, Mr President, inasmuch as your statement this morning does give seme answer to the public statement of the Soviets, whether we can't defer this for twenty-four or forty-eight hours wldle we try the private letter route in answer to his private letter of last night.
Adlai Stevenson has suggested a letter here that may not be bad in this particular context.
The first thing that needs to be done, however, is for work to cease on offensive missile bases in Cuba, and all weapons systems in Cuba capable of offensive use rendered inoperable.
Assuming this is done promptly"" — we're likely to hear something about U N. action now.
I would like to say again that we very much want to move in this direction.
If your mention of Turkey signified — of Turkey and other countries signifies that you are prepared to discuss a detente affecting the whole of Europe, we are of course quite prepared to consider with our allies the suggestions that you and your partners in the Warsaw Pact might have in mind.
But to continue work on the missile bases or prolong the discussion of removing missiles and other offensive weapons from Cuba by linking these problems with the broader questions of European and world security would intensify the Cuban crisis and would be a grave risk to the peace of the world which you described in your letter of yesterday.
So we don't you think we ought to say very hard what we've got to do, in the end, is that we've got to get an understanding in the next — on the question of the cessation of work.
Rusk ; to have a letter in hand though, which would give him a chance to work it out without relation to Turkey.
The poii± of the matter is Khrushchev's going to come back and refer to his tiling this morning on Turkey.
And then we're going to be screwing around for another forty-eight hours.
I think what we've got to do is say that we've got to make the key of this letter the cessation of work.
Otherwise he'll come back and say, ""Well, we're glad to settle the Cuban matter.
So then we're on until Monday afternoon, and the work goes on, and we haven't had a chance to specifically get his good faith on the cessation of work.
So I think we ought to make that the key question — the cessation of work.
Then if we get the cessation of work, we can settle the Cuban question and a few other tilings.
Otherwise he can hang us up for three days while he goes on with the work.
I don't think Adlai and U Thant have yet abandoned the possibility of working this out without direct relation to Turkey though.
I thought — you haven't got those to the point that we have iii this letter and in that letter.
Let's start with our letter to let's start with that, because otherwise we'll never get an answer.
We're going to take the cease-work and I think our letter is specific that it's desirable.
Now the only problem with this letter again on page 3 is ""when we get agreement on Cuba,"" which he isn't going to give us.
He's now moved on to the Turkish thing so we're just .going to get a letter back saying ""well we'll be glad to settle Turkey if we'll settle — settle Cuba if we'll settle Turkey.
So I think we have to make the crucial point in this letter, without opening up Turkey, is the question will he, at least in the next twenty-four hours, while we discuss all these matters, will he agree with me to stop the work on the bases.
If he says No to that, then we're — at least have — we have some indication.
The deal is they remove the weapons, we guarantee not to invade, and then put paragraph 1 at the end.
Well in Number 1, you'd undertake agreement to cease work on offensive missile bases in Cuba and promptly to render inoperable all weapons systems in Cuba and permit UN verification of this action.
But I think that that ought to be made as a separate matter in the letter.
A week ago — the work has stopped RFK : trees Voice : If the Cubans would agree not to interfere with reconnaissance.
I mean I don't think we're going to get as much but I mean let's make it as reasonable as possible.
See if you don't think that you could use Adlai — his draft — an| put in the specific tilings down there where the arrow is.
Just put in ""this to be verified — this to be satisfactorily verified — this to be verified under — well, right.
Rusk ; What Adlai says about what to do about Turkey — another problem is pretty good, JFK ; The only thing is — what he's saying is that they've got to get the weapons out of Cuba before we'll discuss the general detente.
Now we're not going to be able to effect that, He doesn't agree with that.
Rusk ; Let a couple of us go out and try to put the specifics of this letter in with the paragraphs of Adlai.
I don't think there's any doubt he's not going to now that he made that public.
Thompson ; I don't agree, Mr President, I think there's still a chance that we can get this line going.
Thompson ; This is, maybe, just pressure on us, I mean, to accept the other, I mean so far.
Thompson ; The important thing for Khrushchev, it seems to me, is to be able to say ""I saved Cuba, I stopped an invasion,"" and he can get away with this, if he wants to, and he's had a go at this Turkey tiling, and that we'll discuss later.
And the promise that when all this is over, there can be a larger... jFK ; He's going to want to have that spelled out a little.
They're more confused Voice : I really think — uh — JFK: Let's send this.
You know it puts seme heat on him if you put out ~ if you can get his message out of last night.
How about you put, as you have said before — publicly assured the world before — there will be no change of policy.
Well I'd say, I'd rattier say that the United States has no hostile Indentions towards Cuba, just so we state it as an obvious fact.
To force out the — uh$he Khrushchev letter to which this is a response.
Cut the next sentence. of your desire Statement of a — uh of your desire of a desire on your part to seek a prompt solution to the problem statement of your desire welcome the statement of your desire just say my desire is the same.
I can assure you of the great interest of the people of the United States to ~ uh — find a satisfactory solution to this.
Rusk ; ""The first tiling that needs to be done, however, is for work to cease on offensive missile bases in Cuba, and for all weapons systems in Cuba capable of offensive use to be rendered inoperable under effective United Nations arrangements.
Rusk ; I note the indications in your second letter which you have made public that you would like to work toward a more general arrangement as regards other elements.
No, I know, but — uh — this morning before I studied that letter, because I hadn't seen a copy of it, I was under the impression that his reference to Turkey was just sort of an example of.
So I suppose we have to fudge it somewhat, but I agree with you, he's just talking about Turkey.
If your mention of NATO bases signifies that you are prepared to discuss a detente affecting the whole of NATO and the Warsaw Pact, we are of course quite prepared to consider with our allies the suggestions that you and your partners in the Warsaw Pact nJ.-.jht have in mind.
But the continued work on the missile bases and prolonging the discussion of removing missiles and other offensive weapons from Cuba while linking these problems with the broader questions of European and world security would intensify the Cuban crisis and would be a grave risk to the peace of the world which you described in your letter of yesterday.
I therefore most earnestly urge you to join us in a rapid settlement of the Cuban crisis as your letter of October 26th suggests is possible, so that we can then go on to an early solution of other serious problems which I am convinced are not insoluble.
RFK; I don't understand — can I just say — what's wrong — uh — what about all the points that we made in this letter.
Well these are points that have already been — uh — been set out, up there.
The reason for the — the actual reason we didn't have those points in this letter was the President's desire not to get his hands too tied with respect to the Turkish problem.
Well I don't think this does that Sorensen ; One, two, three, four, particularly if this letter is going to be made public, are pretty good to have on the record.
Send this letter and say you're accepting his offer — he's made an offer and you're in fact accepting it.
And you think — I think that letter sounds slightly defensive about the fact — God, don't bring in Turkey now; we want to settle — we're not -I don't know whether it adds anything.
Rusk ; By the way, there's another — there's another paragraph to be added.
The first ingredient — let me emphasize that the cessation of work on missile sites and measures to render such weapons inoperable under effective international guarantees.
That's correct, but I don't think, if we're going to ^ make this public at this point, when we don't know how much we re going to get, we don't want to get in that far.
What? . , Bundy : You've got to give him something to get him back on this track. ,_,.', w * RFK: Well, can't you say ""Like I've said publicly before.
Why? , .. rfk ; Because I think, one, its just in general terms, rather defensive, and is just says we don't want to get in — please don't into discussion of NATO, or Turkey, because we want to talk about Cuba.
I think we just say he made an offer, we accept the offer, and it's silly bringing up NATO at this time, based on whatever their explanations have.
I tell you, Mr President, I think Adlai — I think if we could take our letter, introduce some qf the elements his letter in the last part of it, that might do it.
The one you're going to have to worry about is Adlai, so you might as well work it out with him.
I read your letter of October 26th to mean that this will be acceptable.
The elements of the proposal which you have put forth seem to me to be — Voice : These elements seem to me to be as follows.
As I say, we're not going to — he's not going to ~ now ^ Tommy isn't so sure, but anyway, we can try this thing, but he s going to come back, I'm certain, but the only thing is I don t want him — that's why we've got to end — end with saying, whatever we're going to do, that we've got to get a cessation of work. , , Bundy : That's right, but I think that Bobby's notion of a concrete acceptance on our part of how we read last night's telegram is very important.
In other words you want to — you have to get them to say we accept your proposal.
No, we have a long message in from Hare, which arrived this afternoon, in which he responds to the message sent to him on Wednesday at great length, that he'll do his damnedest but it's very difficult, which is in essence what he — the way it comes out.
Well now we have the question of a choice between the bilateral arrangement with Turkey — in which we more or less do it, or whether we go through NATO and let NATO put the pressure on, and also explain to the Turks what's going to happen to them if it does — if they end up slow in this matter.
If you re going to deal directly with the Turks, the President simply sends a message to the Prime Minister and says this is the problem and this is the way I think it ought to be solved, and I'm prepared to do it tonight.
And I need an answer from you within six hours — or eight hours ~ something like that.
The difference between Reinhardt's report and — uh — and Hare's is between night and day.
I realize that, but there are — uh — what I m suggesting is that we can do this with both Italy and Turkey and get Italy to 90 along with us, I think, and this will put some additional pressure on Turkey.
You want to do it ~ if we're going to that, Bob, and that may be the way we ought to do it — the effect of that, of course, I don't know how you — not having had it explained in NATO what's going to be the effects of continuing with it ~ it's going to look like we're ~ uh ~ caving in.
We have to get ground up to do it, and we have to look at some of the actions in between.
Flak came up in front of the flight, and they — they veered away, That's not been determined.
I talked to Captain — there's some difference « I think you have to wait until a little later.
If we send them in with proper cover and they re attacked, we must attack back, either the SAMs and /or MIG aircraft that come against them, or the ground fire that comes up.
Well, we can't send these low — we can't send these low-altitude aircraft in JFK : If you're going to take a reprisal — the cover isn't much good because you've got antiaircraft guns.
I would think we ought to take a chance on reconnaissance tomorrow, without the cover, because I don't think cover's really going to do you much good.
My personal view is that we (mixed voices) and also ready to invade but make no advance decision on that.
Let's be prepared for either one tomorrow — let's wait and see whether they fire on us tomorrow.
Meanwhile we've got this message to U Thant — and we're — so let's be well prepared.
If we get fired on, then we meet here, and we decide whether we do a much more general announce that the work is going ahead, announce that we haven't got an answer from the Soviets, and then we decide that we're going to do a much more general one than just shooting up some gun down there.
Well that's what I want to come to now, Now let's think over the Turkish thing.
How about — I don't think we're going to be able to get the NATO meeting encouragement.
Wouldn't it be possible to send something short of what Bob suggested to the Turks and the Italians, their Prime Ministers, saying that as things are developing « — our planes were fired on today — as things are developing it may become necessary for us to take forceful action in Cuba.
Uh — there is the risk that this would involve an attack on missiles in Turkey or Italy, depending on who you're talking to.
So we've got to have it look to the general interest, and a more effective defense for you.
Now, they're not going to want to do it, but we may just decide we have to do it in our interest.
I doubt if the Council will recommend that we stand down Turkish missiles.
We have — that's the way I interpret the Turkish position now and also a couple of years ago.
Rusk ; When we talked about Polaris in place of the missiles, the Turkish reaction was the missiles are here, and as long as they're here you're here.
JFK ; Well I tell you there's a few club members of NATO who won't like it much.
Most of the NATO members aren't going to be very happy about it, because the problem is Berlin or something.
The British have recognized the obsolescence of the Thor and have decided to take it out and replace it with other systems of which Polaris is an effective one.
JFK ; Well, they will, as I say, it's bound to be looked on though as the United States — they'll say that this is because the United States — to make a trade.
What we want, obviously, is the Turks to suggest it, but they're pretty tough, and they probably figure that — uh — that their security is better with them in than it is with them out.
That's exactly right, McNamara ; We have our air squadrons there with nuclear weapons.
JFK ; We want — In other words, Bob, we want to send a message to our ambassador to begin this track, some message to NATO what the facts of life are.
If they decide — if the Turks say no to us, it would be much better if NATO was also saying no than it will be if everybody will say, which is what always happens, a few days later when the trouble comes, that we should have asked them, and they would have told us to get 'em out.
We estimate that — what if we have until Wednesday or Thursday JFK : On the air strike.
RFK ; I think if you waited till tomorrow morning and he's rejected it — our acceptance of his other offer and — uh — then you know whether the work's going to continue and you know some of these other things, and then on Monday morning you call a meeting of NATO, and you say this is what we're up against; they're going ahead with this, and this is what we suggest, and by then we'd know what we would want to do.
JFK ; Well one, it seems to me, ought to begin a negotiation with the Turks now.
Bundy ; I think it's very difficult to negotiate with the Turks as long as we think there's anything in last night's track.
The letter doesn't not talk to the He was estimating the situation himself.
I think there was an early conversation raised the question with him of news reports.
Apparently this was a SAM-site that had actually had the energy It all ties in in a very plausible way.
McCone ; I wonder if this shouldn't cause a most violent protest a letter right to Khrushchev.
It would be very dangerous, I would say, Mr Secretary, unless we can reconnoiter — reconnoiter each day. (words unclear) reconnaissance.
I think you've just got to take out that SAM-site, you can't with them.
It builds up, though, on a somewhat different plane than the all-out attack plan.
JFK ; There are so goddam many... we could take it all day if ... well let's say if we're sure the U-2*s been shot down it seems to me we've got to announce it — it's going to dribble out.
JFK ; Then we ought to not say anything, don't you think, and just take the reprisal without making any announcement.
JFK ; I think we ought to announce that — uh — that — uh — action is being taken — action will be taken to protect our fliers.
Well now, we're going to get out an announcement and (words unclear) this thing and we're going to say that — uh ~ McNamara: We're going to say it was shot down and we're goinq to continue our surveillance protected by United States •Fiqhter aircraft Dillon t Suitable protection.
That's right, exactly JFK: They say — uh ~ that's why I'd like to find out whether Havana says they did shoot it down.
That's the significant part if it is the SAM-site. — Voice: You might have Cubans.
This is a know 96 ° f pattern ' n ° w wh * it's a change of pattern we don't RFK:*Yeah.
McNamara ; And it was in operation, we believe, at the same tine that the U-2 was over.
Voice ; If he had altitude and had any type of a failure, he could fly to Puerto Rico.
Let's talk a little. more about the Turks — how we're going to handle that.
Explain the thing, where we are — uh — I'm just afraid of what's going to happen in NATO, to Europe, when we get into this thing more and more, and I think they ought to feel that they've a part of it.
McNamara ; I would agree, but I think we ought to know what we want NATO to do tomorrow, which means that we have to have a proposition.
Actually what we should do tonight, Mr President, not only get a message to NATO but get to the capitals, to our ambassadors so they can talk to the governments, because these Permanent Representatives won't be able to do anything.
Sorensen ; We just have one last line, Mr President, that Bobby thought you ought to look at.
McNamara Well we say that because of the danger to NATO of this situation, because we can relieve that danger while without in any way reducing the defense of NATO, we believe that steps should be taken, Bundy; We can't withdraw the missiles, and therefore the action we take is that the President should order inoperability.
The French would charge this is — the only thing, as I say, if this is going to come, we ought to — the Turks and NATO, this is on the cheap for them, they'll say the United States is — is holding out in order to try to make a deal on Cuba.
No matter whether we say it's to protect Turkey or not, that's the way they're going to think about it.
We can say we're in a position where we believe we're going to have to attack Cuba.
If we attack Cuba there's great likelihood that the Soviets will attack the missiles in Turkey.
McNamara ; We are willing, if you would wish us to do so, to give you additional guarantees, move Polaris submarines there, deploy additional planes in, and to state beforehand that the missiles in Turkey and Italy have been rendered inoperable, before we attack Cuba, thereby increasing your safety if you wish us do so, and put it on that basis.
JFK; And if they don't take it, we feel they should recognize the danger, accept the danger.
McNamara; The third proposition is that if we do this, and leave those missiles in Turkey the Soviet Union may, and I think probably will, attack the Turkish missiles.
Well, I've got a — why don't I get through ~ then let s go back and attack each one of my propositions.
I simply said it reduced the chances of military action against Turkey.
Voice ; The State department they invite them — we talked about this, and they said they'd be delighted to trade those missiles in Turkey for the things in Cuba.
Voice ; This was just the kind of thing McNamara ; I'm not opposed to it, now, all I'm suggesting is, don't push us into a position where we haven't traded it and we are forced to attack Cuba, and the missiles remain in Turkey.
Bundy ; We were going to let him have his strike in Turkey, as I understood it last week. at one point at least that was the way we talked about it.
Ball ; And then we don't want it, and we're talking about a course of action which involves military action with enormous casualties and a great — a great risk of escalation.
McNamara ; Well, why don't we look at two courses of action Voice ; Let's see what consequence George draws.
Ball ; Well, I would far rather — if we're going to get the damned missiles out of Turkey anyway , say, we'll trade you the missiles, we're going to put Jupiters — I mean we're going to put Polaris in there, you're not going to benefit by this — but we will , if this is a matter of real concern to you, to have these on your borders, all right, we'll get rid of them, you get rid of them in Turkey — in, in Cuba.
These things are obsolete anyway — I mean you're not going to reduce the retaliatory power of the NATO Alliance, Voice ; You put Polaris in there, it's going to be a lot bigger.
Well, I think you have two alternatives Bundy : I missed your statement: I have to ask you to say it again.
And surveillance Ball : And surveillance Voice : What you do, with the Turks and NATO, you go through the propositions that Bob has outlined here.
But Mac, this other course will in a sense be that, so get first the message written on the assumption that — write that.
We can carry this on I would think I couple of days, maybe three days, possibly even four.
We sat for a 111^ * n * S^erybody. was in favor of doing it, and I'd make that part of the message.
That's no ^^""f' You C ° U f v dn 'i Si9n that and sav we know what we signed And before we got the damned thing read the whole deal chanced think that s the only answer, and we ought to think of some o+> *l answers here.
I wouldn't try to negotiate a deal. (mixed voieeO t'a send him a threatening letter.
Let's 90 down and try and draft, oet this (words ^ofce1 ' 3 SrLr,-r h 1 Ve lat f r t0ni9ht *°*e alternat^'here. voice.
Itates of « p Union, what have you done, what are you doing ^ The JrSfiS^ made a fine speech.
I think he might... 2iil2S* If you do this if you at the same time send that message to everybody , you see, which is explaining why, which is theessage that's being drafted. ^rl * thi ^ averments are old and tired and sick.
Dillon ; We're just talking about missiles, because we can't talk about planes.
Then we have to take our planes out of Turkey, you see, and we don't want to do that.
They give up Turkey, and then they shoot another — then they give up Berlin.
Dillon ; We haven't run into the basic thing that all of us talked about less than a week ago.
This proposal is that whatever you want out of Cuba, take out of Turkey.
Dillon ; Oh I see, what you were talking about a week ago was that they'd take everything out of Cuba, and we'd just take the missiles out of Turkey, whereas now he's saying I'll take missiles out of Cuba, you take missiles out of here.
Thompson ; That's why I think any suggestion that we're willing to accept this unless there is an irrevocable decision that we're to take these out by bombing is very dangerous.
Either Khrushchev was overruled and — or Khrushchev and /or his collegues were deceived by the Lippmann piece and the fact that Kreisky put this out which made them think that we were putting this out, that we were willing to — to make a trade.
It's our position to say unless you agree not to shoot at our unarmed planes until these things of yours are inoperable in Cuba, then we're going to have to hit you.
The choice is yours, A confused discussion of Lippmann' s position follows, largely mixed voices.
I think they'll change their minds when we take continued forceful action, stopping their ship or — or taking out a SAM-site.
Dillon ; Well, would you rather send them a thing like this which says if they shoot at all you're going to take them all out, or would you rather just go in and take one SAM-site out.
The first letter he was wobbling around rather slowly, (words unclear) but that is not to be ignored, Then there is read, probably by McCone, a longer version of the McCone draft letter.
The essential point is the same all proposals are worth discussing but meantime shooting at planes must stop, work on bases must be halted, missiles rendered inoperable, and ultimately to be removed.
LB J ; I'm surprised that they've been allowing these planes to go in all these days anyway without any action.
Thompson ; The only thing that bothers me at all about it is the — ■ uh — you can see that we have two conflicting things here.
And the purposes are conflicting because if we want to get him to accept the thing that he put in his letter last night, then we shouldn't give any indicaton that we're ready to talk about the Cuba-Turkish thing.
McNamara is drafting that message, 55,L L « *f se f "" ha * the difference is, and then we can think about that.
It gets it back on — centered on Cuba, and our willingness to accept it.
And that — that somewhat diminishes the need for any talk about — about Turkey.
It seems to me the public will be pretty solid on that, and that we ought to keep the heat on him and get him back on the line which he obviously was on the night, before.
Sorensen ; It was in the Washington Post JFK ; Well, I think we ought to — just a second — I'll just say, of course we ought to try to go the first route which you suggest.
Secretary McNamara suggests that we draft a message to the Turks and to the NATO people, saying that we will give you Polaris for the Jupiters in Turkey.
And we're going to hit Cuba and therefore we ought to do this because then it means that you ' re safer than you would be.
Ball takes the position that you shouldn't — you should get something for your trade, if you're going to give up the Jupiter, why you ought to get him to take care of Cuba, LB J ; McCone's got one that lays down an ultimatum, that just says we're going to — you shot down our man there, we're not going to take any more of it.
It would just get us completely out of Turkey in every respect, and leave the Soviets very much in Cuba.
Dillon ; Ambassador Thompson has another idea, was that instead Of an ultimatum, a lot of talk about if you shoot any more of our unarmed planes, that it would probably be more effective and make more of an impression on him if we did do what we said we were going to do before and just go in and knock out just one SAM-site.
Bundy ; Voice ; Havana has announced it, that it was shot down by antiaircraft fire.
Well, we ought to get that and make sure that McNamara knows that Thompson ; I also think that we ought to — if that Soviet ship comes in within this line we ought to stop it.
What we considered offensive and analogous means would have to come out of Turkey.
Your representative will make a declaration to the effect that the U.S on its part will remove the similar means from Turkey.
That's why I think it's very dangerous to indicate any incentive to play on this thing. — as the Secretary says — it's either/or We either get out of Turkey completely or we leave the Soviets in Cuba, and only missiles out.
Get everything out of Cuba, and negotiate with the Turks with the same objective.
JFK ; We can't very well invade Cuba with all its toil, and long as it's going to be, when we could have gotten them out by making a deal on the same missiles in Turkey.
He takes his missiles out of Cuba, he takes his men out of Cuba, he takes his planes out of Cuba, why then your whole foreign policy is gone.
You take everything out of Turkey, 20,000 men, all your (word unclear), all your planes, all your missiles, and crumple.
This Turkey thing has been Voice ; ... get those missiles out of there.
Rusk ; If we're going in tomorrow with with the (words unclear) that we're going to enforce the right to surveillance.
Taylor ; The Chiefs have been — I went back this and talked this over with the Chiefs.
The problem of low level surveillance is becoming difficult because in all the flights today around the SAM-sites, the -uh --, , missile sites, there's low-level ack-ack.
We have some photography and I would say by tonight — by the end of the day — we probably have seen some of the dispositions around these sites.
When we reach that point, and if we're going to continue reconnaissance without actually taking out the whole works, we're faced with taking out a number of the SAM-sites that medium and high-level reconnaissance.
But low-level reconnaissance probably is on its way out, and I think we'll learn that tomorrow.
JFK ; Let me say, I think we ought to wait till tomorrow afternoon, to see whether we get any answer — if U Thant goes down there — we're rapidly approaching a real — I don't think that firing back at a twenty millimeter coming off the ground is good.
I'd rather take — I don't think that it does any good to take out — to try to fire at a twenty millmeter on the ground.
I think we ought to, tomorrow — let's get U Thant our messages — take — if they fire on us, tell them we'll take them all out and if we don't get some satisfaction from the Russians or U Thant or Cuba tomorrow night, figure that Monday we're going to do something about the SAM-sites.
Taylor ; I might say this, that as a part of the help to cutting the time short of invasion, shipping is really more important than this, although I'm entirely fo r this JFK ; Well, tomorrow, when do we talk, Mr Secretary, I thought maybe tomorrow we'd do the shipping.
I would like this to — let me read this and see — Today United States unarmed reconnaissance aircraft, conducting surveillance of the build-up of offensive weapons secretly introduced into Cuba by the Soviet Union, were fired upon.
Such surveillance operations were in accordance with the resolution adopted on October 23rd by the Organ of Consultation of the Inter-American system under the provisions of the Rio Treaty of 1947.
To ensure that the nations of the Western Hemisphere continue to be informed of the status of the threat to their security, it is essential that such reconnaissance flights continue.
To protect these flight against attack, it will henceforth be accompanied by fighter escorts.
The possiblity of further attack on our aircraft, and the continuous build-up of the offensive weapons systems in Cuba, require that we be prepared for any eventuality.
Therefore tonight, acting under the authority granted me by Execution Order such-and-such, I have instructed the Secretary of the Air Force to order to active duty twenty-four troop carrier squadrons of the Air Force Reserve with their associated support units.
Gilpatric ; You might want to take out the sentence about the fighter escorts.
McNamara ; Yeah, I'll do this (Discussion in low voices, not general, hard to understand.
After all, the assurance was to U Thant and not to me, that they'd keep them out of there.
Mr President, with regard to reconnaissance the Chiefs talked this over at great length.
We would say there is no great — no need for more reconnaissance tomorrow, except for the fact that we know that we should check on whether they're working or not.
I agree ... we also want, to find out (words unclear) if they're firing tomorrow.
He gave U Thant assurances on sending ships, so I think that we ought to, tonight, call Stevenson to inform U Thant that this ship is continuing to approach that we'd like to get some answer from them, whether this is going to be called back or otherwise we — the confrontation must take place.
Could we have a couple of minutes — just a minute's discussion, as to whether we should intercept it or not.
I don't know whether we think that that's advisable if we're going to — uh — face firing — if they are firing on us.
Well, I was just making a list here of the things that have happened today.
By the way the intercept area business was available last night, I think.
Will you find out where it is, Mac, in a technical way, and give them the latitude and longtitude.
I was just talking to Harlan Cleveland JFK: We don't need to say what we're going to do about it, but we ought to say this is approaching, and we'd like to have you know about it.
Yeah, we can wait until about noon tomorrow, Rusk: Mr President, just to remind us of seven things that have happened today.
Now, in general, I think that's — uh — for one day, that's building up.
Secondly, we've got the announcement about these — whatever happens — if we don't take the ship, we announce that the (words unclear) been broken, and from now on, it's POL, all ships, and — uh . — so on.
What we'd better do is now figure out these messages to NATO and the Turks.
I just talked to Finletter, who is arranging for the NAC meeting in the morning.
Finletter 's presentation should be brief, factual and should be cool and skeptical, without suggesting that you have established a firm and final position.
The resulting discussion would, I hope, be useful to you as an indication of European opinion, and might develop some aspects of the problem of importance to you in making your decision.
In any event it should help to avoid a situation in which you can be wrong whatever you do, and your allies can be right and wise regardless of developments.
No matter how productive and useful a NAC discussion may be it will not, I fear, substantially relieve you of the burden of making a difficult decision.
Clearly Khrushchev seems now publicly to have placed Cuba in that category.
This is a very incomplete list of the questions which come to mind as one considers this problem.
The answer seems to me to add up to a rejection of Khrushchev's proposal, and I believe Finletter should be instructed to indicate this as the general direction of United States thinking.
We could let them know that we've got to take action in Cuba if this thing continues, and this will create dangers in the NATO area.
The one is that we — that NATO takes the position that they cannot connect the defenses of NATO with the situation — the security situation in another part of the world.
Therefore we have to stand by them in NATO and make sure that — uh — the Soviet Union realizes that we have to combine with NATO on this issue.
The second alternative would be, on straight security grounds, take Bob McNamara's point, here on page three.
The third would be to take George Ball's proposal ~ uh — draft here, saying that we accept this but on the full understanding that — uh — we will make alternative arrangements, which are easily made, for the nuclear defense of NATO But — and tell them that in this situation, since we understand the grave issues involved, that we would be glad to have the views of NATO — to take into account before we decide what has to be done here in this Hemisphere, and how we handle this particular problem.
Well, if you're going to really present it to them that way, you wouldn't want to state a position, I don't think, Mr Secretary, would you, because they'll feel compelled then to agree with that — it sounds sort of strong and firm and clear, and then they — uh — unless we're sure that's the direction we want to steer them.
It's officially the easiest position, but I think we ought to be sure that that's what we want to do.
We have to -what we want to do — it seems to me, Mr Scretary, that even if we want them to end up that way, we don't want to look like that s where we urged them and therefore they have accepted, some reluctantly, some eagerly, the United States opinion, then it goes bad, which it may well, then they say well, we followed you, and you bitched it up.
I don't think we areeven indicate — all we're doing is saying, ""This is it.
And if we don't — take it, then we want everybody to understand what we think may be the alternative i~ we're going to have to move.
I think that's probably what this first meeting ought to be, and then we might have another one the next morning.
Some of them may come up with an idea that would unlock this damned thing, something that we haven't thought of.
Mr President, do we believe that we'll be able to settle Cuba more easily with or without the Jupiters in Turkey.
But if we are hard on this thing — the gains that we have we know that we've got some respite that see some way in Moscow — the way that they made the offer initially.
Why don't we just wait another eighteen hours, see if that's been eased at all.
Well, but the only thing is have we lost anything (words unclear) Voice: You shouldn't discuss the Turkey deal.
It simply leaves out, as I understand it, the recommendations section of both messages.
If it's a very serious briefing, this could serve as an indirect warning to the Russians.
I would suggest ~ I would suggest you not lead into discussion of this.
But I think you can say that we won't — that we're going to ask for a meeting on Monday on it.
I think the message should begin that this is — it is now decided that your briefing should not be related to the Soviet proposal but to the situation — I think that's really what s concluded, especially in the light of the fact that tomorrow is the day of signals to the Soviet Union.
He's announced it, so I think the Sorensen ; I think in some ways it's a sign of weakness if we keep resorting to messages.
JFK ; I think we shouldn't send him one again. think we ought to just let that one go tonight.
Well, I was thinking about that ship, because we're going to be faced with the problem of that ship tomorrow.
Our ambassador — I think he ought to send a letter to de Gaulle — also Macmillan and Adenauer, but I was thinking more of de Gaulle — but let's send it to all three, it involves Berlin.
We'll be in touch with him in twentyfour hours when we find out if we're successful in putting the Russians back on the original track.
You can send this personally to de Gaulle, Adenauer, and Macmillan, if you want to JFK: We've sent a message to Macmillan, send one to Adenauer and de Gaulle.
Taylor ; They say they shot down planes, RFK t Then we're going to get shot at tomorrow, McNamara ; Mr President, if we go in at a low level tomorrow, we ought to be prepared, it seems to me, to attack MIGs if they attack our aircraft, McNamara ; This time we would make it perfectly clear that if they attack our aircraft, we're going in after some of their MIGs.
RFK ; Well, I think we're doing the only thing we can do and well, you know, McNamara ; I think the one thing, Bobby, we ought to seriously damned sure the and then we need to have two things ready, a government for Cuba, because we're going to need one and secondly, plans for how to respond to the Soviet Union in Europe, because sure as hell they're going to do something there.
