On 14 October 1962, Major Heyser went on a secret mission to take photographs of suspicious military sites in Western Cuba.
The images on the photographs were identified as medium-range ballistic missiles.
The following source contains information regarding the discussions that were held after the discovery of medium-range missiles in Cuba.
Tuesday 16 October 1962, 11:50 The Central Intelligence Agency chief photo interpreter hovered over (looked over) the president's shoulder.
Arthur Lundahl held a pointer in his hand, ready to reveal a secret that would bring the world to the edge of nuclear war.
The secret was buried in three black and white photographs pasted to briefing boards hidden in a large black case.
The photographs had been shot from directly overhead, evidently from a considerable distance, with the aid of a very powerful zoom lens.
In secrecy, while insisting they would never contemplate such a thing, the Soviet leaders had installed surface to surface nuclear missiles in Cuba, less than a hundred miles from American shores … Lundahl took the briefing boards out of his bag and laid them on the table.
He used his pointer to direct the president's attention to a canvas-covered missile trailer next to a launcher erector.
His voice was clipped and tense, betraying a boiling anger beneath the calm.
SOURCE 2A The comment by Nyerere below focuses on Tanzania's policy of socialism and self-reliance in 1967.
In very few cases was any ideology involved; we thought and talked in terms of greatly increased output, and of things being provided for the settlers.
The fact that people cannot be forced into ujamaa villages, nor told how to run them, does not mean that Government and TANU have just to sit back and hope that people will be inspired to create them on their own.
To get ujamaa villages established, and to help them to succeed, education and leadership are required.
The Arusha Declaration and the actions relating to public ownership which we took last week were all concerned with ensuring that we can build socialism in our country.
The nationalisation and the taking of a controlling interest in many firms were a necessary part of our determination to organise our society in such a way that our efforts benefit all our people and that there is no exploitation of one man by another.
Cordially known as Mwalimu, he led by example; his humility equalled by his commitment to the well-being of the poorest of the poor, yet without ignoring the rights of others.
His dedication and identification with the masses, and his passion for fairness, were evident throughout his tenure as the nation's leader.
When he became president, he worked and lived with them in their villages, slept in their huts, and ate their food.
He spent days, and weeks, working with them in the rural areas in all parts of the country.
He mingled with the peasants so well that you wouldn't even know who the leader was in the group, let alone be able to identify him as president of a country if you didn't know what he looked like.
No other African leader lived the way he did, and worked in the rural areas as much as he did, clearing and tilling the land for hours with ordinary peasants.
Not a detached, arrogant leader and intellectual who felt it was beneath him to soil his hands like the poor, illiterate peasants did.
I also know how humble he was, because of what I witnessed years before I even became a national news reporter, first at the Standard, next at the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting as an information officer, and then at the Daily News.
Nyerere said ten years after his retirement that he would do things differently if he could turn back the clock.
As he stated in an interview, 'I would still write the Arusha Declaration.
But even such voluntary collective settlements would probably not have provided catalytic change in the economic transformation of Tanzania because their main attraction would have been social services – schools and clinics – provided by the government, not profit.
The result was economic failure which may take Tanzania decades to overcome.
Yet with great achievements in health and education, and provision of social equity, Tanzania's economy was not a total failure.
When Tanzania adopted socialism, she was virtually locked in place in terms of economic development, going nowhere.
At one time, the World Bank made more loans per capita to Tanzania than to any other nation.
After scattered efforts to repeat the success achieved by the Montgomery Improvement Association in 1955–56, a second major event occurred early in 1960 in Greensboro.
Four first-year students from North Carolina Agricultural and Technical College took seats at a segregated lunch counter and refused to move until they were served.
Their return each day to the segregated lunch counter, despite increasingly hostile treatment, drew the support of other black and some white students throughout the South as well as adult leaders, and sparked repetitions of their actions in hundreds of cities.
Civil rights workers and black citizens were arrested, beaten, jailed, deprived of their jobs, intimidated , and killed.
As a result important court decisions were handed down, major federal legislation was passed, public facilities such as transportation and waiting rooms were desegregated, and black citizens gained better access to the polling booths.
On May 4, 1961, a group of blacks and whites set out on a highly publicised trip to test a Supreme Court order outlawing segregation in bus terminals.
Many of them belonged to the revitalised Congress of Racial Equality , which had tested integration laws during the 1940s.
Ten days into their journey, on Mother's Day, the first bus of Freedom Riders pulled into the terminal at Anniston, Alabama.
Waiting for it was a mob of white men carrying pipes, clubs, bricks and knives.
The bus driver quickly drove off, but the mob caught up with the bus again outside the city.
As the bus went up in flames, the riders rushed out into the hands of the mob and were brutally beaten.
When the second busload of Freedom Riders pulled into Anniston, eight white men boarded the bus and beat the occupants from the front to the rear.
The most seriously injured was Walter Bergman, who was thrown to the floor and kicked unconscious.
He suffered a stroke as a result of the beating and was confined to a wheelchair for life.
A poster informing the American public about the march to Washington, 28 August 1963.
Mathew Ahmann Joachim Prinz Eugene Carson Blake A Philip Randolph James Farmer Walter Reuther Martin Luther King Jr.
This source outlines the march to Washington where Martin Luther King Junior delivered his 'I have a Dream' speech.
The march on Washington, a culminating event of the movement, drew a larger number of people to the Capitol than ever before – about a quarter of a million.
Estimates are that 20 to 30 per cent of them were white; many interracial northern groups attended.
The 28 August 1963 march was a peaceful demonstration, a rally – perhaps an extension of the thousands of packed mass meetings that had taken place in black churches all over America and especially the South.
Civil rights leaders had felt that the events of 1963 required a significant climax.
It was the veteran A Philip Randolph, who now proposed a march that would really take place.
A main objective was to demonstrate to Congress that public opinion was on the side of desegregation and voting rights and that a considerable number of whites strongly supported these goals.
Unity and goodwill prevailed for the day, at least on the surface, as noted entertainers, black and white, performed and a series of leaders addressed the crowds.
King marched on the state capital and delivered his now-famous 'I have a Dream' speech, calling for equal treatment for all Americans.
Taken from a paper delivered by Steve Biko at a SASO leadership conference, 5 to 8 December 1971 in Pietermaritzburg.
Any man who calls a white man 'Baas', any man who serves in the police force or Security Branch is ipso facto a non-white.
Black people – real black people – are those who can manage to hold their heads high in defiance rather than willingly surrender their souls to the white man.
The following is an extract from an interview between Biko and an American businessman.
It was only printed in The New Republic newspaper on 7 January 1978 because the apartheid government imposed a media ban related to Biko's death.
You are either alive and proud or you are dead, and when you are dead, you can't care anyway.
So if you can overcome the personal fear of death, which is a highly irrational thing, you know, then you're on the way.
My attitude is, I'm not going to allow them to carry out their programme faithfully.
If they want to beat me five times, they can only do so on condition that I allow them to beat me five times.
Steve Bantu Biko was an influential leader, but in the way he died so pitiably exposed the poverty of morality at the heart of the state.
Biko, who had eluded police for a year, was on his way to Cape Town in mid-August – to distribute pamphlets 'inciting blacks to cause riots', police said – when he was arrested at a road block outside Grahamstown and taken in terms of Section 6 of the Terrorism Act, which allowed for indefinite detention.
He was driven the next day to Port Elizabeth, where he was stripped naked and held in various cells for the next two weeks.
Still naked but placed in leg irons, he was taken to police headquarters on 6 September, where he was interrogated by five security police officers.
On that day or soon after, he was rammed against a wall so hard that he sustained the brain injury that would kill him.
Biko did not die immediately but it was clear to his persecutors that something was very wrong.
They called in no fewer than three state doctors, who made false diagnoses to protect the interrogators.
The 1960s Freedom Struggle (Twayne Publishers: Massachusetts) Byrne, P 2006.
An Illustrated History (Jonathan Ball Publishers: Johannesburg and Cape Town) Mwakikagile, G 2006.
Biko, The Quest For A True Humanity (Developed by the Apartheid Museum) Valtman, S and Valtman, E 1991.
