It was the Cold War era and United States was making operations against Cuban Regime.
Some of the unsuccessful operations in this period are Operation Mongoose and Bay of Pigs.
After unsuccessful operations, Soviet and Cuban governments decided to build bases in Cuba for intermediate-range and medium-range ballistic nuclear missiles.
It would make possible to strike all continental United States with this missiles from Cuban.
A United States Air Force U-2 plane captured all bases in Cuba with nuclear missiles and events went to a big crisis.
There were deep conflicts between Russia and USA after unsuccessful Bay of Pigs Invasion.
John F Kennedy and Cuban exiles invaded Bay of Pigs in 1961 but they failed and this event embarrassed USA government publicly.
Some writers foreseen that Russia will take a step after this fail to get stronger and save Cuba.
Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev taught that USA is taking advantage of “splendid first strike” against Russia and he decided to put missiles to Cuba.
Also USA turned the target of its missiles in Turkey and Italy to Russia.
According to important political writers, Nikita Khrushchev didn’t place missiles to Cuba for hitting USA but he thought to take some concessions and guarantees from USA for withdrawing missiles.
Some of the guarantees he would want were an agreement that USA will not invade Cuba and they will withdraw missiles in Turkey.
Some politicians decide to attack Cuba in parliament but then Kennedy changed it to a military blockade on Cuba.
USA government announced that any missiles will be permitted to enter Cuba.
Nikita Khrushchev wrote a letter to President John F Kennedy and said blockage is propelling Russia to world nuclear-missile war.
According to history writers, Russia and USA made aggressive announcements but they searched an agreement in back channels and at last they signed an agreement in October 28, 1962.
According to agreement, Russia will dismantle their missiles and took them back to Russia and never mantle them again, USA will never invade Cuba and also dismantle the missiles in Turkey and Italy.
Two weeks after the agreement, Russia started to dismantle all weapons in Cuba and loaded them to ships.
Also the Soviet Il-28 bombers were loaded to ships and went back to Russia.
Cuba’s leader Fidel Castro falls out with Nikita Khrushchev because Khrushchev didn’t ask to Fidel Castro about situations and agreement in the crisis period.
Moscow–Washington hotline is created between two countries after crisis and leaders talked on this phone when a problem occurs.
The Terminator series is one of the most popular sci-fi movie series in the cinema history.
