The agents reported this ^formation as soon as they were able, but in most cases had to depend on secret writing for communication.
Hence, there was a lae of several days at least before their information became available.
Refugee reports were delayed considerably longer, for other, and uncontrollable, reasons—the time of the ..in. dividual 's decision to leave Cuba,"" his discovery of means for doing so, and his delivery to an interrogation center.
Many of the reports so received dealt with unidentifiable construction activity.
Many of them, because of the time-lags noted above, did not arrive in Washington until after 14 October, and some are still coming in.
Since the moment of Castro s triumphal march into Havana, the Intelligence Community had t been flooded with reports of Soviet weapons shipments and missile installations in Cuba.
There were several hunted such reports, claiming the presence of everything from^mall arms to ICBMs, before August 1960,e., before the USSR had supplied Cuba with any weapons at all.
All of these were either totally false or misinterpretations by the observer of other kinds of activity.
CIA analysts had naturally come to view all sucn reports with a high degree of suspicion.
The establishment of Opa Locka coincided with a sharp drop in reports of missile activity received in Washington.
For the better part of two years, CIA had been checking information obtained from refugee, defector, and agent sources with NPIC whenever it was apparent that the information was of a kind that could be verified or negated by aerial reconnaissance.
When the first indications of build-up began to come in in August,^ these procedures were further tightened.
An example of its procedures is the handling of targets in the Sagua La Grande' area.
Readout of the 29 August coverage showed an SA-2 site near Saigua La Grande which apparently was the. -basis for the reported activity there, and the target card was ; changed to show a confirmed SA-2 site.
It should be noted that knowledge that this site was in the area could have led analysts to misinterpret any subsequent reports. of MRBM activity as part of the SAM development , but in fact no such reports were received.
By September, the volume of agent and re.fugee report. ing had become very large indeed.
During the month. reports on internal activities in Cuba were disseminated, exclusive of telegraphic dissemination.
A substantial TOP SECnBT |l 36. proportion of these dealt with the deployment of defensive missiles and related activities.
Knowledge on the part of the analysts that such a deployment was in fact going on, plus the normal difficulties encountered by untrained observers in telling an offensive missile, from adefensive one, tended to throw a sort of smoke-screen, around the Soviet offensive deployment when It finally began.
The CIA analytic' apparatus, .however, recognized -and correlated the first authentic reports of MRBM equipment ever to be received in Washington, and took action upon them.
It targeted the San Cristobal area, not as' another location where alleged missile activity should be negated by photography, but as a suspect SS-4 site.
This process took about three weeks, from, the date when the first observation was made on the ground in Cuba to the preparation of the target card.
An observation in Havana on 12 September of a convoy, carrying; long canvas-covered objects which the source identified under interrogation as resembling SS-4s.
This report, which was disseminated by CIA on 21 September, contained sufficient accurate detail to alert intelligence analysts.
An observation on 17 September of a convoy moving toward the San Cristobal area.
The arrival of the second report led CIA analysts to a tentative conclusion that the two observers had in fact seen the. same convoy ,:and that there was a possibility of the SS-4 .'identification., being genuine.
Another report, too general to be used in the process described above, is nevertheless of interest as the first good information distributed on the Sovi^^oifensive build-up.
