The New Nuclear Arms Race: The Outlook for Avoiding Catastophe Report: A New Vision: Gender.
Slick back your hair, grab a scotch, and don’t forget to triple check that route to the nearest Fallout Shelter.
It is October after all, the month in which the United States and the Soviet Union came closer to nuclear war than any other time in history.
The nation held its breath as President John F Kennedy faced off with Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev in waters just offshore of Cuba.
Earlier in the month, a U-2 spy plane over Cuba captured images of nuclear missile launch sites being built by the Soviets.
Given the proximity to the United States and the already looming threat of the Soviet Union, President Kennedy knew that he could not let this stand.
After secretly conferring with a group of advisors , Kennedy announced the establishment of a naval blockade on all further armament shipments to Cuba.
In a speech to the nation on October 22, Kennedy called for the removal of missiles already in Cuba and the destruction of all launch sites.
Over the next week, Soviet ships carrying weapons to Cuba were locked in a stalemate with United States warships in the Caribbean.
Faced with the very real possibility of nuclear war, Kennedy decided to approach Khrushchev with a deal to end the standoff peacefully.
Publically, Kennedy promised not to invade Cuba if the Soviets withdrew their missiles.
Privately, Kennedy promised to withdraw United States nuclear missiles from Turkey within six months.
Thirteen days after the start of the Crisis, Khrushchev accepted the offer and called back Soviet ships.
But while Don Draper and company were dancing to the Monster Mash , others were beginning to see that the situation in Cuba was more intense than even President Kennedy was aware.
After declassification of top-secret information and years of analysis by scholars and government officials, the reality of how close the world actually came to nuclear war is startling.
On October 27, American destroyers forced a Soviet submarine to surface near the quarantine line using depth charges.
Unbeknownst to the Americans, the sub was carrying a nuclear-tipped torpedo.
The Soviet commander believed that war had started and prepared to fire.
The Joint Chiefs of Staff recommended sinking a United States ship and blaming the Cubans in order to create national support for a United States invasion of Cuba.
The JCS sent Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara a list of possible courses of action to garner support for an invasion of Cuba entitled Operation Northwoods.
These recommendations were for planning purposes, intended to provide a guide for crafting a single plan.
Previous actions toward Cuba by the United States government played a big role in creating the Crisis.
Events outside of the immediate crisis had more of a driving effect than previously realized.
The Bay of Pigs invasion of 1961 and Operation Mongoose led the Soviets to believe that Kennedy was determined to get rid of Castro.
In part as a way to protect an ally, Khrushchev decided to send nuclear weapons to Cuba.
In the early morning hours of October 27, the Soviets deployed nuclear cruise missiles within 15 miles of the United States naval base at Guantanamo Bay.
A United States spy plane accidentally entered Soviet airspace during the Crisis creating potential for the use of nuclear air-to-air missiles.
On October 27, a U-2 spy plane took a wrong turn and entered Soviet airspace.
MiG fighters were sent to shoot the plane down and nuclear-armed United States fighter-interceptors were sent to escort the spy plane home.
President Kennedy and Secretary of Defense McNamara were not informed until an hour and a half into the event.
Whether through luck, or smart diplomacy by world leaders, we were able to head off nuclear destruction.
This blog post was authored by Ploughshares Fund intern Jessica Sleight.
