In addition this case study allows scholars to derive a greater sense of the importance of a detached and specialised Foreign Office in a political system which places greater power in the hands of an elected and transient government with narrow interests.
Introduction For thirty years historians have been able to only speculate about Britain's role and involvement in the Cuban missile crisis.
Admittedly there is already an enormous library of volumes dedicated to describing, assessing and reassessing this defining moment in the history of the cold war, but so far Britain's participation has been accorded either only a brief mention, or has been relegated to a footnote.
For example Dino Brugioni's 1991 re-telling of the Cuban missile crisis' is critical of suggestions that Harold Macmillan and President Kennedy did not merely consult with one another, but actually engaged in substantial dialogue in which Macmillan's opinions were valued and sometimes decisive.
Brugioni declares that Macmillan disliked the way the President handled the crisis; that he purposefully downgraded the missile threat, and privately expressed his anger that Kennedy had not consulted him more.
The author also acknowledges the assistance of his colleague at Nottingham, Dr Richard Aldrich.
His account must therefore be approached with a degree of caution, but is nevertheless useful as a balance to Alistair Home's reproduction of the crisis and, of course, to Macmillan's own memoirs.
The intention of this article to reappraise the so-called 'special relationship' between the United States and Britain by scrutinising Britain's involvement in the Cuban missile crisis.
Its premise is that Britain's attitude towards the missile crisis suggests that Suez was not the watershed in foreign policy that it is often claimed to have been; that the illusion of Britain's power had not yet been shattered, and the perception that Britain could still be a major player on the world's stage and expected to be at least consulted on the most significant international issues of the day prevailed.
This study is of course not intended to be the definitive last word on the subject.
Rather it is hoped that this discussion will be the opening salvo in what is expected to be an extremely exciting debate once all the details of the research and analysis have been published.
The Story So Far It is perhaps important to begin with the traditional version of events which describe the Anglo-American relationship in the most cordial of terms.
The often personal relationship that Harold Macmillan enjoyed first with President Eisenhower,5 then with Kennedy, is often regarded as the epitome of the special relationship.
Any damage which had been suffered during the Suez crisis was soon repaired and a future of co-operation was certain, especially in the military sphere.
In this way Britain's role in the missile crisis seems to have been guaranteed by a close personal relationship, while the United States, of course, would readily defer to Britain's international maturity.
Notably the President informed Macmillan that 'We shall have to act more closely together.
The President hoped, however, 'that in the further development of the crisis the United States and United Kingdom Governments would act closely together', while in reply Macmillan suggested that he and Kennedy should 'concert their policy' over the crisis as soon as Khrushchev's reaction to the broadcast was known.
Clearly this is referring to the rather informal, yet allegedly extremely valuable telephone conversations between the two leaders, of which more later.
As the immediate emergency abated on 28 October 1962, Britain's Foreign Secretary, Alec Douglas Home, sent his congratulations to Rusk on the way the crisis had been handled.
Rusk knew that 'the President shared this view'.15 A Not So Special Relationship On the surface then, Britain's involvement in the missile crisis was extensive.
Ormsby-Gore was an active participant in advising the President sometimes, it seems, his only adviser while the ambassador's numerous reports to the Foreign Office suggest that Britain was regularly consulted and its advice received with gratitude.
In fact, as will become clear, the Americans seem to have been quite prepared to sustain Britain's selfdeception in order to further their own foreign policy interests in other areas, such as Europe, where British co-operation was crucial.
Rusk's reply to Home's message, for example, is likely to have been intended as nothing more important than a diplomatic formality, a nicety expressed to America's old Atlantic partner.
Moreover Kennedy completely dismissed Macmillan's reservations about the action taken by the United States in a letter to the Prime Minister dated 21 October; while confirming that Macmillan did receive advance warning of Kennedy's intentions, this was again merely a formal observance of diplomatic procedure.
Ormsby-Gore stated his preference for a blockade of Cuba rather than a military strike.
Personal alliances are never that close, especially in times of crisis.
Even Ormsby-Gore's role in influencing the President to release the photographs of the missiles must be challenged.
The version of the story provided by the ambassador himself that he suggested releasing the photos to the President at a dinner party held on 23 October is simply incompatible with the chronology of events; the photos were shown on the BBC news that same evening, even though Britain is five hours ahead of Washington.
According to Brugioni, Kennedy agreed to Macmillan's suggestion that the photos be released but without specifying a definite time for doing so.
Macmillan apparently assumed that their release would be immediate, told the American ambassador in London of the President's 'decision', and permitted the British press to be fully briefed.
Yet a reading of the transcripts of these conversations20 suggests that this special relationship was based on nothing more substantial than the relay of information from Washington to London, with the Prime Minister serving purely as a sounding board for Kennedy's rambling thoughts.
There is little evidence of Kennedy genuinely asking Macmillan for advice, except on the so-called '$64,000 question' on whether or not the United States should take military action against Cuba.
Kennedy knew that such a course of action would have significant implications for European stability, and was anxious to seek Macmillan's opinion and support.
Yet this one exception notwithstanding, the dialogue between the two leaders was indecisive.
Indeed, despite recalling the conversations as evidence of the role that Britain was still required to play in international affairs, Macmillan's memoirs also reveal that he too acknowledged their limits; apparently he 'felt all the time intimately informed of each changing aspect of these terrible days', acquainted with events that were beyond his control or influence.
The reality would in all probability be that the President had already taken his decision to act.
Thus at that time it would be likely to be too late for any other initiative.
If the Prime Minister were to ask for more time in order for instance to summon a meeting of Heads of State, the result could hardly change things at this stage.
It would only have the consequence that the President would conclude that when it came to the crunch Britain had wanted to chicken out.
If this is right we would not have been able to alter events and we would have done lasting damage to our relations with the United States.
In other words the perception which the United States retained of Britain was of more central concern than whether Britain should, or could, actively become involved in seeking a settlement to the crisis.
In fact such preoccupation with the psychological ramifications of any move continued to dominate discussion.
The problem is of course that we are presently in no position to judge Soviet actions and calculations in this incident until the Russian archives have been thoroughly trawled and analysed in the detailed way they require.
But Frank Roberts's own reminiscences are themselves extremely vague on such an important issue.
In fact there is little on the crisis in his memoirs at all except an explicit declaration that the Soviet leadership did not expect the situation to get so out of control.
The most startling moment in the crisis, however, occurred on 27 October when the Foreign Office instructed their representative in the United Nations, Sir Patrick Dean, to announce that Britain would respond favourably to any request made by the Secretary-General (that is, a third party neutral request) for the immobilisation of Thor missiles in the United Kingdom if it would ease the situation.
This was intended as only a temporary measure, but had nevertheless been offered as a genuine response to Khrushchev's wish to trade the missiles in Cuba for the Jupiter's in Turkey.
The Americans, however, quickly dismissed the idea, unable to envisage that there might be 'any advantage in putting forward the suggestion about Thor missiles in the United Kingdom as they still hoped to set geographical limits to the area of discussion'.28 Britain's hopes of implementing an 'independent initiative' based on its own diplomacy were subdued by overriding American interests.
British Reservations The Foreign Office seems to have offered a much more realistic assessment of both the situation and the British response to the crisis than the government, which was completely absorbed in maintaining its own, and the country's, prestige.
Concern with America's handling of Cuba was longstanding, predating the missile crisis itself.
The Foreign Office had voiced forceful criticism of America's almost personal vendetta against Castro, especially once it reached its climax with the disastrous Bay of Pigs invasion and was then sustained by a most obsessive, some would say paranoid, campaign of incitement and propaganda.
The Americans understandably will be a great deal less patient'.35 Joseph Godber summarised Britain's inability to influence events, offering a reassurance that the government would 'keep in close touch with the United States Administration about the problem of Cuba, but we do not believe that there is any further overt action which we can usefully take at the present time in regard to this problem'.36 Britain's ambassador to Cuba, Herbert Marchant, was equally less concerned with sustaining the special relationship by becoming too involved in the crisis.
He also doubted the effectiveness of economic sanctions against Cuba, and appreciated the Foreign Office's averred reluctance to participate.
However, he did suggest that if Britain was to become involved, primarily he felt to placate American opinion ('only those who still believe in miracles', he said, 'can imagine that will fall down of its own accord'), such involvement should be as discreet as possible in order that the United States would be held responsible for any action which might be taken.
This seems to suggest that the Foreign Office was acutely aware of the possible spillover effects that the missile crisis might precipitate in Europe; Kennedy's Executive Committee had already discussed the likelihood that the blockade of Cuba might provoke the Soviets to again attempt a blockade of Berlin.
Initially their support had been offered on the premise that the blockade would be confined to ships carrying arms,42 but then the Americans expressed their intention to include oil tankers.
The Foreign Office was persistent that oil could not be 'regarded as an offensive military weapon', and was worried that the 'Interdiction of oil supplies to Cuba would strike at the moral basis of the American action and convert a purely military blockade into an economic blockade' which Britain was simply not prepared to tolerate.
Macmillan described the position of shipping as 'fairly satisfactory while the blockade is limited to weapons which they would not, in any case, be carrying.
There is however no evidence to suggest that Dean or any other member of the Foreign Office made any positive contribution to this decision.
The Foreign Office was equally concerned that the draft resolution contained 'no express authority for the continuation of the American measures and thus places heavy reliance on the legality of what has been done.
Dean was told, however, to vote for the resolution regardless of whether the Americans accepted these proposals or not.
Furthermore he was instructed, if questioned, to say that the United States had acted correctly by approaching the Security Council, thus inferring that they had been justified in taking immediate emergency action.
This may appear that despite the reservations, Britain was providing a blanket endorsement of America's proposals.
In other words the British were anxious that any action against Cuba be legitimated within the framework of the United Nations, which was a striking change in attitude given their own dismal record of involving the UN during the Suez crisis.
On the question of the blockade, however, there continued to be problems which hinged upon the preservation of the legal rights that the British shipping industry presently enjoyed and expected to continue.
It is noteworthy that a second draft was written to be delivered by the Foreign Secretary to the Trades Union Congress, which clearly demonstrates how the government was quite prepared to hedge around the most salient issues which concerned them in private, but would accept and endorse the American position in public.
On the legality of the blockade, for example, Vallet drafted a skilful speech for Home which allowed him to avoid the issue.
One has to consider', the draft continued, 'the legality of this action, in the light of the United Nations Charter, which expressly preserves the right of self defence and of the general principles of international law.
The question here is whether the action by the United States is within that right and those principles.
I don't much like serving written notice on the United States now but I am more concerned about what is said in the House of Lords.
I should have thought it would be impossible for the Lord Chancellor to refuse to give an opinion if he is directly challenged to do so.
He was advised to avoid the issue and reiterate that Cuba was not threatened by any external source (thus conveniently ignoring the sustained anti-Castro campaign waged by the United States), rendering any such argument about 'sovereignty' worthless.
Whether the Foreign Office genuinely believed these sentiments is uncertain, and they were written despite the fact that Joseph Godber had earlier recorded his belief that 'No one would insult the United States by thinking that Cuba represents a military threat against her'.52 Even when the missiles in Cuba did menace the United States, the Foreign Office still did not accept that they threatened the existing balance of power.
The Special Relationship Redefined By the end of the Second World War British foreign policy is said to have inhabited three interlocking circles the alliance with the United States, Europe, and the Empire and Commonwealth.
Of the three, the so-called special relationship has endured the longest.
The Suez crisis was the prime example of how fragile the Anglo-American relationship could be at a time when sovereignty and national interest conflicted with the conventions of international behaviour.
Britain's role during the missile crisis reinforces the notion of a delicate special relationship governed by the dictates of national interest.
Despite facing the greatest challenge to the status quo to that time, the British Foreign Office still looked upon the crisis as exclusively an American problem.
A similar, though more forceful, line was taken over Vietnam when the British refused American requests for military support.
For the British, Cuba and Vietnam were considered to be 'out of area operations' which the Americans believed would have benefited from the multilateral legitimacy that British support would have provided.
Moreover, Germany may well have been an area chosen for the testing of a new quid pro quo relationship between the superpowers whatever the outcome of the crisis.
That Britain adopted such a realist and calculating posture is evident as the immediate crisis abated and thoughts inevitably turned to securing the best results.
Sir David Ormsby-Gore suggested taking advantage of the outcome to ensure that Berlin was granted a more favourable status, that is offer a firm assurance that no offensive weapons would be located in Berlin and that this would be subject to verification by the United Nations.
M According to Ormsby-Gore this would give Britain full value for Cuba as a pawn which is at our mercy.
It gives increased security for West Berlin as the Soviets would be put on notice that any undue pressure on us there would result in the disappearance of the Castro regime within a matter of hours.
It would introduce United Nations observers into West Berlin in an unobjectionable role and this would constitute an additional embarrassment to the Soviets if they wanted to move against our position in the city.
It also illustrates how the British realised that this might entail applying diplomatic pressure on the Soviets and the Cubans, and to this end Britain was willing to maximise its special relationship with the United States.
However, Britain's ambassador to Moscow, Sir Frank Roberts, approached the resolution of the crisis from an alternative perspective.
It was in the resolution of these issues that the power and prestige of the Anglo-American relationship would be most valuable.
As for the special relationship itself, the declassification of relevant material by the PRO has still not provided the clarification which one would have hoped for or expected.
For example, the Cabinet minutes record how Macmillan was in regular contact with Kennedy, and the many Foreign Office cables filed by David Ormsby-Gore corroborate this.
The Cabinet was concerned that the details of this informal consultation should not be made public on the grounds that it might embarrass the President, and so decided to leave the details purposefully vague.
The problem, however, is that the Cabinet minutes themselves are ambiguous and do not record the particulars of these consultations; Macmillan's own accounts are useful but leave many gaps, and are of course constructed in order to present the British in a more active and influential light than they actually warrant.
In this way Macmillan sustained the illusion of British power and predominance, perpetuated the myth that the United States had benefited from his advice, and he was enraged by any suggestion to the contrary.
In turn the Americans were granted at least one ally of proven democratic worth at a time when their sponsorship of tyrannical antiCommunist regimes in Dominica and Vietnam was proving troublesome.
In short Britain's primary function during the crisis seems to have been in leading European and Commonwealth support for the United States.
The Suez crisis had dealt a savage blow to foreign policy, restricting Britain's capacity for unilateral action, and the Foreign Office had adapted to this new climate by adopting a more measured and realistic attitude to the missile crisis.
However, for the politician, driven by ambition and reputation, it was important to keep the myth of British power and influence alive.
The Anglo-American alliance provided the ideal vehicle for this, since British foreign policy had taken a severe beating in other areas in Europe where it was engaged in delicate negotiations for membership of the EEC, while at the same time struggling to ensure that the interests of the United States were tied to European security, despite growing French opposition to American influence on the continent; in the Empire where decolonisation was proceeding apace, and where influence within the Commonwealth was steadily diminishing, itself breaking the chimera of British power.
Hence the contradiction between the Cabinet minutes and the memoirs of the participants on the one hand, and the opinions recorded by the Foreign Office on the other.
The Cuban missile crisis therefore demonstrates the value of a specialised Foreign Service given the idiosyncrasies of elected government.
States within the international arena are essentially interdependent; thus a facade of unity between states within the alliance despite reservations being made in private may be maintained, and an arrangement for consultation and dialogue between the partners might be structured, while at the same time allowing for the possibility of 'independent initiatives' for settlement.
But in the final analysis the issue at stake and the risks to be taken will determine that a state, in this case the United States, will act as an independent power, with its interests overriding international law if necessary.
In turn this determined the extent of Britain's involvement which diminished if the issue was of only marginal importance for Britain.
What is interesting is that the Foreign Office were more aware of this than the government, and were concerned more with the implications of the Cuban missile crisis than the crisis itself.
In other words Suez had not challenged Britain's traditional perception of its own power; even by the end of the Cuban missile crisis, the special relationship was helping to sustain it for particular ends.
Thus we can gain a clearer understanding of how the Anglo-American alliance operated at the most critical moments in recent history.
Macmillan's biographer, Alistair Horne, is a keen advocate of the idea that the communications extended beyond consultation.
Eisenhower's biographer, Stephen Ambrose, describes Macmillan as being among the President's close circle of friends.
Nevertheless such intimacy, according to the version presented by Brugioni,380, did not prevent the President from attacking Gore 'with anger and some venom' at the negative attitude adopted by many in Britain, especially the press.
An announcement had been made in August 1962 that the Thors would be removed in 1963.
What Roberts did not foresee was that the conditions that would have brought such an undertaking into play — international inspection of missile sites for purposes of verification were never met by Castro.
The precarious and vague situation was made clearer only in 1970 when the United States finally accepted mutual commitments regarding Cuba after the Soviets began constructing submarine bases on the island.
Macmillan sent messages seeking support to de Gaulle, Adenauer, Aminore Fanfani , Menzies in Australia, Nehru and the 'African PMs e t c ' Macmillan, op. cit.,194.
