Followers 0 Recommended Posts Evgenia Plotnikova-Doumerc Posted July 28, 2004 Evgenia Plotnikova-Doumerc Members 11 Share Posted July 28, 2004 I have got a question over a certain period of the Cold War Cuban Missile crisis.
Once when still being in International School of Toulouse, I had to write a test that conatined a question on ''seriousness'' of the Cuban Missile crisis.
I argued that despite during this crisis the war seemed more likely than ever, the crisis was not as serious as it seemed at the time.
This can be proved by the fact that when American U-2 spy plane was shot down while flying over Cuba, Kennedy was advised to take immediate action, but he decided to try peace talks with Krushchev.
In additon, when the accident was almost repeated another U-2 flew over Soviet region, Kennedy apologised publicly.
Some sources say that the orginal aim of Krushchev was to remove the missiles from Turkey, which means that he would not let the crisis to come down to war, but will try to bargain as he actually did with the telegrams.
As he agreed to remove missiles even though the conditions outlined in his 2d telegramme were accepted by Kennedy only in private, it proves that he at this point he would not risk the war.
However, after it, my history teacher, Mr Jones-Nerzic, told me that he would argue the opposite.
With time my opinion also changed a bit to the point, where I am not very sure which position to take.
That is why I would really love to hear other opinions as that will help me to shape my own.
On 15th October, 1962, photographs were taken that revealed that the Soviet Union was placing long range missiles in Cuba.
Robert S McNamara, Secretary of State for Defence, suggested the formation of the Executive Committee of the National Security Council.
During their discussions they considered several different strategies for dealing with the crisis.
Use the United States Navy to stop military equipment reaching Cuba from the Soviet Union.
President Kennedy and his advisers had to take into consideration how the Soviet Union and Cuba would react to decisions made by the United States.
If Kennedy had accepted this advice it would probably have led to an all-out nuclear war.
Remembering the poor advice the CIA had provided before the Bay of Pigs invasion, JFK decided to wait and instead called for another meeting to take place that evening.
On October 24, President JFK was informed that Soviet ships had stopped just before they reached the United States ships blockading Cuba.
One has to wonder what would have happened if the USA and the Soviet Union were not being led at the time by two men who were willing to negotiate an agreement.
That the Soviets brought about this crisis in order to get United States nuclear missile removed from Turkey.
The logical thing for the Russians to do would be to move into Cuba which they had already done, and to take over, which they would do by a mutual security pact.
You are not suggesting… Earl E Smith: That is a speech I made in February.
Evgenia Plotnikova-Doumerc Posted August 1, 2004 Evgenia Plotnikova-Doumerc Members 11 Author Share Posted August 1, 2004 John, thank you very much for this answer.
Please, correct me if I am wrong; perhaps, I just do not understand this part of the crisis well.
In my school in Tolouse we were doing an activity of ''advising'' the President which decision he could take and offering all kinds of solutions , as if we were part of the Executive Committee of the National Security Council.
When we discussed all the solutions to the crisis I thought that I would advise negotiation with the USSR, as I thought that option had the least risk of war.
So, I wondered if there was a lot of members in the Committee who suggested this option.
The leadership of both United States and the Soviet Union knew that they could not go to war with each other.
Therefore, the trick was to pretend you was willing to go to war in order to gain your political objectives.
Kennedy and Khrushchev both believed the other would be unlikely to launch the first nuclear attack.
Kennedy had been elected on a policy of being tougher on the Soviets than Nixon and the Republicans.
His reputation as a Cold War warrior was badly damaged by the Bay of Pigs operation.
Publicly he talked tough but in secret it was doing a deal with Khrushchev over missile bases in Turkey and Italy.
Justin Q Olmstead Posted October 5, 2004 Justin Q Olmstead Members 66 Location:Winfield, Kansas USA Interests:I am a history teacher currently working on my masters degree.
I have also created an on-line American History course for my school district.
While I currently teach about lthe United States Constitution, American History and Middle Eastern Studies, I have always been very interested in the 1860's to 1990's time period in European history.
In this respect I am a huge ManU and Reading fan but follow European Football as a general rule.
Share Posted October 5, 2004 While John does a masterful job of answering your questions, I would like to add that one of the reasons that war seemed so inevitable is that there were leaders on both sides that felt that war was inevitable.
In fact some believe that the second letter that Krushchev shows a power struggle within the Kremlin.
The danger that this represents is that if the Chairman's position was unstable it could produce an even more militaristic Soviet Union that is willing to go to war to defeat the West.
He did not want to go to war but the politics of the time forces him to have to balance his political needs against what he believed was right.
While he was getting pressure to use military force against the Soviets in Cuba , he was attempting to use diplomacy to defuse the situation.
Some here call it shotgun diplomacy...either you do as I say or we will shoot you.
Talking to people in the United State who were alive at the time they recall how terrified they were that a war was going to break out.
People talk about going to bed not knowing if they would wake up tomorrow.
Tornado sirens were not tested because of the fear that people would mistake it for an air raid alert and panic.
People didn't always behave rationally during the Cold War ExComm based some of its decisions on inadequate intelligence.
McNamara says they didn't know that the Soviet Union had many operative missiles in Cuba at the time of the crisis, including, crucially, tactical weapons.
There is other evidence which indicates that the Soviet commander had approval to use tactical nuclear weapons in the event of a United States invasion without needing to consult further with Moscow.
So you can see that ExComm came close to ordering a land invasion of Cuba bassed on inaccurate evidence.
They would be able to rely on the MAD doctrine which would stop any Soviet ""first use"" -they would use massive force to invade Cuba quickly and crush Castro and then sit back and hope Khruschev didn't respond.
JFK's turning back the momentum toward war that had been building since the nuclear age began represents, IMO, his single greatest contribution.
This misconception grew out of a mutual deception by Khrushchev and Eisenhower, who both knew that the United States was overflying the Soviet Union with the top secret U-2 reconnaissance plane, and who also both knew that Khrushchev’s boasts were false.
For Khrushchev, the boasts were an integral part of his blustery campaign to bolster Soviet prestige throughout the Third World and in China.
The impression that the Soviet Union was equal or superior to the United States in terms of intercontinental ballistic missiles was essential to both his domestic and international standing.
This deception by the two leaders was the most tightly held secret within both superpower governments.
Sending Allen Dulles to brief Kennedy during the election, Eisenhower told his CIA director to emphasize the fact of the U.S.’ commanding military superiority.
But Dulles decided on his own to tell the candidate that he could not be sure of the true status of the missile gap until the United States had full satellite coverage of the Soviet Union.
Richard Nixon would later assert that the CIA, and Dulles in particular, had deliberately held back the truth in order to provide Kennedy with a powerful campaign issue.
Nixon may well have been correct given the fact that the CIA was better informed on the issue than even the Air Force as a result of its own U-2 reconnaissance overflights.
The Bay of Pigs, however, would quickly dispel the CIA of the notion that Kennedy would be a more favorable friend to have in the White House.
Only three weeks after the Inauguration, Secretary of Defense McNamara told a group of reporters in a casual briefing that there actually was no missile gap.
He had quickly concluded that “the CIA was right and the Air Force was wrong.
When he went to Kennedy to apologize and offer his resignation, the President said, “Oh come on, Bob, forget it.
We’re in a helluva mess, but we all put our foot in our mouth once in a while.
The construction of the missile gap fears was not so easily dismissed for the public or the military bureaucracy.
When the Kennedy administration had come to power it quickly become apparent that Kennedy could not match his predecessor’s military credentials.
By the autumn of 1961, the Soviets were threatening to seize West Berlin.
After refusing to commit American forces at the Bay of Pigs, and then being beaten in debate with Khrushchev in Vienna, Kennedy feared that the Soviets might seek to exploit his perceived weakness.
However, information from the new Corona satellite had revealed the location and provided for the targeting of all Soviet intercontinental ballistic missiles.
Kennedy knew that the few Soviet ICBMs that actually existed were suddenly obsolete.
He expected that if the United States revealed the Soviet inferiority, Khrushchev would be dissuaded from pursuing his risky policy on West Berlin.
In hindsight, it can be surmised that Khrushchev did not anticipate that pressing his agenda on West Berlin would result in Kennedy being forced to reveal the degree of the Soviet ICBM inferiority; and Kennedy did not anticipate that his public revelation would require Khrushchev to produce a remedy that would more quickly redress the exposed strategic imbalance than a crash ICBM buildup would offer.
The strain such a buildup would have placed on an already beleaguered economy, the impatience of the hard-line Soviet generals, and the potential loss of face with the Chinese and the Third World, were all elements that demanded an immediate solution.
The constructions of political spectacles and impressions management had come to result in the deployment of medium and intermediate range missiles to Cuba, thereby precipitating the most dangerous confrontation in the history of the world.
The Russian’s promises “to obliterate Western Europe” and to “bury” capitalism , accompanied by the quiet complicity of Eisenhower, resulted in a deeply rooted misperception.
With the demise of the Soviet Union, a wealth of new information has emerged, exposing more clearly than ever before the methods and motives of Soviet command and control structures.
Recent oral history conferences involving both American and Soviet participants have generated startling revelations about the nature and degree of the threat represented by the Crisis.
Analysts would learn that the absurdity of an unknown, unannounced deterrent had actually been in place in Cuba in 1962, revealing to some degree the illegitimacy of the deterrence doctrine itself.
A former Soviet general has revealed that his country intalled more than medium and intermediate range missiles in Cuba during those dangerous days.
Soviet field commanders also had six mobile launchers and nine Luna tactical missiles with nuclear warheads.
The officers were pre-authorized to use the missiles at their discretion to repel a United States invasion, which the Soviets believed to be imminent.
Although Kennedy was in Washington lobbying and stalling ExComm from its demands to invade, it is entirely possible that failing in these efforts, he would have had no choice but to give his generals the go-ahead.
Had the invasion taken place, it is likely that at least one of the tactical nukes would have been used against United States forces.
McNamara has said that the resulting pressure for the United States to launch a nuclear counterstrike at Cuba or the Soviet Union would have been irresistible.
The question raised by the gauntlet thrown down by Khrushchev seemed to be whether Kennedy would choose holocaust or humiliation.
As he agreed to remove missiles even though the conditions outlined in his 2d telegramme were accepted by Kennedy only in private, it proves that he at this point he would not risk the war. \nThat\u0027s what I thought at the moment of writing the test.
It was therefore only right that the Soviet Union should be allowed to place missiles in Cuba. \n Negotiate.
In return for the Soviet Union dismantling her missiles in Cuba, the United States would withdraw her nuclear missiles from Turkey and Italy. \n Invasion.
Send United States troops to Cuba to overthrow Castro\u0027s government.
The missiles could then be put out of action and the Soviet Union could no longer use Cuba as a military base. \n Blockade of Cuba.
Use the United States Navy to stop military equipment reaching Cuba from the Soviet Union. \n Bomb Missile Bases.
Carry out conventional air-strikes against missiles and other military targets in Cuba. \n Nuclear Weapons.
Use nuclear weapons against Cuba and/or the Soviet Union. \nWhen discussing these strategies.
President Kennedy and his advisers had to take into consideration how the Soviet Union and Cuba would react to decisions made by the United States. \nAt the first meeting of the Executive Committee of the National Security Council, the CIA and other military advisers explained the situation.
If Kennedy had accepted this advice it would probably have led to an all-out nuclear war. \nRemembering the poor advice the CIA had provided before the Bay of Pigs invasion, JFK decided to wait and instead called for another meeting to take place that evening.
The committee was now so divided that a firm decision could not be made. \nThe Executive Committee of the National Security Council argued amongst themselves for the next two days.
However, the majority of the committee gradually began to favour a naval blockade of Cuba. \nKennedy accepted their decision and instructed Theodore Sorensen, a member of the committee, to write a speech in which Kennedy would explain to the world why it was necessary to impose a naval blockade of Cuba. \nAs well as imposing a naval blockade, Kennedy also told the air-force to prepare for attacks on Cuba and the Soviet Union.
Kennedy also promised his military advisers that if one of the U-2 spy planes were fired upon he would give orders for an attack on the Cuban SAM missile sites. \nA public opinion poll in the United States revealed that three out of five people expected fighting to break out between the two sides. \nOn October 24, President JFK was informed that Soviet ships had stopped just before they reached the United States ships blockading Cuba.
The next day a second letter from Khrushchev arrived demanding that the United States remove their nuclear bases in Turkey. \nWhile the president and his advisers were analyzing Khrushchev\u0027s two letters, news came through that a U-2 plane had been shot down over Cuba.
Kennedy refused and instead sent a letter to Khrushchev accepting the terms of his first letter . \nKhrushchev agreed and gave orders for the missiles to be dismantled.
Yes. \nEarl E Smith: It would mean a great deal to them if we got out of Turkey.
Please, correct me if I am wrong; perhaps, I just do not understand this part of the crisis well. \nI also have got another question.
In my school in Tolouse we were doing an activity of \u0027\u0027advising\u0027\u0027 the President which decision he could take and offering all kinds of solutions , as if we were part of the Executive Committee of the National Security Council.
However, both could not be completely sure of this . \nKennedy had been elected on a policy of being tougher on the Soviets than Nixon and the Republicans.
The danger that this represents is that if the Chairman\u0027s position was unstable it could produce an even more militaristic Soviet Union that is willing to go to war to defeat the West. \nAs for Kennedy, it is fairly simple.
Some here call it shotgun diplomacy...either you do as I say or we will shoot you. \nTalking to people in the United State who were alive at the time they recall how terrified they were that a war was going to break out.
McNamara says they didn\u0027t know that the Soviet Union had many operative missiles in Cuba at the time of the crisis, including, crucially, tactical weapons.
There is other evidence which indicates that the Soviet commander had approval to use tactical nuclear weapons in the event of a United States invasion without needing to consult further with Moscow. \nSo you can see that ExComm came close to ordering a land invasion of Cuba bassed on inaccurate evidence.
They would be able to rely on the MAD doctrine which would stop any Soviet \""first use\"" -they would use massive force to invade Cuba quickly and crush Castro and then sit back and hope Khruschev didn\u0027t respond.
The Bay of Pigs, however, would quickly dispel the CIA of the notion that Kennedy would be a more favorable friend to have in the White House. \nOnly three weeks after the Inauguration, Secretary of Defense McNamara told a group of reporters in a casual briefing that there actually was no missile gap.
He was so na\u00efve at that point that he had misunderstood the difference between \u201coff the record\u201d and \u201con background.\u201d As soon as he had entered the Pentagon he had made it his first order of business to \u201cdetermine the size of the gap and the remedial action required to close it.\u201d He had quickly concluded that \u201cthe CIA was right and the Air Force was wrong.
We\u2019re in a helluva mess, but we all put our foot in our mouth once in a while.
It\u2019ll blow over.\u201d \nThe construction of the missile gap fears was not so easily dismissed for the public or the military bureaucracy.
When the Kennedy administration had come to power it quickly become apparent that Kennedy could not match his predecessor\u2019s military credentials.
Thus, Kennedy arranged for the Soviets to learn the true situation. \nIn hindsight, it can be surmised that Khrushchev did not anticipate that pressing his agenda on West Berlin would result in Kennedy being forced to reveal the degree of the Soviet ICBM inferiority; and Kennedy did not anticipate that his public revelation would require Khrushchev to produce a remedy that would more quickly redress the exposed strategic imbalance than a crash ICBM buildup would offer.
The Russian\u2019s promises \u201cto obliterate Western Europe\u201d and to \u201cbury\u201d capitalism , accompanied by the quiet complicity of Eisenhower, resulted in a deeply rooted misperception.
The public necessity generated by this misperception severely limited the range of options available to Kennedy, who remarked to his brother that if he had responded less forcefully, he \u201cwould have been impeached.\u201d \nWith the demise of the Soviet Union, a wealth of new information has emerged, exposing more clearly than ever before the methods and motives of Soviet command and control structures.
Strangelove,\"" there was a popular culture depiction of what Robert McNamara has now described as \u201cthe most dangerous element of the entire episode.\u201d Analysts would learn that the absurdity of an unknown, unannounced deterrent had actually been in place in Cuba in 1962, revealing to some degree the illegitimacy of the deterrence doctrine itself.
Had the invasion taken place, it is likely that at least one of the tactical nukes would have been used against United States forces. \nMcNamara has said that the resulting pressure for the United States to launch a nuclear counterstrike at Cuba or the Soviet Union would have been irresistible.
He has called this \u201cthe most dangerous element of the entire episode.\u201d In hindsight it can be seen that the apocalypse would have been initiated \u201cnot by a head of state in consultation with his best informed and thoughtful aides, but by some panicked colonel in fatigues on a beleaguered island far from home who was just trying to do the best he could to save his men and himself.\u201d \nThe question raised by the gauntlet thrown down by Khrushchev seemed to be whether Kennedy would choose holocaust or humiliation.
