Duplication of this document for the purpose of resale or other distribution is prohibited.
Our eText Classroom fo R Editions are designed to allow you to post individual readings, study guides, graphic organizers, and handouts to a learning management system or other password protected site.
If you would like to use V material from a Choices unit in your own work, please contact us for permission.
Considering Its Place in Cold War tr W International Education Intern History was developed by the Choices for the 21st Century Susannah Bechtel Education Program with the assistance of the research staff of the Thomas J Watson Jr.
Course materials place special emphasis on the importance of educating students in their participatory role as citizens.
Considering Its Place in Cold War History is part of a continuing series on international public policy issues.
New units are published each academic year and all units are updated regularly.
Choices was established to help citizens think constructively about foreign policy issues, to improve participatory citizenship skills, and to encourage public judgement on policy issues.
Known as the Bay of Pigs invasion, it was a siles capable of carrying nuclear weapons on disastrous failure. the island of Cuba, just ninety miles from the The president had met with Soviet leader United States.
Nikita Khrushchev the previous year in fo R Tensions between the Soviet Union and an effort to improve relations between the the United States had been high since the late two nuclear powers, but with little success. 1940s.
For every United States president since Harry Khrushchev, convinced that the Soviet Union E S Truman, this ideological standoff—known was a growing power and emboldened by adr as the Cold War—had shaped foreign and vances in Soviet rocket technology, saw little V domestic policy.
D I months about Soviet intentions toward West Nonetheless, Khrushchev had promised Berlin and in Southeast Asia, but Cuba was not to do anything that might affect the upmuch closer to home.
Furthermore, he had launched, these missiles could hit the United promised not to place offensive weapons in States in minutes.
Now Kennedy wondered what Khrushto boil over. chev was doing and how he should respond.
Cuba presented a thorny problem for the In these readings, you will explore the president.
Cuba’s leader, Fidel Castro, had recircumstances that brought the United States ib cently aligned himself with the Soviet Union, to the brink of nuclear war in 1962.
Fition was a rejection of the United States effort to bring nally, you will explore what happened in the American skills and values to the region. crisis and what the United States has learned io The island had become a flashpoint for United States since.
Considering TRB Its Place in Cold War History Day One 3 Retracing the Path to October 1962 Objectives: 2.
Identify the tensions in have answered the discussion questions, ask U.S.-Soviet-Cuban relations that contributed to them to share their responses with the entire the Cuban missile crisis. class.
Assign to each group the role of the United Students should read “October 1962: The ut States, Cuba, or the Soviet Union.
