Peterffy believes voters in November could unwittingly decide the sort of social system that defines the country for decades to come.
Citing his childhood in Hungary and similar scenarios that he maintains have played out in other Eastern European countries and in Cuba, he warns that America risks its freedom to succeed.
Barack Obama, Benghazi cover-up, Benghazi murders, Benghazigate, Special Operations Speaks Right Jabs For October 28, 2012 Politics is not a playground, it’s a battlefield.
Within 30 seconds to a minute after making the move to respond, his second in command apprehended General Ham and told him that he was now relieved of his command.
It’s not easy for a guy who worked for ACORN to hit new lows, but Obama managed it by conspiring with the infamously slimy lawyer Gloria Allred on a last minute smear job against Romney.
Anyone working in our government who knew anything about that night lied to the nation.
And the press cowered and simpered, like a well-dressed Wormtongue, covering and twisting the narrative to help their Master.
The optimism that Obama’s supporters project is unfounded in hard data and historical precedent.
The deadbeat of America. …individuals come to America because it represents the land of opportunity…not Obama’s vision of Socialism.
After Obama had denounced Youssef in every forum from 60 Minutes to the United Nations to Pakistani TV, he was arrested, not to protect the Innocence of Muslims, but to protect the Innocence of Obama.
Now is the moment for you, General Petraeus, to demonstrate whether or not you are a careerist or a patriot.
If the America of now is one in which unemployment is high, people give up on the jobs market in despair, food stamp usage is at a record high, the government has control of our health care, earning power is down, GDP is low, and the government can do whatever the hell it wants, regardless of the Constitution, I’ll take the America I knew, even if you call that racist.
Because we care, we present the unintentionally amusing Campaign Ad of the Day.
F-16s and Apache helicopters remained parked and unused at Aviano Air Base in northern Italy.
Two Navy destroyers already in the Mediterranean Sea were moved off the coast of Libya on the day of the attack but were never used.
I hope the ghosts of Ambassador Stevens, the personal representative of the Chicago Messiah, former Navy SEALs Tyrone Woods and Glen Doherty and Information Management Officer Sean Smith who were left to die, haunt him all the days of his sorry, arrogant life.
Someone needs to bring the blood-encrusted machine gun that Woods and Doherty were firing when they were killed by a mortar shell and toss it on the Resolute Desk right in front of this cowardly president.
Barack Obama, Benghazi cover-up, Benghazi murders, Benghazigate, Chris Stevens, Glen Doherty, Hillary Clinton, Leon Panetta, Sean Smith, Tyrone Woods Tuesday, October 23, 2012 Photoshop™ Of The Day: Horses And Bayonets Marines still use bayonets.
Here are a few links from conservative bloggers who are waging a war of words against the misanthropy, priggishness, prejudice, luddism, illiberalism and irrationalism of the mainstream media bobble-head dolls and groupthink poodles of the press corps.
We suspect once President Romney is sworn in challenging the president will become a patriotic duty.
Hard as it is to believe, the disgusting farce of Barack Hussein Obama’s presidency is still hitting new lows.
Jeremy and his parents must be thrilled at the prospect of the young scholar requiring a year or two of retraining after acquiring his expensive 4-year degree in order to get him up to speed for the hypothetical factory jobs that will blossom under Obama's best-case employment scenario.
Soledad needs a cocktail. …still nothing—here on the dawn of the most important election in United States history.
The first freedom in the days of the American Revolution was freedom from British rule.
The first freedom in 1941 was freedom from Nazi Germany and Imperial Japan.
That flushing sound you hear is another $50 million taxpayer dollars going down the shitter of Teh Won’s Green Energy policy.
And, if they say what I think they’re saying, Obama will be back in Chicago on January 21, 2013.
Those who think they are owed free stuff and those who are just stupid. …unless the country changes direction and stops moving “forward” this great country will soon be on that road to hell.
James Taranto believes that CNN’s Candy Crowley was duped by David Axelrod to do President Obama’s bidding at the last debate.
It’s just that the agenda for a second term is a retread of the first, including all the lies and failure.
At its essence, it seeks to counter violent aggression with the consensus-based woolgathering of the European Union.
A post written back in August of 2011 seems eerily prescient in light of our non-response to the 9/11 attack in Benghazi, Libya.
There is always a way, and innovation powered by free-market capitalism is the signpost.
Because then he can walk into a debate and get away with saying stupid shit like this.
Just this past Friday, in a remarkably brazen move, Secretary of State Hillary Rodham Clinton, thrown under the bus, simply refused to answer questions about the attack.
In a stunning revelation Monday night while in Peru, Clinton told CNN, “What I want to avoid is some kind of political gotcha or blame game.
Secretary Clinton linked the YouTube video to the murder of her colleagues even as the four caskets lay alongside her at Andrews Air Force Base—even though she had known for days that it had nothing to do with it.
It’s weird enough that politicians now give campaign speeches to returning coffins.
But to conscript your “friend’s corpse as a straight man for some third-rate electoral opportunism is surely as shriveled and worthless as “politicization” gets.
The first successful terrorist attack on United States sovereign territory since 9/11, and on the very anniversary and by al-Qaeda-linked killers, was not helpful to the Obama team.
Smaller love hath no man than Obama’s, than to lay down his “friend” for a couple of points in Ohio.
Reviled by the right, mistrusted by the left and ever unpredictable, was nonetheless a major force in the United States Senate for three decades, casting what were often crucial votes on everything from judicial nominations to economic policy.
As a member of the Senate Committee on the Judiciary, it was in 1987 that Specter helped to defeat confirmation of President Ronald Reagan’s Supreme Court nomination, Robert Bork.
Four years later, his aggressive questioning of Anita Hill’s allegations of sexual harassment during Clarence Thomas’ nomination hearing, helped him ascend to the nation’s highest court.
In February 2009, he voted for the Democrats’ economic stimulus package, inflaming GOP sentiment against him.
Specter announced on April 28, 2009 that he was changing party affiliation from Republican to Democrat.
The party switch, which Vice President Biden helped to engineer behind the scenes, temporarily gave Democrats the 60th vote they needed to overcome Republican filibusters against President Obama's health care overhaul.
The raucous scene that followed, aired on newscasts and posted on YouTube, would shake Democrats, embolden Republicans and force the White House to accelerate its health care strategy.
Bettmann/CORBIS On October 14, 1962, a United States Air Force U-2 plane on a photo-reconnaissance mission captured photographic proof of Soviet missile bases under construction in Cuba.
No one was sure how Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev would respond to the naval blockade and U.S. demands.
Cuban missile crisis, Fidel Castro, Iranian nuclear arms, John F Kennedy, Nikita Khrushchev This Administration Lies To This Day Of all the lies told by the current regime, those told about the Iranian nuclear weapons program and the savage murder of Ambassador Christopher Stevens are among the most shocking and reprehensible.
The Benghazi slaughterhouse is the sickening result of an administration’s failure to heed the pleas and the warnings of ambassador Chris Stevens.
Stevens and three other Americans died on September 11, 2012 and the administration lies to this day.
Congresswoman Donna Edwards , while appearing on CNN said, ""It's an evolving security situation.
One can expect one thing true in the beginning is different in the end.
It has been 17 months since the death of bin Laden and despite having pledged not to use his death as a trophy, Obama and his minions continue to trot out his corpse in order to bolster his foreign policy chops and play on Americans’ fear.
One of the most effective attack ads Clinton launched was the White House phone ringing at 3m.
The hour is 5m., Sept., Washington time, and the scene is an Oval Office meeting among President Obama, the secretary of defense, the national security adviser and the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.
The United States diplomatic mission in Benghazi has been under assault for roughly 90 minutes.
Barack Obama, meanwhile, was jetting off to Las Vegas for a fundraiser.
The stunning Benghazi fallout is a failure of policy stemming from a flawed president’s flawed worldview and the political needs of an election season.
Completing the circle, according to proprietary reporting from Ed Klein, Bill Clinton is concerned that Barack Obama is about to throw Hillary Clinton under the bus.
On CNBC’s The Kudlow Report, Klein said that President Clinton is reaching out to friends in the legal profession trying to figure out what his wife should do if she’s subpoenaed—called in to testify about events in Libya.
Our four dead Americans had a terrible, horrible, no good, very bad day.
Mr Obama must remember that it was the “machine” that chose him and it is the “machine” that uses him and will throw him away when it is done with him.
Hopefully, November 6, 2012 will hasten that day and he too, will have a terrible, horrible, no good, very bad day.
Watch as one of Obama’s propaganda ministers tries to filibuster on the issue of Libya and then is forced to squirm when pressed about the matter.
Barack Obama, Benghazi cover-up, Benghazi murders, Benghazigate, Bill Clinton, Chris Stevens, Ed Klein, Hillary Clinton, Larry Kudlow Saturday, October 13, 2012 Right Jabs For October 13, 2012 Politics is not a playground, it’s a battlefield.
JFK's 1962 tax policy is much closer to what Romney wants than what Obama wants, fifty years later.
The outcome of this debate is that Biden just gave Benghazi-gate more legs.
And you can quote me on that.” …as soon as we read Mr Al-Mulhim’s article, we understood that this honest and courageous man has painted a huge “Kill Me” sign on his back.
And with each battle, freedom has been lost as a new layer of privilege and the regulations that protect that privilege have been added.
We have long ago lost the presumption of innocence, now everyone is guilty of something and the power to wield that guilt like a whip is the ultimate privilege. his story isn’t going away.
Biden’s statements during the debate can be viewed as a continuation of the coverup.
Obama sends billions to Pakistan, but refused to give Benghazi any Marines.
In fact, it was Biden himself who broke into the Kennedy wardrobe to try on some of Bobby Kennedy's lines in his infamous 1988 Democratic primary debate plagiarism incident, and Biden's problems with plagiarism didn't end there.
It strains even the most robust sense of credulity to expect voters to believe that Obama personally approves kill orders on suspected terrorists and closely supervised the Bin Laden kill, but mysteriously hasn't a clue what's going in Libya.
You can tell Obama is losing, because he’s even more smirky and shouty than normal, hurling insults and tossing out committee-generated one-liners.
That the vice president of the United States could put together a performance that was just one step short of Nikita Khrushchev pounding his shoe on a desk at the United Nations should be deeply disturbing to average Americans.
Joe Biden, laughing, Vice Presidential debates Thursday, October 11, 2012 Biden: All Gaffed-Up And Ready To Go Tonight, the Vice Presidential Debate between Joe Biden and Paul Ryan will be broadcast across the all networks, cable news channels and will be streamed live on YouTube™ and other internet sites.
This debate is of profound interest both nationally and internationally.
There is, of course, no evidence that Romney would not have ordered the bin Laden raid.
The fact is Biden has a near-perfect record of being wrong about almost every major foreign policy question that the United States has faced in the past three decades.
He opposed aiding the Nicaraguan democratic resistance that helped roll back communism in our hemisphere, the Reagan defense buildup that bankrupted the Soviet Union, the first Gulf War that liberated Kuwait, and the 2007 surge that turned back the insurgency and defeated al-Qaeda in Iraq.
With this record, it is no shock that Biden opposed the killing of bin Laden as well.
Joe Biden, Paul Ryan, Thrill in the 'Ville, Vice Presidential debates Wednesday, October 10, 2012 Obama Hiding Behind Big Bird The owners of the children's show ""Sesame Street"" have asked the Obama campaign to pull down an ad released Tuesday that shows an image of Big Bird and mocks Republican nominee Mitt Romney for holding up the popular children's character as a symbol of unnecessary government spending.
A reporter traveling with the Obama camp asked Jen Psaki aboard Air Force One, “Thinking back to the last campaign of ‘08 and this time, too, the President has bemoaned at times the focus on trivial things.
And even though you made the point about cutting the deficit, a lot of people will read about it, hear about this ad—we‘re a month away from the election and we’re talking about Big Bird.
Romney continued, “Of all the VMI graduates, none is more distinguished than George Marshall—the Chief of Staff of the Army who became Secretary of State and Secretary of Defense, who helped to vanquish fascism and then planned Europe’s rescue from despair.
His commitment to peace was born of his direct knowledge of the awful costs and consequences of war.
Romney then began in earnest to demolish the president’s foreign policy by raising the issue of Benghazi.
They are expressions of a larger struggle that is playing out across the broader Middle East—a region that is now in the midst of the most profound upheaval in a century.
This latest assault cannot be blamed on a reprehensible video insulting Islam, despite the Administration’s attempts to convince us of that for so long.
Lara Logan, CBS correspondent told 60 Minutes in a passionate plea, “that our government is downplaying the strength of our enemies in Afghanistan and Pakistan as a rationale of getting us out of the longest war.
Romney emphatically said it is the “responsibility of our President to use America’s great power to shape history—not to lead from behind, leaving our destiny at the mercy of events.
Romney said he would support Israel, the nation most obviously at risk if Iran acquired nuclear weapons, and charged that Obama’s poor relationship with Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu has helped embolden Iran and other adversaries.
He closed his speech with optimism, “The 21st century can and must be an American century.
Despite these threats, the State Department left its personnel there to fend for themselves.
I suspect that when the morning after photographs of the Vice Presidential Debate are released, if we look closely, we’ll see Axelrod’s hand up Biden’s ass pulling the strings and controlling every word Crazy Uncle Joe utters.
Then, when the VP debate turns into a bloodbath, “heartbroken“ Chris Matthews will know exactly how and why it happened.
Barack Obama, David Axelrod, Joe Biden, Paul Ryan, Vice Presidential debates Right Jabs For October 7, 2012 Politics is not a playground, it’s a battlefield.
Only political junkies will ever see these clips, and everybody—even the folks who are going to vote for him—know he’s a phony, race-baiting jack hole by now. …it’s only a matter of time before his words are branded as racist.
The expectations were high and remained high until the Chicago Messiah began to speak.
It is tempting, for example, to imagine recent history and the state of America had President Barack Obama never existed— if, say, Stanley Ann Dunham had decided to try out for the Dallas Cheerleaders, or pursued a degree in physics, instead of trying to prove her ""tolerance"" with a sham marriage with a Kenyan Muslim and making whoopee in Hawaii with a black Communist on the FBI's watch list while pursuing degrees in anthropology and micro-financing—and so have never been born and sparing the country of his brand of super-sized community organizing.
I want to state for the record that I whole-heartedly encourage King Barack the Unready to charge head-on into the next debate, Narcissism-a-blazing.
Godless Commies in academia and the media are crapflooding the public discourse.
It’s time for a great awakening in this country, where we kick Commies curb-ward, and re-assert liberty and mutual respect.
Let these Commies return to hell, and take their lies, Affirmative Action, and Equal Opportunity Officers with them.
The first question, which has been asked many a time without an answer, is why the Obama admin would send the United States Ambassador to the UN out on to the political show circuit in the first place, and with those talking points.
The second question is what the administration thinks they will accomplish by throwing the intelligence community under the bus.
Attorney General Launches New Office of Environmental Justice 1 hour ago The First Street Journal.
