The next two months would be devoted to President John F Kennedy trying to get Communism, Khrushchev, and the missiles out of Cuba.
This event showed that the United States may be able to place missiles around the world to threaten their enemies.
The United States had installed missiles in Turkey, just across the Black Sea from Russia.
These missiles could strike Soviet soil in ten minutes, whereas it took Soviet Missiles located in Russia nearly twenty-five minutes to hit the United States.
In a conversation between Nikita Khrushchev and Marshal Rodoin Malinovsky, the threat of the American missiles in Turkey was discussed.
Malinovsky brought up the fact that they should place missiles closer to the U.S; Khrushchev then thought to place them in Cuba.
Khrushchev told his plan to his colleagues and to the First Deputy Prime Minister Anastas Mikoyan.
Mr Phileas Fogg bet twenty thousand pounds that he could make it around the world in eighty ... 1 pages 11 1 May/2001 3.0Cuban Missile crises:a tragedy ... the Carribean.
The United States stated that the United States was in danger if we did not react.
The invasion failed, this opened a window of opportunity for the Soviet Union to change the global power balance towards the Soviet.
President Kennedy had to do something to halt the growing number of missile sites in Cuba.
If missiles were launched from Cuba they would take just 17 minutes to hit their targets.
The greatest crises between the United States and the Soviet Union occured in October of 1962.
The Soviets secretly put nuclear missiles in Cuba, while saying repeatedly that they never would.
Nikita Khrushchev, the Soviet Premier, began to supply Cuba with nuclear missiles, which would put the United States within range of an attack.
In the religious aspect, Aztecs believed in signs and ... 3 pages 31 Feb/2008 4.3Disappearance of the Mayan Civilisation ... water sources in the area near the Mayan cities.
Scientific climatic modelling, tree ring data and ... 2 pages 22 Mar/2009 5.0The Glass Roses Short Essay/response ... and become men so quickly.
