Throughout history Poland a corridor of attack on Russia so Stalin wanted a Communist gov. Security USSR invaded from west twice.
Stalin wanted a BUFFER ZONE of soviet/'friendly' states West thought Stalin's motives were political to spread Communism and expand Soviet empire throughout Europe. 10 of 62 Soviet Control Over Expansions Soviets freed most of E.Europe from Nazis, but stayed in occupation of countries and established Communist governments.
Vs Communist ~ Communists lost heavily in general election but continued Guerilla war with help of close communists ~ Britian provided troops and money to greece and turkey, but ran out in early 1947.
Announced by United States seceratry of state, General George Marshall, in June 1947 Gave aid to all war-torn european countries to help them reequip their factories, revive agriculture and trade.
Stalin blockaded all routes by land and rail into West Berlin sparked first major crisis and worsened relations between Superpowers JANUARY: United States and British zones merge Bizonia MARCH: Soviets walk out of ACC complaining Western attitudes -unworkable & Bizonia joins with French zone to make Trizonia APRIL: Allied zones included in Marshall PlanEconomy in west much better then east, where stalin used resources for USSR benefit 24 JUNE: Stalin accuse west of interfering in Soviet Zone.
In reality he feared a strong democratic and reunited Germany on the borders of USSR would spread ideas to East Berlin.
If western allies gave in Stalin would take over everywhere else The only way into Berlin was by air so Allies decided on an airlift which would not lead to war Airlift began 28 June 1948 and ended May 1949.
British nicknamed it 'Operation Plainfare' As a warning to USSR Truman ordered B-29 Atom Bombers to UKwithin bombing range of Berlin. Stalin organised Soviet fly overs and awkwardly positioned weather ballons to hinder airlift.
Didnt work. During airlift, Berliners supplied with everything from food and clothing to oil and building materials, but there was still a great shortage. On 12th May 1949, Stalin called off blockade.
Soviet Atom Bomb 1949 earlier than expected started ARMS RACE 22 of 62 Stalin Death 1953 After stalin death, no leader took over after two years Nikita Khrushchev became new USSR leader Within a year he had denounced Stalin and began 'deStalinization' Also began peaceful coexistence with West Detente 23 of 62 Hungarian Uprising Build Up > In 1944, USSR invade Hungary whilst driving German troops back.
Feb 1956Khrushchev secret speech July 1956 Rakoski succeded by Erno Gero.
October 1956 student demonstrations 24 of 62 Key Features of Hungarian Uprising 25th October 1956 , Khrushchev sends in troops and tanks to restore peace.
Tanks kill 12 Same day Gero forced to resign and Nagy takes over on 26th Nagy holds talks with USSR to get tanks withdrawn United States Secratary of State said they will support Hungary, but Eisenhower did not nwant to commit USA. Nagy released political prisoners and published reformsincluded withdrawal from Warsaw Pact.
Political parties banned under rakoski reappeared and Nagy made coalition government Khrushchev did want to be seen as weakZedong was urging him to stop any deviation of Communism Decided nagy went too far, and 4 November 1956 Soviet troops and tanks invaded Ceasefire decided on 10 November 1956, Janos Kadar new leader, Nagy shot in 1958 25 of 62 Reasons For USSR Invasion of Hungary 1.
Eisenhower in presidential elections did not want to commit United States and loose power 6.
USSR wanted to remove Allies because it was area of prosperity, military strenth and Western success within communist territory Berlin was a gap in the Iron Curtain.
Brain Drain Lots of the more educated proffesionals and skilled craftsmen fled to West Berlin.
This drain of labour and economic output threatened to ruin East Germany 3.
USSR thought Allies used West Berlin for Espionage Soviets argued that they needed to control movement and access into Berlin to combat spying.
Had joined NATO and European Economic Community Brain Drain rapidlly increasing amount of refugees Khrushchev fixed a conference with yung, new United States president Kennedy thinking he could push him around Vienna SummitJune 1961 Khrushchev demands western forces out of Berlin.
CIA believed Cubans would help exiles, but they supported popular Castro and helped defeat La Brigada Castro knew about invasion form exiles in Miami La Brigada's ships sunk, and army heavily out numbered. 34 of 62 Results of Bay Of Pigs Castro's position in Cuba strengthened.
Kennedy on TV 24 October: 18 USSR ships turn around to avoid confrontation 26 October: Khrushchev sends Kennedy a letter, saying he would remove missiles if USA removed blockade and didn't invade Cuba 27 October: Khrushchev send 2nd letter saying he would remove missiles if USA remove theirs in Turkey 28 October: Kennedy chooses 1st Letter.
Brezhnev meets with Dubcek a few days later who agrees to remain in Warsaw pact if his reforms are allowed Brezhnev reassured 3 August 1968 Bratislava Declaration signed -shows support for communism August 1968 Tito given enthusiastic reception in Czechoslovakia 1518 August 1968 Politburo meeting.
Brezhnev Doctrine redefined Communism as one party system and made all members part of Warsaw Pact.
Temporarily worsened relations between East and West, but Detente continued after a slight gap.
USSR accept existence of West Germany CO-OPERATION call for closer economic, social and cultural links to lead to closer political agreements HUMAN RIGHTS each signatory agreed to respect human rights and basic freedomsg. thought, speech religion and freedom from unfair arrest 48 of 62 SALT 2 After 1977 President Carter keen to link Human Rights to Arms Limitations to put pressure on USSR Following agreements at Helsinki, he sent a letter to USSR dissident Brezhnev saw it as gross interferance with Soviet internal affairs and said so at Helsinki.
They complained with Carter in 1975 of violations embarressed Brezhnev, but Arms limitations carried on.
Thousands of Afghan Muslims join mujahideen guerrilla movement on holy mission for Allah and want to overthrow Amin gov. so declare a jihad on Amin supporters > Soviet Military assistance programme, started i n1978, increased and Amin dependent on USSR military and equipment.
UUSR saw fudamentalism as a great threat... 50 of 62 Invasion of Afghanistan Between 25 December 1979 and 1 January 1980 more than 50,000 Soviet troops sent to Afghanistan to restore order and protect PDPA from mujahideen.
USSR state acting on 1978 Treaty of Friendship, Co-operation and Good Neighbourliness former President Taraki had signed 27 December 1979Amin shot and replaced by Babrak Kamal, who was in exile in Moscow.
Carter already under pressure in November 1979 after United States embassy staff held hostage in Iran.
Carter proposed creation of quick strike force plus draft of 1820 year olds and CIA increase of intelligence gathering activities.
Also wanted to eradicate Vietnam War, hostages and loss of prestige to USSR in Africa + Central America embarrassments.
USA to place cruise missiles in Western Europe to combat USSR missiles in western Soviet Union.
Both countries accept MAD theory Reagan prepared to discuss arms limitations was in a position of strength November 1981 'zero option' cancel deployment of missiles if USSR do same.
USA decided to give secret assistance to Polish Worker's Trade Union movement Solidarność known as Star Wars Programme SDI / STAR WARS: 1.
Missile destroyed 53 of 62 Star Wars 2 23 March 1983, President Reagan announced SDI plan for a ground adn spacebased, laser armed, anti ballistic missile system, which would create a shield for United States land based missiles 27 March 1983 Andropov accused USA of preparing a firststrike attack on USSR and Reagan inventing new plans for Nuclear War.
Olympics USA see it as a retaliation of Moscow games USSR held Friendship Games DIVIDED 1948 hint of Detent being rekindled lots of fear for NUTS and antinuclear demonstrations March 1985 Mikhail Gorbachev appointed new Soviet leader.
Prepared to adopt drastic policies to improve Superpower relations, because otherwise Soviet Union would collapse 55 of 62 Gorbachev's Role in Cold War Ending Gorbachev decided to call off Cold War unilaterally.
His abandonment of Brezhnev doctrine caugth West and USA off guard, and was clearly a radical change He did it because Cold War was draining USSR's wealth and Soviet Union could not continue to develop economically and increase living standars stopping unrest in Counrty.
Stopped USSR interference in Eastern European sattelite states Gorbachev wanted to maintain Soviet's role as a super power.
He knew he had to win over the Soviet people and show the world that he would not threaten World Peace.
He released dissidents from jail, published banned books and lifted censorship.
But glasnost lead to people demanding more radical changes and criticised Gorbachev.
Treaty eliminated nuclear and convential groundlaunched ballistic and cruise missiles.
By treaty deadline, 1 June 1991, over 2500 weapons had been destroyed Also, both nations allowed to inspect other country.
Both leaders stressed INF was only first step to more radical agreements regarding long range nuclear weapons.
Furthermore, it was evident that the wives of Reagan and Gorbachev had played a role in pushing the two leaders together. 58 of 62 Conventional Armed Forces in Europe At Moscow summit, there were more arms control talsks and more troop reductions in Europe in 1989.
Also Gorbachev's promise to withdraw troops from Afghanistan showed peaceful intentions.
Moscow summit led to Conventional Armed Forces in Europe Treaty which was signed by NATO and Warsaw Pact reprisentatives in November 1990.
Agreement to reduce number of tanks, missiles, aircraft and other forms of nonnuclear military hardware held by signatory states.
New United States president George Bush Senior and Gorbachev announced end of Cold War at a summit in Malta in 1989.
When Saddam Hussein invaded Kuwaiot in 1990, the two super powers acted closely and followed directives of the United Nations and formed a co-alition force 59 of 62 START Talks 1990 1991 At Washington summit of 31 MAy 3 June 1990, Bush and Gorbachev discussed Strategic Arms Reductions and finally signed the Treaty for the Reduction and Limitation of Strategic Offensive Arms , on 31 July 1991.
The key to changes in Eastern Europe in 1989 was Hungary's decision to open it's border with Austria in May of that year.
This meant a hole in the Iron curtain, and a way for East Germans to move to West Germany.
Demonstrations in Germany in 1989 and calls for change to system of government.
Gorbachev visited East Germany in October 1989 and informed political leaders that Soviet Union would not get involved in Germany's political affairs.
Demonstrations continued and, 4 November, the largest demostration in East Germany's history, over 1 million people in E Berlin demanding democracy and free elections.
On 9 November, E German government announced opening of border crossings into West Germany.
New Germany joined NATO and Warsaw Pact dissolved in 1991. 61 of 62 Collapse of Soviet Union 2 Events in Eastern Europe had a catastrophic impact on the Soviet Union.
Many nationalities and ethnic groups saw how satellite states were able to break away from Moscow.
In 1990 Baltic states declared themselves independent and led to demands for independence within Soviet Union.
There were fears that the country was about to disintergrate, and Gorbachev found that he was opposed to most by most sections of Soviet society.
There was an attempted coup d'etat in August 1991 which was defeated by Boris Yeltsin and though Gorbachev was restored he had lost authority.
Gorbachev resigned in December 1991, and the Soviet Union split into several independent states.
Gorbachev and Reagan became personal friends and made significant agreements.
Aspects of International Relations 1945-2004 » Cold War » Post-revisionist and New Cold War Interpretations » Henry VIII » Similar History resources: Cold War 0.
