A Brush With Armageddon THE CU3AN MISSILE CRISIS REVISITED Edited by James A Nathan St.
Those “thirteen days in October” had indeed brought the world to the brink of atomic holocaust.
Until this year, however, we lacked adequate knowledge of how the crisis had come about, how it was resolved, and what it meant in terms of superpower . relations.
The main conclusion one draws from this documentation is that the situation was even scarier than we had ever imagined on our side of the confrontation.
In the purely military sense, it turns out that Nikita Khrushchev, the Soviet leader, had equipped his 42,000-man expeditionary force in Cuba (twice the number reported at the time by United States intelligence) with tactical battlefield nuclear weapons and had given Soviet commanders on the island the discretionary authority to use them against American troops in the event of an invasion.
Kennedy was totally unaware of this fact as he planned his responses during the crisis — an invasion was a very live option and United States forces were ready to attack if the strategic arms were not withdrawn — just as he was in the dark about Castro's appeal to Khrushchev to launch a preemptive nuclear strike on the mainland to forestall an invasion.
For that matter, he did not know, either, that Castro’s urgings had the effect of convincing Khrushchev that his gamble was getting lethally out of hand and that he should accept the secret deal with Kennedy.
Equally frightening, I think, was the extent to which Kennedy, Khrushchev and Castro (who triggered the whole crisis by requesting Soviet protection against the U.S.) had misunderstood or misinterpreted one another’s motives, intentions and actions.
A Critical Portrait, ” interviewed Castro about the missile crisis in Havana in 1984 and 1985. subordinates began doing their own thing, accidentally or deliberately.
Khrushchev, for example, had not realized that his commanders in Cuba had shot down an American U-2 spy plane without orders from Moscow, nearly provoking Kennedy into ordering a massive air strike against the island.
And the president discovered with horror that another U-2 had penetrated Soviet air space above Alaska and that jet fighters armed with nuclear weapons had scrambled to protect it— and that in the middle of the crisis the Air Force had inexplicably launched a test missile, alerting the Soviets to the possibility that a United States first strike was underway.
Under the circumstances, it was something of a miracle that we were spared a nuclear war.
What the new data teaches us about crisis management in 1962 crucially applies to the crises we are certain to face in the aftermath of the Cold War.
Moreover, nuclear perils still exist, with strategic weapons deployed in Russia, Ukraine and Kazakhstan, and with the threat that hardline military plotters may grab power there to reassert the world clout of the former Soviet empire.
China too possesses nuclear weapons, and may be passing bomb technology to Iran.
Finally, dangers and challenges for United States policy loom in the Balkans, the eastern Mediterranean and the Middle East.
The ""New World Order"" announced by George Bush isn’t all that much of an improvement over the old one.
The book is fully up-to-date on all the newly released materials, and several of the authors have participated in conferences on the subject in the U.S., Moscow and Havana, and have conducted major interviews and research of their own.
The chapters in the Nathan compendium throw significant new light on Kennedy’s decision-making processes (based on transcripts of the top-secret presidential deliberations, Kennedy-Khrushchev letters, Central Intelligence Agency reports and collateral materials) and on the reasons he proceeded as he did.
Kennedy held firm against insistence by the United States military on air strikes and invasion while Khrushchev ignored Castro and Soviet military chiefs in his decision to repatriate the missiles.
Addressing themselves to the controversy over whether Kennedy was a hero of the confrontation (as “traditionalists” claim) or a weakling dishonestly playing electoral politics , Bernstein and most of his colleagues conclude that both views are exaggerated.
Their careful analysis shows that final decisions were made, as Bernstein puts it, by “weary men” in the Oval Office led by the president and his brother Robert.
The victory, of course, was the removal of the Soviet missiles and the “compromise” was Kennedy’s agreement to phase out our Jupiter missiles from Turkey and a vague pledge not to invade Cuba.
The authors believe that Khrushchev moved secretly to place his missiles in Cuba to counter the open installation of the Jupiters by the Eisenhower administration and that Castro's real fears of an American invasion after the fiasco of the 1961 Bay of Pigs enterprise became the pretext for doing it.
Because, as most specialists agree, Castro’s fear of a United States invasion was greatly motivated by the Kennedy administration’s covert operations to dislodge (or assassinate) him, this particular episode in the CubanAmencan saga forms part of the overall history of the missile crisis.
The CIA-Mafia War Against Castro and the Assassination of JFK, by Warren Hinckle and William Turner.
