SOURCE 1A The following extract outlines the USSR president, Nikita Khrushchev's reasons for sending missiles to Cuba.
During a vacation on the Black Sea in April, Khrushchev suddenly realised a way to solve his international problems.
Thinking of American nuclear missiles pointing at him from NATO member Turkey, across the Black Sea, Khrushchev decided to station similar missiles in Cuba.
Nuclear missiles in Cuba would not only keep the United States from attacking the communist island but would teach the Americans what it was like to be surrounded by close-range enemy nuclear weapons.
It was an appealing plan and the Soviet leader moved quickly to implement it.
Khrushchev decided it was essential to keep the project completely secret.
When Cuba was fully armed it would be too late for the United States to react.
Certain of success, he refused to consider alternate plans of action if the United States discovered the missiles before they were fully operational.
These are newspaper headlines that appeared around the world on 23 October 1962.
It was after president Kennedy imposed a blockade on Soviet missiles that were entering Cuba.
The days of the crisis were the scariest many people had ever lived through.
Grocery store shelves were swept clean, as people stocked up on food and other things needed to survive in case the bombs fell.
Government civil-defence activities included daily air-raid drills in schools and elsewhere, teaching children and adults how to 'duck and cover' in case of a nuclear blast.
Every evening of the week after president Kennedy's speech, people watched Walter Cronkite, the legendary CBS anchor man and the voice of nightly news for generations of Americans.
Audiences watched live coverage as the Soviet ships came to the quarantine line.
Cronkite wondered along with his viewers what was going to happen out at sea, as the blockade continued.
Watching the television and waiting for the reports of whether the Russian freighter was going to reverse course.
Going to the supermarket with my parents, and they carried that list from the newspaper of the things you needed to have in the basement if there was a nuclear war.
Then my parents set up a battery radio and cots and sleeping bags in the basement, things to store water and a lot of canned food.
During the crisis, many people went to bed wondering whether they would live to see the next sunrise.
SOURCE 1C The following extract is a response by president Kennedy to president Khrushchev's letter dated 27 October 1962.
I have read your letter of October 26th with great care and welcome the statement of your desire to seek a prompt solution to the problem.
The first things that need to be done, however, is for work to cease on offensive missile bases in Cuba and for all weapons systems in Cuba capable of offensive use to be rendered inoperable , under effective United Nations arrangements. … the first ingredient, let me emphasise, is the cessation of work on missile sites in Cuba and measures to render such weapons inoperable , under effective international guarantees.
The following is part of Julius Nyerere's address to the National Assembly of Tanzania, 6 July 1970.
The Arusha Declaration was and is a statement about both politics and economics.
These two aspects are equally important and cannot be separated from each other.
For the Declaration is about the way in which we shall make a reality of human equality in this country, and how our citizens will achieve full control over their own affairs.
Since the Arusha Declaration three years ago, our practical emphasis has been on the necessities for public ownership and control over the economy.
It was this aspect which required immediate action because it involved considerable changes in the institutions which existed before 1967.
But the nationalisation of the banks, of commerce, of food manufacturing plants and of the wholesale export and import trade, only makes the country socialist if the nation is governed by the people themselves through their freely elected representatives.
This is a photograph of Julius Nyerere which appeared on the cover of Time magazine, 13 March 1964.
Ever since independence in December 1961, president Julius Nyerere has tried to bridge the economic and social gap between the urban minorities and the vast rural majority.
His government made various attempts to begin to regroup the rural population into villages to facilitate the introduction of technical progress and modern necessities such as potable water, electricity, schools and clinics.
The main impetus for the program came in 1967, when the government party adopted a policy of socialism based on hard work, self-reliance and the development of agriculture.
There are said to be some 1,5 million small private farmers on scattered holdings who in most cases continue to work along traditional lines.
The government and the party have waged an aggressive campaign to spread the ujamaa spirit.
The movement seems to have caught on, and every day some group announces that it has created a village.
But the policy was not successful in economic terms for a number of reasons.
The majority of the people did not want to work on communal farms because they had traditionally worked on their own farms owned by themselves or by individual families.
The people did not work hard in ujamaa villages as much as they did on their own farms because they did not feel that the farms belonged to them but to the community.
There were no incentives to production in ujamaa villages one would expect to have when working on one's own farm.
As long as they did not get profit for themselves from their labour investments, they were not going to work hard.
In fact, millions resented being resettled in ujamaa villages and there were violent confrontations with the authorities in many cases when people refused to be moved into those settlements.
SOURCE 3A This source outlines the non-violence philosophy that the Civil Rights Movement used in the USA in the 1960s. … the Civil Rights Movement chose the tactic of non-violence as a tool to dismantle institutionalised racial segregation, discrimination and inequality.
Indeed, they followed Martin Luther King Jr's guiding principles of nonviolence and passive resistance.
Civil rights leaders had long understood that segregationists would go to any length to maintain their power and control over blacks.
Consequently, they believed some changes might be made if enough people outside the South witnessed the violence blacks had experienced for decades.
According to Bob Moses and other civil rights activists, they hoped and often prayed that television and newspaper reporters would show the world that the primary reason blacks remained in such a subordinate position in the South was because of widespread violence directed against them.
SOURCE 3B This source focuses on the sit-ins that civil rights activists adopted in the USA during the 1960s.
The basic plan of the sit-ins was that a group of students would go to a lunch counter and ask to be served.
CL Harris, manager of the store, said of the students, 'They can just sit there.
But when a larger group of students returned the next day, wire services picked up the story, and civil rights organisations began to spread the word to other college campuses.
Ella Baker of the Southern Christian Leadership Conference contacted students on many college campuses.
In two weeks, students in eleven cities held sit-ins, primarily at Woolworths' and SH Kress stores.
On 2 January 1965, Dr King ... announced that a new, and more militant, phase of his civil rights campaign would be initiated in Selma, Alabama.
From its inception, the Southern Christian Leadership Conference sought to secure both social and political rights for black Americans.
On 6 March, Dr King called for a march from Selma to Montgomery in order to carry the campaign for voting rights to the steps of the state capitol.
A Testament of Hope – The Essential Writings And Speeches Of Martin Luther King, Jr. by JM Washington] SOURCE 3D This source consists of a written and a visual source on the Selma to Montgomery March.
Only 2,4% of Selma's blacks were registered to vote and the town was notorious for its brutally racist sheriff, Jim Clark.
It annoyed the more radical black activists but King's restraint probably helped president Johnson to push through a Voting Rights Bill in 1965.
This is an aerial view of the civil rights activists crossing the Edmund Pettus Bridge during the march from Selma to Montgomery, Alabama on 7 March 1965.
Thousands of civil rights activists are seen crossing the Edmund Pettus Bridge.
SOURCE 4A The following source comprises two extracts on the philosophy of Black Consciousness.
This extract focuses on the emergence of the philosophy of Black Consciousness.
In the conditions of harsh repression following the banning of the ANC, a vacuum had come to exist in the sphere of organised resistance to white domination.
Exponents of Black Consciousness stressed the need for psychological liberation.
They said that the years of subjugation had caused black people to lose confidence in themselves and develop feelings of inferiority.
They insisted that blacks should not work in the same political, social and cultural organisations as whites.
Blacks should develop their own organisations, they said, with an exclusively black leadership and membership, free from the suffocating influence of white liberals who tended to dominate multi-racial organisations.
This is a positive contribution that we must recognise and to which we must pay tribute.
We should also recognise the significant input that the BCM made towards further uniting the black oppressed masses of our country, by emphasising the commonness of their oppression and their shared destiny.
These views were built on political positions that our movement had long canvassed and fought for.
I was able to go into town, I was able to see the contrast, the differences and all that raised questions in my mind.
Amongst us, we began to develop a keen sense for wanting to discover more ideas about struggles, not only in this country, but also about what happened in other areas.
There was always a list published of books that were banned and for us, it meant that whatever the government banned must be something good and it was part of our adventure as youngsters to actually go out to actively look for those books.
The 1970s were not long after the major student uprisings in Europe, France, and the Civil Rights Movement and the Black Power Movement in the United States.74 was, of course, the year of the Portuguese defeat in Mozambique and Angola and, when that happened, I think it had a major boost on us.
This source outlines the reasons for the students' march to Orlando Stadium, Soweto in June 1976.
The imposition of Afrikaans as a medium of instruction came at an unstable time, as the 'centre of gravity' in black student politics had shifted dramatically in the mid-1970s.
The emerging Black Consciousness philosophy was transforming the way young black people thought, and it boosted their self-esteem.
For this generation of black students, Afrikaans was the language of the police and their employers, and an instrument for giving orders.
They believed that the imposition of Afrikaans was designed to train them for servitude.
This was because for many years Maths, Science and other subjects were taught in English.
The sudden shift to Afrikaans gave rise to difficulties in the student's understanding of jargon and technical terms.
Soweto – Black Revolt White Reaction (Ravan Press, Johannesburg) Kennedy, R 1969.
Tanzania Under Mwalimu Nyerere – Reflections On An African Statesman, Nyerere, J 1970.
A Testament of Hope – the Essential Writings and Speeches of Martin Luther King, Jr.
