A victory is the interpretation given by uninformed tourists who sympathize with the Castro’s revolution, and who wear Che Guevara T-shirts.
Wednesday marks the 52nd anniversary since the United States launched the ill-fated invasion at the Bay of Pigs, Cuba, on April 17, 1961.
Rather than preparing a long discourse on this incident, I’ve decided to proceed on a different and more personal track.
History books are available for those interested in reading the finer details of what really happened.
I, on the other hand, am interested in recounting what the invasion meant to me, and the life lessons that it taught me.
Birthdays symbolize gifts, money, and a party where one got to be the center of attention.
I was the darling of the crowd, and, at least for one day, I could do no wrong.
So, when my parents informed me that I would have a scaled down celebration in 1961, I was not a happy camper.
While my parents explained the danger that we were in, they promised me to host a much larger fiesta in a post-Castro Cuba Libre.
For the United States, the Bay of Pigs represented a public embarrassment in the eyes of the world community.
Soon after, Kennedy got another chance to handle a 3:00 AM crisis call.
In the fall of 1962, the Soviet leadership believed, based on an analysis of Kennedy’s lack of confidence during the Bay of Pigs Invasion, that he would avoid confrontation and accept the missiles as a fact of life.
In October 1962, the United States and the Soviet Union came as close as they’ve ever been to nuclear war over the offensive missiles stationed in Cuba.
Some historians have treated Kennedy lightly over his handling of the Bay of Pigs Invasion.
They claim that it happened just three month after he got elected, and that he was still learning the ropes of governing.
The job of President of the United States has no room for on-the-job training.
It requires a rigorous screening process during the campaign season, and the winner is expected to hit the ground running.
Thus, there is simply no excuse for Kennedy’s lack of leadership on that fateful day in 1961.
It became a day of infamy for Cubans, for Cuban-Americans, for Americans, and for all freedom-loving people around the globe.
President Kennedy promised those Cubans who participated in the invasion that he would provide them with air support – a promise that he reneged on.
If he had changed his mind before launching the invasion, some people may have disliked his decision, but they would have accepted it in the long run.
However, for him to have changed his plans after members of the U.S.-backed Brigade 2506 had landed on Cuban soil, and, thus, were in harm’s way, was unconscionable.
This was a monumental betrayal that Cubans and Cuban-Americans will never forget, nor forgive.
They were driven by a desire to restore freedom and democracy to their homeland.
They fervently believed that with United States backing, victory was a sure thing.
They failed because of the lack of the promised air support, and because they fell short of ammunition.
Rather than a Profile in Courage, President Kennedy’s performance at the Bay of Pigs is better labeled as a Profile in Fear and Indecision.
They, the members of the 2506 Brigade, answered the question posed by the enemies of a Free Cuba that rather than fighting, Cubans voted with their feet by emigrating to the United States.
On April 17, 1961, a bunch of over 1,400 Cuban exiles fought bravely an enemy made up of 51,000 Castro troops.
And yet, they inflicted losses of 20 to 1 against a Soviet-trained army.
They restored the manhood to the Cuban cause, and they silenced those who questioned it.
I’m sure that you’ve heard stories about how President Kennedy tried to diffuse responsibility for its failure by shifting the blame on former President Eisenhower.
Prior to making the final decisions, President Eisenhower was but a phone call away from President Kennedy.
When President Kennedy blew a gasket by saying that all the military experts and the CIA had assured him that the plans for the Bay of Pigs would succeed, it was former President Hoover that offered him a reality check.
In other words, failure and humiliation would not have been viable options for President Hoover.
President Kennedy said that he changed the plans for the Bay of Pigs invasion, after the Joint Chiefs had signed off on it, and scaled down the previously promised air cover because he wanted to hide the U.S.’s role in the operation.
Former President Eisenhower countered by indicating that success mattered more than secrecy.
Then, he offered a brutal rebuttal of President Kennedy’s secrecy argument.
These are all logic-101 questions that President Kennedy should have considered.
Despite being let down by a United States Administration, some Bay of Pigs veterans never lost faith in the exceptionalism of the United States.
Some became officers in the United States Army in Vietnam – including 6 colonels, 19 lieutenant colonels, 9 majors, and 29 captains.
Second in command of the Bay of Pigs freedom fighters, Erneido Oliva, rose to rank of Major General in the District of Columbia Army National Guard in 1992.
These brave men paid back many times over the debt that they owed this country for taking them out of the Cuban Gulag.
They learned that to succeed in the future, they could only rely on themselves.
Fidel took away all their personal belongings when many emigrated to the United States.
He declared them enemies of the Cuban Revolution, and punished them by letting them carry only the clothes on their backs.
They were not allowed to bring even a cent to the United States Nevertheless, Fidel was not able to take away the family cohesiveness, work ethic, and core values that allowed these Cubans to overcome all odds and succeed in the land of freedom and opportunities.
The Cubans considered the hard times in the beginning as a temporary nuisance.
Through hard work, most looked adversity straight in the eyes and came out winners.
Nowadays, Cuban-Americans hold the majority of crucial positions in Miami, Florida.
Some have served as secretaries of cabinet-level federal agencies, others as United States Representatives and United States Senators, one was the CEO of Coca-Cola, one received the Pulitzer Prize for Fiction and another for Drama, and most have sent their kids to top-ranked universities.
They have learned to be self-reliant and to be in control of their own destinies.
Many asked whether the United States would support a future insurrection in Cuba.
My answer is that it depends on many factors, and no one can be sure of what the final outcome would be.
There is an opportunity currently for the United States to support an invasion to topple the Cuban regime.
After the disintegration of the Soviet Union in 1991, Fidel Castro refused to repay Russia the approximate $28 billion lent to Cuba by the former Soviet Union.
Fidel’s reasoning was that the money was owed to a country that no longer existed.
Similarly, the agreement not to invade Cuba was agreed to by President Kennedy and Soviet premier Nikita Khrushchev.
By using Fidel’s logic, this agreement is no longer binding on the United States as it was made with a country that no longer exists.
If some failed to grasp the lesson on April 17, 1961, many did afterwards.
For Cuba to be free again, Cubans in Cuba will have to be their own agents of change.
For Cuban-Americans, the lesson was that they can only control the now, the present.
Educational achievements, on-the-job experience, and the well-being of their immediate family are the tools to a rewarding life.
On April 17, 2013, let us give thanks in our own ways to the fallen and the living members of the 2506 Brigade.
I will wear a Cuba lapel pin, drink a Cuba Libre with authentic Cuban Bacardi rum, and say a prayer to my God for giving us such titans.
But no, it was Golden Boy to the rescue, Mr Wonderful, as if the fact he’d managed to get into the White House had magically turned him into Superman.
Tragically, for millions of people, this Superman was no match for the bad guys, and tragically for him and his ambitions, his failure ultimately led to his assassination.
No, he didn’t put Castro in power, but he surely helped keep him there, even long after his death, due to the Kennedy-Khrushchev pact.
A classic idol with feet of clay, and a classic case of the triumph of image and wishful fantasy over substance and reality–and how disastrous that can be, and was.
