A blog about political change, among other things HomeBioEmail Home→History→The Kennedy conspiracists’ conspiracy Post navigation ← Libya, Obama, the lawyers, and the press Father’s Day → The Kennedy conspiracists’ conspiracy The New Neo Posted on June 18, 2011 by neoJune 18, 2011 I’ve been reading a book by Vincent Bugliosi entitled Reclaiming History, which purports to definitively prove that Oswald killed JFK by himself and was not part of any conspiracy.
Bugliosi amasses a mountain of evidence and strikes down each and every conspiracy theory point by point by point.
I’ve not read the entire thing and probably won’t, but I’ve read a good deal of it, and I think he does a remarkably thorough job, and a convincing one as well.
Bugliosi makes an especially interesting point in his introduction, one I hadn’t really thought of before, which is that although most of the people who believe in the various conspiracies are probably sincere in their beliefs, many of those who actually write the conspiracy books are not.
They are lying and they know it, but they count on their readers not to realize this.
The Kennedy assassination involves an almost unimaginable amount of data and evidence, so much so that most of us have forgotten many of the details although we may think we remember them.
Authors of conspiracy books—who generally are exceedingly familiar with these details—are counting on their readers’ faulty or incomplete memories.
The conspiracy theorists are so outrageously brazen that they tell lies not just about verifiable, documentary evidence, but about clear, photographic evidence, knowing that only one out of a thousand of their readers, if that, is in possession of the subject photographs.
The indisputable fact here—which all people who have studied the assassination know—is that Connally was not seated directly in front of Kennedy, but to his left front.
Bugliosi goes on to add that Connally’s jump seat was also three inches lower than Kennedy, and his head was turned to his right at the time the bullet hit.
The proper trajectory of the bullet was therefore exactly as the Warren Commission stated.
None of these facts are all that difficult to ascertain, and there is little doubt that conspiracy author and consultant Groden is well aware of them.
And this is just a single point on which conspiracists prevaricate; there are countless others.
There is no question that some of the motivation to write these things is to make money.
But for at least some of the conspiracy authors and promoters there is probably another reason, which is that belief in conspiracies undermine faith in our government as a whole.
To say now that , as well as the Commission, suppressed, neglected to unearth, or overlooked evidence of a conspiracy would be an indictment of the entire government of the United States.
It would mean the whole structure was absolutely corrupt from top to bottom, not one person of high or low rank willing to come forward to expose the villainy, in spite of the fact that the entire country bitterly mourned the death of its young president.
I would add that, as the years have gone on and conspiracy theories that allege that the above government agencies were responsible for killing Kennedy—rather than just incompetent or engaged in a coverup—have proliferated, Warren’s statement has become even more true.
I’ve never seen an analysis of whether Kennedy assassination conspiracists are predominately of the left or of the right.
The left has a special reason not only to undermine faith in the United States government but to exonerate Oswald as well, because there is no question that Oswald was a devoted man of the far left.
From my reading of Oswald’s testimony and demeanor, he was well aware that he would be championed and/or exonerated by those who would want to believe him innocent.
His famous “I am a patsy” remark was a brilliant statement along those lines.
Bugliosi’s book explains that Oswald maintained a resistance to police interrogation that was impressive; he virtually never lost his imperturbable demeanor during the time he was in custody.
When confronted with clear evidence of his guilt, he calmly and arrogantly denied whatever implicated him, no matter how powerfully it did so.
Perhaps Oswald correctly surmised that others would do his explaining for him.
That’s with a little “c” to underscore the term incorporates all those who are under their control or influence and who may or may not know it.
But as Neo and others have pointed out, as as was known even back in 1963, Lee Harvey Oswald was of the far left, and had in fact tried to kill General Walker, an icon of the far right.
Dan Rather established his journalistic integrity when he presented Highland Park – a rich Dallas suburbschoolchildren as being happy that JFK was shot.
While the conspiracy theorists are wrong, I don’t necessarily agree that they deliberately deceive.
When we WANT something to be true, we will often ignore contradicting evidence.
That is at least a partial explanation of why the conspiracy theorists get bamboozledand bamboozle others.
The liberal line on the conviction of Alger Hiss for perjury regarding his spying for the Soviets was that Richard Nixon had railroaded an innocent man.
Weinstein’s book helped diminish the number of those who still believed that.
Archives of the former Soviet Union and access to the Venona tapes further demolished the liberal conspiracy line on Alger Hiss.
Similarly, even their sons now believe the Rosenbergs to have been spiesor in their mother’s case, an accessory to a spy.
And attempts to debunk conspiracy theories are made part of the conspiracy.
I think people disappointed in their lives look to explain their condition by using conspiracies to point out how everyone else is equally flawed but just cleverly hiding it.
Much of the fodder for the many theories come from the planned release of much of the evidence 75 years after the fact.
In the Zapruder film Kennedy’s head snaps back violently on one of the subsequent shots.
Body parts do not, ever, snap in the direction a high-powered bullet comes from.
You are talking about getting hit with well over a thousand foot-pounds of pressure.
After all the hullabaloo of the shooting, the race to Parkland, getting Kennedy into the ER, etc., there was found on the stretcher next to him a pristine bullet with no markings on it … other than the markings which would be necessary to connect it up with the Oswald Mannlicher-Carcano carbine.
I have shot a number of animals with high-powered rifles, which experience informs me that heads never snap in the direction of the shot.
I saw, maybe on PBS, an analysis in which a laser beam was extended from the 6th story window and perfectly through Kennedy and into Gov.
Having driven down Elm Street at least 50 times, I instantly understood the laser beam analysis was correct, and it was simply true that the shot came from the 6th story window.
The trajectory from the window, given the position of the vehicle and of the occupants, was perfect.
I date the collapse of civility in American politics to Oswald pulling the trigger.
Either way, it’s the fault of American society in general and conservatives in particular.
Meanwhile, if you’re a conservative, you watch a communist, a genuine Red communist who lived in communist Russia, shoot the President of the United States in broad daylight, and then … nothing.
Obviously the communists have infiltrated American government so deeply that one of their agents can assassinate the President and there’s no ultimatum to Russia or Cuba or anything.
Both sides no longer view the other side as decent people with differing opinions.
Instead, they’re part of something vast and monstrous, to be fought with every weapon at hand.
Since the liberals are more invested in their fantasy, they have been more fanatical.
They have really convinced themselves that conservatives are monsters — determined to reinstate slavery, deprive women of freedom, oppress workers, and wage war on the whole world.
No lie is out of bounds, no vote-stealing or corruption is unjustified.
As the Kennedy assassination fades into history, the poison it released into the American body politic remains as toxic as ever.
For Texans, believing that JFK was assassinated by a conspiracy was the default position simply because LBJ benefited.
Johnson was such a notorious crook, with the radio stations, the Duval county election fraud, and all the rest of it, we just naturally assumed that he was guilty.
It’s taken a long time to sift out the chaff, but it does look to more and more people in these parts that Johnson was, in this case, innocent.
The Kennedy administration remained essentially committed to the Cold War foreign policy inherited from the Truman and Eisenhower administrations.
In 1961, the United States had 50,000 troops based in Korea, and Kennedy faced a three-part crisis–the failure of the Bay of Pigs Invasion, the construction of the Berlin Wall, and a negotiated settlement between the pro-Western government of Laos and the Pathet Lao communist movement.
These made Kennedy believe that another failure on the part of the United States to gain control and stop communist expansion would fatally damage United States credibility with its allies and his own reputation.
It has been demonstrated and proven that the shot came from behind and how Kennedy’s head actually reacted, and why.
Read Bugliosi’s book if you want to gain some knowledge on the subject.
Read the entire book if you want to see every possible conspiracy theory disproven.
Think of a blob of fairly rigid jello moving about inside a rigid sphere when that sphere is struck.
But seriously, folks, Trimegistus had a good comment at 6:44 pm. vanderleun on June 18, 2011 at 8:44 pm said: Thinking about this essay I happened across this quote from the writer Robert Heinlein in a letter he once wrote: “I could go on endlessly–but there isn’t time.
What conspiracy theorists miss is the need to keep all those who planned and carried oput the operation quiet.
The Kennedy shooting involved only one man, so, if the CIA had set up and trained Oswald, there would only be a small number with guilty knowledge.
Just that it is very hard to keep the wraps on any covert or black operation even if there are a small number of people involved.
Something as big as assassinating the President would be explosive guillty knowledge and you would expect a deathbed confession or an end of life bio.
Such as Harry Felt’s confession of his “Deep Throat” identity as he neared the end of his life.
In the same vein, the 9/11 truthers can’t seem to understand how many people would have to have been in on a government conspiracy to carry ourt such an large operation.
I agree with Bugliosi on Kennedy’s assasination but have wondered about his soundness since he published The Prosecution of George W Bush for Murder.
Fact is, Bugliosi is a man of the far left, and he doesn’t just disagree with conservatives, he hates them.
One must admit that it’s at least slightly ironic to see a level-headed destroyer of conspiracy theories turn-around and morph into a BDS-inspired kook.
However, in the Kennedy book, one would expect the “bias” of a far-leftist to make him want to join the conspiracy theorists in some way, so my sense is that Bugliosi’s prejudices were pretty much shut off there.
In any case, other, saner people such as Gerald Posner have reached similar conclusions, so at least you’re not reading something, as is the case with the Bush book, that is seconded by the likes of Chris Hedges and Noam Chomsky.
If one were per chance curious to know what kind of work the Bush book is, just check out the reviews on Amazon.
The whole book is based on one big conspiracy theory, which Bugliosi presents as hard fact without ever explaining exactly what the aim and intent behind the conspiracy was.
BDS remains one of the more fascinating cases of collective madness in modern history.
What Bugliosi doesn’t seem to realize is that his moonbattery and tendency to substitute arrogance and invective for argument leads people to discount his work on Kennedy.
One of the reviewers on Amazon who read the God book said, somewhat but not entirely jokingly, “Divinity of Doubt is so poorly researched and so ineptly argued that it casts doubt on the Kennedy book.
Many people with intellectual dementia are like the proverbial broken clock.
French Intellectuals 1944-1956” is one of the best eviscerations of post-War French philosophy and politics that I’ve ever read.
OK, I’m going to chime in on a couple points which seem to be problematic.
I’m not a conspiracy believer, really, but I do agree with the notion that the best environment to have a conspiracy is the one where they are seen to be everywhere.
In other words, if you WERE going to have a conspiracy about ANYTHING, now is one of the best times and conditions in which to execute it.
Now, Gerald Posner writes in “Case Closed” that, while in Russia, Oswald went hunting with friends/coworkers there.
I repeat — a shotgun — The friends alleged that he was hopelessly inept with that.
Now, the Manlicher-Carcano that Oswald used was hardly a state-of-the-art rifle even in the 60s, yet, despite being too inept to hunt with a shotgun, Oswald managed to pull of a supposedly impressive shooting job — not “impossible”, as Stone suggests, but actual professional marksman supposedly had to WORK to accomplish the three shots in the narrow time frame clearly defined by the Zapruder film.
Now realize that Posner is NOT a supporter of conspiracy theories — his book was written specifically to challenge the stuff in Stone’s movie.
It always struck me as very, very strange that he never, ever actually made the connection between those two facts.
There’s nothing to put them together in his book, despite the fact that it seems pretty significant, to me, to be inept with a shotgun.
George Hickey and William Greer are the two SS agents that have been named as likely accidental shooters.
I haven’t read the books in question so I have no idea how well they make their case.
I’m just saying that this DOES offer an explanation for a coverup without there being some widespread eeeeevil conspiracy going on.
After Kennedy got shot, the nation was in shock, and one can EASILY accept the idea that those “who knew” it was a frigging dumbass stupid random-chance accident that killed “a god” like Kennedy believed that America would not be able to accept that notion, that either they would go into deep despair over it, or, perhaps, start REALLY believing there was some kind of massive evil conspiracy to execute Kennedy.
I’m sorry, I can SEE that discussion occurring without presupposing some massive, well-planned and intricate conspiracy that created the situation.
Please read the Bugliosi book, including this excerpt on Oswald’s marksmanship and his rifle.
A ballistics expert testified to the Warren Commission that all of these fragments “produced a profile highly characteristic” of the type of ammunition Oswald used in his Mannlicher-Carcano rifle, and these fragments were found to all be from one bullet.
Since some of those fragments were found in Kennedy’s brain, it seems pretty clear that the theory that they came from a Secret Service agent doesn’t wash—unless the agents were carrying Carcano rifles at the time.
In fact, every single conspiracy theory has flaws you can drive a Mack truck through.
Once again I will state that the evidence in Bugliosi’s book that Oswald did this alone is simply overwhelming.
The book is 1600 pages long, with a CD-ROM containing 1600 pages of footnotes.
There is a search function there, so you can find where the book deals with topics you want to read about.
I also recommend highly the first two hundred pages, a timeline of the assassination.
For example, his book about the Manson case, Helter Skelter, is quite good.
He is great at amassing evidence in a systematic way and prosecuting a crime—that’s what he’s known for, after all.
You completely ignore — and I do mean completely ignore — what I said in favor of a straw man argument that I didn’t make though plenty of others have.
I’m sorry, if you’re ANY good with a gun, you’re going to be able to use a flinkin’ shotgun.
The government is claiming that Oswald was officially a “good shot”, yet people who specifically knew him and went hunting with him said he couldn’t hit a barn door at 50 paces with a shotgun.
That’s the biggest problem with the whole JFK thing — there’s sooooo much crap that makes you go “Hmmmmm…” it strains credibility all around.
On the one hand, there is a lot to the whole “conspiracies don’t work” which I concur with.
OTOH, there’s a lot of stuff that jars in its overall improbability, coincidence, and absurdity that really doesn’t fit the idea that NO ONE is futzing with the facts on the “Oswald was alone” side.
The best environment for a conspiracy is the one where everyone believes in conspiracies, because then everyone also discounts a lot of claims of conspiracy because a huge percentage of them are false.
But in this scenario, one tends to throw the baby out with the bathwater and not even notice, too.
To be good with a rifle, as one would be in the service, does not mean good with a shotgun.
In comparison to today’s political standards, it seems to me JFK would easily be a republican.
Since all these friends/coworkers with whom Oswald was hunting in Soviet Union were obviosly KGB operatives, they could say only what KGB want you to believe.
Neo, you and the others have allowed yourselves to be focused on one conspiracy; that’s what they want you to do, so you ignore the older and much bigger conspiracy.
Since the assassination of William McKinley over one hundred million Americans have died…and many under mysterious or unexplained circumstances.
Note that the left not only ascribes the Kennedy assassination to a “right-wing climate of hate,” but the “They” who killed Kennedy also killed Bobby Kennedy…although in this case “They” was a Palestinian who shot RFK over his support of Israel.
The time line of Nov 22nd portion of what Neo linked to is fascinating reading.
Top secret messages from the source warn that that the Soviets are unable to remove the mentally unstable Khrushchev from office while he has the support of his Army.
The only conspiracy that took place in Dallas on November 22, 1963 was perpetrated by the President himself.
Twenty years ago I moved back to Dallas and was asked by a writer to go through some files that were kept by one of the top detectives in the Dallas Police Department.
There were several hundred copies of all sorts of little bits and pieces the police were following, lots and lots of trivia and not one smoking gun we thought we might find.
There were copies of the interviews with Oswald and the FBI involvement with Oswald both before the Kennedy shooting and after.
A lot of the information was also about Jack Ruby and where each police officer was at the time he shot Oswald.
At the time of the shooting it never entered the mind of the cops that someone would be nuts enough to do what Ruby did.
Later I spoke to people who personally knew Jack Ruby and they were not surprised at all that he could and would shoot Oswald.
Oswald was a Marine and he was good with a rifle and to make the shot he did you did not have to be great, only good.
In November of 1963 Oswald had rented a room to be closer to his work and he was not living with his family.
I surmise that he sat in his rented room night after night working the bolt on his rifle until the action was smooth as butter and he had his muscle memory perfected.
As far as the gun is concerned, it was an old Italian made gun that shoots a small diameter bullet that is longer than most.
What this means is that in full metal jacket the bullet does real goofy things when it hits and if it does not impact bone, it can come out pristine.
As for shotguns and rifles, I am a shot gunner and it takes hundreds and hundreds of rounds to use a shotgun with a decent level of skill.
The rifle shot is a static shot with concentration while the shotgun is used with a sweeping fluid motion.
I have had some contact with people who were in law enforcement and others in here in Dallas at the time and I am convinced that the smoking gun we were looking for twenty years just is not there.
Speaking of gun smoke, on the grassy knoll, guns had not been smoking for about 70 years at the time of the shooting.
One sorry, goofy guy who had already screwed up trying to shoot General Edwin Walker months before here in Dallas created a perfect storm that we all wish never happened, but it did.
Also, while I’ve not read Bugliosi’s book , I did read Posner, and the one thing that I recall is that, time and time again, he tap dances around any of several questions that immediately occur to me while reading his evidence… It’s like he’s managing to avoid putting two and two together to make four, because he’s too busy trying to show how neat it is that two and two equals eight. rickl on June 19, 2011 at 10:54 am said: I have a pistol, a rifle, and a shotgun.
I’ve shot them a little at a nearby indoor range, but I haven’t practiced nearly enough.
But for what it’s worth, I’m better with the pistol than with either the rifle or the shotgun.
Rifles are for long distance shooting, and I don’t have an outdoor range near me so I haven’t shot it much.
The indoor range I’ve used allows shotguns, but I’m simply more accurate and more confident with the pistol.
The shotgun is loud as hell even with ear protection, and kicks like a mule.
A person might be good with a shotgun but that takes extra evidence, not merely the fact that he was in a military service.
The description used was pretty much that he was hopeless I’m sorry, the reason a shotgun is considered the “ideal” household gun protection for someone not interested in investing the time to be vaguely good with a handgun is that it’s hard to miss the target when using it at short ranges.
In other words, it’s difficult to NOT be vaguely competent with a shotgun… and yet apparently Oswald the “pretty decent marksman” couldn’t do this.
What this means is that in full metal jacket the bullet does real goofy things when it hits and if it does not impact bone, it can come out pristine Nice try, but you show ignorance here.
This bullet — and only this bullet HAD to be the one which shattered Connolly’s wrist, along with battering through both Kennedy’s AND Connolly’s bodies.
I failed to state it clearly in my 10:54 comment, but I have actually missed the paper target altogether with the shotgun, even though I can easily get close to the bull’s eye with the pistol.
I’m not taking issue with anything else you said; I’m pretty much an agnostic on this subject.
I note that you are smart enough to know this but pretend it’s another issue altogether; home defense.
The cries against Kennedy conspiracy become more shrill as time passes.
IGotBupkis: I’m going out in a couple of minutes and only have a moment or two to tend to the blog right now.
Also, while I’ve not read Bugliosi’s book … That tells me a great deal—which is that you’d rather traffic in distortions than facts on this topic, for some reason.
Because nearly everything you’ve written is incorrect—simply does not conform to the facts.
I took the time and trouble to give you links to passages from the Bugliosi book that specifically answered the charges you made and refuted them.
If you did, you would see that the shotgun business you report from Russia are refuted handily and specifically.
If, according to igot, you’re good with a rifle, you must necessarily be good with a shotgun.
Ability to recognize and correct one’s biases, that is, to be objective, is the rarest of all intellectual virtues.
It takes years of serios effort to aquire, and still almost never is perfect.
This is the real reason why conspiracy theories are so successful among untrained minds.
When I was in basic training, they taught us to hit moving targets by shooting at metal discs, about the size of a half dollar, with a bb gun.
An instructor standing a few feet in front would flip the disc into the air, like someone flipping a coin, and the trainee would try to hit it with a snap shot from a bb gun.
It sounds impossible, and when it was explained what we were going to be doing, I couldn’t believe it.
So, a basketball could be considerably farther away, and still not be all that hard to hit.
I became convinced a long time about that most of the conspiracy theory kooks are that way because they don’t want to admit that a leftist killed the sainted Kennedy.
But the common sense reason why I believe it could not have been a conspiracy boils down mostly to one simple question.
A super secret conspiracy that would have taken weeks if not months of planning would have been derailed by the vagaries of the weather.
But let’s say the planners were willing to accept the risks noted above about weather and they went forward with an ill-conceived plan to assassinate the president using a high powered rifle from a building window — just in case the car’s top was down.
I can’t imagine why the weapon of choice for a well planned but ill conceived assassination attempt would be a bolt action rifle.
Compound that with the increased difficulty created by using a bolt action rifle rather than an automatic rifle.
From a common sense perspective, none of it makes sense to be a conspiracy.
From the choice of weapon, to the reliance on weather, to the need to keep co-conspirators quiet.
The key to hitting the slug, or, as the instructors did it, to knock the wad of paper out of the hole in the slug, is to wait until the slug is motionless at the top of the throw.
My point about shotgun hunting vs. marksmanship on a range at a fixed target is that Oswald was awful at something not covered in his Marine training.
If he couldn’t hit a bird with a snap shot, he couldn’t hit a guy at 90 yards moving slowly and diagonally away, making the lead little or zilch.
That he could surmount shooting challenges that most of us can’t and couldn’t has little to do with it.
Straight line stock, heavy barrel, bipod, and, of course, it was also illegal for civilian use.
But getting one for a nutcase shooter would be a clear signal there were some Big Shots involved.
Listing the actions completed by working a bolt sort of stretches the thing out in the mind of the unwary–just a coincidence, I’m sure.
Fact is, and I say this as the owner of a pre-war Enfield .303, it’s “whackety-whack” just about as fast as you can say it.
If you have the rifle in some kind of rest, if it’s done right, leaning against something, resting on something, your normal return from the recoil brings you back very close to the sight line.
About that time, or a couple of years earlier, the NRA had been offering M1 carbines for $20 if you joined,which I did, to find I was behind about forty-leven million other carbine lusters.
Point is, Oswald had access to a number of weapons which people not Oswald might think superior to his Carcano.
I’d be interested in knowing how long Oswald had owned the thing, how many rounds he’d shot with it, and how many times he’d sat around cycling the thing empty and trying to maintain a sight picture.
He may just have thought this was the best weapon because it was familiar to him.
Oswald purchased his rifle in March of 1963 thru a mail order ad for $14.95, if I recall correctly.
He tried to shot General Walker through a window in his house in April and he was not successful.
Carcano made in Italy in 1940, it was an old design that was still very good.
At the time it occured I was in college but I had shot the same model rifle in 1962 when I was in high school working in a hardware store where we sold all types of used guns that I would clean up and test fire.
That was a sad sorry day for the whole world when a rifle that cost next to nothing could turn us all upside down, but it did.
Conspiracy theories about major world events are popular because they are comforting.
I mean “major” in the sense of things that have a huge impact on the public consciousness because of their scale and/or the degree of media attention that is given to them, not necessarily the things that the judgement of history will find to be the most important.
They assume that we are living in an orderly world where everything is planned, and that the planners are familiar Western politicians.
They assume that the ordinary citizen can buy a book and learn the SECRET TRUTH OF THE WORLD yet not live in fear of being disappeared.
So they appeal to wishful thinking and give the believers a pretext to feel that they are bravely facing the truth instead of running away from it.
Conspiracy theories are to history what Agatha Christie novels are to murder.
A modified M-14 in semi-auto mode only was barred by Los Federales from civilian access in 1965.
I agree Oswald having a mil-only rifle in 1963 would have been prima-facie evidence of conspiracy.
The Cherry Coke then splattered on my mouse and subsequently changed velocity heading toward my monitor where it then, somehow defying the laws of physics, dripped down the backside of the monitor.
Also, I nearly choked, as an almost infintesimal, yet adequate amount of Cherry Coke proceeded to go “down the wrong chute” as they say.
Kindly refreain from making such comments again or I may have to bill you the price of replacement components.
Conspiracy theories persist because conspiracies are real, and they happen all the time.
Political assassinations have been carried out by conspiracists from time immemorial.
Julius Caesar, Abraham Lincoln, and Archduke Franz Ferdinand were all assassinated by conspiracies, just to name three off the top of my head.
Those 19 hijackers didn’t just wake up one morning and spontaneously decide to do the same thing at the same time.
Scoped, based on Wiki photo of weapon ‘from National Archives’. vanderleun on June 19, 2011 at 9:36 pm said: Dear Mr Sullivan, We regret any damage to your equipment but we remind you to dig where the gold is and send the bill to the CocaCola company.
I find it fascinating that world events could have been drastically altered had Oswald’s buddy simply noticed the package Oswald was carrying into work was a gun and not curtain rods.
Expanding on my earlier comment about the prevalence of conspiracies, I’ve often thought that the “lone nut” assassin might be a peculiarly American phenomenon.
I haven’t exhaustively researched assassinations in foreign countries, so I could be completely wrong about that.
Maybe it’s an unfortunate side effect of our traditional culture of individual liberty and self-determination.
I do note, however, that there is some talk about Oswald’s skill at rapid fire in the Corps.
With iron sights, with some kind of rest, or if you’re really good at what we called stockweld–cheek to stock–you come back down from the recoil very, very close to being right on target.
I could cycle my Enfield rapidly, although I didn’t live fire it that fast, and keep a fixed hold on the weapon.
The left hand pulls it in against the shoulder while the right hand operates the bolt and you learn to do that without pulling the rifle around.
Not saying it couldn’t be done, as it obviously was by a number of guys.
Just that saying Oswald was good at firing the M1 fast is a weak connection to his Dallas shooting.
My favorite JFK assassination mystery: “On Nov., 1963, sirens were already screaming across downtown Dallas when William Wayne Whaley parked his cab at the Greyhound station to get a pack of cigarettes.
He knew who would be a chatter and who would try to ride all day without paying a dime.
That afternoon, he saw a fare walking down Lamar Street whom he took to be a wino.
The driver didn’t know that minutes earlier, Oswald had gotten off a bus two blocks north.
He had hoped it would take him out of downtown but instead had gotten snarled in traffic near Dealey Plaza.
A few minutes before that, of course, Oswald had perched in a building overlooking that same plaza and shot President John F Kennedy in the head. – Before Whaley could pull out of the station, an old woman came up to the car and stuck her head through Oswald’s window.
Richard Aubrey: I think the point of bringing up Oswald’s shooting record as a Marine is not to say it’s an exact correspondence, but to show that the conspiracy theorists who bring it up and say it indicates he was a bad shot are wrong.
From which it follows that he would have felt familiar with it and confident with it.
Most guys, with Marine training behind them, could buy a rifle, run maybe hundred rounds through it to get used to it, and then just keep it clean, presuming correctly they’d be almost as good as in the Old Days.
I understand Prinzip was on the wrong street, but the guys on the right street either choked or had some kind of problem.
Bruce: one other thing—Oswald was so unperturbed and relaxed that he killed Officer Tippit in cold blood on a Dallas street in the middle of the day with a whole bunch of witnesses looking on, and just because Tippit stopped him.
Richard Aubrey Says: June 19th, 2011 at 10:47 pm I understand Prinzip was on the wrong street, but the guys on the right street either choked or had some kind of problem.
From reading Barbara Tuchmann’s account in The Guns of August, it was practically a comedy of errors.
From Gringo:Dan Rather established his journalistic integrity when he presented Highland Park — a rich Dallas suburbschoolchildren as being happy that JFK was shot.
At our school that day in Dallas, we were allowed an excused absence to go downtown to see the motorcade.
One classmate, Tina Towner, did just that and has had her video footage shown in many stories of that day.
Tippet who was killed by Oswald in the Oak Cliff section of Dallas that day.
The History Channel recreated the Kennedy assassination using mannequins built by an Australian company that tests the destructive power of weapons such as landmines.
The mannequins are comprised of ballistic-gel flesh and organs, resin bones, and chamois skin.
A marksman fired the same rifle that Oswald used, from the same height, distance, and angle, and all the injuries to Kennedy and Connally caused by the “magic bullet” were recreated.
I also saw a documentary years ago in which an 86-year-old retired doctor fired three on-target shots in the same time period as Oswald, with the same rifle.
Apparently this doctor had demonstrated this ability on multiple occasions.
I have to agree with neo-neocon that the whole Tippit thing was weird since Oswald took a cab home after offering it to someone else.
There is no way to definitively prove all of these years later that NOBODY else was involved in the Kennedy assassination.
Yes, you can dispel some of the more absurd conspiracy theories to a point, but the perpetrator is dead, may of the witnesses are dead, and some of the evidence went missing.
Nobody knows his every move and every person he may have spoken with in the months or years leading up to the assassination.
As to the point about the government knowing there was more to the story and perhaps covering it up, they wouldn’t have had to cover anything up, they could have just blown the investigation.
Perhaps there were a few who harbored doubts but figured it would be irresponsible to voice them without absolute proof.
If they did suspect the Russians, I can certainly see why they wouldn’t want to reveal that.
It basically would have put us back into a potential nuclear standoff situation with them.
If Bugliosi’s intent was to establish that Oswald was the only person who actually shot at Kennedy, then bully for him.
You should listen to some of the speeches that Bugliosi gave, found on C-SPAN’s video site, Youtube and FORA.tv.
I’ve been in situations like that, but I was 14 and skipping school early morning to catch a bus to go see the Two Towers.
There was almost successful attempt to assassinate Brezhnev by a lone nut.
Dressed in police uniform, armed with two handguns in the sleeves of his trenchcoat, he mixed with police officers standing in Kremlin along the path of limos carring Brezhnev and cosmonauts.
He opened fire from point-blank distance from both hands and killed a driver of a limo.
He was arrested, found legally insane and spent 18 years in a special prison for mentally ill criminals.
You know, Neo, you keep misattributing comments to me that are VASTLY more absolute that ANYTHING I’ve made.
Please make an effort to actually STOP AND READ CAREFULLY what I’ve said, instead of forming some knee-jerk extreme reaction to it based on the fact that you are now, having read the book, far more ABSOLUTE on your own position’s correctness than I’ve EVER been about my own.
I concede the “discovery location” as being on the stretcher and not the floor of the car.
I don’t believe this has a substantial impact on my doubts, as, it says very little about the real issues.
Having flown as it is claimed to, it’s not unlikely that it should have passed out through the floor of the car or something.
This is what more typically happens to bullets, and yeah, I’m more than open to the idea that there may be reasons it didn’t happen that way.
Now — I wish to reiterate — I don’t think anything here is conclusive, it just seems reasonably suspicious that a bullet which does ALL THAT — smashes into/through four bodies and TWO bones comes out looking far less like the above “fired bullet” shots (or this, or this and instead like that fairly unaffected bullet from the wiki piece.
Crap happens, things are not always as we expect… but it just seems really odd that the bullet came through with so little obvious damage when bullets generally expand on impact into the first solid thing they encounter.
The problems we get are manifest, here — 1) This single bullet has to have done a LOT of damage, yet come through it comparatively unscathed.
Not only does the car have to be in an exact location, not only does Oswald have to have fired at a very precise moment, in a very precise direction, from a very precise angle, but the very body positions of the people involved have to be different from what they were only moments before the shot which “did the damage” had to have occurred.
I just says that, when faced with two explanations, the simpler of the two is more often right than wrong.
THIS situation, a very important one, hinges on VERY specific movements, actions, and decisions on the part of literally dozens, if not hundreds, of individuals to act in a manner which, in many cases, is against training and/or common practice.
Or we can assume that there was another person who shot a bullet into the limousine — which could be an accidental misfire by one of two SS agents and which WAS covered up by multiple government agents/agencies after the fact, which is, really, not that improbable to believe.
The worst part is that no one appears to have since come forth to fess up on their deathbed.
Maybe the government made some deal that somewhere, there’s a set of large payments being made out to the family of each of those “in the know” for fifty years after their death, if and only if they don’t speak.
That would do it, and is certainly possible to bury enough that there are maybe only a couple people, if anyone, left on earth who actually know.
That would explain it sufficiently, and sufficiently reasonably, that that objection melts away.
My whole issue here is that a) I’ve listed a couple things which bother me about the matter. b) the reaction so far is NOT “Well, actually, xxx deals with that in book yyy, he says that these people said that, and these experts concur.” c) No, it’s instead, “Mischaracterization x of your statement, ergo ‘y’ proof that the mischaracterization is false… ” while ‘y’ pretty much clearly fails to apply to the actual original statement.
And that’s the problem with the whole issue — people respond to requests for light with plenty of heat, but very little light.
That’s the response of the converted evangelical to an assault on faith, not the rational thinker on a subject of curiosity.
Stop answering the question you THINK you’re hearing instead of the exact words I am applying.
If I say “ALMOST” pristine that most emphatically DOES NOT mean the same thing as “PRISTINE” When I wrote that I had those EXACT PICTURES of the bullet in *my* head.
I consider those to fit the bill of “almost”, as there is NO sign of any mushrooming at all, just a noticeable amount of axial flattening.
That does not jibe with my own admittedly far from substantial experience with fired bullets.
Point me to THAT rather than to something largely, if not totally UNRELATED to it, and then yell at me as though I didn’t even look at what you pointed me to AND THEN expressly TOLD YOU THAT IT DIDN’T match up with my query.
I claim no position on the matter, just that, at this point, Occam’s Razor is cutting both ways.
The latter isn’t even conceding the point, it’s just saying you believe you recall the question being asked and that it was answered sufficient for your opinion to remain firm, but have better things to do with your time than to hunt down the exact location of it for me.
So far, though, your responses have been far more, as I note above, evangelical than rational.
Quote me accurately please, and in any response assume that any words I used were used with substantial precision.
Nobody is dumb enough to believe it, yet he presumes somebody can be fooled with the planted axiom.
And who somehow can, despite this illiteracy, read BETWEEN the lines to find things I never said.
Shotguns are RECOMMENDED WEAPONS for household protection for people who don’t want to actually BOTHER to take the time to learn how to shoot.
The reason for this is that, for short ranges, a shotgun is, with its expanding field of fire, not that easy to MISS with.
Now, you want to argue, from experience, or via some expert’s statement, that this says nothing about using a shotgun for hunting, I’m ready to hear it.
It seems doubtful, but I’m listening, which is FAR more than anyone else supporting Neo appears to be doing.
And yes, I believe that, lacking any expert’s claim to the contrary, that, if you can’t aim a shotgun, which does NOT require much accuracy, that that is likely to be relevant to how well you aim a rifle, which DOES require some accuracy.
But they are REASONABLE questions, and it’s amazing how many times and just how precisely specific I’m having to actually state them to get the point across in this forum to get someone to actually attempt a reply to THEM, and not some near-question which isn’t the same at all.
Oh, right, the same ones who have a vested interest in our believing him to be a good shot.
And, since I’m SURE you’re about to mischaracterize the above, THAT DOES NOT CLAIM HE WAS NOT a good shot.
It says there are two sets of claimed facts I find in opposition — 1) That Oswald was a good shot, for which the sole evidence is the people who have an interest in your believing that.
Scott @3:31 Your arguments have merit, but they don’t apply to the other suggestion I’ve pointed to, which is that there WAS a coverup, but only after the fact, and that a lot of the problems of the magic bullet, etc., are resolved by an errant shot from one of the SS agents in a misfire incident.
IF there was any conspiracy , then this one seems far more likely to fill the bill than a vasssst eeeevil cabal’s intricate plan.
Having punched through four things, it is reasonable that the bullet was found on the floor of the car or on Connolly’s stretcher.
I find issue with the lack of mushrooming more than anything else, here, and that’s hardly a conclusive statement on my part — just one of a stack of “little things” that provide justification for doubt.
Some time spent at examining spent bullets while target practicing with a rifle will reveal that not all bullets react the same.
Its oddity was most misfortunate for fueling conspiracy buffs in the same way had Oswald been carrying ten Canadian quarters in his pants pocket.
Igot introduces a new subject not covered in the whole enchilada, home defense and shotguns.
Matter of fact, shotguns for home defense are not the same as those for bird shooting.
Most guys aren’t going to get two, one with a long barrel and a choke for birds and one with a short barrel to be handy in a house.
So one will do for both, or you get one for one use and something else for the other, or, maybe you get a shotgun for home defense with the various characteristics you want and don’t bother bird shooting.
Point is, the home defense distraction aside, there is no necessary connection between being good at bird hunting and being good with a rifle except being used to the recoil.
Jacketed military bullets which don’t hit bone are less likely to suffer deformation passing through soft tissue than are hunting rounds.
Indeed, bullets expressly designed to deform in soft tissue are illegal–see dum-dum–and there was some lefty agitation against the M16 round with its reduced rifling and designed propensity to tumble in the flesh.
The copper-jacketed lead slug is not only the legal bullet for most combat uses, it is handy.
Nicely pointed and will penetrate thin-skinned vehicles and some structures and retains its shape in brush.
These characteristics make it less likely to deform than a hunting round.
Whether there were communists behind Oswald in the sense that they arranged for him to assassinate Kennedy or not has, afaik, not been seriously addressed, not least for lack of smoking guns, so to speak.
But there is certainly no reason to think that Oswal wasn’t motivated by the communist ideals he had, and possibly encouraged, as opposed to enabled, by the communists, to take some pains with his life to be able to do this.
Strikes me that the Marines went into WW II with the bolt-action Springfield ’03.
I wonder if there were any ’03s still around and perhaps some of the Old Corps insisted on everybody putting a few rounds down range, maybe as a sniper rifle.
Long range accuracy was not the issue, but from watching the way the rifle was held steady, hundred-yard hits might have been pretty likely.
Talked this over through the years with various soldiers–emphasis on soldiers–and only civilians think Oswald had a tough shot.
It must be unfortunately noted however that Mr Bulgiosi himself committed this act with his outrageous book claiming that George Bush should be prosecuted for first degree murder because of his decision to overthrow Saddam Hussein.
And that the entire justification made by the White House to intervene military was a lie.
I had a great deal, indeed enormous, respect for Mr Bugliosi before he wrote that last book.
Now it’s possible that he was somehow manipulated into commiting his crimes but the evidence that he did it is overwhelming.
Look folks…if you want to believe that JFK was killed by a lone nut assassin who was killed by a lone nut assassin, up to his eyeballs in organized crime contacts.
Take a look at the youtube short…”secret service stand down”…and then tell me there was no conspiracy.
Take a look at the youtube short…”secret service stand down”…and then tell me there was no conspiracy So, Warren Commission Report, Gerald Posner and Bugliosi’s 1,000 pages vs….a YouTube video.
Yes, an avowed Marxist who scored well as a Marine sniper shot a man in an open car moving directly and continuously within the range of his gun sights.
Many others find comfort in the notion that their lives are rigged, controlled by some shadowy cabal, ultimately relieving them of responsibility for their lot in life.
There comes a time when it’s clear you just don’t want to hear the answers.
JFK ordered the SS not to ride along because he believed that it was limiting his contact with the public.
This was after a previous trip where they did ride along on the boards.
He stated numerous times that if someone wanted to kill him and didn’t care what happened to themselves, that there was nothing that could be done to stop them.
If there was a conspiracy to kill JFK, then JFK himself was at the center of it.
JFK did not order the secret service off of his car…that order came from the secret service itself.
Problem is I’ve read so many books about the assassination…both pro and con conspiracy I can’t remember which one got to the bottom of that particular story.
As long as they looked the other way while he had private time with his women.
SteveMG: I agree that Bugliosi’s book on Iraq sounds pretty awful, although I haven’t read it.
But, as I wrote in an earlier comment, Bugliosi’s strength is criminal law prosecutions.
Because it dealt with the points you are supposedly making, and demolished them as well.
The main point made is that it is well documented that Kennedy himself was on record as not wanting Secret Service agents to the right and left REAR bumper of the presidential limo.
However, Secret Service agents could overrule this if they thought it especially necessary to have agents stationed there, in certain circumstances.
Four days before the assassination, when the president was visiting Tampa, agents mounted the rear in just that manner, and Kennedy told the agent stationed in the front seat of the limo to have them get off and return to the follow-up car.
So in Dallas, agents were following his general orders and oft-expressed desires, although in the final analysis they could have overruled him if they saw an exceptionally special reason to do so.
IncreaseMather, your namesake in Puritan times sat in on the judging of the Salem Witch Trials.
From what i’ve seen of Oswald’s firing angle, i don’t believe agents on the rear bumper would have been much of an obstacle anyway.
And if a bullet would have went through an agent before Kennedy and Connelly we could pretty much hang it up on combatting conspiracist at that point.
Dear IgotBupkis, Not only do you still gotbupkis you are blathering about bupkis.
Re your comment today at 6:35 AM, you are confusing several comments of mine with each other.
When I wrote, “I took the time and trouble to give you links to passages from the Bugliosi book that specifically answered the charges you made and refuted them,” I was referring back to this comment of mine, which at the time was my only previous comment to you in this thread.
In it, I did what I said—I provided links to excerpts from the Bugliosi book that were in response to points you had attempted to make earlier.
The first excerpt I linked to concerned Oswald’s marksmanship and the rifle.
The second concerned whether the first shot was an easy one or was actually the most difficult.
I had trouble with a link for the third, so I summarized it; it had to do with the theory about Secret Service agents firing the kill shot accidentally.
The fourth excerpt concerned the reports from Russia about Oswald’s skill with a shotgun.
Whether you had used the term “pristine” or “almost pristine,” you were making the point that the bullet was “almost pristine and pretty clean, with very little deformity of any kind,” and therefore suspicious as the bullet that did the damage to both Kennedy and Connally.
And JFK was the one who ordered the Secret Service not to ride along on the limousine.
The head of the SS that day in Dallas was passing along the orders that JFK gave earlier.
JFK told the secret service after a trip in Miami that he didn’t want them riding on the car.
If you read Bugliosi’s book, you see he does it quite effectively, by pointing out, among other things, that Oswald was an unstable character and everyone who came into contact with him knew it.
Strange conspiracy that would rest on his being in the right place and the right time, when that place and time could not be known more than a couple of days ahead of time no conspirators with financial resources would choose that particular gun as the murder weapon.
An avowed Marxist takes a shot at the President during the height of the Cold War.
If all it is is encouragement, there’s no connection and the logistics can be managed by the loose cannon himself.
I agree that financial resources may have limited Oswald’s choices, but suppose the Reds had explained to him, jovially and apropos of nothing much at all, that the Italians made really good stuff.
Either of us, Oswald or me, were paying eight or nine hours of minimum wage labor for our weapons.
My weapon and Oswald’s, or more accurately, the clones in the millions, had already killed millions.
Perhaps Oswald was savvy enough to know when more was, if not less, not more.
Oswald wanted to prove he was the superior mind on top of being a superior marksman.
He relished the game of interrogation he was playing with detectives for those two days.
I recall somebody, probably Rebecca West in “The New Meaning of Treason”, saying that the doctrine for reds was to insist on innocence if caught in United States jurisdiction and use the trial to both attempt to be acquitted and to discredit United States justice.
It’s not just enough that he said he didn’t do it and they had the wrong guy.
Richard Aubrey: the Soviets themselves, in their own files tried to steer clear of Oswald.
It is very unlikely they would have recruited him for any sort of assassination, or even suggested it to him.
If they’d wanted to do Kennedy in, they would have used more trusted people.
Oswald was actually under psychiatric observation at a hospital in the USSR in 1959 because he was so unstable he had tried slashed his wrist there after his application for citizenship was denied.
He kept a diary in the USSR that detailed his disillusion with how he was being treated by the Soviets.
It stretches credulity to imagine he was recruited by them—not that they were above trying to assassinate Kennedy and using an agent.
Russian secret services never employ anybody with mental instability, in any capacity.
But, if you have him on hand, putting a bug in his ear, metaphorically speaking and not talking about those electronic thingies, would cost nobody anything.
Perhaps, instead, they told him about how bad the capitalist system was, most especially the far right, and let him think about doing something.
But planting bombs which might or might not go off and cause disruption could be a good idea if there were complete deniability and zero actual resources expended.
The only positive reason not to was if the Sovs thought JFK was better than the alternative.
But if half a dozen notable figures, mostly on the far right, had been killed in the space of a couple of years, along with some important dems,all by nutcases, the resulting disorganization of the country might have provided the Sovs an advantage.
This is speculation based on the claim of “patsy” as a tactic and what I’d have done in the KGB’s shoes.
I figure it must have been Madison Square Garden, because you had to have the entire Presidential Detail of the Secret Service, the entire Dallas Police Force, all of the doctors and nurses on the ER staff at Parkland Hospital , the pathologists at Parkland , Earl Warren, Arlen Specter, the United States Marine Corps and a host of others.
The first one you ask will beat you to a bloody pulp, then drag you to the nearest FBI office.
Were I part of the KGB back then, and had some loose cannons running around, I’d get them back home, unless they looked stable enough for a work camp, with suggestions that they could make a Big Difference wherever they were, for the cause, by wrecking stuff.
