Their hostility was based on the placement of nuclear missile heads in Cuba.
The conflict began shortly after the unsuccessful Bay of Pigs Invasion.
Nervous about another American attack, Cuba turned to the Soviet Union.
In July 1962, Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev and Cuban leader Fidel Castro reached an arrangement in which ballistic missiles were placed in Cuba in order to prevent American aggression.
Meanwhile, in the United States, the government was denying allegations that it had been paying no heed to the placement of nuclear missiles 90 miles away from Florida.
To confirm that the Soviet Union and Cuba were indeed a threat, an American U-2 plane captured aerial photographs of various launch sites.
As a response, the United States established a military blockade around Cuba.
This tactic was used to stop the Soviet Union from bringing nuclear missiles into Cuba.
In addition, the United States wanted the Soviet Union to disassemble the current weapons and send them back home.
After several excruciating days of negotiating, Khrushchev and President John F Kennedy came to a decision.
The Soviets would remove their ballistic missile heads from Cuba in exchange for the United States promising to never invade Cuba.
In addition, the United States would remove weapons they had placed in Italy and Turkey.
Analyze each document carefully, and answer the question or questions that follow.
This is an open threat to the peace and security of all of the Americas.
Our objective must be to prevent the use of these missiles against this or any other country.
We must secure their withdrawal from the Western Hemisphere… I call upon Chairman Khrushchev to halt and eliminate this secret and reckless threat to world peace.
You say that Cuba worries you because it lies at distance of ninety miles across the sea from the shores of the United States.
But in response to the bombing of these bases, in the course of which Soviet specialists might suffer, the Soviet government will undoubtedly respond with the same against us, somewhere in Europe.
Summarize Robert Kennedy’s view of destroying the nuclear missile bases in Cuba.
