Mr Bundy SUBJECT : Cuba History I spoke to Frank Sieverts in State regarding State's comprehensive history of the Cuba situation.
Mr Sieverts told me that he is pulling together ^ contributions from State, Defense and CIA ana he expects to have his history pulled together by the end of next week.
ExCom meeting notes) and had planned to talk to you when he had all the material pulled together.
In light of the above, it would seem advisable to hold off on the appointment of a White House historian, at least until we have had a chance to look at Mr Sieverts' work.
History of the Cuban Crisis Pursuant to our discussion of last November, and responding to your request, my Special Assistant, Frank Sieverts, has written a history of the Cuban missile crisis which is transmitted herewith.
It is based on documents available in the State Department and additional material provided by the Department of Defense, the White House and the Central Intelligence Agency, as well as on personal interviews and private notes.
Some of the sources are highly classified, and the entire history should be handled on a Top Secret Eyes Only basis.
When you have had a chance to read it, we should discuss what further disposition, if any, should be made of the paper.
It can be assumed that the decision to pursue this course of action -unprecedented in the nation that looks to Lenin for policy guidance -was taken early in 1962.
On January 10 of that year the Soviet news agency, TASS, announced that the Soviet Union and Cuba had signed a trade protocol for 1962, providing for a ""considerable increase"" in trade between the two countries.
At his inauguration, Marinello declared that all students at the university would be requested to study Marxist -Leninist principles.
The Castro government also made public plans to launch a nationwide network of ""Revolutionary Instruction Schools"" for instruction in MarxismLeninism.
On March 26, 1962, Castro denounced Anibal Escalante, a longtime Cuban Communist leader who symbolized the oldline hard-core group within the party that for years had maintainced close ties with Moscow.
The significance of this action by Castro was to show Khrushchev and his associates that there remained little chance that the traditional Communists in Cuba would come to power.
F i FT^rr 1 ^ ^"" -3Castro had already placed himself in the Marxist -Leninist camp.
While the Soviet leaders may have retained doubts about his reliability, the attack on Escalante plainly convinced them that there was no longer any reason to postpone a majoi investment in the Castro regime.
It is not known whether the initiative for the emplacement of offensive missiles and bombers in Cuba came from Castro or the Kremlin.
It may have started as a request by Castro for ground-to-air anti-aircraft missiles of the type which the Soviets claimed brought down a high-flying U-2 photo reconnaissance plane over Russian territory in the spring of 1960.
It now appears more probable that these weapons were supplied to Cuba by the Soviets primarily to provide anti-aircraft protection for the medium range and intermediate range missiles. top sccncr u ** w"" — s * -4In one sense it is difficult to see what Castro would gain from the presence of offensive weapons on Cuban soil.
All the IRBM and MRBM sites, both those constructed and those contemplated, were of the unhardened type, suitable only for first-strike use.
They thus would make Cuba a prime target for pre-emptive United States military attack in any crisis anywhere in which use of the missiles seemed likely.
By offering its territory to Soviet IRBM's and MRBM's capable of delivering nuclear warheads to targets in the United States, the Castro regime placed its own country and people in nuclear jeopardy.
Establishing a Soviet offensive striking force in Cuba was a logistic exercise of great scope conducted under conditions of drum-tight security.
The missiles, bombers, and related systems had to be brought to secure ' :-> r~~ /•». r-\ < — r KP C C CnCTuLu U H L7 — -5Sir ports in the Soviet Union for loading onto ocean-going ships.
Personnel to operate the missiles and to perform the many other functions connected with an effort of this size and character on a Spanishspeaking island thousands of miles away had to be assembled and Security measures within the Soviet Union appear to have been completely effective.
The arms were under tight Soviet military supervision, first in the Soviet Union itself and aboard Soviet TCP SECriZT^ """" 7 nTTTT Hn — lilL-nci E YES ONL Y -6ships, then in Cuba, where the offensive missiles and other weapons systems were unloaded by Soviet personnel in secure ports, some of them especially constructed for this purpose, and transported in Soviet-manned truck convoys to sites from which Cubans were excluded, then deployed and erected by Soviet crews.
In addition, the Soviets sought to divert attention from missiles by frequently assuring us over a period of some months that there would be no offensive weapons in Cuba.
Once the missiles arrived in Cuba and had to be transported in trucks and other conveyances to their destined launch sites, fragmentary reports on them began to reach United States intelligence agencies.
From that moment on, knowledge in the United States government about what might be happening in Cuba began to become abreast of events.
It is thought by some that no nuclear explosives were ever landed in Cuba.
A ship suspected of transporting such warheads was en route to Cuba at the time of the Proclamation of Interdiction.
It was one of those which turned around and returned to the Soviet Union.
To be sure, nuclear warheads could be carried by air, but there is no indication as such that any TOP SCCRETto. met ."""""" 7, were actually brought to Cuba.
Intelligence Background From an American perspective, the Cuban crisis begins with the intelligence gathering procedures which made it possible to discover the existence of the offensive missiles and other Soviet arms shortly after their arrival in Cuba.
In late 1961 the intelligence community was instructed to increase its efforts to gather information about developments in Cuba.
Until these steps were taken, and up to the end of March, 1962, the intelligence community and other high Government officials recognized that[ ^ expected that the measures adopted would provide significantly mare information by July.
It was this series of measures which placed the intelligence community in a position of readiness when the Soviet build-up began in late July and early August.
SECRET EYSS 0NLY ' These had to be carefully sifted and evaluated but did yield some useful information.
A few scattered reports referring to missiles were received as early as 1961, | any other means.
However, theg evidence on conventional Soviet weaponry going to Cuba — such as tanks, artillery, and aircraft — was entirely — TOP 3ECRET rKTF S 0NIY S{r 10. consistent with other information available on arms shipments through the first half of 1962.
From mid1962 on, a large volume of intelligence data was being received.
Beginning in August, a small but growing percentage of the total concerned the secret influx of conventional weapons and related activities.
A smaller but more rapidlygrowing portion proved when checked to refer to the introduction of defensive missiles.
It was not until after mid-September that some bits of information were suggestive of Soviet offensive missiles, and they were not evaluated as such when first received.
The first offensive missiles — MRBM's — probably did not arrive in Cuba until about September 8.
Until midSeptember there were no signs of this or of the Soviets intentions.
SECREP S0 HLY Skr \l The speed of dissemination of information within the Government was high.
Prom early September there were some restrictions on dissemination of information within the Government about Soviet weapons in Cuba.
These did nob affect the flow of raw data to the analysts or to decision-making officials at the highest level.
Quite apart from the restrictions, no information on offensive missiles available until October 15 was hard enough to permit writing of a credible item for dissemination.
The restrictions on dissemination (""publishing"" within * the intelligence community) were the result of an instruction from the Director of Central Intelligence that all reports relating to a possible Soviet arms build-up in Cuba should be subjected to^^^^^^^^gverification to the greatest possible T U J o HCRCT' EY 5S 0NLY """"ETSTS ONLY extent.
This was interpreted to mean that reports on this subject should not be ""published"" and thus brought to the attention of the normal recipients of intelligence data circulated within the Government unless they had been so verified.
On August 31, the President ordered that there be no publication within the intelligence community of this information until our course of policy was determined. v The information continued to be available to intelligence analysts and a small number of top decision-makers.
On September 4 the President publicly announced the presence of a missile defense system in Cuba.
SECRETE S ONLY 16. on SAMs was disseminated in intelligence community publications.
In early October, firm evidence of a shipment of IL-28s going into Cuba was obtained.
Because of the bomber's offensive capability, White Hous2 permission was needed to publish information on it within the intelligence community.
At the time this permission was granted, the President directed the Director of Central Intelligence to put into effect a system of rigid control of information on offensive weapons.
This system stayed in effect until after the President's speech on October 22.
Its effect within the intelligence community was to confine raw information on offensive weapons in Cuba to United States Intelligence Board principals and the analysts working directly on the problem.
The Estimates on Cuba In January, March, August, and September, the intelligence community produced Estimates on Cuba.
Each considered possibility of Soviet use of Cuba as strategic base; each concluded the Soviets would consider the risk of United States retaliation too great.
ClGRlT ra * «g 18. which would run risks of losing Cuba or chance of war.
The Soviets hoped to win victory for communism by other than military means; this policy would be impaired by establishment of a strategic base on Cuba.
The Soviet military build-up as known to us before September 19, 1962, appeared consls tent with these policies. purpose of The September 19 Estimate viewed the/military build-up as then known as being to strengthen the Cuban regime against presumed U S. attempts to overthrow It.
Air defense and coastal defenses increased Castro's security, thus his strength at home, and so permitted him to carry on more aggressive revolutionary activity In Latin America.
The Estimate said that the Soviets might add weapons like submarines and light bombers of a more ""offensive"" character.
It also stated that TOP SECRET £Vss ONLY IU. uLCRCT ^iS ONLY 19. the Soviets could derive military advantage from placing medium or intermediate range ballistic missiles in Cuba, or from a submarine base.
It considered the latter more likely, but considered both incompatible with Soviet practice to date.
It pointed out that Latin Americans would fear and resent Soviet military intrusion into the Hemisphere and said that if it became clear the Soviets were establishing an offensive base in Cuba, most Latin American governments would expect the United States to eliminate it by whatever means were necessary. top szcncr ^ oroY Tl.
TOP SECRET ife s obly Sir TOP GlCRLT k ™ nf mr TOP SECRET^ """""" TOP SECRET EYES OHM 29.
The mission authorized at the October 9 meeting TOP SECRET Ems oittt 32.
T O r-CrcnCT'^"" ■ ""■» — The First Days By late afternoon, on October 15» skilled analysts at S\y ^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^Scontained unmistakable evidence of Soviet offensive missiles in Cuba.
In the course of the evening this information was made available to high officials of the Departments of State and Defense, the intelligence community, and the White House.
Deputy Under Secretary of State U Alexis Johnson; Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs Edwin M Martin; State Department Director of Research and Intelligence Roger Hilsman; Director of Central Intelligence John A McCone; his Deputy, General Marshall S Carter, and White House Special Assistant McGeorge Bundy.
Secretary Rusk took the call at a phone outside the formal dining room in the State Department, where he was host at a dinner for German Foreign Minister Schroeder.
Assistant Secretary Martin Was informed by telephone at the National Press Club, shortly after he finished an address to the Washington Chapter of Sigma Delta Chi on the Cuban situation.
Several were informed at a private dinner at the Fort McNair quarters of General Taylor.
The photo interpreters continued to work through the evening, examining ^^^^P^^^^^^^ an( * analyzing their JCP SECRET^ n roc < OP GlCR.T ^ ir findings.
During the night they prepared a written report on what had been learned, for presentation to the Presjdat first thing the next morning.
Early the next morning there were meetings of intelligence officers and high policy officials at the Defense and State Departments.
At 9m., McGeorge Bundy presented thej|||jEr£'s3 |Bj^^A^ evidence to tile President in his bedroom.
He straightaway ordered that a meeting be convened at the White House at ll:M-5.
Those attending included most of the individuals who hadteaa informed the previous evening with the addition of the Vice President, Treasury Secretary C Douglas Dillon, Attorney General Robert Kennedy, and Presidential aide Theodore G Sorenson.
It was the first meeting of the group that came to be known as the Executive Committee of the National Security Council, or informally, Excomm.
General Carter, Deputy Director of the CIA, gave a iCr cECRiiThYE s only 35.
He said that the evidence of the presence of offensive missiles on the island, while unmistakable, was fragmentary.
It was not known how extensive a deployment had been made, or how near to operational the missiles might be.
Accordingly, it was agreed that increased to obtain comprehensive coverage of Cuba as quickly as possible.
That afternoon and thereafter every morning at 8:30 the United States Intelligence Board met to draw together all intelligence strands.
On the afternoon of the 16 th it directed the Guided Missile and Astronautics Intelligence Committee to prepare an immediate evaluation.
The GMAIC evaluation concluded that the missiles were clearly under Soviet control and that there was no evidence that nuclear warheads were present in Cuba.
It also noted that the missile installations that had been identified did not yet appear to be operational.
Already at this early moment the close relation between policy planning and intelligence information can be noted.
Secretary Rusk and others have observed that both the timing of our response and the actions initiated were closely related to the intelligence indications of what was happening in Cuba.
CJjFibTjhZE s ONLY -TOP SCCRET *""*ES ONLY >Slr Meetings and conferences took place through the rest of the day in the intelligence community and the Departments of State and Defense.
At State, a meeting took place in the afternoon with Ambassadors Bohlen and Thompson, both formerly ambassadors to the Soviet Union, and United Nations Ambassador Stevenson, in attendance.
A late meeting at the State Department concluded in the Secretary's office after 11m.
Wednesday, October 17, was a ""blur of meetings"" for the main policy group, located mainly in Under Secretary Ball's Conference Room at the State Department.
John McCone had returned from California by this time and took part in the discussions, as did Ambassador Thompson and Deputy Under Secretary of State U Alexis Johnson.
The President departed for Connecticut in the afternoon to keep a campaign commitment.
It was a day of ""full and free discussion,"" according to one of the participants, with no rigid positions, no ""departmental"" points of view.
The next meeting with the President would not take place until the next morning; additional information on the missiles was being gathered.
This, therefore, was a day of thought and analysis, a day for the weighing of alternatives, for interpretation and conjecture.
The solution to the ""mistake"" was to erase it — by an extremely Most of the group limited air strike. considered the missile deployment an effort to establish a major Soviet base, not primarily to support Castrol An intelligence spokesman argued that the present build-up was probably only a first phase of a very large commitment of Soviet strength in Cuba.
It was necessary to assume that nuclear warheads were at hand, near the three MEBM sites that had been spotted; in addition many ships were en route from the Soviet Union, and it must be assumed that they carried additional weapons.
Another discussant stated the view that by his missile venture Khrushchev was preparing for a series of showdowns --on.
Successful establishment of an offensive base on Cuba would give the Soviet leader the best chance of coming out ahead.
The discovery of the missiles very shortly after their arrival in Cuba and before they were operational jumped the gun on Khrushchev.
Several believed that Khrushchev would not be able to maintain his grip on power if he failed to respond strongly to any United States action.
The least he would do, it was felt, would be to exert pressure on or move against the Jupiter missile top sccncT EYES ONLY lur GECRET £Veso ^ Installations in Turkey.
Under the political heading came suggestions that Castro, not Khrushchev should be held responsible, and that an emissary be sent to Castro demanding withdrawal of the missiles.
There was recognition that a political approach to Castro or Khrushchev would inhibit military action, and that any political approach would be effective only if backed by the threat of military force.
No half-way measure appeared to be logically consistent. , -OCT -kt rs ONLY 3lr Mf, ■TorsccncT EYES CHLY Preliminary discussions of an air strike centered on the number of sorties and bombs that would be required to knock out the Soviet weapons. point was also made that offensive weapons were our sole target in Cuba.
Preliminary discussion of a blockade saw the advantage that this action would permit the crisis then to be put into a political context.
On the other hand, it was argued that a ES ONLY ^.cnzT EYES ONLY sSlr ^5. blockade was the policy most likely to cause difficulties and divisions among the western allies.
Before the day closed there was also some discussion of calling Congress into session — either to recognize a state of war, or to emphaszie the difference between the action to be taken and war.
The President had returned late the previous evening from his campaign trip to Connecticut.
An intelligence estimate put together jointly by the Joint Atomic Energy Intelligence Committee probable that MRBM's could be launched within 18 hours.
At 11m. the main policy group met with the President at the White Hmse.
It would have the advantage of not killing any Russians, and would permit the issue to be placed subsequently on a political track.
Whatever course was to be followed, the more time there was to plan it in detail the better it was likely to work.
But each passing hour increased the chance of a security leak and gave the Soviets additional time to perfect their own plans and operations.
The President listened, asked questions, probed replies — and gave directions.
One participant observed that at the close of a session the President issued orders firmly.
One firm Presidential decisionstated at the close of that meeting was that operational Soviet MRBM's in Cuba could not be accepted — for both military and political reasons.
This decision was the basis for further discussion among the main policy group — without the President — which continued that afternoon in the Secretary of State's Conference Room, By this time former Presidents Eisenhower and Truman had been apprised of the situation, and had made their views known to the President, who in turn communicated them to the planners.
Of the various options only one, the pure political track, could be implemented without notifying our allies.
The non-military action *sv lUr OLihtl EY2S ONLY TOf SCCRCTeyes ohiy — of sending private letters to Castro and Khrushchev, with the option of then going to the UN was considered to be of doubtful value.
One participant characterized the political approach as ""going down with a whimper,"" and thought it better to risk a bang.
It was not enough to knock out 16 missiles if in the course of doing so ve lost three countries.
Retaliation against the Guantanamo Naval Base was a possibility that could not be ignored.
There was discussion of the analogies between United States bases in Europe and the Soviet penetration into the Caribbean.
Some thought that Khrushchev would certainly try to make the removal of his missiles from Cuba a qiij d pro quo for our withdrawal from Europe.
The possibility of a UN team being sent to all the world's missile installations was mentioned, as was the possibility of major negotiations <ith Khrushchev on all foreign bases.
It was generally agreed that te basis of our presence in Europe is significantly different from the Soviet intrusion into this hemisphere.
Essentially five main lines of action had been considered, separably and in various combinations.
Diplomatic pressure, but no military action, on the thesis that the weapons in Cuba did not change the overall military equation.
A limited surprise air strike against just the offensive missiles capable of carrying nuclear warheads.
A massive airstrike against the missile sites as well as bombers, SAM 'si,, and everything else in Cuba of an offensive nature. -rr.s. or^r>r--r lu. o-u.iul ms omY top sccncT ^ 52.
Vice President Johnson had termed a blockade an ""act of war"" in a speech as recently as October 6.
Stopping, seizing, and searching a Russian ship on the high seas might have grave consequences.
On the other hand, a limited air 3trike precisely targetted on the missiles could perhaps be pulled off without a major power confrontation.
Possibly it could be treated as the i960 U-2 episode should have been -in effect to pretend it hadn't happened.
We would assume the y_ \ missiles were in Cuba '♦by mistake;"" wiping them out with a few non-nuclear bombs would correct the mistake.
On the basis of the I it was thought that an air strike of a few minutes duration could destroy all the offensive missiles in Cuba, with little damage to surrounding areas and negligible loss of life.
Most of the group favored this course of action in the first hours of discussion.
This more detailed intelligence made it plain that an air strike to destroy all the offensive missiles would be a major effort, not an affair of a few bombs and a few minutes.
Both the diplomatic and military implications of such an operation loomed large.
Human beings, ^'' ULQ ' L USo OffiV both Russians and Cubans, would undoubtedly be killed.
United States responsibility for the bombing could not possibly be concealed or evaded to any significant extent.
Retaliation by the Soviets, or conceivably even the Castro regime, could take unpredictable and catastrophic forms.
The Meeting wi th n-nn^y^ Soviet Foreign Minister Andrei Gromyko was scheduled to see the President Thursday evening.
The meeting was a remarkable confrontation, both for what was said and for what was left unsaid.
The President conferred with Secretary Rusk and Ambassador Thompson shortly before Gromyko' s arrival.
The possibility of handling the Cuban Missile situation by diplomacy alone had been discarded by this time.
Although the JBBffl^RHp5vidence was detailed and irrefutable, it was decided not to present it to the Foreign Minister or in any other way to tip our hand.
The Sovjeb diplomat opened the conversation with some routine phrases on the desirability of working for the elimination of differences between the two great countries.
He remarked that it was unfortunate there had been no progress on Berlin and expressed the ""sincere hope"" of his country for a settlement of the German question.
The President interjected that the Soviet proposal on Berlin contained nothing new and provided no guarantee of security for the city.
The President said he'd be glad to i w UL/JfluT^ uuf Sir 56. see Khrushchev if he came to. the United States.
He charged that the United -States was ""pestering"" a small country, interfering in its internal affairs.
Cuba is not a threat, he said; it is a baby compared to the giant United States As for Soviet assistance, Gromyko said he was instructed to make clear that such aid was solely for the purpose of contributing to the defensive capability of Cuba.
If it were otherwise the Soviet Union would never have become involved in rendering such assistance.
The basic principle of Soviet foreign policy, he reiterated, was to alleviate tensions, eliminate outstanding problems, and resolve them peacefully.
The President replied that there was no threat of a United States invasion of Cuba, and that he would have been glad to give TOP SECRET*^ 0NTiY ~ 57. assurances to that effect had Khrushchev asked.
It was having a profound impact on the American people and the Congress.
The President cut in that he'd already told Khrushchev that was a mistake, and the he would have given assurances that there would be no further invasion, attempt.
But since July when the arms shipments had started the situation had changed.
Gromyko reiterated that the Soviet specialists in Cuba were giving training in handling certain kinds of defensive arms — and he wished to stress the word defensive.
The conversation turned to an extended discussion of the nuclear test ban issue, then broadened to cover the prospects for coexistence of the two ideologies.
The President agreed that theirs were two great countries with respect for peace -so it was all the more inexplicable that the Soviets should be sending arms to Cuba.
At 8:00m. he was the guest of honor at a dinner hosted by Rusk in the 8th Floor dining room at the State Department.
Dinner was exchange followed by a long, detailed, and technical on Berlin, which turned into an acrimonious but general discussion of which side was responsible for the tensions of the. .. cold war.
Rusk TOP SCCRCTmb aa Jfir 5S. returned to his office at that hour for a brief discussion with Thompson, Ball, and Johnson, at which they brought him up to date on the policy group thinking during the evening.
The President had asked former Secretary of Defense Robert A Lovett to see him; he did so shortly after Gromyko left the White House.
The main subject was how a blockade would operate and what its consequences might be.
For awhile George Ball met separately with Martin, Johnson, Ambassador Thompson, and the Acting Legal Advisor of the State Department, Leonard C Meeker, who had been asked by Secretary Rusk earlier in the day to prepare a legal analysis of a blockade of Cuba under the circumstances.
The Soviet Union was to be held accountable for the missiles; Cuba was seen as a pawn, a useful piece of geography for the Soviets.
It was recognized that the United States must act, but that we have ""too much self-respect to respond by an act of aggression,"" as one participant put it.
There was risk in any course, but it was deemed better to take the risks of action than inaction.
A blockade won wide approval on the ground that it permitted better control of events and the exercise of subsequent options.
The President made a tentative decision to impose a blockade and to announce it Monday night.
He directed that detailed planning be started to carry out this decision.
Homestead Air Force Base bringing the total there to 18, six F-106's from Langley Air Force Base to Patrick Air Force Base , six RC-121 early warning and control aircraft with specialized aerial radar and surveillance equipment to McCoy Air Force Base where there were already six others of this type, and to retain a detachment of ten naval all-weather fighters, F4D's, at the Key West Naval Air Station.
Tyndall Air Force Base in Florida was also alerted for possible use as augmentation forces.
The President was scheduled to leave on a campaign swing on the 19th, and to avoid arousing suspicions he did not cancel out.
All members of the Excomm agreed he should go, recognizing that if and when additional intelligence was available, and when the staff work and detailed recommendations were in better shape, he could be called back to Washington at short notice.
Meetings of the planninggroup of principals were held through much of the day, beginning at 11:00m. in the Under Secretary's Conference Room.
A detailed ""Joint Evaluation"" by GMAIC and JAEIC was presented to the group.
It concluded that there was a Soviet MRBM regiment at San Cristobal and one at Sagua la Grande, and an IRBM regiment at Guana.jay; and that the Soviets intended to develop Cuba into a prime strategic base.
Then some of the political and legal aspects of a blockade were discussed.
The basis of the blockade was self defense; its legality would be secure if it received the approval of the Organization of American States, where the votes of at least 14 countries would be needed, and was not disapproved by the Security Council.
Former Secretary of State Dean G Acheson argued that a mere quarantine meant little, that the security of the country should not be risked for the sake of legal formalities.
Any who wanted to would understand the necessity for whatever action was required to eliminate the missiles.
Although the President had made a tentative decision the previous evening to follow the blockade track and to announce it Monday, and had assigned planning responsibilities accordingly, the air strike possibility occupied the group for some time.
Both courses of action, blockade or air strike were made on both practical and moral grounds.
It was pointed out that in the light of the additional intelligence on the numbers of missiles in Cuba an air strike would have to be quite large to be effective.
In the end the blockade approach commanded the broadest support in part because it was the first step which permitted the widest range of future steps, Including the possibility of a subsequent air strike.
But it was decided to keep both alternatives under active consideration by having detailed staff work done on them so as not to limit the President's range of choice the next day.
It is not wholly clear how long there remained a possibility that the course of action to be followed might be different from that actually selected.
By Friday, it was apparent to most of the insiders that a ""rolling consensus"" was moving towards the notification defensive quarantine track.
For one thing, there remained the chance that new intelligence information would sharply alter previous calculations.
A security leak or a sudden, unexpected move by the Soviets might also occur.
Aside from these possible changes in the circumstances, some members of the Excomm considered that there was hedge on the decision against an air strike until Sunday morning.
The purpose and modalities of the blockade were examined in the Excomm during the afternoon.
Some thought that the blockade would not In itself achieve the removal, and that other steps would have to be taken to get them out.
The blockade would of course prevent the arrival of additional missiles.
If the nuclear components were not yet physically present in Cuba, the blockade would help keep them out — though they could be flown in by air transport.
The conviction was expressed that the blockade should continue until the missiles were out.
There was discussion of the effect of a blockade on the Western alliance.
The possibility of strain was noted, but it was felt the alliance would hold, and that the most serious difficulties might arise over any attempts by the Ti ""s r H:""' ; -""T Tris only ^^Kg3^^^_ Sir 67.
The intelligence estimates were seen by most of the main policy planners and the President shortly after they were completed, on the same day.
Some of the group did not see them as promptly, and they were usually discussed as the first item of business at the next Excomm meeting, which might not take place until the next morning.
Liaison within the intelligence community had been strengthened by this time by placing officers from the State Department and other agencies on the Watch Committee of the National Indications Center at the Pentagon.
During the week-end William Bundy, Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs prepared an analysis of United States overseas bases with particular reference to the Jupiters in Turkey and Italy.
The memorandum pointed out that these installations were rapidly approaching obsolescence, that they were an unhardened ""first strike"" type weapon, and that plans were already in train to replace them with missile-bearing submarines patrolling the Mediterranean.
Many of our air and naval bases in other parts of the world were of substantially greater utility; losing them would incur a higher security cost than removing the Jupiters.
From a purely military point of view, some bases could be abandoned without serious consequences to the national defense, the memorandum stated.
Secretary Rusk cancelled a trip scheduled for Friday evening to Hot Springs, Virginia, where he was to address the Business top srCRET ,EY3rs 0NLY Council.
The Director ottne Arms Control and Disarmament Sir Ttffi SECRET pieo ohm — 70.
Our ambassadors to Latin American countries who were in the United States were ordered to return to their posts that evening.
Ambassador to Mexico Thomas Mann did not depart for his post until Saturday night.
Until then he was held in readiness as a possible envoy for a face-to-face talk with Castro in Havana.
In addition Ambassador Bell did not go to Peru; our embassy in Lima was headed by the Charge throughout the crisis.
A complete scenario for each was worked out, covering a wide range of contingencies and Soviet responses.
In all the planning it was recognized that the Soviets were at a tactical 71. disadvantage In Cuba and would be likely to take countermeasures elsewhere.
The United States could dominate the air and sea over and around the island should non-nuclear combat take place.
There were obvious advantages to the Soviets in retaliating elsewhere, such as Berlin or the Jupiter sites in Turkey or Italy.
They could attack by air, invade, or blockade these critical spots which were located closer to their homeland.
The President had asked Ambassador Thompson to write a paper on how the Soviet government viewed the situation and what their likely responses to various proposed courses of action might be.
During the afternoon Friday the Atlantic and Carribean commands had been alerted against possible air attack on Panama Canal, Ramey Air Force Base and Naval Station, Roosevelt Roads, and were requested to prepare recommendations to strengthen air defenses.
Hawk Battalions were directed to Increase their Tf O r-CPnCT EYEO QITLY top sccnnw cm* — 71a.
Further, the spokesman said, the Pentagon has no information indicating the presence of offensive weapons in Cuba.
Saturday, October 20, the Joint Chiefs of Staff advised the military commanders-in-chief that a state of tension with regard to Cuba could lead to military action.
During the morning the planning group met in the Secretary of State's Conference Room.
A detailed scenario had been prepared by U Alexis Johnson charting the expected course of action.
Messages, letters, draft telegrams of instruction, and contingency papers were prepared at the State Department.
The Chief legal officers of the Departments of State, Defense, and Justice drafted the quarantine proclamation. — TUi ' w^URlT **^ v^t "" 5V 72. a Meanwhile, /series of ship, air, and troop movements were going on around the country.
The timing of this exercise was fortunate; it provided an almost ideal ""cover"" for military preparations related to the Cuban crisis.
For example, more than forty ships involved in the exercise got underway October 15.
In his annual ""State of the Corps"" message delivered January 3, 1963, Marine Corps Commandant David M Shoup said that ""one of the greatest assault teams in American history"" was assembled for a possible invasion of Cuba.
The answers were not strictly speaking incorrect until 11:07 am on Saturday, when CINCLANT was directed to suspend PHIBRIGLEX 62.
The President flew to Andrews Air Force Base from Chicago, then took a helicopter to the South Lawn of the White House, landing at 1:37 pm.
At 2--30 he met with the planning group ^ of principals in the Oval Room.
The full group was there, including Ambassadors Stevenson and Thompson and Robert Lovett.
The ^5,000 marines awaiting their Government's decision on invasion, and the 100,000 more ready to back them up, knew all the answers.
I saw it in their eyes. . . ."" , tap crpnrT . — tl-i r wiLui.ti — iras 0TTLY ■ 5lrj 7^. -IOP SECffFf ML I EYES ONLY mobile, fast to set up; it was estimated that it could take as little as 18 hours to make them operational.
An airstrike would have to be big, it was pointed out, and would almost certainly have to be accompanied by an invasion.
It was hardly conceivable that the Soviets would not respond militarily.
The President commented that the air strike plan as presented was ""not surgical,"" but was ""apt to grab"" and require a massive commitment of United States strength.
He directed that attention be concentrated on the track of action whose main feature was the defensive quarantine enforced by the United States Navy.
This he said was the only course of action compatible with our principles.
D QrPDCT sin lljI! :_ ■* SYBJ 0K51 K 75 _ TCP crcnCTui-i wj. — sw at the same time it was a substantial initiative which permitted the subsequent exercise of other options.
The question of extending the quarantine to airplanes flying to Cuba was raised.
It was recommended that they be shot down if there was good reason to think they carried nuclear warheads.
The President said that there would be no bargains over our bases in Turkey and Italy.
He also noted that the thrust of our response would be directed at the offensive missiles, that the bombers in Cuba were less of a problem.
The objective of the blockade was to achieve the removal of the missiles.
A distinction would be made between the missile threat and the Castro problem.
If after several days there was a continuation of missile site construction an airstri;ce might be necessary against a minimum number of targets to eliminate the main nuclear threat.
It was held unlikely that the Soviets would retaliate, especially since the Strategic Air Command would be in a full alert condition.
An airstrike might not be 100. per cent effective, and could provoke retaliation.
No matter what track was chosen, the Soviets might retaliate in Berlin or elsewhere.
But if the missiles were left in Cuba, both Khrushchev and Castro would be able to do what they pleased.
After weighing all the pro's and con's, the President directed that a defensive quarantine be instituted as quickly as possible, taking into account the need to notify allies and to make the necessary military preparations.
We would also take the invitiative in the United Nations Security Council.
The ""scenario"" for the full TOftSECnCT * iib 'MM 77TCj'' SCCnCTEYiroNiy— operation — covering diplomatic steps, ship movements, public statements, etc— was reviewed and approved.
The President's television address was set for Monday at 7:00 pm, designated ""P Hour,"" with the possibility of acting sooner if a security breach occurred.
At the Defense Department the Navy and the other services went forward with preparations to carry out the defensive quarantine.
During the day the United States Information Agency took steps to link up American medium wave stations with the Voice of America to broadcast the President's speech, and to go on 24-hour s-a-day transmission in Spanish.
In the early evening the President called the British Ambassador, Sir David Ormsby-Gore to the White House and talked to him privately for a short time.
Late that night the President spoke with Prime Minister Macmillan by trans-atlantic telephone.
Transition from Planning to Action Up to Sunday morning there remained a possiblity that our opening move would be a limited air strike at the missiles, as had been advocated by some members of the Excomm.
At 10:00m. the President met with Secretaries Rusk and McNamara, and after a brief discussion gave final approval, both as to substance and timing, to the plan that was to be followed.
Revisions in the scenario were proposed, and in _ r _ o p Sir | Ur ClbilL l — EYES OBEY 79. some cases accepted, right up to the moment of the President's speech, and afterwards too, on points of timing and detail as well as policy.
The Navy sought clarification of policy for dealing with various contingencies that might arise in connection with the blockade.
The coordination of military and diplomatic moves was kept under careful view.
In a few instances, ambassadors had suggestions concerning approaches to the governments to which they were accredited.
There was also a proposal that the thrust of the President's speech be altered to pin responsibility for the missiles on Castro as well as the Soviets.
This would have the advantage of laying the groundwork for dealing with Castro after the missiles were out and, depending on events, demanding Castro's removal as part of our price.
The determination of the United States to compel withdrawal of the missiles, by use of force if necessary, would be made clear in any case.
Spreading the blame more widely might also have the incidental benefit of giving the Soviets a face-saving route out.
If the initial challenge to Castro and the Kremlin did not achieve the desired results, the full thrust of the United States demand could be escalated and concentrated on the Soviel&Jnion.
The disadvantage of this proposal was that to be effective, the blockade would have to cover additional items other than arms in order to put pressure on the Cubans as well.
While this view received serious attention, it did not make its way into the President's speech, principally because of the difficulties posed by starting the blockade at a higher point on the scale.
All day the Departments of State and Defense, normally somnolent on a Sunday, hummed with activity — entirely behind a tightly-maintained security curtain.
Staff personnel were summoned to both Departments by telephone calls Saturday evening and Sunday morning.
Once the policy had been determined the chief task was to see that it was carried out — nn rrnprT TfYD-^rrprT^' 1 ^ qbly 79b. $yr with maximum effectiveness, with due attention given to every facet.
At the Defense Department the Office of the Joint Chiefs, the War Room, the Office of thefchief of Naval Operations, and the Office of the Secretary were focal points.
Work at the State Department involved the Operations Center — which was tied directly to the War Room and the White House Situation Room; the Secretariat, several regional Bureaus, the International Organization Bureau, the Bureau of Intelligence and Research, and the Legal Advisor's office.
During the day Livingston Merchant arrived to prepare for his mission to Ottawa where he was to brief Prime Minister Diefenbaker.
Dean Acheson was briefed for his mission to Europe, and Ambassador Dowling was called back from Georgia where he had been visiting his mother who was ill.
Work on drafts of resolutions for the OAS Council and the Security Council was — r x s q q r r nr*T E""~s only 79c . tc p sccnrr raa ^ underway.
During the day the Board of National Estimates stated that the Soviets would be cautious in the face of United States determination, but would probably continue the build-up if the United States position was ambiguous.
It also concluded that the Soviets would not make major military retaliation if the United States sank a Soviet ship while enforcing the blockade.
The Joint Evaluation that day concluded that there would be at least five Soviet offensive missile regiments in Cuba with a salvo potential of about one-half the current intercontinental ballistic missile threat from the Soviet Union. ■ ■ i'lURCt^b OBEY ' 81.
At 2:30m. the President convened a formal meeting of the National Security Council.
Admiral George Anderson, Chief of Naval Operations, and Don Wilson, Acting Director, USIA, attended.
Discussion centered on the third draft of the President's speech and progress reports on preparations.
Admiral Anderson raised questions on how the first intercept should be made.
The President stated that our first objective was to block further shipments of offensive military equipment to Cuba, and that our aim was also to see that the Soviet missiles were removed from Cuba under UN supervision and inspection.
During the day White House aide Larry O'Brien prepared a list of Congressional leaders and with General Godfrey McHugh arranged for military jets to bring them to Washington for a 5:00m.
That night the State Department sent top secret telegrams in code describing the proposed actions to our Ambassadors.
The text of the President's speech with a covering letter to Khrushchev was sent to our Embassy in Moscow for delivery to the Soviet Foreign Office one hour before the President's speech.
Letters from the President to Macmillan, de Gaulle, Adenauer, Nehru, Diefenbaker, Fanfani, Mayor Brandt and others were sent in code to our Embassies for transmission.
Individual letters from the President were sent to M-3 Heads of Government.
During that week-end the State Department transmitted 15 separate Presidential letters or *.-""V-nr-T 2YSS oiiiri Sir 83.
Meanwhile Washington's press corps seethed with curiousity, not all of it ill-informed or idle.
He was given a partial briefing with a request that in the interests of national security the story not be printed.
On Sunday the President called Orville Dryfoos, President of the Times and enlisted his cooperation.
A story did appear in the Sunday morning Washington Post speculating on the late -hour comings and goings at the White House, Pentagon, and State Department, and suggesting that the most likely focus of the activity was Cuba, though the presence of Martin J Hillenbrand, head of the Berlin Task Force, at one White House meeting prompted the reporter to write that it might also involve Berlin.
Starting late Saturday night and continuing through Sunday Lincoln White, the State Department spokesman, logged some 60 telephone calls at home.
At 9:00m. the ""go"" signal was sent ""in the clear"" (that is, not in cipher) to all the posts with action responsibilities, which included most NATO and Latin American capitals.
By then, ships were moving, troops were being readied, diplomatic preparations were in train, public affairs staffs were gearing up for action, steps to inform and consult with key members of Congress were being taken, speeches were being polished, resolutions sharpened, and preparations for the use of the security mechanisms of the United Nations and the Organization of American States were well under way.
All these activities were in line with the basic ""scenario"" setting forth the anticipated track of United States policy hour by hour and minute by minute for the next two days.
The scenario was subject to constant revision on points of detail and timing; it went through a large number of drafts up to the 85.
President's speech in the light of the unfolding situation. as pages 86, 86a, 87 & 87a.
One of the final versions is attached/ But the main thrust of United States policy was set, and the hundreds of pieces of action going on in Washington and around the globe that day were designed to give it effect.
T Jlb UHM •i~LTO* ~rr.m i r ^ ml» 5(r 83b. personnel of the news office and public affairs bureaus at State and Defense also were besieged with queries.
With the exception of the Post story, no newspaper accounts of the crisis appeared until Monday, and none were 'hard 1 until after the President's speech.
In the morning the Atlantic Fleet was given its orders in the form of a planning directive for the quarantine of Cuba.
At 12:37m. the Tactical Air Command was instructed to put into effect a partial airborne alert and to execute a pre-arranged force dispersal plan.
During the morning our embassies in London and Ottawa were told to ask the British and Canadian governments to suspend temporarily all transit facilities and overflight clearances for bloc aircraft destined to Cuba.
At 10:55 Washington time a special ""go"" signal was sent to all Latin SECfiTT ^ 89.
The President said that it was important to think about procedure as much as policy.
He said that personal messages should be sent to the commanders of our Jupiter installations in Italy and Turkey asking them to take special precautions.
There was discussion of possible problems arising out of the lack of notification of the NATO allies.
The reason for the omission, it was agreed, was the obvious one of lack of time.
Fairly substantial explanations would have to be made, it was recognized, to all the NATO allies.
Cticnci^ ^ j 1 p r< A^-U'K/ E YES ONLY State Department would be useful, and the missions of Dean Acheson, Livingston Merchant, and Walter Dov/ling were also viewed as key elements.
While it was important to get the allies to see the issue as we saw it, the United States was determined to act and would do so.
The correct course of action, properly executed, would probably bolster the Alliance while, it was hoped, impressing the Soviets with the strength of our determination.
Much of the activity Monday within the intelligence community concerned the question of how much information the could be released in/briefings of ambassadors and the press scheduled for that evening.
One the one hand, it was essential that enough* data be released to make plain the extent and character of the Soviet build-up in Cuba to audiences some of whom at least might be disposed not to take the United States' word for it.
On the other hand, we did not want to divulge the full extent of our T '""•■■* -:■'■'■■ .-i-'T EYES ONLY TOP SECRET Sir 91. ■ v « ui-uiii_i EYBS 01ffiy intelligence gathering capabilities by revealing all the knowledge thereby obtained, in particular, those in charge of the photographic reconnaissance and interpretation activities were extremely hesitant about releasing The USI3 meeting that morning, several meetings at the State arid Defense Departments and the CIA, as well as one with the President, and countless telephone calls during the day, dealt with this issue.
At 11:45m. there was a meeting at State attended by Hilsman and others from the Intelligence and Research Bureau, Robert MannLng and two deputies from Public Affairs, and representatives of the CIA, at which there was discussion of what would be told the ambassadors and the press.
In the end it was decided to exhibit a selection of blow-ups to the ambassadors and the press, but not to release them for publication or general circulation.
The briefers heading for London, Paris, and Bonn were also authorized to show the photographs to keypeople within each government, but not to release them.
There was some nervousness around noon in the White House and elsewhere as the result of a report relayed by a United States network television correspondent that Soviet Foreign Minister Gromyko was planning to make an important statement at 2:00m.
Arrangements were made to monitor his statement, and to proceed at once if necessary with an announcement of the Quarantine.
As it turned out, he merely said a few words of farewell suitable TOP SECRET Sir TOP SECRET-^ mx 93. to the occasion of his departure from the United States.
Additional steps to link the key action centers in the government were taken.
The State Department detailed three officers full time to the Battle Staff Roster at the Pentagon to facilitate communications with the Defense Department.
These officers were taken from the Bureau of Inter-American Affairs and the Bureau of European Affairs (the two Bureaus most directly concerned with the exercise), until Tuesday, when they were replaced by staff from the Operations Center.
At the State Department, work continued on the two proposed O.A.S. resolutions, one converting the Council into an Organ of Consultation, the other seeking support for the course of TOP SECRET-^ ^ — s(r 94. action proposed by the United States.
At 12 noon Monday, October 22, the crisis for the first time became visible though not yet in substance.
At that hour Pierre Salinger, the White House news secretary, announced that the President would make an important statement at 7:00 m.
He also requested air time for the President's speech from the radio and television networks, which was promptly granted.
The only person previously 95. absent that this brought into the picture was Edward A McDermott, head of the Office of Emergency Planning.
The other members of the N.S.C. were all on the Exhoth Excomm, the informal working group that had been meeting night and had day for nearly a week.
During the N.S.C. meeting the President formally established the Excomm and asked it to meet with him daily at 10:00m.
He reviewed again the chief arguments against the air strike — the Pearl Harbor analogy and the chance that it was not certain that all the missiles could be erased in one operation.
He also reminded his associates that it might yet be necessary to invade or take other action, and raised theuestion of what should be done if ^^^^^^^^^^^^^^3 He emphasized the importance of not saying an air attack or invasion were actively considered.
The course adopted was to be viewed as the consensus which all had helped reach.
Discussion also covered the chain of reasoning behind not having acted sooner.
SECRETmO ONLY 97. missiles were not sufficient' to commit the United States to a major initiative in the Cold War.
Quite aside from our own position, it would have been impossible to win support for our action from the O.A.S. or our NATO allies (some of whom thought the United States had a ""fixation"" about Cuba, it was remarked) until irrefutable evidence of the Soviet Union's offensive designs was available.
Underlining all these considerations was the fact that expert Sovietologists had been unanimous in the opinion that introduction by the Soviets of offensive missiles into Cuba was highly improbable.
This was seen as a problem of public affairs, not policy, and the types of arguments and responses which would be most appropriate were reviewed.
A few had returned to Washington at near-3uper-sonic speeds in the military Jets laid on by General McHugh.
The President conducted the briefing with the assistance of Secretary Rusk and an Intelligence officer.
Aerial photographs were displayed and explained, and the President outlined what he planned to do.
The Congressional leaders expressed support, though some thought he would have to go beyond the act of quarantine to an air strike or invasion.
The President listened to their comments but did not change his position.
WT During the afternoon each United States Ambassador in Latin America, having been cued by the ""go"" signal, called on the Foreign Minister to whom he was accredited, to tell him there was a likelihood of Communist demonstrations that evening and to suggest that it would be a good idea for the local security services to take precautions and go to an alert tingency /P re P arat ^fd been made for evacuation and life protection of United States nationals in each Latin American country.
To expedite communications, the State Department asked the American Telephone and Telegraph company to give top priority to calls between the O.A.S. representatives in Washington and their Presidents and Foreign Ministers in the Latin American capitals.
Extraordinary steps had to be taken to brief the President of Mexico, Lopez Mateos, who with his Foreign Minister was in an airplane high above the Pacific.
He had been in Manila and was scheduled to stop in Hawaii, so a full set of briefing materials was sent to our embassy in the Philippines and to CINCPAC, for transmittal to the Presidential party.
As it turned out, CINCPAC i U w-CJoEj EYfl0 0NL¥ I UJ I I i i i i i 101. got the documents to him well before the President's speech.
The United States Information Agency and the Voice of America had been preparing since late Friday to provide facilities for relaying the President's speech around the globe.
The Acting Director of USIA, Donald M Wilson had been briefed on the crisis Friday night by high State Department officers.
At that time George Ball instructed him to make plans to broadcast the President's speech to Cuba when it was delivered Sunday or Monday evening.
It was decided that the most effective way to reach Cuba would be to link up a number of American medium wave stations with the Voice when the President spoke.
The Voice would then stay on the air 24 hours a day in Spanish, commencing with the speech, and the medium wave stations would be urged to stay on the VOA network during the crisis period.
Direct telephone lines to the stations from the White House were readied.
Pierre Salinger telephoned the heads of the nine stations to request their cooperation, which was readily given.
As soon as Salinger received each approval, Loomls called the station again to advise on the technical arrangements that had been made for the telephone lines.
By 6:30m. the hook-ups were completed, and at 7:00m. all the stations were on the air.
In addition to the Voice transmissions, USIA put the speech and subsequent statements on its worldwide Wireless Pile, often in several languages.
They also made use of their fast shipping facilities to send photographs, tapes, and films of the President's speech to all parts of the world.
J_ Telephone calls were placed ""in the clear"" to key Embassies in Europe.
In guarded language Washington verified that the messages had in fact gotten through and that preparations for P Hour were going as planned.
In addition, last-minute changes in the speech and in the instructions for delivering it and the official letters to the host governments were radioed to posts during the afternoon.
In the course of checking it was learned that the radio relay station in Nicosia, Cyprus had encountered atmospheric conditions which blocked transmissions to some embassies in Africa.
By the time this was discovered it was too late to do anything about it, so official notice of what the United States proposed to do was given to those nations through their embassies in Washington.
Clocks in the European capitals were five hours ahead of Washington, and it was well into the evening when Dean Ache son Tr-rs r-r\~\r~r \$\j* 104.
Iui f Ji'JuRliUrao oitiy , — called ok President de Gaulle' at the Elysee Palace to Inform him of what the United States proposed to do.
Acheson was accompanj by an intelligence briefer, who displayed severa the French President.
De Gaulle paid close attention to Acheson' s briefing and expressed support for the United States policy.
He said that President Kennedy was entirely right to make a firm response to the Soviet move and assured Acheson of France's cooperation.
At about the same time Ambassador Bruce in London briefed Prime Minister MacMillan and Ambassador Dowling in Bonn briefed Chancellor Adenauer.
Both heads of government expressed support for what the President proposed to do.
Later that evening Acheson appeared before a special session of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization Council to explain the reasons for the United States action and why it had not been possible to consult fully in advance.
He was given a courteous reception and received expressions of support from the allies.
At 6:26m. the State Department logged receipt of a letter to President Kennedy from Prime Minister MacMillan.
However, we must rest not so much on precedent as on the unprecedented condition of the modern world in a nuclear age.
He may try to escort his ships into the Caribbean and force you to attack them.
Berlin ... pressure on the weaker parts of the Free World defense systemi' The President did not see the letter until after his speech.
Later that evening a reply responding to each point in the letter was sent from Kennedy to Macallan.
Soviet Ambassador Dobrynin was ushered into S e cretary Rusk's blue-carpeted 7th floor office at the State Department.
At the same hour Adlai Stevenson called on the United Nations Secretary General to inform him of the President's speech and of the impending United States request that a meeting of the Security Council be convened.
At 6:15 the Ambassadors In Washington from the NATO, SEATO, and CENTO countries were given a detailed background briefing in the International Conference Room at the State Department by Under Secretary Ball and Roger Hilsman., Forty-six ambassadors and charges* attended.
Aerial photographs showing the erected missile launchers and missile site constructions ■ Tup SlCRCF -hb ml* S(r 107. at several locations In Cuba. were shown.
A television set had been placed on the front rostrum, and most of the ambassadors remained to watch the President's speech.
Ambassador Poy Kohler, only recently arrived in Moscow, called at the Kremlin to deliver a letter from President Kennedy and the text of the speech.
He did not see any Soviet officials of high rank, and there was no immediate Soviet Response.
His voice and were image/ carried on all the major networks and on a large majority of the nation's broadcasting stations.
Nine stations, under arrangements made by the White House and USIA, broadcast the speech in Spanish on commercial frequencies to Latin America.
Sir At the same hour the Defense Department ordered a worldwide alert status designated DEFCON 3. it had the effect of signalling all United States military elements to assume ami increased state of readiness.
Assistant Secretary Mar-tin conducted a further closed-door briefing for Latin American Ambassadors in the Under Secretary's Conference room.
At the sam& hour Ambassador Stevenson called on Valerian A Zorin, chief Soviet delegate to the UN, in his capacity as President of the Security Council for the month of October, and gave him a letter requesting that he summon an urgent meeting of the Council.
Stevenson also transmitted the text of a draft resolution for the Security Council calling on the Soviet Union to dismantle and withdraw the missiles under UN verification.
Secretary Rusk spokrs to a meeting of all other Ambassadors in Washington, and a background briefing for the 109. press was held in the small auditorium in the east wing of the State Department.
This briefing was conducted by George Ball, was flanked by U Alexis Johnson, Legal Advisor Abram Chayes, who Intelligence and Research Director Rojger Hilsman, and Assistant Secretary for Public Affairs Robert J Manning.
A similar briefing for Pentagon reporters was held by Secretary McNamara at 8:00m.
A special concert commemorating the 17th anniversary of the Pounding of the United Nations took place that evening in the State Department auditorium.
Some of the top-level guests ~ among them Secretary Rusk — were absent from the flack-tie audience.
But Assistant Secretary Martin attended, and managed to beard two ambassadors — those from Ecuador and Guatemala — for a bit of private diplomacy during the intermission.
During the evening at the Pentagon mobilization planning was reviewed and preparations were ordered for a possible call-up of reserves.
Secretary McNamara ordered an acceleration of the TGP ZZCM\ ^ UilLi Sir no. induction and training of Cuban nationals.
Prom 10:40 to 11:25 he met with the Chief of Naval Operations for a discussion of blockade and surveillance procedures.. that night United States dependents from the Guantanamo naval base began to arrive in the United States That evening the public affairs bureaus at State and the Pentagon went on a 24-hour schedule.
At least one principal officer was on duty in the two bureaus at all times.
Throughout both Departments, and in the White House, key personnel remained in their offices or on call through the nights.
At State, for example, George Ball and Alexis Johnson had been alternating IQE-SFrRFT i(H k,1k.i> Utiht 111. on the night shift since Friday.
Intelligence officers did much of their' work at night, so as to have reports completed for early morning briefings and meetings of the Excomm.
Late Monday night Lord Bertrand Russell, the British philosopher and pacifist, unable to sleep after hearing the President's speech, sent telegrams to Kennedy, Khrushchev, Macmillan, Galtskell, and U Thant, calling on them and the world to take immediate steps to halt what he viewed as a headlong plunge into the maelstrom of nuclear war.
Provided oral briefings to 95 foreign Ambassadors and an unknown number of American newsmen.
That in itself, in the eyes of some senior officials, represented a certain victory.
The chance that hot-headed Cubans might have responded to the President's speech by seizing the missiles and irrationally firing them at the U.S., or that the Soviets themselves might have taken precipitate action, was never out of anyone's mind.
With United States nuclear forces in a fully alert status, ready to respond if ordered, the northern hemisphere might have been well on its way to incineration.
The Soviets had not closed the autobahn leading from West Germany to Berlin.
They had not made a conventional or nuclear bombing attack on the Jupiters in Italy and Turkey.
Most important, they had not as of that' moment perceptibly accelerated the construction of missile launchers in Cuba.
None of the weapons appeared to be ready to fire, and no rapid preparations to make them so seemed to have occurred.
Secretary Rusk made the main speech advocating that the Council transform itself into an organ of consultation under the immediate emergency provisions of the Charter.
Many of the delegates were in need of instructions from their home governments and so made full use of the priority lines arranged by AT & T The two most important countries which hesitated before committing themselves to support the United States proposal were Brazil and Mexico.
Both governments felt a general hesitancy about moving so fast and also raised the constitutional question about the authority of the Council to transform itself into an organ of consultation.
The real motives standing behind these legalisms undoubtedly related to domestic politics.
Both Presidents had been elected with the support of left-leaning elements who tended to view Castro as an authentic Latin folk hero.
They did not want to commit their governments to actions which would alienate these groups and which might provoke demonstrations and riots.
He also telephoned our ambassadors in Rio de Janeiro and Mexico City to coordinate efforts and apply maximum pressure.
Secretary Rusk called the Mexican foreign minister by telephone at his hotel in Honolulu.
In the end, both countries cast their votes for the Resolutions, though Brazil abstained on one point relating to invasion.
At the time Bolivia was absenting itself from the O.A.S. in connection with a dispute with Chile.
Unable to get a satisfactory telephone connection with La Paz the Bolivian Ambassador, Emilio Sarmiento Carruncho, attended the meetings anyway and cast his country's vote for the resolutions, remarking to Assistant Secretary Martin that he might soon be needing a job.
The Uruguayan delegate, Emilio Oribe, was unable to get instructions from his government in time for the was vote shortly before 5:00m.
SHrnhJ — wn n Q1TLY 116. a nine-man council who had to be unanimous before any action could be taken.
Uruguay recorded its affirmative vote the next day, making it a unanimous 20-0.
The unanimity of the council, due in considerable part to shrewd diplomacy by State Department officials, was viewed by many as an important factor in blunting a possible Soviet propaganda rejoinder to the President's speech.
Adlai Stevenson delivered his opening statement to the specially-convened meeting of the Security Council.
Introduced two parallel letters to the President of the Security Council also requesting an urgent meeting of the Council in a desperate attempt to alter the focus of the issue.
They alleged that the United States count ermeasures and ""aggressive action against Cuba"" were the real threat to peace in the Caribbean.
In the course of his speech, Stevenson charged that the Soviet Union had converted Cuba into ""a bridgehead and staging area"" in the Western Hemisphere and urged the Council to call for the immediate withdrawal of missiles and other offensive weapons from Cuba.
He traced the ""vast plan of piecemeal aggression' 1 and ""the basic drive to abolish the world of the Charter"" which had characterized Soviet policy in the post-war years and which had not been altered by the present Soviet Government.
While Stevenson was speaking a note was passed to him by Assistant Secretary of State for International Organization Affairs Harlan Cleveland.
It was ftom Assistant Secretary Martin in Washington reporting the unanimous OAS support for the United States position.
Stevenson promptly read the note to the Security Council, a scene observed by millions on television.
He denounced the United States quarantine action as an ""act of war"" and declared that the Cuban people had answered the armed attack with general mobilization.
He decared that the United States charges were ""completely false"" and ""a clumsy attempt to cover up aggressive actions"" in Cuba.
The statement declared that the Soviet Government will do ""everything in its power to frustrate the aggressive design s of United States imperialistic circles,"" and appealed to all Governments and peoples to raise their voices in protest against the ""aggressive acts"" of the United States and strongly r U/ ^LuftEPras 0X. — to condemn such acts.
Ambassador Zorin attempted to associate neutrals with his cause by quoting earlier statements by a number of countries in support of Cuba and critical of alleged interferences in its internal affairs.
The Soviet resolution insisted that the United States ""repeal its decision on the control of ships of other states going towards the shores of Cuba,"" and called upon the US, Cuba, and USSR ""to establish contacts and enter into negotiations for the purpose of normalizing the situation and thereby removing the threat of war.
Meanwhile, at the State Department special instructions to our Ambassadors in Venezuela and Chile were being readied.
These two countries were especially important because of their membership on the Security Council.
Our Ambassadors were told to talk to the Presidents and Foreign Ministers in a special effort to make sure they would support the United States position — which they did.
While this overt activity in the United Nations and O.A.S. was in motion, the Excomm met with the President at 10:00m. and again at 6:00m.
In the morning the President approved the final test and issuance of the Proclamation of Interdiction.
He also signed an Executive Order authorizing extension of tours of duty for certain members of the armed forces.
Walt W Rostow was formally designated to head the advance planning group.
Jerome Wiesner, the President's Science Advisor was asked to direct the group examining the government's world wide communications capability.
The President also asked Paul Nitze to head a committee to think about problems of inter-allied relationships.
It was considered essential to find out if work on the missiles was continuing.
With that imperative in mind the President ordered a sharp increase in lowlevel reconnaissance over the known sites.
The read-out on the pictures they took became available late that evening and early the next morning.
TCP SECRET EYES ONLY A meeting of the 'Ambassadorial Group,' which normally discusses Berlin, took place at the State Department during the day.
Its membership consists of the British., French, and German Ambassajojdjrs, plus an American representative. question of possible United States action against SAM sites in Cuba was also raised.
These matters were discussed in Mr Nitze's committee later in the day, or the next day.
Sir During the day Secretary Rusk transmitted to the White House a memorandum prepared by Assistant Secretary for European Affairs William Tyler, Assistant Secretary for Near Eastern iV; 126.
The Germans, Italians, Belgians, Turks, and Canadians have favored such a step and would probably respond with a strong show of interest.
The memorandum, interesting in part for its relevance to 5ir TCr secret ms 6Hi7 — future discussions of nuclear sharing and the multi-lateral force, took account of the European concern about Soviet MRBM's threatening their home territories.
It was designed to show Europeans that the Cuban crisis, far from diverting the United States from its positive long term policies in Europe, had intensified our desire to prosecute these policies.
The initial costs of a modest force could be shared by the United States and the participating European nations, and the U.S., as a transitional measure, at least, could keep custody of the nuclear warheads.
The multilateral concept, according to the memo, had aroused great interest in the North Atlantic Council It would help stave off pressure for bilateral sharing with France.
If the policy was adopted it could have the effect of closing out the crisis before mounting public pressures and possible incidents in the blockade might result in increased risks of war and divisive pressures within the alliance.
It would also permit us to ior aicutf™ ^ draw positive advantage from the crisis in pursuing our own positive goals in Europe. afternoon (morning During the/ in Washington) Dean Acheson went to Bonn to talk to Chancellor Adenauer and German Defease Minister Franz Joseph Strauss.
Both gave Acheson a cordial reception and expressed full support for the President's action.
The British government, meanwhile, issued a statement expressing ""deep concern at the provocative action of the Soviet Union ing in placing offensive nuclear weapons in Cuba,"" and declai its support for the United States position.
Moscow time — thirteen hours after the President's speech — TASS, the Soviet news agency, began transmitting a Soviet Government statement.
Because of delays in transmission, the letter was not received in Washington until 11:56m. , nearly four hours after it was handed to Kohler.
The letter reflected the tone of the public statement, ^^^^accused the United States of piracy, violation of international law, and provocative acts that might lead to nuclear war, interspersed with professions of devotion to the cause of peace and denials that the missiles were in Cuba for offensive purposes.
Significantly, neither the letter nor the statement denied the truth of the United States charge that Soviet intermediate and medium range missiles had been Tp-3 ^ r ^P^J TfTiS QNLY — r-t-j '\i i'^rT 130. ""ib r sccncr^Bj omx secretly introduced into Cuba.
At 7*00m. the President signed the Proclamation of Interdiction in a ceremony at the White House.
CINCLANT was promptly directed to enforce the quarantine in accord with instructions previously drafted.
Secretary McNamara held a press conference at which he announced that action had been taken to deploy our forces to make effective the quarantine by 10:00m. the next morning.
McNamara said that 25 Soviet ships were enroute to Cuba, their course unchanged in the past 2khours.
He indicated he had given orders to interdict these and all other ships headed for Cuba, starting 10:00m. the next day.
Before the night was out messages from the President were sent to Mayor Brandt, Chancellor Adenauer, and President de Gaulle.
At 1:00m. aerial reconnaissance photos of the Soviet missile installations in Cuba were released to the United States press.
By morning, newspaper readers and television viewers were given this visual proof of the missile build-up.
The United Nations Holds the Stage At 9:00m. the Security Council met and heard the representatives of Venezuela, Sr.
Sosa Rodriguez, associate the Latin American nations with the United States stand.
The weapons In Cuba, he emphasized, were no longer defensive but offensive, and they were of a magnitude that might be sufficient to wipe out any of the American republics and drag the world Into the holocaust of nuclear war.
He described the apprehension felt throughout the continent at Cuban subversive activities, including the introduction of agents, propaganda, and weapons Ti EYS5 Olim Sir TOP SECRET syss omlx — 132. to equip guerrilla forces in American republics.
Sosa Rodriguez declared that he was speaking for the entire continent in asking the Security Council to take measures to stop nuclear weapons from arriving in Cuba and to have the presently existing bases of nuclear rockets in Cuba dismantled.
Sir Patrick Dean, Representative of the UK, noted that by no stretch even of the Soviet imagination could a nuclear missile with a range of 2,200 miles in Cuba be called defensive; and recalled assurances on this point by Mr Gromyko and President Dorticos of Cuba in the General Assembly the previous month.
While the Soviet Government were acting their lie, he stated, the orders were being given, plans laid and preparations being made for the supply of missiles to Cuba.
The speech by the Representative of Rumania, Mr Malitza, was an exercise in pealty which supported the position of the Soviet Union and called for condemnation of the United States and ""immediate annulment"" of the naval blockade.
The Irish Representative, Mr Aiken, underlined world concern with the growth of the Soviet intervention in Cuba.
In both casesfthe contacts and negotiations were suggested as the first step in a wider scheme of proposals, but he warned that only through negotiation at the start could agreement come.
Mr Aiken's speech adumbrated the anxiety of the smaller powers who were grasping for some compromise formula, no matter how tenuous, to defuse the crisis.
Before the Security Council *t oY ; JC.ll HE I EYES OKI Sir 135. -Uk' nr »,;< {• 1 ^.„„ ^^ reconvened that afternoon several mediation efforts were floated in the halls of the UN, most of which were prescriptions for restraint and negotiation.
Many neutrals were urging the SYG to intervene, confer with the parties, and make a ""balanced appeal"" to both sides to refrain from aggravating action.
The first versions were tentatively advanced for a standstill formula compounded of a Soviet pledge not to introduce any more offensive military equipment in exchange for lifting the quarantine, along with the stationing of UN observers in Cuba.
The pictures were of high quality, and it was decided to release them later in the day.
Secretary McNamara reported on the increased state of readiness in our military forces.
There was also a discussion of communications. ~^r ZU^ZJ irrLZ 0MLY "" 136.
Tpn or nnry EYES SL<g lAt 11:00m. a State Department background briefing wa3 held for delegates of the European Broadcasting Union.
Prank Stanton, President of CBS, and other prominent United States television officials attended.
Twelve types' of information were listed as vital to national security and not releasable.
The White House press secretary requested information media to exercise discretion in publishing information relating to national security.
At a press briefing at 4:00, Sylvester announced that there were 8-10 missile installations in Cuba, with about & 4 launches per base; that there were at least thirty missiles and more *"" 20 IL-28 jet fighter bombers, as well as 5000 Soviet personnel in Cuba.
At 7:35 four of the low-level reconnaissance photos discussed that morning in the Excomm 139.
That evening TASS released the exchange of telegrams between Bertrand Russell and Khrushchev.
At 9:24m. a letter from Khrushchev to. the President was received at the State Department.
The Soviet leader's letter was on the whole a repeat of the previous letter and broadcast statement.
The President's reply was sent 4£hours later, at 1:59m., and was hand carried at that hour to the Soviet Embassy in Washington.
SECRET '""*""""""■» China, the highlights of the meeting were the satement of Chile, the UAR Ghana ""restraint"" resolution, and the first public intervention by the Acting Secretary Generajr.
The Representative of Chile, Mr Schweitzer, endorsed the security measures of the regional system and expressed support for the United States draft resolution.
He welcomed authorization that the United States draft resolution gave the Acting Secretary General to dispatch saying that an observer corps to Cuba,/ Unfortunately, the representative of Cuba yesterday rejected this idea.
SECRET E ^ ™ty TOP SlCRET EYLn onY I 141. contrary to international law and likely to increase world tension.
Dorticos had told the General Assembly that the weapons Cuba had acquired were ""defensive in nature"" and called for ""normalization"" of relations between Cuba and the United States The Ghana representative, Mr QuaisonSackay, took a similar position, adding that he had no ""incontrovertible proof... as to the offensive character of military developments in Cuba"" and therefore could not condone the quarantine.
The formula proposed by the so-called unaligned countries was thus limited to a general appeal for mediation by the Secretary General, but provided neither for the suspension of the Soviet offensive buildup nor for UN involvement in inspection and verification.
U Thant Proposal of October 24 At the close of the meeting the Acting Secretary General addressed an urgent appeal to President Kennedy and Chairman Khrushchev ""at the request of the permanent representatives of a large number of Member Governments:"" His message asked that all concerned refrain from any action that may aggravate the situation, and that time should be given to enable the parties concerned to get together with a view to resolving the present crisis peacefully and normalizing the situation in the Caribbean.
JHP ?::»pr] ""s YS<5 nNTiY all arms shipments to Cuba, and also the voluntary suspension of the quarantine measures involving the searching of ships bound for Cuba.
Unbeknownst to the Security Council, U Thant had already sent a private appeal to Kennedy and Khrushchev at 2 o'clock that afternoon.
It expressed a similar hope that the two great powers would avoid any confrontations that would risk general war.
He said he hoped that a peaceful solution to the crisis will soon be found which will make It possible ""to move to a wider field of negotiation,"" but added, ""I' think what has happened in the last fev; weeks must confirm our view that in these grave matters we cannot rest upon mere words and promises.
It a then seemed to many of us ... that in the struggle of Wills between the Soviet Union and the Western powers, primarily the United States, the world might be coming to the brink of war.
He went on to say on the same occasion that during the crisis week the Soviet government ""were doing TOO 1-n Dr 147.
Among other things, Mr Ward said that Ivanov had stated that the Americans had created a situation in which there was no opportunity for either the Americans or the Russians to compromise and that the Soviet Government looked to the United Kingdom as their one hope of conciliation.
TOP SECRET""*™ nWTlT — informed Sir Hugh Stephenson, then Deputy-Under-Secretary of the Foreign Office and I think that my Honourable Friend was one of Mr Ward's patients that Ivanov had been to see him to give a somewhat similar story and to ask for some indication that the British Government were considering working towards negotiations.
Lord Arran agreed and Ivanov and Mr ward came to see him on 27th October.
Ivanov again stated that he wished to get a message to the British Government by indirect means asking them to call a Summit Conference in London forthwith.
Lord Arran repeated this initiative at the time both to my Office and to the Foreign Office and later sent in a full report.
Ivanov' s approaches were ... only a small piece of the jigsaw; they were a natural part of the Soviet attempt to weaken our resolution.
Implementing the Quarantine The first intercept of a Soviet ship took place Thursday, October 25, at 7:15m., when the USS Essex made contact with the soviet tanker Bucharest.
Aerial photographs were quickly taken and processed, and by 10:00 it was possible to confirm that there was no deck cargo of any interest on the F6f '^ rj'c.
It was plainly. an ordinary tanker, and after discussion between the President, Rusk, and McNamara, it was permitted to proceed, though United States ships contained to trail it until early evening.
The Sxcomm met at 10:00 and opened with a report on the military situation.
There was discussion of whfch Soviet on ships to intercept and board, and/procedures to govern the boarding and inspection process.
Don Wilson of USIA was given responsibility for preparing a leaflet and making arrangements.
Later in the day a draft text was checked and cleared personally by the President.
At a Defense Department news conference at 11:50m., Sylvester stated that at least a dozen Soviet vessels had turned back, apparently because they were carrying offensive weapons.
At noon the Secretary of State gave a background briefing for United States correspondents, followed by a 2:00m. briefing for the foreign press.
Shortly before noon three ships carrying 2146 dependents of tj.s. personnel at Guantanamo arrived at Norfolk, Virginia. j There was extensive discussion during the morning between the Pentagon, State, and the white House, concerning the selection, method, and timing of the first ship to be boarded.
It was decided to board a non-Soviet ship first, one that was proceeding through the quarantine zone, carrying j chartered bjr the Soviets, anj drty cargo ,/ registered in a neutral, not allied, nation.
Wrj T.TM WIT directly engaging the Soviet Union. "",he Lebanese freighter Marucla fulfilled all these requirements, and shortly after noon the decision was made to intercept and board this ship.
The USS Kennedy and the USS Pierce headed in her direction throughout the afternoon.
The actual boarding took place without incident at 7:50 the next morning.
At 8:35m. the East German passenger ship Volkerfruend with 20 students bound for Havana was cleared through the quarantine.
In addition the British ship Suiaco headed for Kingston, Jamaica, and a Polish ship bound for New Orleans were allowed to proceed without inspection.
During the afternoon the Strategic Air Command — which -rr-.r) rmnrr Otr 152. had assumed chargep^^^^ffi^^^^^^^| on October 12 — was directed to keep CINCLANT and the Navy's air headquarters I land to asdst under CINCLANT advisedi CINCLANT in sea surveillance operations.
SCCnET^ o^ Y Shortly before the Security Council reconvened Thursday afternoon for what proved to be its last formal meeting, a second public / message from U Thant was sent to Kennedy and Khrushchev, again asking that they avoid any direct confrontations of Soviet and American ships In the quarantine.
He noted that some representatives in the Council said did / they/ not know whether the Soviet Union has in fact built in Cuba installations capable of firing nuclear missiles ""'TOP GCCRET 'n® umls Sir 155. . ,r EYES ONLY over ranges from 1,000-2,000 miles.
If further doubt remained on this score, the United States would gladly exhibit photographic evidence to the doubtful.
One by one Ambassador Stevenson demolished Communist arguments and replied to neutral misgivings.
The one action in the last few days which had of the United States and its allies the strengthened the peace was the determination/ to stop further spread of weapons in this hemisphere.
The Soviet representative — unaware of the fact that history would soon call his bluff — chose to concentrate his speech on a challenge to the ""incorirovertible facts"" concerning the offensive 1 Jf ^luiiul fes5 Oil Tly"""" 157. — — "" ;h I'ma ujmlz military build-up in Cuba.
The ""kernel of the matter"" lay ""in the aggressive intentions of the United states with respect to Cuba.
It was at this point, early in the evening of October 25, that the now famous encounter occurred between Stevenson and Zorin.
Well, let me say something to you, Mr Ambassador: We do have the evidence.
We came here today to indicate our willingness to discuss U Thant's proposals -and that is the only change that has taken place.
But let me also say to you, sir, that there has been a change You, the Soviet Union, have sent these weapons to Cuba.
You, the Soviet Union, have created this new danger -faot the United States Finally, Mr Zorin, I remind you that the other day you did we not deny the existence of these weapons.
But today -again, If I heard you correctly -you say that they do not exist, or that we have not proved they exist -and you say this with another fine flood of rhetorical scorn.
I am not in an American courtroom, sir, and therefore I do not wish to answer a question that is put to me in the fashion in which a prosecutor puts questions.
I am prepared to wait for my answer until Hell freezes over, if that Is your decision.
I am also prepared to present the evidence in this room. i Up ocAjRETsyss umr 160.
The photographs were then made available to members for detailed examination in the Trusteeship Room following the meeting.
TOP .^rrRAi -^ut,., stated, was his answer to the question of the United States representative.
It had become clear that Security Council action was impossible since no resolution could escape a veto.
Mr Quaison-Sackey of Ghana recalled that the SYG's appeal to the United States and USSR had been made at the request of some fifty members of the organization and expressed his gratification that It had evokeo/ generally favorable response from both sides.
His understanding of the situation was that ""while refraining from any action which might aggravate the situation, the parties concerned -that is to say the United States, Cuba and the Soviet Union -will avail themselves of the Acting SYG's offer of assistance to facilitate the negotiations on the immediate steps to be taken to remove the existing threat to peace and to normalize the situation in the Caribbean.
V>n r y EyTTCf mr . and to adjourn the meeting was adopted by the Security Council without objection.
The Security Council thus adjourned sine die but remained ""seized"" of the problem while the parties negotiated.
The Planning subcommittee, with members from Defense, State, Justice, CIA, USIA, and the White House, and headed by Walt Rostow, met for the first time on the 24th, and thereafter every day.
A large number of memos on these and related subjects flowed from the subcommittee to the Secretary of State, the Excomm, and the President.
Thursday afternoon an order was issued by the Defense Department stating that the prohibition on surface-to-surface missiles in the Proclamation of Interdiction covered missile propellants and other chemical compounds to power missiles.
Sir All United States embassies were instructed to inform foreign ministries and mariners of this notice.
The Defense Department also issued a notice covering procedure for surfacing and identification of submarines which was relayed to all appropriate countries.
Though the ship was chartered to the Soviet Union, its cargo proved to be innocent and she was permitted to continue on her way.
The intelligence briefing, based largely on the low-level reconnaissance flights, conveyed the somber fact that construction work on the missiles continued unabated.
The Soviets appeared to be seeking full operational capability as rapidly as possible.
There was discussion of the ship interceptions, the quarantine and the line of response to be made to U Thant's proposal.
The President said that our determination to get the missiles out of Cuba remained firm.
Their conduct up to that time, it was felt, amounted to delaying actions and public bluster, accompanied by a few probes and feelers — mostly directed at our allies — aimed at searching out soft spot3 in our position.
The President directed that low-level reconnaissance flights be maintained on a once every two -hour schedule day and night.
A new photograph was selected from the most recent batch, one which provided unmistak able evidence of the missiles in Cuba.
The President also directed Pierre Salinger to make a public statement on the continuation of missile site construction in Cuba.
The Commander of the Atlantic Fleet, Admiral Robert L Dennison, told reporters that Guantanamo could be defended in case of an attack.
Later in the afternoon again the Collangatta, was intercepted by the USS Perry and/allowed to proceed. the afternoon tightened security measures went into effect at the Pentagon.
Salinger's statement on the continuing missile construction activity was read to reporters at 6:15m.
The development of ballistic missile sites in Cuba continues at a rapid pace.
Through the process of continued surveillance, directed by the President, additional evidence has been acquired which clearly reflects that as of Thursday, Oct., defense buildups in these offensive missile sites continued to be made.
The activity at these sites apparently is directed at achieving a full operational capability as soon as possible.
There is evidence that as of yesterday, Oct., considerable construction activity was being engaged in at the intermediate range ballistic missile sites.
Bulldozers and cranes were observed as late as Thursday actively clearing new areas within the sites and improving the approach roads to the launch pad3.
Since Tuesday, Oct., mi ssle -related activities have continued at the medium range ballistic missile sites resulting in progressive refinements at these facilities.
Surveillance on Oct. revealed that some of these same missiles have now moved from their original parked positions.
Cabling can be seen running from missile -ready tent3 to powered generators near-by.
In summary, there is no evidence to date indicating that there is any intention to dismantle or discontinue work on these missile sites.
The letter to Khrushchev was sent on the 25th; the parallel letter to Kennedy the morning of the 26th.
The President's letter of reply was hedged to keep the ball in the other court.
I must inform you, however, that this is a matter of great urgency in view of the fact that certain Soviet ships are still proceeding toward Cuba and the interception area.
I share your hope that Chairman Khrushchev will also heed your appeal and that we can then proceed urgently to meet the requirements that these offensive military systems in Cuba be withdrawn, in order to end their threat to peace.
I must point out to you that present work on these systems is still continuing.
U Thant also served as the channel to Castro, the odd man out in this drama.
Castro's reply came the next day and proved to be a hedged T;~^ ^rrncT Sir \\ji OUu'iiui E YE S 0KL y acceptance.
Read literally , Castro was saying that he would consider the suspension only at the price of ending the quarantine.
Aleksander Fomin, Counselor of the Soviet Embassy in Washington, from time to time had lunch with John Scali, ABC correspondent assigned 26th to the State Department.
The morning of the/Fomin phoned Scali and urgently requested an appointment for lunch.
He pointed out 'that the Cuban delegate in the Security Council had previously asked for such noinvasioi assurances in return for dismantling, but had received no reply.
Scali hastened to the State Department where he met with Roger Hilsman and Secretary Rusk.
The closest to what Fomin had in mind appeared to be the statement by Sr.
A response to Fomin 's offer was prepared by State and cleared at the White House.
Fomin asked several times if this came from high sources and Scali replied that it came from very high sources.
Fomin asked whether it would be possible to have UN inspectors also check American military bases in Florida and surrounding Caribbean countries.
Scali replied that this was a new element and he had no official information.
However, Scali said, he felt it would raise a terrible complication for President Kennedy in a period when time was of the essence.
Fomin said that this information would be communicated to the highest Soviet sources and simultaneously to Zorin, whereupon Fomin left in obvious haste.
At six that evening the State Department telegraph center logged receipt of the first take of a long letter from Khrushchev to the President.
It had been translated by the United States Embassy staff in Moscow before transmittal.
During the next several hours three additional sections of the letter arrived, making fou r takes in all.
It was this letter, which has never been published, that contained the particulars of the Soviet offer that made possible a settlement of the crisis.
The letter was long and like all Khrushchev's correspondence, argumentative.
It repeated the Soviet stock phrases accusing the United States of criminal acts and piracy, and _^ rrr^CX Eras rv.TT.y 176/ TOP SECRET toe oi 1Li — upheld the oft-reiterated Soviet thesis that the missiles in Cuba had a defensive purpose.
However, embedded in the rhetoric were a number of sentences which amounted to a volte face by the Kremlin.
Theywere, however, liable to the interpretation that they constituted an offer to settle the crisis on terms which the United States was willing to accept.
As the letter came in it was given intent scrutiny by Excomm members at State and Defense and by the President.
There were long sections of the letter in which Khrushchev's attitudes did not seem to have deflected from his previous utterances.
He did not spell out clearly and concretely an offer to dismantle and/or remove the missiles from Cuba.
He raised the consideration that Castro's consent would be needed to remove the weapons.
As a condition of the settlement he asked that the United States in effect guarantee the security of the Castro regime — a condition certain to ca/§yfe political difficulties domestically, at least in the long run.
SECKEF ETO 0I7LY ^ 179. elimination of United States bases, or, most importantly, the Jupiters in Italy and Turkey.
Accordingly, a consensus was reached that a reply should be sent to Khrushchev treating the letter as a bona fide offer.
Drafting work on the reply commenced late that night at the State Department and the White House.
Bertrand That evening the President's reply to/ Russell's appeal was sent and made public.
In it Kennedy pressed the theme that it was strange to criticize those who caught the burglars, rather than the burglars themselves.
Grim News, Conflicting Signals Saturday morning began on the high seas.
Two navy ships were ordered to intercept and trail the Soviet ship Grozny, and another was ordered to intercept the Lebanese 180. ship Pella.
The intelligence summary contained the information that work on the missile bases appeared to be continuing.
The discussion then turned to the draft reply to the Khrushchev letter.
At that very moment Radio Moscow was broadcasting the test of a new message from Khrushchev.
Unlike the private letter of the previous evening, this one contained a serious catch.
We agree to do this and to state in the United Nations this commitment.
Khrushchev continued to term the missiles ""defensive"" ""The weapons in Cuba that you have mentioned and which you say alarm you are in the hands of Soviet officers.
At the other side of the world an American U-2 on an air sampling mission in the Arctic accidentally overflew the Chokut peninsula on the eastern part of the USSR, due to navigational difficulties.
Soviet fighters scrambled from a base near Wrangel Island to intercept the stray.
Within another hour one of the low-flying reconnaissance planes encountered artillery and small arms fire from ground stations in Cuba.
In a television broadcast from Havana, Fidel Castro shouted defiance of the United States and vowed to shoot down planes that violated Cuba's air space.
The hopes that had risen from the previous evening's letter were largely dashed.
Instead of an offer, conciliatory in tone, which the United States could honorably accept, the Exomm and President were being asked publicly to bargain away the security ofa close ally and, ■ TOP SLCRET^m 6to ^ 183. with it, a part of NATO's nuclear shield.
Evacuating these bases under duress would call into question the United States commitment to Europe's defenses and could seriously shake the Western alliance.
At the same time it was recognized that Khrushchev's offer had an obvious appeal to many nations, especially the neutrals, and to the people everywhere who were willing to grasp any 3traw to get out of what was widely viewed as a nuclear impasse.
The obvious conflicts in the substance and tone of the Khrushchev messages were puzzling.
Most likely, it was felt, there were competing groups within the Kremlin.
One group viewed the Cuban missile venture as a gamble that failed and was willing to pull ox& ft^flTri-i&kl^^ Biff 1151 ® ln the hope v5V that escalation towards nuclear war would be avoided.
The other, bolder, group considered it worth trying to exact a price for removal of the missiles.
It was also suggested perhaps less seriously, that the Kremlin had not thought at first of linking the missiles with United States overseas bases, but that after this had been suggested by leading v/estern figures such as Walter Lippmann and Austrian Foreign Minister Bruno Kreisky, Khrushchev thought it was worth a try ~ like accept an Odessa merchant who's willing to/ a lower price but wants to see, even as an afterthought, whether he can't squeeze a bit more out of the bargain.
After much discussion a tentative decision was made by the President, He would pick out of the earlier, private Khrushchev letter those sections which provided the basis for a satisfactory solution.
Several Exoomm members assembled at 2:30m. in George Ball's Conference Room.
The problem uppermost in everyone's mind had veered away from the dangers of boarding a Soviet ship at sea to the consequences of having United States reconnaissance planes shot down.
Low level flights were going over Cuba at two-hour intervals night and day.
Detailed consideration was given to the timing and implications of a possible air strike.
At 3:15 the State Department announced the CLEARCERT procedures to enable vessels to transit waters near Cuba without running afoul of the quarantine.
At 3:35 the Pentagon issued a statement explaining the legal and diplomatic basis for the presence of the Jupiters in Turkey pursuant to a NATO Council resolution of December, 1957.
The Defense spokesman also said that one of our U-2's was missing over Cuba and presumed lost, and stated that any interference with our surveillance of Cuba will meet counteraction.
At 4:00m. the President called the Excomm back to the White House to review the proposed replies to Khrushchev.
McNamara reported that two low-level reconnaissance planes flying over Cuba had been fired on by light anti-aircraft and small arms.
After brief discussion the President approved the two messages to Khrushchev.
It was decided to make both public, though the letter would be delayed until later in the evening.
The President decided not to say anything about the accidental U-2 flight over the USSR unless the Soviets publicized it -which they did not do until the next day.
He also ordered further air reconnaissance over Cuba despite the downed U-2 and the reports of ground fire.
It did not shut the door to negotiations on bases — within the context of arms control — but it made plain that no such discussions were possible until the missiles were removed.
After final polishing, the letter to Khrushchev was despatched at 8:05m., having been sent to U Thant half an hour earlier.
The letter was phrased with great care, since it was recognized that it might form part of the contractual basis for a settlement.
As I read your letter, the key elements of your proposals — which seem generally acceptable as I understand them — are as follows: 1) You would agree to remove these weapons systems from Cuba under appropriate United Nations observation and supervision: and undertake, with suitable safe-guards, to halt the further introduction of such weapons systems into Cuba.
Its main purpose was to have the President approve the calling up of 24 Air Force reserve squadrons, which he did.
At the State Department a message was received from U Thant that Zorin had refused to receive information about the reception area.
The Department also received a copy of Castro's reply to U Thant rejecting the proposal that missile bases be dismantled and demanding immediate halt of the quarantine.
During the day approximately 5 million leaflets for Cuba had been printed and loaded into containers.
The Tension Breaks Sunday morning dawned bright and warm in Washington, a glorious fall day.
The city had had an extra hour of sleep due to the return to standard time.
The names of the air force reserve units to be called up were released.
The 5th Marine Expe ditionary Brigade embarked at West Coast ports and headed towards the Caribbean via the Panama Canal.
Radio Moscow announced it would have an important announcement on the hour.
Embassy in Moscow ten minutes after the start of the broadcast — 7:00m. in Moscow.
SECRET %m only 5{r 193. to the Excomm when it convened at the White House at 11.
A reply to this message was prepared, discussed, approved, and sent, without even waiting for an official copy of the message.
SECRET monr 5lr 19*. both our governments which should be promptly carried out.
I hope that the necessary measures can at once be taken through the United Nations as your message says, so that the United States in turn can remove the quarantine measures not •/ in effect.
There was a deep sense of relief in the Excomm, though not without reservations.
The President said that, while the message was welcome news, it contained some disquieting £y 2S oflSY 195.
Cj Lb RET 'Byes owly — elements and, above all, it remained to be implemented.
Obviously, serious hitches could arise in connection with such an operation as dismantling, withdrawal, and inspection of the missiles.
The message had not mentioned the IL-28 bombers; these must be gotten out too.
Khrushchev's reference to ""earlier instructions"" to cease work on the missiles was puzzling, as no such cessation had been observed.
Certainly it was not a time for gloating, nor could one draw general conclusions about the future course of Soviet conduct.
TOP SECnCTma ^ station, until arrangements had been made for adequate inspection.
Nonetheless, the basic tone of the Administration was optimism that morning.
The leaflet dropping operation was suspended. j At 5.00 pm Secretary Rusk met with the Latin American ambassadors to brief them on the latest developments.
At 5.40 a letter was received from U Thant stating his understanding of the agreement that had been reached.
President replied confirming the lines along which a satisfactory settlement could be reached.
Later in the evening the Secretary General informed Castro that he accepted his invitation to go to Cuba with his aides to work out a solution.
Sc.Cu£l 'KVSS ■on™ TOP SECRET^, ^ EPILOGUE The 28th of October was not, of course, the end of the story.
In one sense It was the beginning — of negotiations which ultimately dragged on until the turn of the year.
It soon became evident that the solving the missile crisis did not solve the problem of Castro.
Already on the 28th Castro had issued his ""Statement of Conditions,"" including the demands that the United States cease ""violations of air and naval space"" of Cuba; end ""all measures of commercial and economic pressure;"" and withdraw from the Guantanamo naval base and return it to Cuba.
Unless all hi3 conditions were met, Castro insisted, he would not permit any inspection or verification in Cuba of the missile withdrawal.
It was against this background that U Thant and a party of nineteen, including Brigadier General Rikhye and a small military staff, flew to Havana.
The main subjects in these discussions were the modalities for checking and inspecting the withdrawal of the missiles (and further incoming Soviet shipments to Cuba) ; the role of the International Committee of the Red Cross; the nature of the additional United States and Soviet pledges; the continuation of aerial reconnaissance; and other long-term arrangements.
Mikoyan flew from Moscow to Havana on November 2 in what turned out to be a to fruitless effort to get Castro to agree/on-site inspection.
Meanwhile a highly private exchange of letters was underway between Kennedy and Khrushchev.
It was a continuation of the correspondence exchanged during the week ending the 28th; both leaders indicated that they valued this channel of communication and hoped it could be kept open — and private.
As a result of this correspondence an agreement was reached under which the United States would lift the quarantine and the Soviets would remove the IL-28's.
And, as I said in September, 'we shall neither initiate nor permit aggression in this hemisphere. ,¥ The Soviet Government carried out it3 promise to remove the IL-28's, and by December o informed the United States that all of them had left.
But virtually no progress was made ia acuieving the ""adequate international arrangements for the task of inspection and verification in Cuba"" that the President had mentioned on November 20, and which were part of the original \\Ji Cu-OiiC' EYgg only -t op zxr.zru ^ 5 ^ -202under standing.
Mikoyan's three-hour conversations with the President on November 29 and with Secretary Rusk on the 30th did not advance the discussions significantly.
It became apparent finally that further settlement of the outstanding issues would remain elusive., and in the end a formula to terminate the discussions and to remove the issue from the Security Council's agenda was reached.
It represented a standstill, rather than a final settlement, and to an extent was an agreement to disagree.
On January 7 the two governments sent a Joint letter to the Secretary General which he then transmitted to the Council.
