The Inauguration of John F Kennedy and the Speech That Changed America, by Thurston Clarke.
All of us, even those born after he died, can still see and hear him, brushing his thick chestnut mane, punching the air with a finger, displaying his self-deprecatory wit at a press conference.
In Ask Not, he claims that Kennedy, not Theodore Sorenson, was the “stonemaker and mason” of the inaugural address, one of the great orations by a 20th-century politician.
In his fascinating, almost hour-by-hour narrative of the run-up to the inaugural, Mr Clarke unearths a gold mine for Kennedy fact-fetishists.
To establish Kennedy as the “principal architect” of the inaugural address, Mr Clarke dissects every scrap of available evidence.
But Kennedy’s dictation to Evelyn Lincoln , in which he departed significantly from the text that Mr Sorenson had furnished, as well as the evolution of his “Ask not … ” master sentence from his acceptance speech at the Democratic convention to his inaugural address, has convinced Mr Clarke that the President-elect wrote most of the memorable phrases he uttered 10 days later.
Mr Clarke acknowledges that the intellectual intimacy between Kennedy and Mr Sorenson makes it difficult to know who was responsible for which phrases in any given speech.
Kennedy was an accomplished stylist; he certainly made many changes to the drafts he reviewed.
Burned by charges that Mr Sorenson had ghostwritten Profiles in Courage, Kennedy went out of his way to convince reporters that he himself had written the inaugural.
With a strong will to believe , Mr Clarke pushes aside questions about the documentary record he left behind—or destroyed.
Ask Not provides compelling evidence that Kennedy, at his best, was a poet laureate of politics with few peers among the Presidents.
As Mr Sorenson has said, Kennedy “decided on every word and, more importantly, on every idea” for a speech that inspired a generation and continues to be quoted 40 years after it was delivered.
Kennedy’s reputation, of course, rests most heavily on his handling of the Cuban missile crisis of 1962, the subject of Max Frankel’s mistitled High Noon in the Cold War.
Aware of the massive military superiority of the United States, Khrushchev remained restless and impetuous.
The crisis, Mr Frankel insists, did not bring the world to the brink of nuclear war.
Kennedy and Khrushchev were responsible, rational, intelligent leaders, firmly in charge of their governments and determined to avoid a war.
When his prediction that the Americans “will make a fuss, make more of a fuss, and then accept” the missiles came a cropper, Khrushchev ordered that nuclear weapons not be used even if Cuba was invaded.
He didn’t challenge the United States blockade or retaliate in Berlin, as Kennedy feared, or threaten bases in Turkey.
After he gave his impulse to take out the missiles a reality check, Kennedy rejected the recommendation of the Joint Chiefs for an invasion of Cuba.
Instead, Kennedy ordered a blockade—actually, a “quarantine” aimed only at offensive weapons.
A show of strength and determination, it provided time for negotiations.
To close the deal, we now know, Kennedy promised Khrushchev that if the Soviets removed their offensive weapons from Cuba, he would withdraw Jupiter missiles from Turkey within five months.
By keeping the swap a secret, he preserved the appearance of a totally triumphant United States.
Both leaders found it useful to argue that the Cuban missile crisis had been high noon in the Cold War.
Embattled at home , Khrushchev insisted that, almost singlehandedly, he had saved the world from a nuclear holocaust.
For Kennedy, making the other guy blink while rescuing humanity from the brink was evidence of leadership at its best.
That their prudence, pragmatism and decisiveness helped resolve it—that they were determined, even if “conventional” war broke out, to step back from the brink—doesn’t mean that they could or would have done so under different circumstances.
Accident, miscalculation and mischief often change the dynamic in a crisis, mocking the firmest intentions.
There’s a consensus among those who’ve written about the missile crisis that Kennedy managed it with consummate skill and that Khrushchev, who may not have known when to hold ’em, did know when to fold ’em.
To read our full stories, please turn off your ad blocker.We'd really appreciate it.
For Adblock: Click the AdBlock button on your browser and select Don't run on pages on this domain.
Click the AdBlock Plus button on your browser and select Enabled on this site.
Click the AdBlock Plus button on your browser and select Disable on Observer.com.
