Cet essai constitue une telle réflexion, en grande partie d'une perspective canadienne.
Some aspects of how the crisis was handled politically and some of the related military actions still bother people, and so continued research holds the promise of something new about those events.
Because many details remained classified until the Cold War ended, the initial level of analysis was necessarily shallow, but kept alive by a few excellent first-hand accounts, such as Robert Kennedy’s Thirteen Days.
Yet without an adequate data base of facts there was no way of assessing the reliability of the accounts, especially those covering operations at sea where the absence of information was marked.
And because so much information just was not available to the public, conspiracy theories and suspicions of cover-ups inevitability arose.
Any errors, omissions, or contentious statements remain entirely my responsibility.
For the first time, people began to realize that the events of October and November 1962 really did bring the world to the brink of nuclear war.
Since then, the analysis has continued, but with greater emphasis on details and the actions of individuals, often in a critical way.
In 1993, I entered that fray with an analysis of Canadian involvement in the crisis.
Rather than focus on political factors, as most previous analyses had done, I tried to look at the military involvement as well.
But I was constrained by a lack of some key information, especially concerning Soviet submarine operations.
For this reason, I was always slightly disappointed with my analysis; I was able to explain most Canadian military activities during the crisis, but the necessary context of Soviet submarine operations was missing and this left too many unanswered questions.
Jan Drent’s excellent article on the Soviet submarine operations provided much of the impetus for beginning this essay.
I also had some nagging doubts about the political handling of the situation in Ottawa, especially with respect to nuclear weapons, but that is another story for another day.
Now, a dozen or so years later, new information is available and so it is time to re-visit my original analysis.
Dealing with Unidentified Submarines International law is clear in stating that warships may use the territorial waters of another state for the purposes of innocent passage and, in the case of submarines, that they be on the surface.
That law is not clear, on the other hand, about foreign warships using the contiguous and other adjacent waters of a state.
The 1982 UN Convention of the Law of the Sea addressed some of the lack of precision in the law but did not provide definitive statements or even guidance on the use of the high seas beyond the territorial waters for naval operations.
In 1962, the law was not clear on the use of ocean areas contiguous to territorial waters by foreign submarines in nonwartime situations, and this was a major concern for American and Canadian naval staffs.
The right to attack unidentified submarines lurking offshore had never been a problem in the Second World War when their purpose was unambiguous.
Article 25 gives states the right to suspend innocent passage where exercises are being conducted.
The advent of strategic weapons, essentially nuclear weapons and missiles and their adaptation to submarine use, led to re-appraisal of the policies for dealing with unidentified submarines.
In view of the size of the Soviet submarine fleet and the large proportion of ocean patrol submarines comprising it, it must be considered probable that in the preliminary phase of a nuclear war Soviet submarines will be deployed to positions in Canadian coastal waters from which nuclear armed missiles can be launched against targets within their range to coincide with air attacks on other targets.
To achieve simultaneous attacks by sea and air would necessitate the submarines being sailed some days previously in order to make the transit to their launching positions.
It is conceivable, therefore, that the first indication of the enemy’s war intentions may well be the detection by sound surveillance systems, ships or aircraft of a number of submarines approaching the coasts of Canada.
The proposed change, which reflected the earlier shift in NATO strategy to acknowledge Soviet nuclear capabilities, and which was to be sent to the Cabinet Defence Committee, went on to state that the existing rules were inadequate in light of recent submarine developments.
Recommendations for changes in the rules, however, did not include RCAF maritime patrol aircraft which had become key antisubmarine warfare forces in the integrated concept of maritime defence.
Central to the new procedure was the initial interrogation of the submarine contact to establish its identity where possible, and when it could not be identified positively, and contact was only made acoustically , then it would be deemed “hostile” only if a hostile act was committed.
It seems an operational assumption was that the rules of engagement applied to unidentified submarines found within their theoretical maximum weapons range and to those contacts found closing to within such a distance from shore.
The emphasis, it was stated, was on attempting to make early identification.
The Naval Staff’s strategic logic, however, was not supported completely by the officials of the Department of External Affairs who foresaw political rather than legal problems in the proposal particularly in that part of the definition of “hostile act” concerning non-identification.
Here, they argued, it might be prudent to give the submarine the benefit of the doubt.
Essentially, the view was that sinking a Soviet submarine outside territorial waters on the basis of non-identification paralleled questionable Soviet actions in shooting down unidentified aircraft outside the territorial airspace of their country.
Moreover, External Affairs lawyers and the chairman of the Chiefs of Staff Committee, General Charles Foulkes, believed that the procedure and rules should be consistent with those used by the Americans.
The problem lay in the definition of a “hostile act,” a matter that would remain a highly contentious issue for many years.
The next step was to work with the Americans in drawing up a set of coordinated bilateral rules for dealing with unidentified and hostile submarines in North American waters.
This was done through the Military Cooperation Committee of the Permanent Joint Board on Defense , and in March 1958 draft instructions for “The coordination of Canada-United States ASW operations in defense of North America” were submitted to the Canadian Chiefs of Staff.
Unfortunately, DeWolf’s fairly uncomplicated criteria had been massaged into a broader policy statement that would require further amplification if it was to have any operational value.
The maintenance of surveillance and control of the North American and North Pacific Oceans both before and during war requires the following to be accomplished: A) The acquisition, evaluation and exchange of information concerning the pattern of action by non-friendly submarines within the setting of the international situation as it may exist at any time.
C) After the outbreak of war, the detection and destruction of enemy submarines.
The proposal continued in establishing the responsibilities for developing operational plans and procedures including a concept for avoiding mutual interference between Canadian and American submarines.
After the usual discussion, the proposal was concurred in by the Chiefs of Staff who directed that interlocking national plans be drawn up.
This was done, and the Chiefs of Staff reviewed the new national plan on 28 August 1956.
Slemon, were concerned that the plan did not provide enough guidance but they accepted the necessity of such limitations in striking a balance between American and Canadian requirements.
The Chiefs of Staff also debated, at length, the political implications of attacking missilefiring submarines when the location of the target was not known.
Eventually, the decision on approving the plan was deferred pending further review by the Naval Staff.
In April 1959, the Naval Board reviewed a draft of the “Canada-United States Rules of Engagement for Defense Against Submarines” passed on from the Chiefs of Staff Committee.
Not surprisingly, there were reservations to the proposal; documents prepared under political constraints seldom meet all operational requirements.
Also not surprisingly, one of the contentious areas was the definition of a “hostile submarine” which the draft rules had left to “competent shore authorities” to define rather than to the operational commanders who naturally wanted to keep the decision at the operational level to prevent valuable time being wasted.
Also, there was concern that the precise criteria for deeming a submarine “hostile” needed to be spelled out very clearly because there could be no room for doubt.
On top of this, the admirals rightly wanted a mechanism for requiring that a submarine identify itself.
Revisions were made and the new set of rules were approved by the Canadian Chiefs of Staff on 28 January 1960, and forwarded to the minister of National Defence for approval before being sent back to the MCC for discussion in the bilateral arena.
The rules duly came back with further amendments, and the Chiefs of Staff yet again fiddled with the text.
The audit trail is rather difficult to follow because the various files are not complete in themselves and so one is left to garner information from a series of files.
Also, because this subject dealt with Canada-US relations much of the material has not yet been de-classified in Canada.
A copy cannot be found now and so the key issue of how Canadian forces were to demand that a suspected non-friendly submarine identify itself remains unclear.
However, the use of five small explosive charges in quick succession became the adopted practice to call a submarine to the surface within NATO and for Canada-US forces.
On 24 October 1962, the United States State Department sent a telegram to the US Embassy in Moscow telling the Ambassador to inform the Soviet government that the US Navy would use a procedure to have unidentified submarine contacts come to the surface.
This sonar signal is normally made on underwater communications equipment in the 8 KC frequency range.
Submerged submarines, on hearing this signal, should surface on an easterly course.
As the various accounts written by the captains of the four “Foxtrots” of their confrontation with the United States Navy attest, they were completely surprised by the use of sound signals and believed they were under attack.
The Soviet government’s rejection of the advisory note on the surfacing procedures was dangerous if not reckless, especially as it left the submarine captains unsure of what to do under the circumstances which also led them to consider using their nuclear torpedoes in self-defence.
A controversy still exists over whether the “Foxtrot” captains would have used their nuclear torpedoes in self-defence.
According to Svetlana Savranskaya, one commanding officer believed he was being attacked by something more powerful than a grenade.
Unable to reach his higher authority by radio, he discussed the situation with his political officer and second-in-command and wisely decided against using that weapon.
Even though the Americans used “scare” grenades to bring the “Foxtrots” to the surface and identify themselves there are no Soviet accounts of this procedure.
Those submarines that came to the surface did so because of mechanical problems.
As the navigating officer of a submarine during that period and later in the same capacity in a Canadian destroyer, I know that the use of five scare charges was routine during exercises.
On return to Murmansk, the commanding officers and Brigade staff were interrogated and for a while there was concern that they would be severely punished for compromising the mission by surfacing to correct defects.
In summary, it appears that the Soviet submarines were unaware of the standard NATO and Canada-US surfacing and identification procedures and they attempted to remain covert for as long as possible in accordance with their initial sailing orders.
That they misinterpreted the “scare” charges for depth charges and were thus forced to contemplate action for self-defence is troubling.
However, the refusal of their government to accept the advance notification of that procedure is even more troubling.
The Soviet submarine captains were mere political pawns left to manage a very difficult situation without adequate orders or command and control systems.
That the Soviet Navy stayed much closer to home for the next few years is probably the result of this dangerous and humiliating situation.
The Soviet Submarine Threat The problem with the submarines is that no one, save the Russians of course, knows exactly how many Soviet submarines eventually took part in Operation “Anadyr” or were already on patrol in North American waters in October and November 1962.
Without knowing the exact numbers, one cannot determine the potential threat (as a function of both actual capabilities and Soviet intentions) posed by those submarines with any accuracy, but that does not mean that we cannot re-examine what we do know and see if the submarine threat can be assessed with greater accuracy.
There are two underlying problems in trying to throw more light on the Soviet submarine aspects of the crisis.
First, the Russians have yet to open the Soviet Navy archives and so all we really have are a few first-hand accounts some of which could possibly have been produced for a western audience and embellished accordingly.
Second, in the early 1960s Western intelligence estimates of Soviet submarine capability were generally poor.
This was a systemic problem going back to the period immediately after the war when the West had seriously over-assessed the Soviet submarine capability in thinking that the Soviets would be very quick to exploit the technology acquired from Germany in 1945.
In reality, it took the Soviets until the early 1950s to begin exploiting the technology available through the German type-XXI and type-XXIII submarines.
By 1958, the various Soviet shipyards were in full production with a family of good, ocean-going diesel-electric submarines some of which could fire relatively shortrange missiles.
The first nuclear-powered submarine was launched in 1958 and additional hulls followed fairly quickly, but it took the Soviets about five more years to exploit that technology fully.
The first Soviet SSN, K-3 Leninsky Komsomol, was commissioned in July 1958 and in June 1962 deployed under the ice to the North Pole.
The Americans, in the USS Nautilus, had made a similar historic voyage almost four years before.
Those numbers included many obsolete submarines as well as a number of small, coastal submarines, and the important difference between ballistic and cruise missile-firing submarines was not made.
Not having those numbers broken down by class or type, and thus by operational capability, makes it hard to calculate what the Soviets could have deployed into the western North Atlantic in October 1962.
To re-create the effective Soviet long-range submarine capability in the fall of 1962 we need to look elsewhere.
Although the overall numbers of submarines given in Jane’s Fighting Ships varied considerably from year to year through the 1960s they provide a reasonably consistent estimate by type.
The subsequent triumph, as the Soviets heralded it, of the Leninsky Komsomol making it safely to the North Pole was used as a way of showing that nuclear propulsion technology had been made safe.
A Soviet Zulu-class submarine; at least two of this class were on patrol in North American waters before the start of the crisis.
Measuring effective submarine strength is difficult and is usually only done for a specific moment in time rather than as a generalization.
All we are interested in here are those submarines capable of crossing the Atlantic covertly in the Fall of 1962 which essentially means that they came from the Northern Fleet and were “Zulu” and “Foxtrot” patrol submarines.
Despite United States Navy SOSUS analysis up to and including 27 October that there was no evidence of nuclear powered or missile firing submarines,24 I am reluctant to completely discount their presence because there is no solid evidence from Western sources that they were not there.
The approximate distance from Soviet Northern Fleet bases to a hypothetical patrol station off Chesapeake Bay is 4,500 nautical miles and to Cuba is 5,500 nautical miles.
Had they waited another two years to try to implement their Cuban strategy it might have been a very different situation.
Soviet Submarine Operations in the Atlantic and Caribbean We now know from Russian accounts of the crisis that Moscow started planning for the build-up of military forces in Cuba in July 1962 and that those forces would include more than just defence forces to hold off the anticipated American invasion and boost Cuba’s defences; they would also provide a strategic deterrent force in the region.
In its original form, Operation “Anadyr” called for a large fleet of surface ships, mainly coming from the Baltic Fleet, and a composite squadron of four “Foxtrot”class submarines and a “division” of seven “Golf”-class missile-firing submarines, some support ships, and a floating dock.
The plan was that the submarines would deploy covertly and rendezvous with the surface vessels in an area south of Bermuda (an area the Soviets referred to as the Sargasso Sea26) to conduct a fleet exercise openly; presumably as a “show of force” for the benefit of the Americans.
The part of the Sargasso Sea lying immediately around Bermuda later became a patrol area for the Soviet “Yankee”-class SSBNs and thus an area of strategic concern for the Americans.
On 6 October 1986, a “Yankee”-class submarine caught fire in the Bermuda operating area after an explosion in one of the missile tubes and sank with the loss of four lives.
Curiously, perhaps, the crews of the four “Foxtrots” did not know why the decision was made.
The addition of the nuclear torpedoes added complications to an already complex operation.
It had become a temporary deployment rather than the permanent one originally planned.
We do not know why the plan was changed or why it suddenly became a covert operation.
The passage to Cuba, which was to be made over the following 30 days, was to be done covertly and part of the mission was to protect the Soviet merchant ships, especially the Alexandrovsk and the Indigiraka carrying nuclear warheads for the land-based missiles.
The revised plan also made provision for one “November”-class SSN, also with a nuclear torpedo, to accompany the formation, but apparently this was cancelled at the last minute.
In addition, a “Zulu”-class submarine already on station on North American waters, and carrying two nuclear torpedoes, described as “reconnoitring the American coast to the area south of Bermuda,” was assigned to the protection of the high-value transports.
The real surprise for the West in this information has been the presence of the nuclear torpedoes; at the time we had absolutely no idea that the Soviet submarines were carrying nuclear weapons.
The weather was not good because Hurricane Ella has passed through that area four days before making ASW operations more difficult than usual.
Meeting the United States Navy in force was a surprise for the Soviets, but before long they were able to figure out what was going on.
They could intercept not 27 M Zakharov and V Fokin, “Initial Plans for Soviet Navy Activities in Support of Operation Anadyr” , 18 September, 1962, attachment to Burr and Blanton, The Submarines of October.
Report on the Progress of Operation Anadyr,” 25 September 1962; attachment to Burr and Blanton, The Submarines of October.
Moreover, Soviet Navy headquarters later ordered a change in the deployment which held the submarines at sea rather than sailing to Cuba.
This exposed them to the full force of United States Navy ASW operations for the next two weeks during which three of the four “Foxtrots” were forced to the surface.
Eventually, they left the area and got back to their home base in Polyarnyy at the end of December but not without further encounters with the United States Navy as they made their way northward.
Operationally, it was a humiliating defeat for the Soviets; they were unable to conduct covert operations against the Americans and had great difficulty evading the ASW forces once they had made contact.
This was a major failure in a capability vital to their overall strategy.
Afterwards, Captain Ketov drew some interesting observations as a result of the operation First, all detections of submarines in these regions were made by ASW aircraft while the boats were either snorkeling at periscope depth, or holding communications sessions while operating under electric motors.
Third, the submarines were detected visually with the support ASW airplanes or helicopters sent to the region from shore-based command points or surface ships.
Finally, the submarines that were forced to come to the surface, submerged after having recharged their batteries and managed to break away from the United States Navy's ASW aircraft and surface ships in pursuit, after which they were not detected anew.
In other words, American and thus NATO concepts of ASW operations, especially the dependence on maritime aviation for initial detection and localization, were effective.
Unaware that they were at a distinct operational advantage, the Soviets had routinely stationed submarines along the Eastern Seaboard of the North America since the late 1950s, and these deployments had been monitored by American and Canadian forces over the years.
As with the Soviet fishing fleets and the electronic intelligence-gathering vessels , the major concern was their use of American and Canadian territorial waters.
Although the submarines generally stayed out of those waters, they occasionally came very close when they met up with the Soviet fishing fleet and the ELINTs to replenish and possibly use them as communications links.
The fishing fleets invariably worked close to the outer limits of American and Canadian territorial waters because that was where the best catches were to be had.
There is no reason to believe that any of the 32 This is a very short summary of Captain Ketov’s account of the deployment in which he tells a tale of uncertainty, discomfort, apprehension, and occasionally fear as they tried to stay away from the United States Navy under very difficult conditions.
Sonar contact was never lost,” CTG 136. message O 310034 October 1962, attachment to Burr and Blanton, The Submarines of October.
Because the Americans started to deploy their ballistic missile-firing submarines in the autumn of 1962, the Soviets felt it necessary to respond in kind but did not do so until after the Cuban crisis.
One of the reasons for the American deployments was a simple reflection of the belief that the Soviets would try the Cuba gamble again despite the agreement reached after the 1962 crisis.
HMCS Bonaventure had to return to Canadian waters at economical speed and so missed much of the search for the Soviet submarines.
Western navies were just beginning to understand the more complex aspects of sound propagation through water and the effect on sound propagation of temperature layers in the ocean.
The traditional Second World War sonar equipment only transmitted and received sound waves along the surface layer and the ships were virtually blind to submarines operating below the temperature layer.
Research after the war proved that moving transducers below the layer vastly improved detection potential.
Both the initial detection of submarines and the localization of detected targets was usually done with passive sonobuoys, if possible to prevent the submarine becoming aware that it was being tracked.
In 1962, sonobuoys were the main sensor used to search for, localize, and track underwater contacts and to attack designated hostile submarines.
SOSUS relied on strings of hydrophones laid in cables along the sea bed to detect noises generated by submarines and surface vessels.
Although SOSUS had good detection ranges, directional accuracy was limited.
As a result, maritime patrol aircraft would respond to SOSUS contacts and attempt to localize and identify contacts using sonobuoys.
This procedure was relatively effective in 1962, infinitely more so than the ship-borne transducers which had short ranges and could not operate below the layer.
Variable depth sonar transducers were eventually fitted to escorts which allowed them to conduct ASW over a much greater area but success in attacking an enemy submarine was a function of the range of the ASW weapons.
In this, the helicopter became both a sensor and a stand-off ASW weapon.
Although Washington shared the intelligence with Ottawa, Canadian analysts often re-assessed American intelligence using additional input from the embassy in Havana.
In September 1962 the Canadian Joint Intelligence Committee examined the movement of weapons to Cuba,36 but for some reason the situation did not become a Canadian political concern until the crisis became public on 22 October.
In the United States, concern deepened by mid-October as intelligence and aerial surveillance made it clear that medium-range ballistic missile sites were being built in Cuba.
The US military quietly began planning for a blockade of Cuba (this would be downgraded to a pacific quarantine later) and for offensive operations against the island; the latter under the guise of an amphibious exercise.
At the time, though, the full extent of the Soviet military deployment was unknown.
In conjunction, maritime surveillance was stepped up, primarily to find the merchant ships carrying military equipment and personnel to the island, and also in case the Soviets attempted to deploy submarines into the Caribbean.
In the fall of 1962 there may have been two or three Soviet submarines on patrol in North American and Caribbean waters, the “Zulu”-class submarine diverted to 35 Sonobuoys provide both a deployable acoustical signal source and reception of underwater signals of interest.
These received signals are transmitted to any monitoring unit that then process the signal for analysis, classification of any target, and recording on magnetic tape media for replay and post event analysis.
The others present an analytical problem because the Russians have not yet said anything about them and so we have to rely on American and Canadian operational analysis records.
Also, because of the Soviet propensity for compartmentalizing information, the captains of the four “Foxtrots” would not necessarily have known about other Soviet submarines in the North American theatre; the Brigade Commander might have known though.
In all probability, the four “Foxtrots” would have been routed in such a way as to avoid mutual interference.
An RCN destroyer in heavy seas; for much of the time the ships sought the Soviet submarines in rough seas.DND photo, courtesy Maritime Command Museum, Halifax.
The problem was that North American bilateral surveillance systems were not able to provide complete coverage of the western Atlantic.
The SOSUS system was still in its infancy and adequate libraries of acoustic signatures had yet to be built-up and the existing archives were not completely accurate.
Maritime aircraft conducted routine patrols of the seaward approaches to the continent and investigated possible submarine contacts gained by SOSUS as well as investigating the numerous sightings of submarinelike objects.
Strategic ASW was still in a very formative stage and the full political implications of nuclear-armed Soviet submarines “lurking” off the North American 39 CTG 81. message “Appreciation of SOSUS activity in western Atlantic from 230001Z to 271300Z,” P 271645 October 1962, attachment to Burr and Blanton, The Submarines of October.
Without reliable intelligence on the intended movements of Soviet submarines, the American and Canadian military watched for changes in deployment and detection patterns.
One or two submarines on patrol off-shore were expected but any change in that pattern or the appearance of additional submarines and/or Soviet fleet auxiliaries in mid-Atlantic was cause for immediate concern and quickly led to increased surveillance, usually by aircraft working directly with the SOSUS system.
The first indication of a higher-than-normal level of Soviet submarine activity in the North Atlantic came on 13 October when a submarine was sighted in the Caribbean.
Suspicions were raised higher by the arrival in the western Atlantic of the Soviet Northern Fleet auxiliary oiler Terek later that week.
Soviet submarines were known to rendezvous with the electronic intelligence-gathering trawlers and use oilers like the Terek to refuel and get other supplies during their North American patrols.
The problem was to find them because they often took shelter within the various fishing fleets using North American waters.
Rear-Admiral Ken Dyer, commander of the Canadian Atlantic Fleet, agreed to do this as it was within his terms of reference to increase surveillance at sea without political approval.
It is almost certain that some of this had been discussed between Dyer’s and Taylor’s staffs by phone earlier that week because the tempo of RCAF ocean surveillance, which came under Dyer’s operational control, had been increased the day before.
I will come back to these and other command relationship later as they are important, and understanding them clears up a few entrenched myths.
On 17 October, an RCAF Canadair Argus patrol aircraft gained contact with a possible Soviet submarine well to the West of the Azores, and contact was held sporadically for the next three days but without getting proof of identity.
Meanwhile the four “Foxtrot”-class submarines in the area between the Windward 40 By plotting the various submarine contact positions and calculating speeds of advance, it is possible that the contact made by the RCAF on 17 October was the same submarine sighted alongside Terek on 22 October.
It would make sense to order the submarine already on patrol in the WESTLANT area to rendezvous with the fleet oiler and replenish fuel and other stores prior to a potentially longer patrol at a higher operational tempo.
Occasional contact was also made with the Soviet submarine operating in the Caribbean as it moved closer to Cuba.
From recent Russian accounts this submarine could not have been any of the four “Foxtrots” as they were too far to the northeast, a fact confirmed by subsequent analysis.
So, as the crisis unfurled, it seemed that there were possibly six or seven Soviet submarines in North American waters; one or two in the area north of Bermuda and five in the general Caribbean area.
Trying to clarify the submarine situation in the area north of Bermuda is very much more difficult because of the total lack of Soviet information.
Yet, it is a puzzle that needs to be solved because of the conflicting contact assessments.
While SOSUS conditions in the Caribbean were reported as being “good,” nothing specific was said about the northern area, but from the various contact reports it would appear that the acoustic conditions were not as good as the area to the south.
Irrespective of the weather conditions, greater reliance was usually placed on SOSUS and aerial surveillance using sonobuoys.
Although we now have a pretty good understanding of ASW operations in the Caribbean as a result of American and Russian narratives, operations in the Canadian area need to be reconstructed to see if the data provides any new information.
Canadian ASW Operations A logical point of departure to re-look at Canadian ASW operations is the sighting of the “Zulu”-class submarine alongside the fleet auxiliary, Terek, on 22 October.
Those who participated in the operations in the Canadian area agree that this was the start of the ASW side of the crisis.
There are accounts of a second submarine sighting in the general area north of the Azores two days later, but they were never substantiated.
It is far more likely that the “Zulu”-class sighted on 22 October returned to its patrol station off the northeastern seaboard after replenishing from Terek.
If this was so, then the contact gained and held intermittently by RCAF Argus aircraft from 26 to 29 October was the same submarine – the speed of advance was a steady five knots which is realistic, but it cannot be given any classification higher than “possible” because it was never sighted, contact was only maintained acoustically.
Contact was lost on the 29th at the same time as all the submarines, even those in the Caribbean went silent as the crisis reached its most dangerous point.
However, contact was gained on another possible submarine late on 2 November as it tried to seek shelter in the Soviet fishing fleet working Georges Bank in the Gulf of Maine.
The location of this new contact was consistent with the projected speed of advance of the contact held earlier and, more significantly, it made absolute sense for a submarine to seek out the fishing fleet and replenish from the tanker Atlantika which was also there.
That some Soviet fishing vessels tried to drive off Canadian destroyers attempting to pin down the submarine seems to increase the level of probability.
This contact was in the same general area as the ELINT trawler Shkval which had been sighted on 29 October.
The RCAF was also involved in the United States Navy’s ASW barrier established between Newfoundland and the Azores on 27 October.
Once the barrier was in place the United States Navy had to ask Canada for help in providing air cover (in a “pouncer” role while also providing additional surveillance coverage) for the patrol area furthest from Newfoundland because the United States Navy’s Lockheed P2V Neptune patrol aircraft did not have the necessary endurance to maintain a useful patrol there whereas the RCAF Argus did.
Although the barrier’s main purpose was to catch submarines in transit between their home bases and patrol areas, concern existed that a missile-firing “Zulu”-or “Golf”--class might be in the area and might attempt to close to firing range .42 The planned response in such situations was to arm the patrol aircraft with a nuclear depth bomb to be used as a countermeasure of last resort if a submarine attempted to launch missiles.
Contact had also been made with several other possible Soviet submarines, but these did not have the same degree of reliability.
For instance, on 30 October the commander of RCAF maritime air forces, Air Commodore Clements, informed the chief of the Air Staff that even though the view from Ottawa was that the crisis was practically over, the submarines had not left the area.
In his own words, “there have been 5 positive, two highly probable, and 4 possible submarines in Western Atlantic in last week.
When Paul Hellyer became minister of National Defence in April 1963 he attempted to solve some of these problems but his reorganization and subsequent 42 The acoustic signatures of the “Zulu,” “Foxtrot,” and “Golf” classes were similar because of a common propulsion system.
Going back over the data, I find that over the period of the crisis submarine contacts fall into four distinct groups and areas • First, in the area between Bermuda and the Windward Passage where the four “Foxtrots” were held before returning to their Northern Fleet base and were found by the United States Navy.
There are reports of a fifth submarine in that area, but they were never confirmed by visual sighting.
The role of Shkval is still puzzling; at the peak of the crisis she was near the submarine off the Cape Hatteras and immediately afterwards headed north to the area of the United States Navy’s ASW barrier and also to the submarine held down on Georges Bank by the Canadian Navy.
It might seem that Shkval and perhaps other ELINT trawlers had a more direct operational support role for the predeployed submarines and that, as the crisis turned into a debacle for the Soviet Navy after 29 October, the task of those vessels was to help the submarines extricate themselves from contact and get home.
The evidence, albeit circumstantial, points to this being the same submarine sighted alongside Terek to the northeast of the Azores on 22 October.
If this is correct, it could not have been B-75, which leads to the conclusion that there were at least two Soviet submarines on patrol in the Eastern Seaboard before the crisis began.
As I stated earlier, there were many more reports of contact with unidentified submarines, some little more than fleeting contact and others that were held for significant periods.
At one stage, SOSUS claimed to have held no less than 26 different contacts; some were later proved to be United States Navy submarines and others were confirmed to be either marine noise or fishing vessels.
After that, there were 16 “possible” contacts mainly based on single or short-term detections.
The submarine held by the Canadian Navy off George’s Bank was not mentioned because it was primarily a report on United States Navy ASW operations, but correlates with the “Zulu”-class found with Terek.
In retrospect, it does not appear that there were twelve Soviet submarines deployed in the northwest Atlantic and Caribbean during the crisis as we originally thought.
The evidence seems to say that there were certainly six submarines and possibly a seventh.
We will not know for certain until the Russians open the Soviet Navy archives.
First, the implications of a greater number of Soviet submarines in North American waters were recognized early and an appropriate response made without delay; this action was well within the terms of reference of the respective commanders.
Steps were taken quickly to resolve ambiguities, where possible, and sufficient units were moved into the key areas to provide both a deterrent presence and a credible attack force.
Not only was this the role for which American and Canadian maritime forces had trained, but it was also a classic use of sea power in a crisis management situation.
That the Americans and Canadian worked together so effectively is confirmation of the soundness of the bilateral maritime defence plans.
Second, the Soviet submarine capability was not as fearsome as portrayed by the intelligence community; but this was not known until long after the crisis.
More troubling now is the knowledge that they were equipped with nuclear weapons.
Had this been known at the time, one has to wonder if ASW operations would have been conducted differently.
This question cannot be answered easily; responses existed for missiles fired from submarines but there was a distinct difference between merely having those weapons on board and actually firing them.
A torpedo presents a different and more difficult problem because the actual launch may not be easily observed and then there is no way of knowing exactly what type of warhead is fitted.
Third, that the Soviets went home with their tails between their legs represented a crushing blow to their naval prestige and it would be five years before they ventured anywhere near Cuba again, and then only with great caution.
Suggestions have also been made that the way in which the Canadian military as a whole responded to the crisis constituted a serious breach in civil control of the military; this too is a story for another time.
Alternatively, Dyer’s actions in coming to the assistance of the United States Navy in seeking out the Soviet submarines have been upheld as courageous.
Yet, doubt exists as to whether the 1962 crisis really was the RCN’s finest hour of the Cold War as popular history frequently contends.
These are important issues and to make sense of them we need to relook at military command structures and the bilateral defence organization as they existed in the autumn of 1962.
First, the crisis was just that, an international situation which deteriorated to crisis level but never to the point of becoming a war, and a formal emergency was never declared.
NATO and Canadian national emergency procedures had been under review for several years and in September 1962 the first NATO-generated simulation exercise, FALLEX 62, was conducted.
This proved that although much was right with the new procedures, a lot of work remained to be done.
It provided authority for specific actions and provided guidance on how to put the country on a war footing.
The problem was that it was based on a slowly deteriorating international situation precipitated by Soviet initiatives in Western Europe.
Second, contrary to conclusions drawn in some earlier analyses, the crisis was never managed under the NATO command and control systems; instead, a blend of Canada-United States bilateral and national procedures was used throughout.
Canadian war plans developed over the previous three years were not invoked.
For instance, established procedures such as those for the employment of Canadian forces in the event of a nuclear war approved by the Chiefs of Staff Committee on 17 March 1961 did not apply.
Similarly, instructions for the Planning and Control of Joint/Combined Operations of Canadian Forces in the Defence of North America, which had a complete “Defence from Attack from the Sea” Annex did not apply because those instructions were predicated on NATO taking overall control of those operations.
The History of the Canadian Navy (Toronto: McClelland & Stewart, 1999), 290.
The Bilateral Defence Organization49 It has often been claimed that the bilateral maritime defence structure should have come under closer political oversight in the same way that NORAD became political.
A counter-argument is that it was neither intended originally nor necessary for NORAD to become politicized.
Why such a significant difference in political and public perception existed between NORAD and its maritime equivalent has puzzled many people.
There is no precise answer; one theory holds that whereas NORAD is concerned with territory and clearly established boundaries, the maritime situation involves only the less-contentious high seas outside territorial waters.
As those who have studied the origins of Canada-US defence plans understand, their birth was not easy because of the very different military-political cultures of the two countries.
For instance, a potentially destructive impasse emerged in the early stages of planning and was not resolved until a carefully engineered joint public statement was made simultaneously in Washington and Ottawa on 12 February 1947.50 At that time the process by which contingency plans would be developed in Canada was clarified.
There would be a clear distinction between the Basic Security Plan and its specific functional appendices on the one hand and the implementation of those plans on the other hand.
The BSP was considered a war plan and as such only its actual implementation required political approval because the plan was drawn up without any commitment of forces or other assets.
Subordinate plans and any subsequent revisions could therefore be “agreed” by the respective Chiefs of Staff organizations because those plans neither made nor implied actual force or financial commitments.
This process was helped enormously by the development in September 1947 of logical contingency planning criteria by the Military Cooperation Committee which then allowed planning to progress on a more even keel.
In fact, the whole joint planning process gained a great deal more focus, and the politicians came to realize that it was not intended to remove their traditional and necessary right of exercising political control over the military affairs of the nation; rather, it would establish procedures for military coordination and improve readiness.
Apart from the NORAD Agreement needlessly becoming a political “hot potato,” the family of bilateral contingency plans would have remained under exclusive military management until such time as forces had to be committed to hostilities when political approval would be needed.
In the autumn of 1962, a comprehensive series of bilateral contingency plans existed and these had been carefully structured to be interoperable with national contingency and basic operations plans.
So, when faced with an evolving operational problem in the western Atlantic that had nothing to do with NATO (because the Americans chose to treat the situation as a national threat) the question of how to integrate American and Canadian ASW surveillance operations did not became an issue.
COMASWFORLANT in the United States and COMARLANT in Canada to deal with the Atlantic with a parallel structure on the Pacific through COMTHIRDFLT and COMMARPAC respectively.
From a Canadian perspective, each maritime commander had a very clearly defined geographic area of responsibility with precise instructions on what he could and could not do in various situations in those areas.
The corresponding area of American responsibility extended north to 40 degrees of north latitude but further out into the North Atlantic.
The point here is that until such time as a formal emergency, or national crisis, or a war was declared, Fleet Commanders, as Senior Officers in Chief Command, had extensive authority to conduct operations in the areas for which they were responsible.
Thus, for the military, it was important to establish the operational command criteria early in a developing situation.
Dyer (as both a Fleet and a Maritime Commander) was accountable to the CNS, Vice-Admiral Rayner, who was in turn accountable to the minister, Douglas Harkness.
The chairman of the Canadian Chiefs of Staff Committee was not part of the operational command structure at that time.
Dyer’s task was complicated by the fact that he also had to coordinate operations with his United States Navy counterparts to ensure maximum information flow and, as importantly, to avoid mutual interference where Canadian and American units were operating together or in close proximity.
This was not difficult; Canadian and United States naval and maritime air forces exercised combined ASW procedures frequently.
In many ways, the ships and aircraft of the two countries were more comfortable working with each other than with NATO warships, save for the Royal Navy which remained the Canadian “mother” service despite a marked trend to home-grown training and operational procedures.
Today, one would say that the maritime forces of the United States and Canada had developed a high degree of interoperability, especially in antisubmarine operations.
In fact, bilateral procedures were almost identical to Canadian national procedures other than for the command structure which ensured that Canadian ships remained under overall Canadian control.
That little post-exercise analysis took place and that little was even said about the exercise afterwards is perhaps not as remarkable in hindsight as some believe.
Operationally, it was just another incident involving Soviet submarines outside Canadian territorial waters.
The crisis was largely political even though those submarines presented a potential threat.
Yet, no formal alerts were issued; rather, operational readiness was 54 QRCN, Article 41.01.
Elsewhere in QRCN, responsibilities for training, conducting exercises, and maintaining routine surveillance were assigned to Maritime Commanders.
Operationally, this meant that the Maritime Commanders controlled both RCN and RCAF ships and maritime aircraft.
In all of this, Dyer acted prudently and completely within the established criteria for exercising operational command of RCN and RCAF units assigned to him.
What is absolutely clear though is that in responding quickly to an uncertain but potentially threatening situation, the RCN and the RCAF performed well.
They conducted complex ASW operations in conjunction with the United States Navy as well as could be expected under difficult circumstances.
One, we still don’t know exactly how many submarines were on patrol in North American waters before the four “Foxtrots” sailed in early October.
Two, procedures for dealing with potentially hostile submarines found in North American waters were tactically sound but inherently difficult politically.
It would be interesting to know how the politicians would have dealt with the RCN prosecution of the Soviet submarine found on Georges Bank had they been asked to approve those actions.
Three, we can only speculate in what ways the Canada-US response to the Soviet submarines would have been different had we known about the nuclear torpedoes.
HMS/M Alderney of the Royal Navy's Sixth Submarine Division in Halifax deployed early in the crisis to find the Soviet submarines.
The submarine is shown here after a particularly rough trans-Atlantic crossing in January 1962.
Joint ASW Operations” of my original analysis and from the messages exchanged between Halifax and Ottawa that are included in the book.
If there is still criticism of Canadian command and control procedures, then we need to look at the political level.
Those who remain sceptical or critical of the CanadaUS response to the Soviet submarines should bear in mind that the procedures in place in late 1962 were very different to those of today.
To assess the appropriateness, or even legality, of 1962 ASW procedures one needs to do so from the position of the 1962 concepts and not those of today.
They are all classic examples of the fact that modern navies are superbly versatile political instruments always ready to do the bidding of their political masters in any corner of the world at short notice.
Armies and Air Forces cannot make that claim; navies are unique in this respect.
In summary, what we can say is that in the fall of 1962 the RCN and the RCAF Maritime Air Group rose to a challenge and carried out the various tasks for which they had trained in an exemplary manner.
The programme includes a balanced mix of established and emerging scholars, offering many papers on themes such as early charts and navigation of the North Atlantic, seventeenth-century naval rivalry and early colonization, naval operations during the siege of Quebec in 1759, commercial and naval shipbuilding in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries, and transatlantic steamship service.
With the Naval Reserve of the Canadian Navy headquartered on Quebec’s lower town waterfront within easy walking distance of the conference venue, two sessions of the conference will be dedicated to an historical appreciation of Canada’s Naval Reserve and the naval presence in Quebec, and certain of the conference activities will be held in the Naval Reserve facilities.
Artfully displayed artifacts throughout the hotel provide a fascinating glimpse into the life of Quebec's first inhabitants.
The Auberge Saint-Antoine has created a succession of 94 stunning rooms, many offering a view on the St Lawrence River, others of Quebec's renowned fortifications or the Musée de la civilisation.
