Since that fateful day of October 14, 1962 when an American U-2 photoreconnaissance plane captured photographic proof of Soviet missile bases under construction in Cuba, differing views and ideas have been deciphered and written by historians, political scientists, and students of international relations as to what went wrong and why secretive Nikita Khrushchev’s ill-fated operation happened in the first place in America’s backyard without prior knowledge of the United States president, the United States intelligence services, and American public.
From its inception in 1776 when courageous and heroic American men and women proclaimed their inalienable rights to self determination from the forces of colonial England, the government and people of the United States never imagined Weapons of Mass Destruction would be hauled 7,000 miles all the way from the shores of communist adversary U.S.S.R and assembled a distance spanning ninety nautical miles from Florida on the shores of modern-day Cuba.
American global political estrangement boosted Soviet leaders’ ill-conceived and detrimental willpower which consequently tremendously accelerated their convoluted ideological foundations across the globe undeterred.
For several decades, there have been conflicting political, social, and economic rifts between the leaders of the United States on one side and those of Cuba and the U.S.S.R on the other.
Working in concert with host nations besieged by European domination, colonialism, and imperialism-nations whose inexperienced lackadaisical leaders attached great value to Leninist-Marxist ideologythe Soviets, through reckless dissemination of propaganda and rigorous deception, conscientiously exploited every conceivable economic fiber of these retarded nations.
Post Comments A REBUTTAL TO A MISGUIDED COLONIAL ANTHROPOLOGIST December 9, 2021 By Deeq Yusuf & Adan Makina Recently, we came across a widely circulated YouTube video that was on the concept of feder... .image { width: 100%; } JINNI IYO INSI IYO SHEEKO JACEYL Nin Insi ahaa ayaa wuxuu qabay labo haween ah oo mid ay aheyd Insi, ta kalena, Jinni.
THE BEST CHARACTERISTICS OF A MODERN ORGANIZATION The characteristics of a modern organization are multi-faceted and multi-tasked.
Blogger Makina President Mustafe Omer President of Somali Region, Ethiopia Amina Mohamed Secretary of Education, Kenya Ali Bunow Korane Current Governor of Garissa County Garissa County Women Rep.
Anab Subow President of Somalia Mohamed Abdullahi aka Farmaajo Current Prime Minister of Somalia Hassan Ali Kheyre Abdiweli Former PM of Somalia Omar Abdirashid Ali Shermarke Former Prime Minister of Somalia Dr.
Aden Barre Member of Parliament, Garissa County Nadif Jama Former Governor of Garissa County Blogger Beautiful Horn of Africa This is my blog and it is dedicated to human cause.
When the white colonial administrators first came to Somalia, they were impressed by the beauty of this animal.
This site is for the gathering of the wise who want to make changes to their shrinking world.
