The View from Castro’s I n October 1962, the so-called Missile Crisis confronted the United States Cuba and the Soviet Union in a dangerous nuclear game that both, years later and despite having had to negotiate a way out, would declare themselves victorious.
Despite the fact that Soviet missiles were installed on the island, E n octubre de 1962, la llamada Crisis historiography has paid little attention to de los Misiles, enfrentó a los the role that Cuba and Fidel Castro played Estados Unidos y a la Unión during the crisis.
A pesar de que los misiles soviéticos information gathered in these seminars, fueron instalados en la isla, la the events of 1962 from a Havana point of historiografía ha prestado poca atención view. al rol que Cuba y Fidel Castro jugaron durante la crisis.
Lo que sigue a continuación es un intento por reconstruir, a partir de la información recolectada en estos Introduction seminarios, los acontecimientos de 1962 desde el punto de vista de La Habana.
JMorello@chamberlain.edu |#17 | “El Poder de la Palabra” | Octubre 2019 Web site: www.huellasdeeua.com.ar 33 ISSN: 1853-6506 them, and for two weeks in October 1962, the Secretary of State George Ball, and world held its breath as the two superpowers Presidential Adviser Ted Sorenson.
The played a dangerous game with nuclear Cambridge conference added Soviet officials weapons.
The 1989 conference in Moscow leverage, and finally ended up working provided a third and heretofore missing together to negotiate a settlement allowing ingredient.
But lost in all this representatives were joined by their Cuban seemed to be Cuba, which was, after all, where counterparts, including Sergio Del Valle the missiles were.
Another important Little has been written about the role Cuba figure in the Cuban delegation was Raphael played in this episode.
While it seems Hernandez, Deputy Head of the Cuban simplistic, a legitimate question to be asked is Institute of American affairs.
Looking at the of the Moscow and Hawk’s Cay gatherings issue from the Soviet side, placing missiles in were further clarified by a 1992 gathering in Cuba made sense.
But the diplomatic and the political path the missiles took to get to Cuba, and ultimately to leave, and the degree to which The View from Moscow the Cuban government played in the episode is what needs further examination.
There may, arguably, be three reasons why Soviet missiles arrived in Cuba.
First and From a big picture point of view, there’s been foremost was a response to United States hostility.
Since no shortage of information about the Cuban Fidel Castro’s climb to power in 1959, and his Missile Crisis.
Since 1962 and beyond, subsequent embrace of socialism, the United scholars and diplomats have weighed in on States had made his removal a cornerstone of the issue.
The Cambridge, Moscow, and Hawk’s Cay, Florida, Eisenhower administration reduced all of which featured the military and America’s purchase of Cuban sugar, then diplomatic players at the time, have given broke diplomatic relations and later imposed historians valuable first-hand information. an economic blockade, which is still in force The 1987 Hawk’s Cay conference featured a today.
It had allowed him to consolidate his “We had to do everything in our power to hold on Cuba.
According to Rafael Del Pino, protect Cuba’s existence as a Socialist Castro’s former Air Force advisor, Castro now country, and as a working example to other felt ready to fight the war he had always countries of Latin America”.4 wanted to wage against the United States…that would assure him a place in Military aid to Havana would also raise the history. international stature of the Soviet Union in their conflict with China for the hearts and Moscow drew other lessons from the Bay of minds of the socialist world.
They had a range of up to two was willing to gamble that Washington would thousand miles, a first-strike capability, and take no further action against Cuba, even if it fell into the offensive weapons category. learned the country was bristling with Soviet Additionally, the secret delivery of the weapons, even nuclear ones.
Exploiting missiles raised questions about the Soviet Castro’s hatred of the US, his ambition to go Union’s true intentions.
Prior to the discovery down in history, and America’s apparent by the Cuban people that their country had reluctance to engage militarily, Moscow found become a missile launching pad, only Fidel itself with a priceless opportunity to locate a Castro, Raul Castro, and Pedro Enrique strategic base close to its primary adversary.
Oropeza del Portal, head of the Cuban AntiIt would be a bold move, but one which might Aircraft Defense Force, knew they were redress the balance of nuclear power. coming.
Both Castro Castro attended the 1992 Havana conference and Khrushchev were on record as claiming and said he agreed to the missiles not for their the weapons were sent to show other socialist defensive qualities, but rather to help Moscow states that the Soviet Union could be counted gain “a more favorable balance of power on to help its friends.
He told attendees at the leaders were in such a state of denial about Havana conference about a meeting with the possibility that Soviet missiles might be in Khrushchev, who wanted to know how Cuba Cuba they rejected out of hand eye-witness might react to receiving missiles.
The that “the first line of defense of the Cuban Russians had never positioned missiles Revolution was the solidarity of Latin outside its own borders.
Moscow kept a America and other progressive countries, and tight rein on its nuclear arsenal, entrusting it if we installed missiles, I thought this would only to the KGB, the Soviet Union’s national provoke a rejection of the Cuban Revolution security agency.
So, if Castro never allowed near the weapons, let alone was less inclined to see offensive nuclear control them until the mid-1960s. weapons as a deterrent, yet willing to take them as a gesture of socialist solidarity, giving In March 1962, less than a year after the Bay Moscow parity with the United States in the process, of Pigs debacle, the Central Intelligence while raising concerns in the Kremlin that Agency landed a team of anti-Castro Cuban they might undermine the legitimacy of agents on the island.
The agents were to organize other in 2012, Del Pino suggested that after the anti-Castro Cubans, develop an intelligence failed Bay of Pigs invasion, Castro found network to relay information to the US, and, in himself and Cuba in need of long term time, strike the first blow against the Havana financial assistance.
If taking Soviet nuclear regime. weapons and surviving a US-USSR showdown would secure Moscow’s help, he was willing But in August, an agent reported peculiar to take that chance. activity going on at the Pinar de Rio port of Mariel.
A large Soviet cargo ship had arrived, Whatever the real motive, nearly everything and all non-essential personnel, including about the missiles’ journey to Cuba was dock workers and customs officials were sent cloaked in secrecy, casting doubt on Moscow’s home.
That said, it’s worth who, according to the agent, were either mentioning that the transfer was helped in Czech or Russian, who winching flatbed part first by United States inattention, and later disbelief trucks into the ship’s holds.
American were lowered back on the dock, the agent 8 James Blight & David Welch.
On the Brink; Op cit. the Soviet missiles in Cuba recuperado de 9 Rafael Del Pino.
The untold story of how a CIA officer trained a network of agents who found |#17 | “El Poder de la Palabra” | Octubre 2019 Web site: www.huellasdeeua.com.ar 36 ISSN: 1853-6506 reported they were loaded, and the cargo installations were identified, all nestled in the completely draped in canvas.
The trucks were same general vicinity in western Cuba. then driven off under an armed escort.
The agent concluded his report with “it is probable The connection the CIA was yet to make was that the trucks were loaded with rockets…”.12 that the SA-2s were deployed as a defensive cordon for the missiles which were now The missiles which flooded Cuba that summer beginning to arrive.
It had been installation could have been recorded by ordered by Khrushchev and planned by follow-up U-2 flights.
But an SA-2 had shot General Anatoly Gribkov, head of the main down Gary Powers’ 1960 U-2 during a flight Operations Directorate of the Soviet General over the Soviet Union, and that left planners Staff.
So, all missions over Cuba were director John McCone drafted a memo routed away from the western part of the compiling “approximately 60 reports” on island, away from the SA-2 sites, and, “stepped up” Soviet bloc military support of ultimately, away from the incoming missiles.
That included thousands of Soviet It provided perfect cover for the Soviet military personnel, tons of equipment, and Union.
Khrushchev’s goal was to deliver the the deployment and installation of SA-2 missiles to Cuba and have them operational anti-aircraft missiles.
And before the United States became aware of their now, the possibility of medium-range existence, thereby presenting Washington missiles.
Much of what McCone had in terms with a new reality. of high-grade intelligence came from agents on the ground, but stories of the Soviet buildDespite the absence of the U-2 flights, the US up were also coming from returning tourists, still had plenty of evidence of the missiles’ diplomats and newspaper reporters.
On September 18, one of the CIA’s the reports were dismissed by CIA analysts Operation Cobra agents now reported that an who believed the Soviet Union would never even larger area in central Pinar del Rio place missiles beyond its borders, and province had been sealed off by the Soviets. especially in Cuba.
To either corroborate or The report gave the grid locations of four disprove what human assets were reporting small towns that marked the boundaries of would take aerial reconnaissance.
The CIA the area and concluded with the comment had been conducting U-2 spy flights over Cuba that “very secret and important work is in twice a month since February 1962 without progress, believed to be concerned with finding anything unusual.
But the August 29 missiles”.16 Finally, on October 14, a U-2 was flight was different.
The hundreds of photos taken during the reconnaissance 12 Idem. recuperado de www.airspacemag.com/military13 James Blight & David Welch.
Add to that the weight the ground had been saying for weeks; the the United States brought to bear, and the idea that presence of medium-range ballistic anything Moscow could have done to further missiles.
Eight days later, President John 17 the socialist cause in the region would have Kennedy told Americans-and the world-about had a hard time gaining traction.
A public declaration from Moscow, right to decide if and when to make use of the that it sought to bolster Cuba against the nuclear weapons placed in Cuba” according to hostile intentions of the United States, might del Pino. have scored world public opinion points.
Full disclosure might also have won over nations Putting missiles in Cuba may have been less flirting with the idea of establishing socialist about scoring a hit on the United States, but regimes.
And, there were other ways to rather, perhaps scoring points for the Soviet defend Cuba, or allow Moscow to Union.
Rash actions by Castro would not be demonstrate its commitment to socialism tolerated.
By 1962, Cuba was an isolated from the Americans, but instead were state.
It had been expelled from the intended to leverage the United States, the last Organization of American States, and at least thing it would want would be for the missiles fifteen Latin American nations had severed 17 Ibidem.
In something other than what Moscow intended. response, Cuba nationalized the refineries, the American-owned sugar plantations and However, deploying missiles in the name of all foreign banks.
Washington retaliated by Cuban defense is still worth considering, if eliminating the Cuban sugar deal, breaking off only momentarily.
American efforts to get rid diplomatic relations, and imposing an of Fidel Castro had been intensifying after he embargo on most United States exports. took power, and culminated in the 1961 Bay of Pigs misfire.
But both Washington and the During the 1960 Presidential election, Moscow had been jockeying for influence Democrats used the fall of Cuba into over Cuba for some time.
The United States had been communist hands to bash Republicans, in among the first to recognize Castro when he much the same way the GOP had used Mao came to power.
There had also been a longZedong’s victory in China to trash Democrats standing arrangement between America and a decade earlier.
John Kennedy called Castro’s Cuba which allowed nearly three million tons revolution, happening on the Republican’s of Cuban sugar to be sold in the United States at a price watch, the opening World Communism was considerably above that of the world market. looking for to gain a foothold in the Western But the balance of power began to shift in Hemisphere.
At a campaign stop in October, Soviet-Cuban trade agreement was signed.
The bungled job portrayed Castro had tried to work with Castro, but the two as a near victim of American meddling and sides hit an impasse on economic aid and a moved him closer to the Soviet camp. satisfactory compensation package for nationalized foreign holdings.
Meanwhile, Undeterred by the embarrassment of the Bay Moscow began to supply crude oil to Cuba in of Pigs, the United States stepped up its military efforts return for Cuban products.
American oil with a series of military exercises, all of which companies, which owned Cuba’s refineries, seemed, at least to Cubans, to be dress and acting on the advice of the United States rehearsals for another invasion.
Covert enterprises, such as Operations Cobra and Alpha-66 were also So, according to Castro, the ICBMs, which rolled out during the spring and summer of began arriving with all the other Soviet that year.
All of these did not go unnoticed in military equipment was Moscow’s idea.
Moscow, which began moving to formulate a Khrushchev is on record of proposing them, response.
It recalled Sergei Kudryavtsev from and when he heard no protests about the his post as ambassador to Cuba and replaced missiles and their warheads, he might have him with Aleksandr Alekseev.
But if Cuban him, and so did the Kremlin; he’d been its top fears about another United States invasion were KGB operative in Cuba for several years, mounting in the spring of 1962, the ICBMs, nimbler and more adroit than the oafish, hamonce discovered, would have raised those fisted Kudryavtsev, whom Castro hated. fears to a near certainty, putting Cuba in even greater danger than before.
It would be hard The perceived United States belligerence towards Cuba to justify the missiles as defensive in nature, convinced Moscow that vigorous measures given their nuclear payload and their longwould have to be taken to defend it.
That classification would defensive arms package, including troops, the be even harder when stacked against the surface to air missiles, shore defense more traditional defensive weapons the batteries, and even MiG fighters and bombers Soviet Union had provided.
But the intercontinental to be treated as weapons for self-defense, ballistic missiles didn’t seem to be shouldn’t there have been Cuban military part of the order.
In other words, 1962.28 And Castro told his biographer Tad terms and conditions such as how long the Szulc that while he agreed it was necessary to missiles were to remain, or when they might make it clear to the United States that an invasion of be removed.
Cuba would imply a war with the Soviet Union, there was no direct Cuban request for The Cubans recommended a five-year the missiles.
The idea of the missiles was agreement , followed 27 Tim Naftali & Aleksandr Fursenko.
Transparency Moscow wanted to rectify the imbalance, but might have bolstered claims that Moscow’s ICBMs were expensive and took time to intentions were to defend an ally, and world produce.
In the meantime, placing existing public opinion might have tilted against the missiles in Cuba seemed an effective workUS if it had taken steps to interfere.
And, not surprisingly, never positioned missiles outside its own their first-strike capability would increase by borders.
Even the Soviet military was never allowed near the weapons, let alone control them until the The View from Havana mid-1960s.
Once the United States discovered the missiles in midOctober 1962, Cuba became a bit-player in a Everything up to this point makes it hard to super-power showdown which gripped the conclude that the missile shipments to Cuba world for nearly two weeks.
Much has been were a full-throated gesture of Socialist written about the Moscow-Washington solidarity, or even a marginal commitment by exchange which played out as the US Moscow to defend an ally, but rather a announced its discovery of the missiles, its calculated move to redress its balance of insistence that the missiles threatened power problem with the United States.
Nikita national security, and the steps it intended to Khrushchev himself may have proved to be take to eliminate the threat.
The back-channel the best source on the issue, writing about negotiations which ultimately led to a American missiles in Italy and West Germany defusing of the situation have become putting the Soviet Union in grave danger.
On the table were he seemed especially worried about the demands the United States publicly renounce any deployment of United States missiles to Turkey.
It intention to invade Cuba in return for the seemed he thought the time was right to put removal of the missiles.
Few knew about the significance weapons…now they would have enemy of the Turkish-based Jupiter missiles, missiles pointed at them…our missiles would including Fidel Castro.
Few of reaction if he were to conclude that the conditions agreed to by the United States and the the only reason the Russians brought missiles USSR would meet with Cuban approval, and to Cuba was to wrest a United States promise to take its muted resistance would probably missiles out of Turkey. characterize its greatest role in the missile drama.
Did Moscow orchestrate a The USSR removed the missiles, weapons the situation which made it look like it was United States declared were “offensive” in nature.
It extended to aircraft, especially the itself in all this waiting to come after the crisis Ilyushin-28 medium range jet bomber.
If the latter is the case, then it’s also a Il-28 had a range of over 1,100 miles, which case of a missed opportunity. made it a threat to United States security.
Cuba was not a party to the missile negotiations, but the The bilateral arrangement between the United States bombers and other items of the original Soviet and the Soviet Union included an end to the arms package were a different matter.
Sergo US naval blockade, Washington’s promise not Mikoyan, who accompanied his father, to invade Castro’s Cuba, and later, the removal Deputy Soviet Foreign Minister Anastas of United States missiles from Turkey.
Fidel had to issued a promise not to reintroduce ‘offensive be convinced of the necessity to take out the weapons’ to the Western Hemisphere. other armaments.
To both It took three weeks of talks between Soviet sides’ credit, war was avoided.
The United States could and Cuban officials before Castro agreed to reassert that in the words of John Kennedy, release the bombers.
But not before Moscow the Western Hemisphere had remained the helped soften the blow by increasing its master of its own house.
It also left behind a its commitment to contain Communism were Soviet military brigade, which allegedly reassured.
For Moscow, it had given the impression it was willing to go to the brink of war to aid a socialist comrade facing possible 36 James Blight & David Welch.
Cuba could hope for would have been some kind of supporting resolution from the But there was more.
But the request would to invade Cuba was linked to the presence of have died in the UN Security Council, since the United Nations observers on the island to United States held veto power over any and all business witness to removal of the ICBMs.
In the brought to that committee. behind the scenes negotiations between the two superpowers, President Kennedy had Relief from U-2 reconnaissance flights met given “assurances against the invasion of essentially the same fate.
The surveillance Cuba,” conditioned on “the establishment of missions had been a staple of United States intelligence adequate arrangements through the United operations.
It was a U-2 which had confirmed Nations to ensure the carrying out of these existence of Soviet missiles in Cuba in midcommitments”.42 October.
The flyovers were justified by the United States under the UN’s very own Article 51, In effect, the successful resolution of a crisis granting each member nation the right of selfwhich might have led to world war was now defense.
For the United States to honor its nongreater credibility when the Cuban invasion pledge, he had to let UN government refused requests for representatives monitor the missile removal. independent observation of the missiles’ Castro seized the opportunity to leverage the removal. situation to his advantage.
The United States had operated that UN with its own conditions, including the end location since the end of the Spanish of the United States economic blockade, a halt to U-2 American War.
New agreements in 1903, flights over Cuba, and Washington’s modified by the Good Neighbor Policy of 1934 evacuation of the naval base at Guantanamo. crafted a leasing agreement with no expiration date, and the understanding the The communique went nowhere.
The United States base would not be shuttered unless both sides economic blockade had been imposed in part agreed.
The chances the United States would leave this to force Cuba to compensate American critical post now would have to range citizens and corporations for property and between slim and none. assets seized by Castro between 1959-1961.
The United States didn’t see it as having any relevance to In the end, none of Cuba’s demands gained the larger issue, which was the presence of any traction.
At the position, and a way to embarrass Moscow, most it was an issue between two UN was the issue of UN on-site inspection.
Without between the two countries wasn’t known to independent verification, that pledge was off its fullest extent until the January 1989 the table.
First was also brought a message from the Kremlin, Moscow’s failure to make public its decision pleading with Cuban officials to allow UN to provide missiles to Cuba.
But Castro adamantly refused to words of one of the Cuban delegates, “…into a accept onsite UN verification.
Even a direct blind alley…faced with a fait accompli and appeal from UN Secretary-General U-Thant, would have to react with a certain degree of who flew to Havana to confer directly with violence when faced with something that Castro failed to turn the tide.
And Uall the subsequent possible moves the US Thant ended up agreeing with him in would make once the missiles were detected. principle that neither the Soviet Union or the And third, the Kremlin’s failure to consult United States had any legal right to impose Cuba in negotiations ending the crisis which verification measures on Cuba.
And to drive might win concessions from the United States. home his point, Castro turned the tables on everyone, linking any thirdparty inspection In the end, by refusing to allow third-party to his demand that observers witness the inspection, Castro played his trump card, and dismantling of émigré anti-Castro training finally brought Cuba into the Cuban Missile camps in the United States.
It was a position which has stood the agreed to that, so Castro slammed the door on test of time.
Unable to move him from that what he must have considered an invasion of stance, the United States and the Soviet Union both Cuban sovereignty.
In the end, all Moscow informed the United Nations that, from their could do remove the missiles and promise perspective, the issue of missiles in Cuba was Washington they were gone.
But without officially closed. third party verification, the United States must have felt But closed without a firm United States pledge of nonless than honor bound to promise Castro it invasion. wouldn’t attack in the future.
The Soviet Union’s unilateral decision to pull the missiles from Cuba soured relations between Havana and Moscow, no matter how much economic aid the Kremlin shoved Castro’s way.
Decisiva” en Obra Revolucionaria, 7 Allyn, Bruce J & James G Blight & David A de septiembre, 1962.
A Critical History; Remembers; Boston, Little, Brown, Lanham, Md, Lexington Press, 2008.
