The United States would have survived as a functioning country and would have only been hit by 30 or so nuclear weapons, not enough to take out all the United States state capitals.
On the other hand, the Soviet Union and Europe would not have been so lucky.
During the crisis, the United States had 3,500 nuclear weapons capable of reaching the Soviet Union via bomber or missile.
Also, the Soviets had slightly more than 12 ballistic missiles capable of reaching the US, hardly a missile-borne rain of death.
Around 90 nukes were mounted on ballistic missile submarines, which would have been vulnerable while launching their missiles.
As for the nuclear fallout, most nuclear weapons at the time were set for airbursts to destroy cities, which would have thrown out far less radioactive fallout than groundburst weapons.
A Bear Triggered A False Alarm Just a handful of days after President John F Kennedy announced that there were Soviet missiles in Cuba, Volk Field Air Base was swarming with activity.
An alarm had gone off, signaling that Soviet bombers were flying over the North Pole at that moment.
United States fighters armed with nuclear air-to-air missiles had to stop them.
Jets were lined up to take off when the pilots' missions were suddenly canceled---because the entire thing was a false alarm caused by the wrong sound coming out of the speakers.
At a United States Air Force control center near Volk Field, a black bear had crawled over a fence and triggered sabotage alarms that were broadcast to other bases.
But the Volk Field Air Base had received a war alert instead, triggering the massive mobilization.
Fortunately, communication with the control center soon cleared up the error, and a vehicle raced to the runway to stop the aircraft from taking off.
White House Press Office During late October 1962, just before Kennedy was scheduled to end a tour of the United States at the Century 21 Exposition in Seattle, he bowed out.
The administration even provided the press with a photo of Kennedy that looked like he was sick.
He was also wearing a hat, only the second time he had ever been seen wearing a hat.
Upon hearing that the president was sick, the Century 21 Exposition invited Vice President Lyndon Johnson to take Kennedy's place.
But the excuse was ironic, given that Kennedy and Johnson were dealing with a serious case of the Cold War.
American spy planes had photographed Soviet missiles in Cuba just days earlier.
Kennedy didn\u2019t want to make the situation public, so he started the prescheduled nationwide tour.
Then analysts discovered that the missiles would be ready to fire earlier than they expected, prompting Kennedy to cut his tour short with the \""cold\"" excuse.
During the crisis, the two leaders found that the most effective way of communicating was via public announcements, which were then relayed through the international press to the other leader.
Given the massive diplomatic bureaucracy employed by both sides, formal communications between Kennedy and Nikita Khrushchev took six hours through official channels.
During the crisis, a few hours were an eternity when anything could happen.
Public announcements became an awkward but effective means to relay information between the superpowers.
The Soviets even had Aleksandr Fomin, one of their KGB agents, give messages to an ABC correspondent to give to Kennedy.
That way, they could speak to each other quickly to defuse sticky geopolitical situations.
The United States was also flying daring, low-level spy missions over Cuba using carrier-launched RF-8 Crusader aircraft.
As they sped to their targets, the aircraft soared just 60 meters over Cuba on initial reconnaissance runs to avoid antiaircraft fire.
Surprisingly, dog collars and sanitary napkins helped these crews immensely in their spy missions over Cuba.
A new piece of equipment designed to warn the RF-8 pilots of incoming antiaircraft missiles had a tendency to get loose and bounce around the cockpit.
With this new problem, the pilots faced as great a threat of getting hit in the head by the warning devices as they did of getting shot down by the Cubans.
To solve the problem, the pilots used dog collars as fasteners and sanitary napkins as padding.
NASA At the height of the crisis in October 1962, the Soviets launched two Mars-bound space probes eight days apart.
The first probe broke up in Earth orbit, and the second probe failed on the way to Mars.
The Soviets were also fielding the R-7 ICBM at the time, which could be launched from the same launchpads as the Soviet Mars probes.
The rocket for the second Soviet Mars probe was hogging a potential nuclear missile launchpad, interfering with the Soviet military response to the crisis.
The second Mars probe was ordered to be removed from the pad to make way for a nuclear-tipped missile.
However, the missile didn't reach the pad before the crisis was resolved, so the Mars probe was launched.
However, the crew of the Russian submarine had no idea that the depth charges were nonlethal.
The captain prepared to fire a nuclear torpedo on a nearby American aircraft carrier.
However, the captain needed the agreement of two senior officers before he could launch a nuclear torpedo.
Vasili Arkhipov, one of those officers, refused to authorize the attack.
Eventually, he convinced the captain to surface to see if war had actually begun.
In doing so, he probably saved millions of people across the world from dying in the war that would have resulted if a United States carrier had been nuked.
Not aware of the frantic United States and Soviet efforts to defuse the situation and fearing an imminent American invasion, a highly agitated Castro ensconced himself in a bunker on October 27.
Also, Castro's involvement would have made the negotiations more complicated because Castro wanted things that Kennedy would not accept, such as a withdrawal from the United States base at Guantanamo.
If war broke out, Castro also believed that it was better to be nuked by the United States than have United States troops invade Cuba.
Eisenhower Predicted The Crisis Photo via Wikimedia In April 1961, the disastrous Bay of Pigs Invasion happened during the presidency of the recently inaugurated John F Kennedy.
This epic disaster made the Soviets see Kennedy as an indecisive individual and emboldened them to provoke the United States in ways they otherwise might not have.
Right after the Bay of Pigs fiasco, Kennedy asked Eisenhower for advice.
In turn, Eisenhower asked Kennedy why he had not given air support to the Cuban exiles invading Cuba.
Kennedy responded that he was worried that the Soviets would respond in a tit-for-tat fashion in Berlin.
In an eerily accurate prediction, Eisenhower then told Kennedy that the Soviets would see the lack of air support as a weakness and would be \""emboldened to do something they would otherwise not do\""---which came true less than two years later.
But the Soviets claimed that the base did not violate their agreement not to station \""offensive weapons\"" in Cuba.
United States suspicions were sealed when soccer fields were constructed in Cuba.
As United States Secretary of State Henry Kissinger said, \""Cubans play baseball, Russians play soccer.
Sam is just a broke college student struggling to get by!"",""keywords"":"""",""datePublished"":""2016-01-27T00:00:00-08:00"",""dateModified"":""2016-01-26T10:45:06-08:00"",""author"":{""@type"":""Person"",""name"":""Jamie Frater"",""description"":""Jamie is the founder of Listverse.
Jamie Frater Head Editor Jamie founded Listverse due to an insatiable desire to share fascinating, obscure, and bizarre facts.
He has been a guest speaker on numerous national radio and television stations and is a five time published author.
Kennedy didn’t want to make the situation public, so he started the prescheduled nationwide tour.
Watch this video on YouTube On October 27, 1962, American destroyer USS Beale was dropping practice depth charges to get a Russian B-59 submarine to surface.
After the Soviet presence was confirmed, the United States drew a line in the sand with stern warnings.
