The bearded revolutionary, who survived a crippling United States trade embargo as well as dozens, possibly hundreds, of assassination plots, died eight years after ill health forced him to formally hand power over to Raul. getGooglePubAds; Castro overcame imprisonment at the hands of dictator Fulgencio Batista, exile in Mexico and a disastrous start to his rebellion before triumphantly riding into Havana in January 1959 to become, at age 32, the youngest leader in Latin America.
For decades, he served as an inspiration and source of support to revolutionaries from Latin America to Africa.
His commitment to socialism was unwavering, though his power finally began to fade in mid-2006 when a gastrointestinal ailment forced him to hand over the presidency to Raul in 2008, provisionally at first and then permanently.
His defiant image lingered long after he gave up his trademark Cohiba cigars for health reasons and his tall frame grew stooped.
AP Castro autographs a book in a June 1972 picture during his visit to East Berlin in the former German Democratic Republic.
AP Castro chats with Nobel laureate Gabriel Garcia Marquez during a gala dinner marking the Havana Festival celebrating Cuban cigars, on 4 March 2000.
Reuters Castro, , reviews troops during his visit to Leuna, formerly the German Democratic Republic in this June 1972 picture.
Castro was in the United States during his first visit to the United Nations after coming to power.
AP Former United States President Jimmy Carter and then Cuban President Fidel Castro listen to the Cuban national anthem at the baseball stadium “Latinoamericano in Havana on 14 May 2002.
Reuters Castro relaxes in a swimming pool during a visit to Romania on 28 May 1972.
Reuters Castro wearing a Viet Cong hat and checkered scarf, samples root fibers, the staple food of Vietnamese living in the underground tunnel network during the Vietnam War, in Vietnam in this 11 December 1995 picture.
AP Castro is seen during a hunting trip in Romania in this May 1972 picture.
Reuters Then Cuban Prime Minister Castro smokes a cigar during interviews with the press during a visit of United States senator Charles McGovern, in Havana in this May 1975 picture.
Reuters Castro plays golf at the Colinas de Villa real club in Havana, Cuba.
AP Then Cuban president Castro laughs during the year-end session of the Cuban parliament in Havana in this 23 December 2005 picture.
Reuters ❮ ❯ “Socialism or death"" remained Castro’s rallying cry even as Western-style democracy swept the globe and other communist regimes in China and Vietnam embraced capitalism, leaving this island of 11 million people an economically crippled Marxist curiosity.
He survived long enough to see Raul Castro negotiate an opening with United States President Barack Obama on 17 December 2014, when Washington and Havana announced they would move to restore diplomatic ties for the first time since they were severed in 1961.
He cautiously blessed the historic deal with his lifelong enemy in a letter published after a month-long silence.
Fidel Castro Ruz was born 13 August 1926, in eastern Cuba’s sugar country, where his Spanish immigrant father worked first recruiting labour for United States sugar companies and later built up a prosperous plantation of his own.
His life as a rebel began in 1953 with a reckless attack on the Moncada military barracks in the eastern city of Santiago.
Most of his comrades were killed and Fidel and his brother Raul went to prison.
Freed under a pardon, Castro fled to Mexico and organized a rebel band that returned in 1956, sailing across the Gulf of Mexico to Cuba on a yacht named Granma.
After losing most of his group in a bungled landing, he rallied support in Cuba’s eastern Sierra Maestra mountains.
Three years later, tens of thousands spilled into the streets of Havana to celebrate Batista’s downfall and catch a glimpse of Castro as his rebel caravan arrived in the capital on 8 January 1959.
The United States was among the first to formally recognize his government, cautiously trusting Castro’s early assurances he merely wanted to restore democracy, not install socialism.
Hundreds of thousands of Cubans fled, including Castro’s daughter Alina Fernandez Revuelta and his younger sister Juana.
Still, the revolution thrilled millions in Cuba and across Latin America who saw it as an example of how the seemingly arrogant Yankees could be defied.
And many on the island were happy to see the seizure of property of the landed class, the expulsion of American gangsters and the closure of their casinos.
As Castro moved into the Soviet bloc, Washington began working to oust him, cutting United States purchases of sugar, the island’s economic mainstay.
The American government imposed a trade embargo, banning virtually all United States exports to the island except for food and medicine, and it severed diplomatic ties on 3 January 1961.
On 16 April of that year, Castro declared his revolution to be socialist, and the next day, about 1,400 Cuban exiles stormed the beach at the Bay of Pigs on Cuba’s south coast.
The debacle forced the United States to give up on the idea of invading Cuba, but that didn’t stop Washington and Castro’s exiled enemies from trying to do him in.
The biggest crisis of the Cold War between Washington and Moscow exploded on 22 October 1962, when President John F Kennedy announced there were Soviet nuclear missiles in Cuba and imposed a naval blockade of the island.
Humankind held its breath, and after a tense week of diplomacy, Soviet leader Nikita Krushchev removed them.
Neighbourhood “revolutionary defence committees"" kept an eye on everyone.
Castro exported revolution to Latin American countries in the 1960s, and dispatched Cuban troops to Africa to fight Western-backed regimes in the 1970s.
But the collapse of the Soviet bloc ended billions in preferential trade and subsidies for Cuba, sending its economy into a tailspin.
Castro briefly experimented with an opening to foreign capitalists and limited private enterprise.
As the end of the Cold War eased global tensions, many Latin American and European countries re-established relations with Cuba.
In January 1998, Pope John Paul II visited a nation that had been officially atheist until the early 1990s.
Aided by a tourism boom, the economy slowly recovered and Castro steadily reasserted government control, stifling much of the limited free enterprise tolerated during harder times.
As flamboyant as he was in public, Castro tried to lead a discreet private life.
He and his first wife, Mirta Diaz Balart, had one son before divorcing in 1956.
Then, for more than four decades, Castro had a relationship with Dalia Soto del Valle.
They had five sons together and were said to have married quietly in 1980.
By the time Castro resigned 49 years after his triumphant arrival in Havana, he was the world’s longest ruling head of government, aside from monarchs.
In retirement, Castro voiced unwavering support as Raul slowly but deliberately enacted sweeping changes to the Marxist system he had built.
His longevity allowed the younger brother to consolidate control, perhaps lengthening the revolution well past both men’s lives.
In February 2013, Raul announced that he would retire as president in 2018 and named newly minted Vice President Miguel Diaz-Canel as his successor.
AP Subscribe to Mint Newsletters * Enter a valid email * Thank you for subscribing to our newsletter.
