Assia, Fouzia, Sabah, Rhadia and Nedjwa and my brothers : Abdelghani, Abdelsalam and Hamza.
I want to say thank you to my supervisor, Mrs Sehili for her help and also to Mrs Attmani.
Abstract The Cold War is considered as an important aspect of both the history and foreign policy of the United States.
It is a term which is used to refer to the intense competition which occurred between the Communist countries or the Eastern Bloc, which was led by the Union of the Soviet Socialist Republics and the Western countries or the Western Bloc, which was led by the United States.
It began at the end of the Second World War and lasted until the end of the 1980’s.
It is the confrontation which took place in October 1962 between the United States on one hand and the Soviet Union and Cuba on the other hand.
It is among the most serious crises which happened during the Cold War, that’s why it is of great importance.
The Americans have several times tried to interfere and even control the island since the Nineteenth Century.
In the twentieth century and in 1945, the United States became an enemy to the Soviet Union and vice versa.
Their conflict which began with the end of the Second World War and lasted until 1989 and which is called the Cold War included many crises.
The United States got into trouble with Cuba when Fidel Castro, one of the primary leaders of the Cuban Revolution, became the Prime Minister of the island.
The Americans saw that their country was in jeopardy when the Soviets constructed missile bases in Cuba.
The United States tried to contain the spread of Communism in Cuba, especially because it is very close to the United States.
This leads us to the idea that the United States as usual claimed rights which 1 normally it should not have.
The first one starts with explaining the nature of the relationship between Cuba and the United States before the Cold War, which means from the Eighteenth Century to the mid half of the Twentieth century.
I have mentioned some doctrines and events which are crucial to the understanding of the United States attitude towards Cuba and Latin America as a whole.
I used also online articles, journals and magazines, some of which are descriptive and the others are argumentative.
Although the United States policymakers did not colonize all Latin American nations officially, they strove to get control of them by any means.
They capitalized on the bad circumstances from which those countries have suffered and turned them to their interests.
They wrote important and influential documents which helped to define the relationship between the United States and those countries, among which Cuba is a good example.
I)The United States and Cuba before The Spanish Ame rican War of 1898 The relationship between the United States and Cuba is deeply rooted because each of them dealt with the other even before it got its independence.
In the early Eighteenth Century, the North American mainland and Cuba, which was at that time a Spanish colony, began to make illegal commercial contracts in order to avoid paying colonial taxes.
Because legal and illegal trade increased, Cuba became approximately a prosperous area in the region and a center of tobacco and sugar production.
During this period, the Cuban merchants travelled to North American ports and established trade contracts that lasted for many years.
The British occupation of Havana in 1762 opened the trade with the British colonies in North America.
Because of the American Revolution in 1776, Spain opened 3 Cuban ports to North American commerce officially in November of the same year, and the island became gradually dependent on that trade and vice versa.
From the beginning of the dissolution of the Spanish power in America, American statesmen began to look at Cuba as a possible new state.
There were many reasons which made it desirable like its nearness, fertility, its mineral wealth and its command of the Gulf of Mexico.
The annexation of Louisiana in 1803 and Florida in 1819 reinforced these reasons and suggested further extentions of territory at the expense of Spain.
The Secretary of State, John Quincy Adams, described in a letter to the United States Minister to Spain Hugh Nelson the probability of United States annexation of Cuba in the following fifty years stressing that it would not be easy because of the difficulties which existed.
During the first two decades of the Nineteenth century, many revolutions took place in Spain’s South American colonies, which was not the case for Cuba.
Ammon, President Monroe’s biographer, wrote, ""the all-absorbing problem in foreign affairs during Monroe’s presidency was that created by Spain crumbling American empire.
Nearly all his major decisions either centered on this issue or had to be closely correlated with the questions it raised.
One aspect of the problem was the series of revolutions in Latin America.
They were seen in Jefferson’s words as ""another example of man rising in his might and bursting the chains of his oppressor.
The United States did not intervene militarily, but it preferred to be“ the beacon on the hill"", functioning as a guide for those who struggled in Latin America.
However, the majority of Americans did not believe that the people in Latin America could follow this beacon.
As a result, many American commentators felt that the people of Latin America whom they sympathized with were uncapable to rule themselves if they won.
John Quincy Adams used similar reasons to support his argument for his delay to recognize the new states, at least until the Florida matter was settled.
When Spain ceded Florida to the United States, the time came for Latin America.
On December 2, 1823 and in his seventh annual state of the Union Address message to Congress, James Monroe declared an end to the New World colonization and warned foreign powers that any intervention in the Western Hemisphere would be considered as a threat to the United States.
In addition, the Monroe Doctrine asserted that the United States would not interfere with existing European colonies nor in the internal affairs of European countries and expected that the latter would do the same.
Moreover, it created a sphere of influence that would grow stronger with the addition of the Roosevelt Corollary, a document written in 1904 to assert the right of the United States to intervene in the Latin American lands if they suffered from economic or political trouble.
Although the Monroe Doctrine was neglected in the international arena because of the United States lack of a credible navy and army at that time, its influence would appear later.
The Monroe Doctrine was of 6 great importance because it became a defining moment in the foreign policy of the United States and one of its influential tenets.
It set the first ideological justification for any direct or indirect United States intervention in the area; it firmly established an official American tutorship over Latin America.
In addition to the previous reasons which made the United States eager to annex Cuba, there was another one which arose in 1845.
Between 1848-1850, several attempts were made to produce a revolution in Cuba, and expeditions were provided in the United States to help this movement.
The President , Zachary Taylor interfered, but European countries did not side with him.
This was clear when the English and French ambassadors to the United States joined to ask the U.S. government to unite with them in making a tripartite guaranty of Cuba to Spain.
On December 1, 1852 Secretary Everett on behalf of President Millard Fillmore refused to provide the guaranty.
The American vessels were vulnerable to 7 Spain’s arbitrary annoyances and seizures.
One example was that of the Black Warrior, a United States ship seized in Havana in March, 1854.
Unlike Congress which saw it as a violation, the Spanish officials in Cuba argued that the ship violated custom regulations and fined the owners 6.000 dollars.
Although Spain released the ship, the Pierce administration’s concern for Cuba remained.
After Soulé’s failure, Secretary of State, William L Marcy, directed James Buchanan, minister to Great Britain, and John Y.Mason, minister to France, to discuss the issue with Soulé at Ostend, Belgium, where they assembled on October 8, 1854.
However, the document was completed and published in Aixla – Chappelle, in Prussia on the 18th of October.
The Little War which was led by Calixto Garcia was as unsuccessful as the first one.
In 1894 Spain cancelled a trade pact between Cuba and the United States.
The imposition of more taxes and trade restrictions pushed the Cubans in 1895 to launc h the Cuban War of Independence, which in turn led the United States to the imperialist age with the acquisition of the Phillipines, Purto Rico and Guam.
The war was inspired by José 9 Marti, who was a poet, journalist and ideological spokesman of the revolution.
He employed sophisticated guerrilla tactics under the leadership of Maximo Gomez, who used “ scorched – earth” policy3 , and Antonio Maceo.
In parallel with these events and during the same year, there was a problem between the United kingdom and Venezuela.
The conflict led the President Grover Cleveland , through his Secretary of State, Richard Olney, to cite the Monroe Doctrine and threaten the British that the Americans would interefere if the British failed in solving their problem with Venezuela.
This means that the Americans reminded the European powers that the United States’ control over the Western Hemisphere is not just a theory or words written in documents, but it is rather practical.
Through this proclamation, the America ns also confirmed that the United States’ order should be implemented to the Latin Americans and should limit any interference in the continent.
In 1897, Spain recalled Weyler and proposed partial autonomy to the Cubans, but the Cuban leaders refused it and continued their call for complete independence.
In January of 1898, the United States battleship Maine, was sent to Havana to protect the United States citizens and property.
After a hot debate, the Congress approved a joint resolution in which support was given to McKinley’s request.
Although there was no evident support to recognize Cuba as a republic, Congress promised that the United States would not annex the island.
This seems clearly through the fourth and last part of the joint resolution, which is known as Teller Amendment.
On April 19, 1898 the Congress passed the amendment, 42 to 35, and the House of Representatives agreed 31 to 6.
President Mckinley signed the joint resolution on April 20, 12 1898 , and the ultimatum was sent to Spain.
The Spanish American War or the “splendid little war” as it was called by John Hay was brief because the Spanish forces were inferior compared to the American forces.
On May 1, 1898, the Spanish fleet in Manila Bay in the Philippines was destroyed by the United States navy under the command of commodore George Dewey.
On July 3, the United States troops began a battle for the city of Santiago in Cuba.
When the Spanish fleet was sunk on July 3, and Santiago was captured on July 11, the war was effectively over.
The armistice , which was signed on August 12, ended the hostilities and directed that a peace conference would be held in Paris by October.
According to Articles II and III of the treaty, Spain relinquished Porto Rico and Guam and ceded the Philipines respectively to the United States.
Despite of its shortness and inexpensiveness compared to other conflicts, the Spanish -American War is of great importance because it did not only end Spain’s colonial rule in the Western Hemisphere, but it also made the United States for the first time in its history a world power.
It is also important because it was considered as a base on which the orthodox or traditional interpretation4 of the United States foreign policy was established.
In 1899 and after the collapse of the Spanish regime in Cuba , the United States adopted a formal policy of occupation because members of the McKinley administration were afraid of new revolutionary governments in Cuba.
To overcome this fear, the American Secretary of war Elihu Root formulated in 1901 an amendment to the Army Appropriations Act which was presented to the United States Senate by Connecticut Republican Senator Orville H Platt.
Although it was rejected at the beginning by the Cuban Assembly, it was accepted later by a vote of 16 to 11 with four absentions and integera ted into the Cuban Constitution.
Article II stated that Cuba would not contract any foreign debt without guarantees that the interest could be served from ordinary revenues.
On the one hand the Platt amendment gave Cuba a limited right to conduct its own affairs and debt policies, but on the other it gave the United States the right to intervene in Cuban affairs.
After the acceptance of the amendment, the United States ratified a tariff pact that gave preference to the 14 Cuban sugar in the United States market and protection to select United States products in the Cuban market.
The Platt amendment caused a great opposition both inside and outside the United States.
The United States anti imperialists used their arguments against foreign involvement and many Cubans complained that the United States was simply a subst itute for the Spanish oppressor.
Besides, Secretary of War Root tried to establish a difference between “ interventionism” and “ interference” with the island’s domestic affairs.
He argued that the United States intervention would occur only to protect the government of Cuba and preserve the island’s independence and no t to interfere in the country’s internal matters.
During the same year, the U.S. signed the Peciprocity Treaty with Cuba which tightened the relationship between the mentioned countries by lowering duties on the island’s exports to America.
So, the Roosevelt Corollary asserted the right and obligation of the United States to intervene to stabilize the economic and political affairs of small States in the Caribbean and Central America if they were unable to pay their international debts, like what happened in Venezuela in 1902.
The purpose behind the Corollary was to avoid European intervention in the Western Hemisphere.
This happened when the Liberals opposed Estrada Palma , Cuba’s first president , who wanted to keep power in the 19051906 elections knowing that he was to a very great exte nt submissive to United States influence.
The rebellion which broke out led to a second U.S. 16 occupation in September 1906.
The United States Secretary of War, William Howard Taft, failed to find a solution to the problem, and Estrada Palma resigned.
Because of this , the United States government made Charles Magoon temporary governor.
A committee, composed of many advisers, revised electoral procedures, and in January 1909, Magoon gave the government to the Liberal President, José Miguel Gomez.
Although United States officials continuously argued that the Roosevelt Corollary was beneficial to Latin America, it was rather harmful.
That is so because Roosevelt Corollary , together with the Monroe Doctrine were flagrant examples of American imperialism in the region, an imperialism that would last until the Twentieth Century.
The critics ,Mitchener and Weidenmier, are among the proponents who said that the small countries would benefit economically from the Roosevelt Corollary.
The critics also thought that financial stability would lead to the political one.
In other words, if the Monroe Doctrine forbade the European empires to enter the Western Hemisphere, the Roosevelt Corollary announced America’s intention to replace them.
Many people described Theodore Roosevelt’s Corollary to the Monroe Doctrine as Big Stick Diplomacy, which in turn is a form of control or hegemony.
The first use of the phrase by Roosevelt was on September 2, 1901 in a speech at the Minnesota State Fair in which he described his approach to foreign policy.
In the Big Stick Diplomacy or Ideology, there is the idea of negotiating peacefully while at the same time threatening with the“ big stick ”or the military forces which is closely related to the idea of realpolitik5 which is a theory in which a particular state uses its power in a coercive manner to oppress another one without taking into consideration any moral or ideological notions.
After the end of the second presidential term of Theodore Roosevelt in 1909, the Americans tried to further their aims in Latin America, including,of course, Cuba.
President, William Howard Taft, Roosevelt’s successor wanted to reach the same goal of his predecessor but with different means.
They saw that they could dominate Latin American business by using economic power instead of military power.
President Taft also shared the view held by Knox that the goal of diplomacy should be to create stability abroad which in turn would promote American commercial interests.
In addition, Knox felt that diplomacy was meant to use private capital to further United States interests outside its boundaries.
Diplomacy did not only allow the United States to gain financially from Cuba and other countries, but it also prevented other foreign countries from doing the same thing.
Like in Honduras, Nicaragua, Coloumbia and Haiti, Dollar Diplomacy was evident also in extensive United States interventions in Cuba.
This happened during the Gomez administration in which there was graft, corruption, maladministration, financial irresponsibility and social carelessness, especially toward Afro – Cubans.
They felt also that it was too imperialistic for the United States to conduct fore ign affairs without taking into consideration Latin American interests.
In addition , they opposed the expenses which were used to raise armies that would help Latin American countries.
Through the Good Neighbour policy, the Americans wanted to abandon the use of military intervention as a means for solving the internal problems of Latin American countries and instead adopt a new policy.
The latter includes the establishment of PanAmericanism6 , support for strong local leaders, training 20 of national guards, economic and cultural penetration, export– import bank loans, financial supervision and political subversion.
Concerning Cuba and the Good Neighbour Policy, Roosevelt was ambivalent.
On the one hand, he ordered 29 warships to Cuba when the internal confrontations between the government of Gerardo Machado and the political opposition led to a military overthrow by Cuban rebels in 1933.
It is crystal clear that the United States had a strong relationship with Cuba, which is considered as one of the most important and closest countries to the United States in the Western Hemisphere.
They promised that they would not annex Cuba in the Teller Amendment because they knew that under the Monroe Doctrine no foreign power could dare to recolonize the island.
When the Spanish – American War was over, the Americans assured in the Platt amendment their right to intervene in the internal affairs of the country.
So, they maintained their control over the island before they gave the Cubans their formal independence in 1902.
In 1904, President Theodore Roosevelt introduced his Corollary to the Monroe Doctrine, which is considered as a means for applying the President’s Big Stick Diplomacy.
In the Corollary, he stated that the United States had the right and the 21 duty to intervene in Latin American countries whenever the latter misconducted their affairs whether politically or economically like what happened in Cuba between 19061909.
After Roosevelt, William Howard Taft brought the Dollar Diplomacy which focused on achieving economic prosperity by reinforcing American investments in Latin A merica, including Cuba.
When President Franklin D Roosevelt came to power, he introduced a new policy known as the Good Neighbour policy.
Although he cancelled the Platt amendment in 1934, he sent the American army to Cuba a year earlier.
Many American diplomatic historians, like Dexter Perkins, who wrote The American Approach to Foreign Policy defended this kind of interpretation , and they said that United States foreign policy was characterized by discontinuity.
They argued that the United States was more or less isolationist before the Spanish American War of 1898, which changed completely the status of the United States and made it a world power.
This interpretation helped to make the American public think that the United States foreign policy was isolationist until the Second World War.
In Germany, Realpolitik is used to describe the modest or realistic politics in opposition to unrealistic one, while in the United States, it is often similar to power politics.
It is a conflict which took place immediately after the end of the Second World War between the United States and the Soviet Union.
I)The Cold War and Cuba in the 1950’s After the end of the Second World War in 1945, the United States along with the Soviet Union emerged as the only two superpowers of the world.
Although they were allied in their fighting against the Axis powers during the war, this was no longer the case when the war was over.
This was clear especially in the Yalta and Potsdam Co nferences in which they did not agree about the future development of Germany and Eastern Europe.
The post – 1945 struggle which occurred between the two countries is called the Cold War.
Many Americans felt that the security of their country was vulnerable to the Soviet Union’s attempt to spread everywhere, beginning with the creation of the Eastern Bloc.
In February 1946, the United States State Department asked the United States diplomat and historian, George F Kennan, at the United States Embassy in Moscow why the Russians opposed the creation of the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund.
He said, Soviet power, unlike that of Hitlerite Germany is neither schematic nor adventuristic.
Impervious to logic of reason, and it is highly sensitive to logic of force.
In January 1947, Kennan submitted a report called “ the sources of Soviet Conduct” to Defence Secretary, James Forrestal.
The Cold War policy of Containment was tested 90 miles from the Florida coast on the island of Cuba in 1962.
To contain Communism, the United States began to help the European countries which were considered as the most vulnerable nations to the threat of Communism.
To 25 accomplish this goal, the Truman Doctrine¹ and the Marshall Plan² were created.
The American perception of the people of Latin America in the 1950’s was not different from that of their ancestors.
They saw that the economic difficulties of the region were caused by their incompetence and inefficiency.
From 1952 to 1959, Cuba was ruled by Fulgencio Batista whose rise led to an era of cooperation between the governments of Cuba and the United States.
Batista’s second term began with a military coup, which was planned in Florida.
The United States President, Harry S Truman, quickly recognized Batista’s return to rule and provided him with military and economic aid.
During his presidency, the United States dominated nearly all the Cuban economy because there was an increase in the American corporations.
This happened in a time when there was widespread corruption especially in Havavna which became a popular shelter for American organized crime figures.
Arthur Gardner, United States Ambassador to Cuba later described the relationship between the United States and Batista during his second term as president, 26 Batista had always leaned toward the United States.
It was regrettable like all south Americans, that he was known – although I had no absolute knowledge of it to be getting a cut, I think is the word for it, in almost all the, things that were done.
They owned about 75 % of the agrarian land, 90 % of the essential services and 40 % of the sugar production.
The bad economic conditions were not the only factors which led to Batista’s fall.
Fidel Castro was a legislative candidate for the elections of 1952; however, Batista overthrew the government of President Carlos Prio Socarras and cancelled the elections.
Castro attempted many times to remove Batista’s new dictatorship, but he failed.
Because of the political amnesty of 1955, Castro and his brother Raul were released.
Their release pushed them to continue their campaign against the Batista regime in Mexico, in which Castro, organized the Cuban exiles into a revo lutionary group called the 26th of July Movement.
All of them were killed or captured except for Castro, Raul, the Argentine revolutionary Ernesto Che Guevara and nine men who went to the Sierra Maestra of southwestern Oriente province to continue their guerrilla warfare against the Batista forces.
In the next two years, they attracted hundreds of Cuban volunteers, won several battles against Batista’s demoralized armed forces and advanced westward.
The expected Cuban president, Manuel Urrutia Lleo urged the United States to stop its sale of arms to Batista.
In march 1958, the United States prevented the sale of weapons to Batista’s government.
In addition, many Cuban military commanders sympathized with the rebellion or joined it.
Within days Earl T Smith, United States Ambassador to Cuba who said, “ Until Castro , the United States was so overwhelmingly influential in Cuba that the American Ambassador was the second most important man, sometimes even more important than the Cuban president” , resigned his post, and he was replaced by Philip Bonsal.
The United States government became angry about Cuba’s agrarian reforms and especially about the nationalizations of United States owned industries.
Between April 15 and 26th , 1959, Castro and a delegation of representatives visited the United States as guests of the Press Club.
During his visit, he met with Vice President Richard Nixon and outlined his reform plans for Cuba.
After the meeting, the United States began to impose gradual trade restrictions on the island.
As it was used to be, Cuba emerged once again as a major issue not only in American foreign policy but also in American political debate.
As an example, we have the 1960 presidential election competition between the Republican candidate, Richard Nixon, and the Democratic candidate, John F Kennedy.
Both candidates competed with each other in warning the American public of the danger caused by the new government in 29 Cuba.
The debate between the two candidates showed that the American public was not certain in its attitude towards Fidel Castro.
Because state intervention and nationalization continued, trade restrictions on Cuba increased.
Lack of trust was deepened by Castro’s trade agreement with the Soviet Deputy Premier Anastas Mikoyan in February 1960.
After four months, Castro nationalized American oil refineries, which refused to process Soviet petroleum.
Eisenhower stopped to buy Cuban sugar and refused to supply its former trading partner with oil which affected the island’s economy negatively.
In March 1960, tensions increased when the French ship La Coubre exploded in Havana harbor and resulted in the killing of over 75 people.
Fidel Castro blamed the United States and compared the incident to that of Maine.
In the same month, President Eizenhower authorized the Central Intelligency Agency to organize, train and equip Cuban 30 refugees as a guerrilla force to overthrow Castro.
The preparations continued and culminated in the Bay of Pigs Invasion during Kennedy’s presidency.
Whenever the Cuban government nationalized American properties, the American government reacted.
On October 19, 1960, the United States government prohibited all exports to Cuba, and in Janaury, 1961, it broke all diplomatic relations with Cuba.
When Kennedy became president, he was informed by the C.I.A. about the invasion plans and was also told that the invasion would result in a great victory for the United States as it happened in Guatemala in 1954.
President Kennedy also knew that the Bay of Pigs, which is located on the southwest side of the island was the place of the invasion and the April 17, 1961 was its date.
At the beginning, Kennedy approved the invasion plan only as a contingency operation, which means that it could be annulled at any time.
During the same time, the State Department published a pamphlet 31 entitled“Cuba” in which it was stated that Castro did not make the reforms which he promised to do.
The Kennedy administration did not try to negotiate with Castro and did not consult congress in its achievement of the Bay of Pigs Invasion.
The plan for the invasion was tended to be secret, but this did not happen.
When Castro heard about the invasion, he maintained effective personal control over the army and he sent all available troops, tanks and airplanes to the invasion area.
Besides, his call for strong resistance against the invaders did not include Communist ideology but rather Cuban nationalism and anti – Americanism.
The United States Ambassador to Cuba, Philip Bonsal, attempted to show to the Americans that Castro’s regime became communist because of the Unites States policy towards Cuba.
However, the United States government was not convinced by what he said.
On April 15, 1961, three United States airplanes which were piloted b y Cubans bombed 32 Cuban air bases.
After two days, the Cubans who were trained by the United States and who used United States equipment landed in many sites, the most important one was that of the Bay of Pigs.
The invasion failed because Castro’s troops were stronger than the Cuban exiles.
The invasion ended on April 19 when its last stronghold and more than 1100 men were captured.
Although Kennedy accepted the full responsibility for the failure of the invasion, he considered the C.I.A. and the Joint Chiefs of Staff as responsible for this catastrophe.
If the failure of the invasion humiliated President Kennedy, it pushed Castro forward.
The latter considered it as a great victory for the Cuban Revolution over American imperialism.
The failure of “ Operation Zapata” , as it was called, strengthened the relationship between Cuba and the Soviet Union.
For the first time, Castro affirmed publicly his personal commitment to the ideology of Marxism – Leninism “ I am a Marxist 33 – Leninist and will be one until the day I die ” , and he aligned Cuba with the Communist nations.
As a response, the Kennedy administration wanted to isolate Castro both politically and economically.
After some hesitation, Latin American nations voted to approve the American proposals to expel Cuba from the O.A.S. in January 1962, but they did not agree to punish it economically.
When the Bay of Pigs invasion failed, a special committee was founded to look for ways to overthrow Castro from power.
Through this committee, the Kennedy administration wanted to eliminate communism especialy in Cuba, which was the nearest communist country to the United States.
Furthermore, they believed that the failure of the government’s socialist economic policies and the persecution in Cuba made the Cuban people live in an atmosphere in which a resistance program would be possible.
Because of this, the United States developed a secret plan to arouse anti – regime spirit.
The United States Department of Defense Joint Chiefs of Staff saw that the project’s greatest objective was to provide adequate justification for a military intervention in Cuba.
They asked the Secretary of Defense to give them the responsibility for the project, but the Attorney General Robert Kennedy kept effective control.
Samuel Halpern, a C.I.A. coorganizer said, CIA and the United States army and military forces and Department Commerce, and Immigration, treasury, God knows who else – everybody was in Mongoose.
Some of them included the use of American Green Berets, destruction of Cuban sugar crops and attempts to assassinate Castro.
In order to make the United States public side with the military intervention against the Cuban government, the United States created Operation Northwoods.
The latter was a 1962 plan, which was signed by the chairma n of the Joint Chiefs of staff and presented to Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara who approved it.
The operation involved 35 artificial attacks on Cuban exiles and United States military targets.
Although the Cuban Project was stopped on October 30, 1962, 3 of 10 sabotage teams had already been sent to Cuba.
Like the Bay of Pigs Invasion, the Cuban Project is considered as an American policy failure in Cuba.
In May 1962, Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev thought that the best way to react to the United States superiority in developing and deploying strategic missiles was to place his own intermediate-range nuclear missiles in Cuba.
The careful denial and deception which the Soviet Union adopted from the beginning was called in Russia as Maskirovka.
All of the planning and preparation for transporting and deploying the missiles were done secretly.
Even the troops who were prepared for the mission were given false information; they were told that they should wear suitable clothes for the winter seaso The Soviet code name for the operation ANADYR was also the name of a river which 36 flowed into the Bering Sea and the name of the capital of Chukotsky.
In early 1962, a group of Soviet military specialists in constructing the missiles went with an agricultural delegation to Havana.
They met with Fidel Castro because the Cuban leaders had a great expectation that the United States would invade Cuba especially after the Bay of Pigs invasion and the Operation Mongoose, they agreed eagerly with the idea of installing nuclear missiles in Cuba.
Like Castro, Khrushchev felt that a United States invasion of Cuba was very soon.
They thought that the loss of Cuba would harm the communis t cause, especially in Latin America.
The plans for installing nuclear missiles in Cuba were approved by Cuban President Rodion Malinovsky, on July 4 and Khrushchev on July 7.
In September, the Cuban leaders became exteremly worried when Congress approved the United States joint Resolution 230, which authorized the use of military force in Cuba if the American interests were t hreatened.
On the same day, the United States announced a major military exercise in the Caribbean, PHIBRIG LEX-62, which was considered by Cuba as a proof that the United States planned to invade it.
The leaders expected Kennedy’s acception of the missiles because they saw him as a weak 37 and less confident person after his failure in the Bay of Pigs invasion.
On September 7, Dobrynin confirmed to the United States Ambassador to the United Nations Adlai Stevenson that the U.S.S.R. was supplying only defensive weapons to Cuba.
The first sending of R-12 missiles arrived on the night of September 8 and followed by a second one on September 16.
The Soviets continued their Maskirovka program and denied several times that the weapons which brought to Cuba were offensive.
On October 7, Cuban president Osvaldo Dorticos spoke at the United Nations General assembly, “ If we are attacked, we will defend ourselves.
Although the Americans heard about the missiles in Cuba, no U-2 flights were made over Cuba from September 5 to October 14.
On October 12, the administration decided to transfer the Cuban U-2 reconnaissance missions to the Air force.
They thought involving Air force flights would be easier to explain than C.I.A. flights.
When the reconnaissance missions were re-authorized on October 8, the bad weather kept the plans from flying.
The committee was in a hurry because it had to make a decision before the missiles became operational.
The Ex Com discussed the effect on the strategic balance of power, both political and military.
The Joint Chiefs of Staff believed that the missiles would change the military balance seriously, but Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara disagreed.
He was convinced that the missiles would not affect the strategic balance at all.
He said that an extra forty would not make a big difference in the strategic balance.
The United States had already approximately 5.000 strategic warheads; while, the Soviet Union had only 300.
In 1990, he repeated that “ it made no difference …The military balance wasn’t changed.
However the EXCOMM agreed that the missiles would affect the political balance.
Second, the United States credibility would be damaged in the eyes of the American people and its allies if they allowed the Soviet Union to compensate the strategic balance by placing missiles in Cuba.
After the crisis, Kennedy explained that “ it would have politically changed the balance of power.
The former wanted an air strike on the missile installations and a further invasion if necessary, but the latter wanted a naval blockade through which ships would be prevented from coming or going to Cuba.
Robert McNamara supported the naval blockade as a strong but limited military action that left the United States in control.
Admiral Anderson’s, Chief of Naval Operations wrote position paper that helped Kennedy to differentiate between a quarantine of offensive weapons and a blockade of all materials and showed that a classic blockade was not the original purpose.
Since it would take place in international waters, President Kennedy obtained the approval of the O.A.S. for military action under the hemispheric defense provisions of the Rio Treaty4.
On October 19, the EXCOMM formed separate working groups to examine the air strike and blockade options.
At 5:00m., he met with 40 Congressional leaders who opposed the blockade and asked for a strong action.
In Moscow, Ambassador Kohler informed Chairman Khrushchev about the blockade and Kennedy’s speech to the nation.
Before the speech, the American delegates met with Canadian Prime Minister John Diefenbaker, British Prime Minister Harold MacMillan, West German Chancellor Konrad Adenauer and French President Charles de Gaulle to tell them about United States intelligence and their proposed reaction.
On October 23, the British press expressed their doubt about the existence of Soviet bases in Cuba and guessed that Kennedy did this to be reelected.
On October 23, Khrushchev explained that the missile sites were put only to defend Cuba against the attack of the United States.
On October, 24 the first Russian ship, which carried oil, reached the naval quarantine and was allowed to enter Cuba.
However, this was not the case to the other ships which carried missiles.
During the same day, the Chinese People’s Daily announced that 650,000,000 Chinese men and women supported the Cuban 41 people.
In Germany, newspapers supported the United States’ response and expressed their fear of a Soviet retaliation in Berlin.
In France, an editorial in Le Monde doubted about the authenticity of the C.I.A.’s photographic evidence.
On October 26, Khrushchev sent a telegram to Kennedy in which he proposed to dismantle the missiles if Kennedy agreed to stop the blockade and promise a non – invasion of Cuba.
In the same day, Castro sent a letter to Khrushchev through which he wanted to convince him that the United States would invade Cuba and that he should respond with a nuclear strike against the United States.
On October 27, and before Kennedy could reply, Khrushchev sent another letter.
He said that Kennedy should also dismantle American missile bases in Turkey.
The incident was ignored by Kennedy who replied that he agreed to the terms of the first letter and also to the second letter but secretly.
On November 20, 1962, Kennedy lifted the blockade and on April 25, 1963, the Jupiter missiles were removed from Turkey.
The blame should be put on the United States, Cuba and the Soviet Union.
The United States tried to contain communism in Cuba as part of its application o f the Containment policy.
Under the Monroe Doctrine, the United States had the right for doing so to protect itself from the Soviet Union’s threat and especially in Cuba which is a Latin American country.
However, without taking the Monroe Doctrine into consideratio n, the United States had not the right to intervene in Cuba, which was an independent country and can make any agreement with any country.
The Cubans accepted the Soviet Union’s installation of the missiles because they wanted to defend themselves against United States aggression.
The United States isolated Cuba diplomatically, ousted it from the Organization of American States, imposed an economic embargo, assisted anti Castro rebels in the Bay of Pigs Invasion, tried to assissnate Castro in what is known as the Operation Mongoose.
The Soviet Union also had the right to install its missiles in Cuba as a reaction to the United States’ installation of missiles in Turkey.
After 1945, the Cold War emerged and brought with it the Containment policy which the Americans used to protect themselves against the Soviet Union.
The Americans of the 43 1950’s saw Latin American nations , including Cuba, as primitive people and inferior to them , a perception which is not new for a country whose people throughout history believed in their superiority.
During the 1950’s, Cuba witnessed many internal problems and at the end of the decade, Fidel Castro’s rule began.
Harry S Truman on March 12, 1947, declaring immediate economic and military aid to the governments of Greece, threatened by Communist insurrection, and Turkey, under pressure from Soviet expansion in the Mediterranean area.
As the United States and the Soviet Union struggled to reach a balance of power during the Cold War that followed World War II, Great Britain announced that it could no longer afford to aid those Mediterranean countries, which the West feared were in danger of falling under Soviet influence.
The United States Congress responded to a message from Truman by promptly appropriating $400,000,000 for this purpose.
The current government of Cuba was excluded from participation in the Organization under a decision adopted by the Eighth Meeting of Consultation in Punta del Este, Uruguay, on 31 January 1962.
That adherence by any member of the Organization of American States to MarxismLeninism is incompatible with the inter-American system and the alignment of such a government with the communist bloc breaks the unity and solidarity of the hemisphere.
That the present Government of Cuba, which has officially identified itself as a Marxist-Leninist government, was incompatible with the principles and objectives of the inter-American system.
That this incompatibility excluded the present Government of Cuba from participation in the inter-American system.
The centeral principle contained in its articles is that an attack against one is to be considered an attack against all of them; this was known as the “ hemispheric defense” doctrine.
In this crisis, the United States interfered to stop the spread of communism and also to remove the missiles which the Soviet Union had installed in Cuba.
It helped to make the United States and the Soviet Union realize that a nuclear war was impossible.
This dissertation shows that the United States’ interference in Cuba in 1962 was not new.
Throughout history, the United States interfered in a way or another in Cuba.
It shows also that the crisis did not happen by accident, but it was well calculated.
This is clear if we look to what happened before the crisis took place.
United States Foreign Policy at Home and Abroad, 1750 to Present 2nd ed.
