With rare exceptions, schools fail to acknowledge that there even is such a thing.
Thomas Edison, George Westinghouse and the Invention of the Electric Chair, by Mount Holyoke College sociology professor Richard Dean Moran.
The violence, we are often told, was a reaction to misguided United States policies.
The series traces the history of the Middle East from 1855 to 1917 through the eyes of an Egyptian who fought British occupiers and the Zionist movement.
What had not been clearly recognized until now, though, is that the general health of Native Americans had apparently been deteriorating for centuries before 1492.
John Noble Wilford gives examples of what the teams of anthropologists, economists and paleopathologists who did the research found.
President Bush's release of an audacious new strategy last month for defending America against future foreign threats stunned Washington and even some close allies.
America, it states, is the world's strongest nation, enjoying""unparalleled military strength,"" and will never again allow its military supremacy to be challenged as it was during the cold war.
Mencken, an obstreperous polemicist against American Puritanism, ever met George Orwell, a left-wing anti-Communist who fought the Fascists in Spain, the result, I imagine, would have been mutual disgust.
Yet here they are, brought close by the accidents of publishing and the epicycles of literary taste and perhaps because both touched on issues that are still unresolved and still urgent.
It is not clear if the North Koreans are bluffing, actually have a nuclear program or have yet produced any nuclear explosives.
Even less does it amaze that he reportedly sympathized with the 9/11 attacks.
CUBAN MISSILE CRISIS Forty years ago today, a United States spy plane's surveillance tape showed evidence that the Soviet Union was constructing nuclear missile silos on Cuba, 90 miles from the United States mainland.
Journalist Richard Heinberg suggests that the comparisons of the United States with Rome and Bush with Caesar do a disservice to Caesar.
It transformed the Roman Catholic faith more sweepingly than any other single event since the Protestant Reformation.
Yet despite two trials, one execution and many official investigations, the event — known as the Mountain Meadows massacre — remains shrouded in mystery and rumor.
PLAGIARISM INVOLVING AMBROSE, GOODWIN AND THE SLAVE HANNAH CRAFTS Three high-profile cases of plagiarism involving Stephen Ambrose, Doris Kearns Goodwin and Hannah Crafts are discussed, as are the historical manifestations of plagiarism.
A CENTURY OF CONFLICT NPR News presents a seven-part series on the roots of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict to bring context and perspective to the story, and to help listeners understand the complex situation in the Mideast, the history, and the consequences of the confrontation.
In fact, John Paul II has recognized more saints than any pope in history -more, in fact, than all the popes of the past four centuries combined.
It is certainly true that pre-emptive wars are not the norm in history.
It is not about weapons of mass destruction, or terrorism, or Saddam, or United Nations resolutions.
The Battle of Oxford, Mississippi, 1962 describes the showdown that proved""the biggest domestic military crisis of the twentieth century"" and a pivotal moment in the civil rights movement.
The calendar depicts undergarments from the early 18th century to the 1960s.
The last chapters include an account of how David Irving responded to the evidence in court.
NPR INTERVIEW Charles Tripp, author of a history of Iraq, explains how the history of Iraq led to the creation of a Saddam.
