Cuban accounts yields insights that can help us anticipate and overcome the D&D efforts of a growing Close-hold num Planning ber of foreign adversaries roda~ Gen.
Anatoh Gribkovthen a senior member of the Soviet General Staff Maskiro vka provides revealing insights into the early planning of the operation.
I-Ic says that, after Nikita Khrushchev Moscow has always had a flair for decided to emplace the missiles in D&-D, known in Russian as Cuba m the spring of 1962, the Gen rnriskirovka.
Its central tenet is to pre eral Staff detailed only five officers vent an adversary from discovering four generals and a colonelto serve Russian intentions by deceiving him as the center of the military planning about the nature, scope, and tiimng of apparatus.
Semyon Ivanov, an operation. j~Iasktrovka covers a chief of the General Staffs Chief broad range of concepts, from decep tion at the strategic planning level to Operations Directorate, was in over camouflage at the troop level.
Send comments regarding this burden estimate or any other aspect of this collection of information, including suggestions for reducing this burden, to Washington Headquarters Services, Directorate for Information Operations and Reports, 1215 Jefferson Davis Highway, Suite 1204, Arlington VA 22202-4302.
Respondents should be aware that notwithstanding any other provision of law, no person shall be subject to a penalty for failing to comply with a collection of information if it does not display a currently valid OMB control number.
PERFORMING ORGANIZATION REPORT NUMBER Center for the Study of Intelligence,Central Intelligence Agency,Washington,DC,20505 9.
DISTRIBUTION/AVAILABILITY STATEMENT Approved for public release; distribution unlimited 13.
From May with skis, felt boots, General Staff detailed only five through October, for reasons of officersfour generals and a fleece-lined parkas, security, no communications colonelto serve as the center of and other winter about the proposed. planned, and the military planning apparatus. actual Soviet deployments in Col.
Cuba were sent, even by coded of the General Staffs Chief Oper messages.
Everything was hand ations Directorate, was in overall carried by members of the small charge.
During that summer, the coterie of senior officials who circle of collaborators and con were directly involved. tacts expanded to include dov was brought in as well. members of each of the relevant possibly for the cover that he service branches, but secrecy and later provided for traveling dele Developing A Cover Story need-to-know prevailed.
Biiyuzov and his experts most senior officers brought into believed that the deployment The General Staffs code name for the plan were at least told that could he made expeditiously and the opera tionANADYRwas Cuba was involved in the opera secretly, without the United States discover designed to mislead Soviets as tion, hut only a few were ing the missiles.
Mikovan was well as foreigners about the desti informtd-of the exact nature of surprised at this judgment and nation of the equipment.
Anadyr the mission 5 believed the marshal to be a is the name of a river flowing into fool.
Rashidov was confident that the Bering Sea, the capital of the The top civilian and offi the missiles could be hidden, military Chukotsky Autonomous District, cials conceptualizing the claiming that the) could he and a bomber base in that deso operation did not see eye-to-eye placed so as to blend in with the late region Operation ANADYR about the likelihood of pulling off palm trees.
Gribkov held that was designed to suggest to lower a successful deception.
Promoting the Presidium member Frol Kozlov, sile site illusion, the troops that were Defense Minister Marshal Rodion called up for the Cuban expecli Malinovsky. and Marshal Sergei lhroughout the early planning tion were told only that tIle) were Biryuzov, commander of the Stra secretaries used to going to a cold region.
A colo Presidium member Sharaf Rashi dons, such as missile engineers, nel with good penmanship rote were informed that they would he the proposal that the Defense Council adopted It grew into a taking ICBMs to a site on Novaya Gen Anatoli I Grihkov and Gen Will island in the Arc Zemlya, a large am Y, Smith.
Generals Recoii ut ten, which was approved by Af~ssile Cr,s,~c C Chicago.
Gribkovs role in planning and imple 7 Dm0 A Brugioni, Eyeball to E~obalI To strengthen the concealment, nienting the operation The Inside Story of the Cuba,, i~l,sstle Cn many units were outfitted with ~ Ibid .c,s, p Raymond l, Ganhnff, Reflections on the 84.
Moreover, perhaps to further backstop the cover the group actually was Marshal Pliyev, traveling under the name plan, Moscow tapped four ground Biryuzov, and that he needed to Pavlov, arrived in Cuba to com forces regiments from the Lenin meet with ci /uicinictci inc with mand the Soviet contingent. grad Military District in the north out delay.
Only three hours later Two days later, 67 specialists for dispatch to Cuba.
The Cuban machine operators, irrigation fooled Soviet officers leadership unanimously and even senior specialists, and agricultural spe sent to Cuba.
Their covers, however, asked Grihkov why winter equip in principle. could not have withstood prob ment and clothing had heen ingthey had been assigned to provided.
The general admon Soviet maritime policy began to occupations about which they ished him to think like an adult, shift in accordance with these first knew nothing.
In June and July, the USSR to consult the few genuine spe ANADYR for We could a reason. began to charter Western ships to cialists traveling with them to gain have given away the game if we carry general cargo from the some rudimentary knowledge of had put any tropical clothing in Soviet Union to Cuba, resening their ostensible jobs.
Khrushchev with the propose the audacious to met military officers and sensitive Fidel Castro and other Cuban Defense Minister on 3 and 8 July. electronic and leaders.
The officials arrived in Raul Castro initialed a draft treaty Havana with little fanfare on with the Soviet Defense Minister signal-monitoring equipment to Cuba.
The group included was not to be publicly revealed Then-Minister for Industry Ernesto Col.
Ivanov and several mis until a visit that Khrushchev the Guevara and the head of sile construction specialists and planned to make to Cuba in the Cuban militia led another del ~s other military experts, whose job November. to Moscow during 27 egation it to determine whether the was August-2 September.
The pur missiles could be deployed in to introduce Fidel pose was GarthofC 15; alsn, Grihkov and secrecy.
P 14 Castros revisions into the draft 0 Fursenko and Naftali, p iad treaty.
Bruce J Allyn. and the deployment he made public Aleksancir Fursenko and Timothy Naf David A Welch, with the assistance of tali, O,w lie/I ofa Garth/aT Khnsb Davis Lewis.
Castro, and Ke,,,,edL 19581964 the Missile Crtc,s, and the Soviet Co//apse can overreaction; Khrushchev, , p 8.
Company, 1997), t9L This valuable This source draws extensively on input source relies on material from Soviet/ from key Soviet/Russian and American Russian archives officials who had a hand in the crisis i9 Fursenko and Naftali, 192.
On deck were cargo continued secrecy. be delivered. trucks, none of which were asso ciatcd with the missiles Nonetheless, some United States experts Keeping The Secret At Home speculated that the ship might he carrying ballistic missiles deep in In the Soviet Union, the men and its hold, because the Soviets equipment destined for Cuba tended to use largehatch ships of were assembled, loaded, and dence.
The train routes and between the ports and the final destinations \vere kept Defense Ministry in Moscow.
Mail and telegrams along where their cargoes were to he the way were strictly prohibited.
Before casting off, the same nias/eirovka measures that captain and the troop com To mask the immensity of the they had adopted when they first iiiander jointly received a large overall effort, the shipments to began to send weapons to Cuba. sealed envelope.
Unfastening it, Cuba left from eight portsfour Packing crates or special ship they found a smaller envelope to in the north (Kronstadt, Liepaya, ping containers concealed and be opened only at a certain set of Baltiysk, and Murmansk) and four protected weapons carried as geographic coordinates in the on the Black Sea (Sevastopol, deck cargo.
Nikolayev, and Poti).23 tary equipment was boarded up reached the designated point, an \Vestern access to these ports was with planks to make it look like officer from the KGBs Special closed off It was normal for the the ships superstructure Even Department joined them for the Soviets to close ports when muni on-deck field kitchens were dis opening of the envelope.
The Soviets shielded instructions told them to proceed time the surface-to-surface mis crated military hardwaresuch as to a Cuban port and authorized siles were being put on the ships missiles and launcherswith them to inform the ships com under tight security and cover of metal sheets to defeat infrared pan) of the destination.i The dark ness.~ photography.
They stored other concern for secrecy permeated combat and specialized equip the process.
After nearby military facilities during Ordinary automobiles, trucks. familiarizing yourself with the the two or three days required to tractors, and harvesters ~vere of this document, contents load a ship.
Guards were posted placed on the top deck to con destroy it. to prevent anyone from leaving ~ev the impression that only the area.
No letters, telegrams, or civilian and agricultural gear was telephone calls were permitted, a being transported.
Every ship involved in Operation rule that also applied to the offic ANADYR carried thick folders, ers.
The ships crew members, The prepared by Defense Ministry freighter Poltat.a, which of whom made than sailed Cuba in staff officers, which contained some more to September, was one run to Cuba, were forbidden a good example.
No external background information on a shore leave and correspon indicated that it number of countries with which signs was carry the USSR had good relations.
In July 1962. the Soviets buried in these packets, so that with State and military described United States reconnaissance mis not even the compilers would sions in international waters as know the real focus of the secrets, take measures harassment, and requested operation. to protect the through their GRU officer in personnel, and sink Washington, Col.
Cargo records were altered and Soviet crews would lower bulg Bolshakov met with Attorney the tonnage declared was well ing parcels of vodka, brandy, General Robert Kennedy more below what ~~as being carriecl.~~ caviar, sausages, and other clelica than a dozen tithes.
Grihkov noted that this Odessa, although they had loaded at other ports.
Most of the voyages lasted from Everyone likes to get presents, to Cuba listed Conakn, Guinea, 18 to 20 days.
When the even pilots.~~ mask froplea measures, the troops volume of traffic increased, a were kept below decks except or number of ships did not give their The captains were instructed to a few minutes at night when destinations but simply stated that take all possible evasive action in small groups crc allowed to they were carrying general the event of attacks or an effort to exercise and get some fresh air.~ cargo and awaiting orders. hoard their ships.
Should evasive During the tropical days. heavy action fail, they were to destroy tarpaulins cove ccl the hatches to Transit through the Bosporus and all documents with state and mili the lower decks where the troops the Dardanelles Straits presented taiy secrets, take measures to were berthed.
Not only protect the personnel, and sink lation, the inside temperature were the soldiers kept below the ships.
Rations were under orders to prevent any for route, the captains were to issued twice a clay and only in eigners from boarding, even the explain to ships offering assis darkness~ ~lu Many of the troops on Turkish pilots who usually guided tance that they were exporting hoard swore that they would civilian ships through those tricky automobiles.~ 1-lad this occurred, never again set foot on a ship. waters.
Whenever the pilots it might have provided cluesthe USSR had few cars of any kind Although the restrictions macic and was not recognized as an conditions on board nightmarish, ~3 United States SIGINT revealed that Soviet vessels automobile exporter. were making false port declaianons and the deceptions worked.
Gen. listing less than their known cargo-darn Grihkov states that United States intelli ing capacity B) late August, the Nation al Security Agency noted that 57 voyages Moscow also resorted to diplo gence discovered neither the true to Cuha had taken place in a little over a matic means to reduce United States significance of the surge in Soviet month and that some ships were on their reconnaissance of the ships en shipping to Cuba nor the mission second voyage in that period of time.
National Security Agency, Ni-I anti /he CuI,ii,i Missile Crisis (Fort Mciclc, MD NSA center for cryptologic History, 3~ Grihkov and Smith, p 57 ~Ibfr1, p 193.
In earl) fall, they began to approached Cuban ports, a num included personnel for field hos ber of niaskjropka exert control over the pitals. bakeries, mechanical precautions had been imple movements of all foreigners on workshops, and other support mented.
News reporters and units, all with a threemonth sup the Soviets built a large cinderply of food and fuel.
During foreign embassy personnel were block wall around the unloading forbidden to travel outside Septenther, the plan was revised area so that none of the port Havana, In the Cuban agents to eliminate submarine and sur city, could he observed by activity face ship squadrons, clue to suneilled and harassed foreign land-based agents. -i5 As the ships ers, especially British embassy potential resupply problems and lay in port, KGB officers kept concerns that their presence officials. watch on deck.
All Cubans, even might sound an alarm bell in militiamen, were barred from the Washington.
Local inhabitants size of the contingent in Cuba 11 Cuban the within a mile of the waterfront in had reached about ports to receive 41,900 person Mariel had to evacuate their Soviet ships Havana, Mariel, ndquadruple the size that US Cabanas, Bahia Honda.
The Mariel the northwest coast and brought the initial shipment of General Staff had on neglected to Casilda on the south coastto nuclear warheads on 4 ~ provide to facilitate passwords receive the surface-to-surface mis According to one source, this ship communication between the siles and nuclear warheads.H4 carried 99 nuclear chargessome arriving transport ships and the two-thirds of all nuclear weapons sent to Cuba and over 20 times IlneL the Fursenko and Naftali, 217.
There 12 148The Cu bans explosive power dropped by is Brugioni. p probably conflicting source information on the knew that the British were helping the number of warheads ~.pecifically for tile United States, which did not have formal 85-4 misstles Gribknv states that 36 such representation in Havana.
LS Brugioni. p 1514 warheads crc introduced. this issue ~3 Grihkov and Smith. p 38 Grihkovs David Detzer, The B,, C,,hcet, ,1 is cannot he resolved based on crirrent ev map puts Nicaro in the wrong location. cl/c c;,s,.s /962 figapparently confusing it with Niquero nn Crowell.79), p 69 Lire as that tracks with Soviet doctrinal the Southea~t cuasr JhicL, p 57 requirements for relire nlksiles.
Accord accurate information rate information about the deployment so as to mask it.
The ingly. some ship captains and onabout the deployment information was funneled through board troop commanders had dif through discredited counterrevolutionary organiza ficulty accepting orders to reroute their ships from their originally groups] so as to mask tions and their press in the United States, especially in Miami.
The captain of CIA discounted the information, one ship even turned back out to because it did not consider the sea rather than allow a Cuban groups and people peddling it to he credible.
This strategy was patrol boat crew to come aboard to guide him to his anchorage. highly effective, according to a former Cuban intelligence Movement to Field Sites officer.
In the initial military cargo, and maskijouka not stages exploited the dmigrds lack of of the operation, the United States requirements invariably compli credibility was unwittingly back received reports from friendly cated the work.
Equipment that stopped by correspondence nations, newspaper correspon between Cubans and their friends had at least a superficial resem dents, and other sources and relatives in the United States. blance to agricultural machinery indicating that hundreds of Rus From June to September, Cu ban was unloaded in broad daylight. had been sian troops in fatigues intelligence intercepted some hut weapons and other military seen in Havana and in seemingly 17,000 letters that had something equipment could he unloaded endless convoys along Cubas to say about the deployment of only at night.
Many young Rus Soviet troops and missiles in sian also had been obsenred specialized equipment was stored men Cuba.
In late September, Cuban sightseeing in the Cuban capital authorities permitted those letters in sheds or moved directly to des in checked, cotton shirts and to arrive in Miami as part of the ignated bases along back roads at cheap trousers.
Just as night 52 Soviets and Cubans took extra Havana expected, the CIA paid precautions to keep gawkers no attention to these letters.
All this time, Radio Moscow was away from the whanres and moved the nuclear cargoes away claiming that the USSR was only under black canvas and escorted For United States intelligence analysts, the machine tools, amount of noise from Cuba giving Cuba by heavy guard, the chatty wheat, and agricultural machin Cubans gave a steady stream of grew deafening.
Reports flooded in from Cubans, tourists, foreign ery, along with some 7,000 tons clues to United States SIGINT collectors. diplomats in Cuba, and newspa of various fertilizers.
This per officials reporting in a private consistent with At the same time, the Soviets and description was Cubans mounted a major cam the false identities provided to paign using HUMINT channels to 5 Doini ngo Aniuchastegw.
Cuban In many of the Soviet military spe bolster the overall deception telligence and ihe October Crisis.
At the CIA focal point at mention their inilitaiy designa Dobiynin sought out Robert Opa-Locka, Florida, intelligence tions or the ranks of their Kennedy and stated that he had officers screened countless commanders.
Moreover, all com received instructions from reports and debriefed Cubans munications between the Soviet Khrushchev to assure the Presi who had fled (lie island 58 Most of military headquarters in Havana dent that there would be no the reports from Cuba were exag and units in the field had to he surfacetosurface missiles or gerated or imaginarysome were made in person, not written or offensive weapons placed in so outrageous that they were sent by radio.
Dobrynin also added that laughable and made all the oth brief hookups and equipment the Attorney General could assure ers suspect.
There were far tests, Soviet troops maintained his brother that the Soviet mili fetched tales of African troops total radio silence in order to ta rv bu ildu p was not of any with rings in their noses, lurking mask their identity, location, and signifiance.u1~ On 6 September.
Mongolians. and even Chinese troop strength from US Theodore Sorenson, special coun troops These followed intelligence. hi accounts sel to President Kennedy, met earlier erroneous reports of Soviet military with Dobiynin, ho reiterated his equipment secreted away In retrospect. some Soviet and in caves, underground hangers, Cuban officials found it remark assurances that Soviet military and concrete domes.
The following day, stream of reports of Soviet unnoticed on the hack roads of Dobnnin assured United States Ambassa the island for long As they rum clor to the United Nations Acllai bled through the little Cuban Stevenson that the USSR was sup From the port areas, the canvastowns, they left a trail of downed plying only defensive weapons to covered 55-4 missiles were moved telephone poles and mailboxes.
Cuba On 11 September, TASS in night convoys, under tight When a peasants shack had to be announced that the USSR neither security, to sites in the interior of moved or knocked down to allow needed nor intended to intro the island.
Security was tightened a missile carrier to turn a tight duce offensive nuclear weapons so that the troops disembarked corner, those who witnessed the into Cuba. ~ dressed as civilians, and their event were hound to talk Soviet escortsSoviet personnel who and Cuban efforts to discredit had arrived earlierwere such anecdotal accounts paid off.
In late September, Khrushchev required to wear Cuban mil tar) ernbaiked on a barnstorming tour uniforms and issue commands in the Turkmen and Uzhek along the convoy routes only in Disingenuous Diplomacy republics, ibis highprofile tiip, Spanish.
Soviet military men Soviet spokesmen kept up a week of October, emphasized remained dressed in civilian steady stream of denials and dis agricultural themes.
On 4 Khrushchevs man) speeches dur September, Ambassador Anatoli ing his travels was there any ~ Deizec p 59 reference suggesting aggression 1/nd., (tO. or threats to the United States.
Grihkov and Smith. p 39 liii,, ,uash,,ovhu requirement is comparable I/mI . p 52. and Amuchastegu , p loL to ti Ia t used during the Korean conflict, A cautionary note here is that i his a rude when Soviet pilots were instructed to is the only puhli,~hecl account by a Brtigioni, p 115~ speak in Chinese while flying nlisiOiiS firmer Cu ban intelligence officer tliu~ Blight.
Allyn, and Welch, pp i63-i64. tn tO, t( knit United States SIGtNT units linigioni.
Chester ing nuclear-armed B-52s a loft Bowles, questioned Dohrvnin on graphs that yielded the and engaged in extensive policy whether Moscow intended to put first confirmation of deliberations in the Executive offensive weapons in Cuba; the offensive missiles in Committee.
On 22 October, Presi Ambassador denied any such dent Kennedy revealed the Cuba. intention.
Bolshakov brought Robert fronted with the photographic Kennedy a personal message evidence, the Russians informed directly from Khrushchev to Presi Raul Castro that i-nore attention dent Kennedy that under no would have to he paid to con circumstances would surface-tocealing the site work and surface missiles he sent to Cuba. concrete slabs and surrounded camouflaging the missiles and The next day Foreign Minister not only by the missiles, but also other heavy equipment. lhe Gromyko met with President by multiple buildings, fuel trucks Soviet units stretched tarpaulins Kennedy for two hours.
Gromyko and tanks, and hundreds of and nets over the missiles, and assured him that the Soviet aid to meters of thick cable To try to daubed paint or mud across the Cuba pursued solely the pur maintain secrecy, Soviet com canvases.
Nonetheless, number of missiles a nd protect Soviet commanders and planners against sabotage.
They \vere constructed in signature from groundlevel, but formula to end the crisis.
United States Governnieni Print generally sparse, consisting of a ing Office. i996i. p 29Although uncer few clusters of six minutes, United States Air Force Maj. palm trees or a a in aix u the status of the wea ix )ns in thick undergrowth of bushes.
Washington stepped up deployed, for example. only about ha If intelligence collection of all kinds, ~~cre ready to he fueledan i8hour processand not one had been pro grail] iiied ft )r night.
In Conclusion The Soviet deception effort was com prehensive, but not free from shortcomings.
The early, overly opti mistic assessments by Marshal Biryuzov and Rashidov evidently went unchallenged.
Many of the slips occutred not in the USSR but in Cuba, when Soviet units had to unload theit weapons, transpott them to the field, and set them up.
The operation might have been enhanced by the presence of maskirovka special ists in all Soviet units in Cuba.
In the l980s, a special rnaskirovka director ate was created within the General Staff.
Such an organization would have played a vital role had it existed in 1962.
On 4 February 1963, the Presidents Foreign Intelligence Advisory Board issued a major postmortem report during the months preceding 14 and deception-aware analytic corps, the October.
The report took the Com the United States could have uncov over signature of its chairman, James R Killian, Jr.
The Killian munity to task for inadequate early ered Khrushchevs ;reat gamble long repott described the inttoduction and warning of hostile intentions and before Maj.
Heysers revealing U-2 deployment of Soviet strategic mis capabilities; failure to provide senior mission. siles in Cuba as a near-total policymakers with meaningful, cumu lative assessments 0f the available Only four decades later, can we intelligence surprise.
It now, concluded that the Intelligence Com intelligence indicators; and failure to uncover the extent of the use of munitys analysis of intelligence produce a revision of the erroneous deception in the events leading to the indicatots and its National Intelligence Estimate (NIE Cuban missile crisis.
To paraphrase Sir production of cur intelligence 8-3-62) of 19 September 1962.76 Winston Churchill, perhaps the leastrent reports failed to get across to key government officials the explored aspect of the crisis was the most accurate possible picture of what Nowhere does the I O-page Killian Soviet effort to cloak the truth of its the Soviets might be up to in Cuba Report mention adversarial denial and strategic missile deployment within a deception.
Within United States intelligence body-guard of lies, on a scale that organizations, the awareness and sys most United States planners could not tematic study of foreign D&D had comprehend.
Central Intelligence Agency, CIA Docu rnenn on the Cuban Aliss11e Crisis (sXhshing ton.
