This movie is on TWM’s short list of the best movies to supplement classes in United States History, High School Level.
MENU Benefits of the MoviePossible ProblemsParenting PointsSelected Awards & CastHelpful Background Using the Movie in the ClassroomDiscussion QuestionsSocial-Emotional LearningMoral-Ethical EmphasisAssignments and Projects CCSS Anchor StandardsBridges to ReadingLinks to the InternetBibliography MOVIE WORKSHEETS & STUDENT HANDOUTS TWM offers the following movie worksheets to keep students’ minds on the film and to focus their attention on the lessons to be learned from the movie.
Film Study Worksheet for a Work of Historical Fiction; Film Study Worksheet for ELA Classes; and Worksheet for Cinematic and Theatrical Elements and Their Effects.
Teachers can modify the movie worksheets to fit the needs of each class.
See also TWM’s Historical Fiction in Film Cross-Curricular Homework Project and Movies as Literature Homework Project.
DESCRIPTION In 1962, at the height of the Cold War, the United States discovers that the Russians are secretly installing nuclear missiles on the island of Cuba.
President John F Kennedy convenes a team of advisors to help decide how to respond.
BENEFITS OF THE MOVIE Thirteen Days captures the tension that the crisis provoked and provides an example of how foreign policy was made in the last half of the 20th century.
It enables students to understand the importance of diplomacy and leadership in high office.
They will exercise research and writing skills in the expression of these insights.
Thirteen Days can be a valuable supplement to the study of the Cold War, but only if serious misimpressions are brought out and discussed.
The Helpful Background section of this Learning Guide provides the information necessary to make these corrections.
PARENTING POINTS You may want to read the Helpful Background information in this Guide should your children want more details about this risky period in Cold War history.
HELPFUL BACKGROUND Thirteen Days is the story of mankind’s closest brush with nuclear Armageddon.
HISTORICAL ANTECEDENTS OF THE CUBAN MISSILE CRISISAlthough the crisis began and ended in October of 1962, the story began much earlier.
Almost immediately after World War II, relations between the Soviet Union and the United States deteriorated, ending the cooperation which enabled the Allies to defeat Nazi Germany.
In response, Britain and America thwarted the expansion of the Azerbaijani Soviet Republic into Iran and began the policy of containment attempting to restrict Soviet expansion.
These ranged from the Soviet blockade of Berlin, the Korean War, American spy planes crossing Russian airspace, Chinese shelling of the Taiwanese islands Quemoy and Matsu, and the confrontation between Soviet ally Egypt and Western allies Israel, France and Britain over the Suez Canal.
The IRBMs could not reach the United States but they could reach Western Europe.
President Kennedy adopted a middle approach in which the United States Navy quarantined the island of Cuba, preventing any additional missiles or offensive weapons from reaching the island.
President Kennedy had ordered these missiles removed months before, but because of objections from the Turks and bureaucratic inertia, the missiles had remained in place.
Future United States presidents and Soviet leaders conducted Strategic Arms Limitation Talks in the 1960s and 1970s to limit the number of nuclear warheads poised to strike the other side.
Looking to expand, Germany demanded that Czechoslovakia cede to it a part of Czech territory called the Sudetenland in which approximately 3 million ethnic Germans lived.
Hitler promised that if Germany absorbed the Sudetenland, it would seek no additional territory.
Their father, Joseph P Kennedy, had been one of the few millionaires to back Franklin Roosevelt in the 1932 election.
From the time of Munich until long after the United States had declared war on Germany, Joseph P Kennedy advocated a compromise with Hitler and isolationist foreign policy.
The status and the prosperity of West Berlin increasingly annoyed the Russians and the East Germans.
Through the years, West Berlin became a wealthy glittering oasis standing in stark contrast to the drab and relatively impoverished life of East Germany.
Robert Kennedy, at the direction of the President, personally supervised these activities and was very persistent in pushing the CIA for more aggressive action against Cuba and against Castro personally.
They’ve got enough to blow us up now anyway, I think it’s just a question of … After all, this is a political struggle as much as military.
So they would say that we endangered their interests and security and reunification and all the rest, because of the preemptive action that we took in Cuba.
So I think they’ve got … I must say I think it’s a very satisfactory position from their point of view.
In every conversation we’ve had with the Russians, that’s what … Even last night we talked about Cuba for a while, but Berlin — that’s what Khrushchev’s committed himself to personally.
It was therefore impossible for any United States government to permit the missiles to remain, and the United States would go to war, if necessary, to remove the missiles.
Khrushchev forgot that the United States mainland hadn’t been invaded since 1812.
Khrushchev never dreamed that the United States populace would react so dramatically to Russian missiles in Cuba.
Over the years, as more about the crisis became public, it has become clear that the non-invasion pledge was a real concession.
Revelations in the 1990s that the Russians had been able to secretly conduct a massive military build-up in Cuba, introducing 40,000 Red Army troops, and that the 42 nuclear missiles were operational during the crisis, demonstrate the wisdom of President Kennedy’s approach.
It appears that Khrushchev had several goals when he ordered IRCBMs to be installed in Cuba.
He wanted to increase Russia’s nuclear capacity without waiting for Russian scientists and engineers to improve and build Russia’s own missile fleet.
President Kennedy didn’t believe that the United States advantage in ICBMs meant that the United States could safely engage in nuclear war with Russia.
Even with the great United States advantage, there was no defense against the 40 ICBMs possessed by the Soviets.
That the Russians achieved nuclear parity a year or two sooner, by placing missiles in Cuba, was not very important to him.
Khrushchev is reported to have made several remarks to close aides that indicated that improving Russia’s nuclear capabilities and reducing the United States advantage were important to him.
For example, Khrushchev could have just sent the 40,000 Red Army troops with a mission to defend the island.
Any of these situations, if they had come to pass, would have shown the Europeans that they could not rely on the United States to look after their interests and would have undermined the NATO alliance.
At that time he was the absolute dictator of the Soviet Union and while the entire Presidium signed onto the plan to put missiles in Cuba, Khrushchev’s word was final.
However, the refusal of the United States to disavow a nuclear first strike made the Russians justifiably nervous.
On balance, responsibility for events which put the future of the world at risk fall more heavily on the Soviet side than to the U.S.; more to Khrushchev than to Kennedy.
Thirteen Days’ recreates for this generation of Americans much of the reality of the most dangerous moment in human history.
Most of the incidents described in the film actually occurred, including the meetings in which the Russian Foreign Minister Gromyko lied directly to President Kennedy when he assured him that the Russians were not installing missiles in Cuba, the late night meeting between Bobby Kennedy and the Soviet Ambassador Dobrynin in which the offer to remove obsolete missiles from Turkey was made, the confrontation at the U.N., the back channel efforts to communicate with Khrushchev, and some of the specific exchanges between President Kennedy and his advisors.
The language of many important conversations has been taken right out of the transcripts or reports of the participants.
While, at the time of the crisis, the Russians were far behind the United States in nuclear capability, the 40 operational ICBMs located in Russia would have caused unacceptable casualties in the United States and the Russian IRBMs could have decimated Europe, something that would be intolerable to the United States As shown by his statements quoted above, this was President Kennedy’s position.
The strains on the NATO alliance would have been severe and perhaps fatal.
The secret placement of nuclear missiles in Cuba was an aggressive move by the Soviets.
The movie does not show the role played by United States foreign policy in helping create the atmosphere in which the crisis occurred.
However, the United States refused to disclaim a nuclear first strike policy The friction between the United States military and President Kennedy was overstated in the movie.
General LeMay thought that nuclear war with the Soviets was inevitable and wanted it to occur before the United States lost its 18 to 1 superiority in nuclear delivery devices.
The film acknowledges the importance of the vote of the Organization of American States supporting the quarantine.
It should also be noted that this vote “had a major psychological and practical effect on the Russians and changed our position from that of an outlaw acting in violation of international law into a country acting in accordance with twenty allies legally protecting their position.
However, the movie glosses over the importance of the quick support of the NATO allies of the United States and even of African countries which would have had an important role if the Russians had tried to send nuclear arms to Cuba by air in order to avoid the naval blockade.
The only available landing strips for refueling were in two countries, Guinea and Senegal, which had agreed not to permit the flights.
The role of O’Donnell was overstated and the roles of other advisors whose input was very important to President Kennedy, were minimized.
After offering to remove the missiles in return only for United States guarantees that it would not invade Cuba, Khrushchev tried to “change horses in midstream” when he was informed of Kennedy’s feelers that the United States might also trade the missiles in Turkey.
Another beautiful elegant touch is the conversation between McNamara and McCone at the end of the film in which they agree that the United States strategic position had been so strengthened by the outcome of the crisis that they could now “run the table” on the Russians in places like Asia.
Just after his administration took office, President Kennedy had everyone on the Security Counsel read Barbara Tuchman’s The Guns of August.
The person making the ultimate decision, in it is the United States the President, should have the benefit of the best information possible and many recommendations and opinions from both inside and outside of government.
Actually, President Kennedy had learned this lesson from the Bay of Pigs debacle.
At the end of World War II, relations between the Soviet Union and the United States deteriorated, ending the cooperation which enabled the Allies to defeat Nazi Germany.
The Communist bloc and the capitalist democracies lurched from crisis to crisis.
The IRBMs on Russian soil could not reach the U.S., other than Alaska, but they could reach Western Europe.
Well over a hundred million people could have been killed in the United States and the NATO countries.
In the effort to stop the spread of communism, in April of 1961 the CIA, with President Kennedy’s approval, mounted an invasion of Cuba that had been planned during the Eisenhower Administration.
Using Cuban exiles as the initial landing force, the target was the Bay of Pigs on the Cuban coast.
The responsible officials, the head of the CIA, Allen Dulles, and an assistant were told by President Kennedy that they were to resign after a decent interval.
After the Bay of Pigs invasion, the CIA developed Operation Mongoose which actively tried to destabilize the Cuban regime and assassinate Cuban President Fidel Castro.
The Soviets, for their part, acutely felt the inferiority of their nuclear deterrent.
The Soviet leadership, however, didn’t realize how much the United States feared Russia’s nuclear power.
In an attempt to redress the imbalance in nuclear missiles and ensure that the United States would not mount another Cuban invasion, Nikita Khrushchev, leader of the Soviet Union, began a program to secretly place intermediate-range nuclear missiles in Cuba.
While some recommended diplomacy, others pressed for military options, such as air strikes or an invasion of Cuba.
President Kennedy adopted a middle approach in which the United States Navy established a quarantine preventing any additional missiles or offensive weapons from reaching the island.
In the meantime, the United States mounted a public relations and diplomatic offensive attempting to use world opinion to pressure the Soviets to remove the missiles.
Acting without Moscow’s approval, a Soviet surface-to-air missile battery shot down a U-2 spy plane over Cuba, killing the pilot and exacerbating the tension between the Cold War combatants.
Future presidents and Soviet leaders agreed to Strategic Arms Limitation Treaties in the 1960s and 1970s that limited the number of nuclear warheads poised to strike the other side.
Never again would America and Russia come to the brink of a nuclear Armageddon.
Looking back on the Crisis from the safe distance of decades, it is easy to see the contrast in styles of decision-making in both President Kennedy and Nikita Khrushchev.
President Kennedy reached out to a broad array of advisors for help in making decisions, whereas Chairman Khrushchev had very few advisors.
In the midst of the crisis, United States policy makers rushed to prepare an invasion of the island without knowing that the missiles were already operational and that the island was guarded by 40,000 Red Army personnel armed with tactical nuclear weapons the size of the bombs dropped on Hiroshima and Nagasaki.
He also knew that there would have been all out war, if nuclear weapons were used on United States troops.
Khrushchev mistakenly thought that the young President was callow and weak.
Nonetheless, when faced with the probability that his ploy in Cuba would lead to nuclear war, and given an out by the U.S., Khrushchev withdrew the missiles.
What Khrushchev had not understood when he gave the order to put the missiles in Cuba in the first place, was that the United States population was unwilling to tolerate hostile nuclear missiles in Cuba.
Failure to gauge the reaction of ordinary United States citizens to the prospect of Russian missiles in Cuba was Khrushchev’s key mistake in his planning for the crisis.
By 1962, with the advent of nuclear tipped ballistic missiles, that feeling of insulation was irrational, but it was still held by many Americans.
Given the massive military buildup in Florida, the attempted invasion at the Bay of Pigs, and Operation Mongoose with its sabotage and assassination attempts Castro had good reason for this belief.
He may not have been completely aware of the great advantage that the United States had in ICBMs, but he did know that Russian IRBMs in Cuba could deal a massive blow to his enemy to the North.
Castro knew Cuba would be incinerated but was willing to sacrifice the island and its people for the good of the Communistcause world-wide.
A final reason Khrushchev was willing to back down can be attributed to President Kennedy’s willingness to provide a formal commitment that, if the missiles were withdrawn, the United States would not invade Cuba and that it would not help others to do so.
As shown in the film, while on the one hand preparing for war if it had to come, President Kennedy always chose actions that would not lead to war.
Revelations in the 1990s that the Russians had been able to secretly conduct a massive military build-up in Cuba, introducing 40,000 Red Army troops, and that their 42 nuclear missiles were operational during the crisis demonstrate the wisdom of President Kennedy’s approach.
The primary example of Kennedy’s restraint occurred on October 27 when a Russian Surface to Air missile shot down an American U-2 spy plane killing the pilot.
However, President Kennedy did know that one choice led the world much closer to nuclear war and the other kept alive the hope for a peaceful resolution.
President Kennedy chose to believe that the attack on the U-2 was unauthorized.
Khrushchev, on the other hand, exhibited poor leadership by initiating the crisis.
Both sides contributed to the crisis, although most Western historians believe that the gravest responsibility lies with Khrushchev and the Soviets.
Furthermore, in the service of Russian neo-imperialism and Communist solidarity, Khrushchev wanted to protect Cuba from invasion from the United States Even before the crisis, with the history of the Bay of Pigs invasion and the ongoing “Operation Mongoose,” the Russians and the Cubans had reason to fear United States intentions.
However, Khrushchev is reported to have made several remarks to close aids indicating that improving Russia’s nuclear capabilities and reducing the United States advantage in ICwere important to him.
United States policy makers felt that its “nuclear shield” was all that kept the peace in Europe.
This imbalance of blame most likely played a role in Khrushchev’s decision to back down and that was his saving grace.
Certainly, the world and Khrushchev were fortunate that the United States had elected a president who had the wisdom and personal strength sufficient to resist demands for an invasion or an air strike and that there was not another escalating incident that would have forced President Kennedy’s hand.
During the crisis he warned that there will be people who, through stupidity or because of their own agenda, would take actions to push the country toward a nuclear Armageddon.
What may have been the result had those who wanted military action against Russia, prevailed.
Students should note that each side has something to gain and to lose in any confrontation; the best conclusion to a deadly stand-off is an honorable exit in which both parties save face as they back away from untenable positions.
However, in 1962 the American people thought that the installation of intermediate-range ballistic missiles in Cuba would have resulted in an intolerable change in the balance of power.
These missiles could have destroyed every major United States population center killing an estimated 100,000,000 people; that was an unacceptable result for any United States leader.
Thus, while the United States had more ICBMs than Russia, the two superpowers were at a stalemate.
The addition of IRBMs in Cuba didn’t really change that fact and the American people were wrong to regard the installation of missiles in Cuba as a substantial change in the balance of power.
However, it would probably have been impossible for President Kennedy to convince them of this.
There were other considerations, including the need to look strong on the International stage, the need to punish Russia for a reckless gamble, etc.
A key episode in the movie Thirteen Days is the confrontation between an American warship and a Soviet ship which refused to stop.
Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara argued that the rules had changed, given the significance of the crisis and the chances for misperception and mistake.
It was a civilian matter because the response of the United States warship could have led to war.
Some may suggest that President Kennedy affirmed aggressive actions against a small, weak enemy yet supported peace when the stakes were high and the enemy was powerful.
It appears that his peacemaker role depended upon the weight of risks and the potential for success both in political and human terms.
Munich taught us that one concession is usually followed by a demand for another, and on and on until war results from miscalculation or when the aggressor simply goes too far.
However, like the Bay of Pigs, it would have been a complete disaster and, unlike the Bay of Pigs invasion, it would probably have started a nuclear war.
The advantage of using previously-planned-out scenarios is that they have been developed at a time of leisure when the stresses of the present crisis didn’t deprive planners of the time to think clearly and meticulously.
See the Helpful Background section relating to the first strike option.
The only justification to prepare for a first or a retaliatory nuclear strike is to convince the other side that if it strikes you, it will be destroyed in turn.
A memorable scene from the movie involves the demonstration by United States Ambassador to the United Nations, Adlai Stevenson, that the Soviets were installing missiles in Cuba and that they were lying about it.
It turns out that Iraq did not have weapons of mass destruction or programs to make them; that there was no operational link between Al Qaeda and Iraq, etc.
Stevenson’s speech was instrumental in preventing a war and it enhanced United States prestige.
Now that the intelligence on which the speech was based has proved to be faulty, the speech has resulted in damage to United States prestige.
The civilians not only have a valuable perspective but they have the ultimate responsibility.
Therefore, the civilian leaders must have absolute control over the military.
In this case, as Secretary McNamara stated, firing on the Soviet ship sent a message to Khrushchev that President Kennedy may not have wanted to send.
The consensus of the world community, expressed in several treaties, is that nuclear, biological, and chemical weapons are special cases, and that their development should be controlled.
The general consensus is that President Kennedy displayed excellent leadership skills in this crisis and that this leadership was key in avoiding nuclear war.
ASSIGNMENTS, PROJECTS & ACTIVITIES Any of the discussion questions can serve as a writing prompt.
Research sources and write an expository essay on one of the following topics any of which can be expanded to include a power point presentation to the class as a whole.
Write a review of the film in which you discuss the tension and seriousness of the situation as it may be evaluated by viewers who have lived through a considerable number of crises, such as September 11, etc.
Compare the tension, the efforts to resolve the problem, and the public’s response.
Write a proposal for a checklist of steps and decisions that the United States would have to make before engaging in warfare.
To John A Tures, Assistant Professor of Political Science, at La Grange College, La Grange, Georgia, for help with early drafts of this Learning Guide and to Alexander Frieden for proofreading and comments.
Benefits of the MoviePossible ProblemsParenting PointsSelected Awards & CastHelpful BackgroundUsing the Movie in the ClassroomDiscussion QuestionsSocial-Emotional LearningMoral-Ethical EmphasisAssignments and ProjectsCCSS Anchor StandardsBridges to ReadingLinks to the InternetBibliography MOVIE WORKSHEETS: TWM offers the following movie worksheets to keep students’ minds on the film and to focus their attention on the lessons to be learned from the movie.
Strangelove, or How I Stopped Worrying and Learned to Love the Bomb, Fail Safe, and Seven Days in May.
