Since Donald Trump assumed the Presidency of the United States on Jan 20, 2017; many believe the prestige of the office of the presidency and the position and the influence of the United States around the world has diminished.
Case in point, President Trump alienated NATO member states by calling them obsolete; he supported Brexit and at the present time he is at odds with North Korea’s dictator.
President Trump’s unpredictability and inflammatory rhetoric to pressure Pyongyang has instead risked the world peace, given that North Korea is not Iraq or Afghanistan but a nuclear power.
However, if we look back at history, this is not the first time the world almost came to a standstill.
To draw some experience, Adan Makina takes us back to the era of Cuban missile crisis and how it was handled by President John F Kennedy.
Chinese rulers of the postclassical era thought the expansive Taklimakan Desert to be a natural barrier against foreign infiltrations and that also the pharaohs of Egypt saw the Sahara Desert as an obstacle for alien invaders, likewise, there was a perception in the United States that the massive Pacific and Atlantic Oceans would safeguard America from foreign aggression.
The objective of this research is to uncover the pitfalls of the Kennedy administration for failing to uncover Soviet military buildup in Cuba, nondescript Nikita Khrushchev’s fantasy of ensuring Soviet longevity through justification and emulation, and Moscow’s morbid suspicion of foreigners-especially America and Americans.
Soviet Belligerence in Words and in Deeds Right after the end of the Second World War, in words and deeds, Soviet leaders and Soviet intelligence worked exhaustively without stop ultimately aiming at inflicting significant harm to the United States, to her allies, and to her democratic values.
If the United States government arrogates this right to itself, it is standing on very shaky ground, because it does not…possess the military might that would permit it to dictate conditions to other countries.
The phrase “direct aggression against another country” is in reference to the United States’ policies toward Cuba while “social system” denotes the communist system established by Fidel Castro in Cuba with help from the Soviet politburo.
Khrushchev issued this echoing message as a stern warning to the United States while the administration in Washington remained oblivious and unperturbed.
Designed to carry nuclear warheads and capable of travelling 1,100 miles; the medium-range missiles were capable of striking Washington, DC, Mexico City and other cities in the south-eastern parts of the United States, Central America and the Caribbean area.
The intermediate-range missiles had the capability to strike major cities in the western hemisphere from Hudson Bay in Canada to Lima in Peru.
On the other hand, President Kennedy noted that Soviet bombers capable of carrying nuclear warheads were being “uncrated” and assembled in Cuba while Cuban air bases capable of accommodating the bombers remained under construction.
Soviet Global political Irredentism The Soviet’s undaunted political irredentism and ideological obscurantism predate the Cuban missile crisis.
During Josef Stalin’s reign, the Soviet Union embarked on forceful territorial expansion by craftily moving southwards towards Iran and Turkey and by stealthily injecting communist thought into Greek political arena.
After World War II the Soviet leaders embarked on a precarious mission of occupying the northern regions of Iran until the prime minister of Iran conceded defeat by promising the Soviets offer of oil to which the Soviets categorically rejected until the United States and Britain got involved with a view to controlling Soviet irredentist tendencies.
As for Turkey, Stalin made various demands that included giving up of Turkish regions straddling Soviet borders, joint Soviet-Turkish administration of the Dardanelles Strait, Turkey sever relations with Britain, and lastly but not least, Soviet demand that Turkey lease bases in the Dardanelles Strait exclusively for use by Soviet naval and land forces.
In Greece, communism spread like wildfire leading to the formation of a right-wing government.
American Demilitarization and Soviet Expansionism The expansion of Soviet influence in Eastern Europe coupled with the spread of communism in Africa, the Middle East, Asia, and Latin America created prolonged competition between the forces of capitalism and communism.
Despite the United States’ active-duty personnel drastically dropping from 12 million in 1945 to a mere 1. million in 1948, on the other hand, weighted against the dilapidated, disenfranchised, and demoralized Soviet military power, the United States, assisted by the largest and the deadliest nuclear arsenals, enjoyed leverage over the seas.
This unprecedented sweeping reduction of active-duty personnel by the United States sent commotion across continental Europe especially among nations that relied on American defense against anticipated Soviet aggravations.
In addition, America’s sublime alienation sped up the evolvement of unparalleled despotic and authoritarian leaders in Asia, Eastern Europe, and Africa in the runner-up to the Cold War.
Compared to the enormous Soviet global sphere of control at the height of communism, apart from providing unreserved protection to its compacted NATO allies in the European continent and the cluster of territories under its trusteeship, the United States enjoyed little global dominance while the Soviet Union’s malevolent communist ideology blanketed continental Africa, Asia, the Middle East, Latin and South America, and the Caribbean.
The Rise of John Fitzgerald Kennedy The Cuban missile crisis happened at a time when the president of the United States, John Fitzgerald Kennedy, kept his brother Robert F Kennedy who at that time was the United States Attorney General-as his closest confidant and advisor.
This task would have been left to someone with profound knowledge of national security issues-issues related to the containment of the Soviet Union’s unabashed spherical predation and growing global communist antagonism.
At that time Soviet leader Khrushchev and his foreign minister Andrei Gromyko and others considered the new president of the United States, John F Kennedy, “a typical pragmatist” while Soviet Americanists saw Kennedy’s position on USA-Soviet relations as being quite contradictory.
Under Khrushchev, Russian people always saw America as inferior technologically and militarily.
Dedicated Communist Fidel Castro climbed the ladder of success with the promise of transforming the Caribbean island into a conspicuous Shangri-La.
Despite preferring “godless communism” to the virtues of peace, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness enjoyed by his neighbor, America, Fidel Castro-the revolutionary zealot and doyen of socialism, hung crucifixes and pictures of Virgin Mary on the walls of his office.
Fidel Castro’s meteoric rise to power culminated in his resentment of the United States such that his coining of the pejorative phrase “yanqui imperialism” resonated across central and south America where Spanish remained the established lingua franca.
To ensure enhanced national security measures, hawkish United States civilian and military leaders preferred the use of force against Cuban leadership before, during, and after the infamous Cuban missile crisis.
Consequently, the defeat of the communist regime in Havana would have ushered in the overall annexation of the island after the dust settles.
The thought by some American leaders that the imposition of tough economic sanctions would cause unprecedented economic strangulation and in the end herald abrupt change in the Cuban political hierarchy preposterously failed to materialize.
For dovish JFK and his ardent supporters in government, dismantling Soviet-Cuban hostility toward the United States and her allies entailed the use of strategies that reconciled with democratic expectations and norms.
Such constraints and others of like measure placed on presidential powers unquestionably created intrinsic predicament in JFK’s pursuit of legitimate national security prerogatives.
Constrained United States Foreign Policy For many decades American foreign policy remained a victim of tumult and political confusion.
An aura of political malevolence and penumbra of mistrust ludicrously contaminated America’s congressional, senatorial, and presidential operations.
The placing of precipitous limitations on presidential powers and erosion of confidence intensified the defeat of raison d'être among members of the legislature.
Since the formation of pluralism, political parties in the American landscape-Democratic, Republican, and moderates alike-have been at loggerheads regarding the direction the nation ought to be steered.
Besides, JFK was surrounded by a staff that had conflicting ideas and mixed reactions about how to handle the Cuban missile crisis.
JFK had little trust even for John McCone-the man who succeeded John Dulles as the highest-ranking CIA operative.
In early August 1962, McCone assigned Philippe L Thiraud de Vosjoli who was Washington chief for French intelligence to go to Cuba and have a glimpse of the island.
Upon returning to Washington, DC de Vosjoli presented compelling evidence regarding Soviet missiles directed at the United States An agitated McCone asked JFK to take action about the Cuban threats.
Because McCone was a Republican, the Kennedy’s gave little attention to his information.
However, McCone’s reports were leaked to the GOP who accused the president of appeasing Castro.
All we have wanted from them was that they would behave themselves and be prosperous and happy so that we would not have to interfere.
Almost all United States presidents shared similar mental images in their concerted attempts to restrain the tiny Cuban republic.
Regardless of undertaking wide-ranging and profound foreign policy measures during his tenure of office, George W Bush did little to effect change in Cuba consequently embarrassing wealthy Cuban-American campaign contributors and regular voters who populate the crucial state of Florida.
Soviet Dissemination of Propaganda The Russians were adept at deceiving foreign leaders who felt inspired by communist principles with medallions of prestige and honor at grandiose ceremonies attended by a retinue of public figures with twenty-one gun salute, cocktail parties, and theatrical performances at the famous Bolshoi theatre in Moscow.
From Latin America to Asia to Africa the number of foreign dignitaries lining up at the Kremlin to be showered on with praise must have been vast and boundless.
United States national security services enjoyed superior and rigorous infiltration and information gathering structures inside the Soviet Union.
On the contrary, the Soviets enjoyed superfluous and extraordinary array of intelligentsia where communism thrived such that Soviet military advisors and multifarious intelligence networksdespite espousing inferior intellectual paraphernalia in context and arrangement-flourished in Africa, Southeast Asia, Latin America, South America, Eastern Europe, the Caribbean, and the Middle East.
Seeing that the United States was turning a blind eye to the rest of the world with the exception of Western Europe where the United States had vested interests, the Soviet Union promptly expanded its sphere of influence clandestinely through antiquated blueprints such that it did not even shy away from setting base in America’s backyard.
Even with the proliferation of Soviet military build-up across the globe during the Cuban missile crisis, the administration in Washington, DC remained reluctant at deterring Soviet global threat.
Thus, we could assume that the farewell reproach by statesman Eisenhower fell on John F Kennedy’s deaf ears.
Although many contemporary historians may allude the Soviet missile build-up in Cuba to be a countermeasure to the United States U2 spy plane shot by the Soviets over Soviet Union airspace, in contrast, to Anatoly Dobrynin-the man who remained Soviet ambassador to the United States during the terms of six American presidents, from John F Kennedy to Ronald Reagan-“the Soviets had been perturbed by the presence of NATO missiles in Turkey.
The Soviet Union may have been a dedicated ally of the United States during World War II, but the truth of the matter is, it transformed into a venomous serpent immediately after the war concluded, perhaps in direct retaliation for the 20 million Russian lives lost and the devastation wrought from 1939 to 1945.
By championing communism-an ideology that vehemently denounced American system of free enterprise in the strongest terms-Soviet leaders fervently took a perilous road for the sake of, needless to say, empowering and disseminating their godless ideology of collectivism while feverishly denigrating the democratic system of governance enjoyed by the United States and her western European allies.
Ineffective United Nations Because of the veto power enjoyed by the two superpowers-the United States and Russia, the United Nations, the highest organization having jurisdiction over matters pertaining to international disputes, remained equally ineffective in settling the Cuban missile crisis.
The United Nations was either ineffective or at the sidelines during the siege of Berlin, in Hungary, Czechoslovakia, and in Afghanistan.
Historically, whenever a dispute arose with incumbent Soviet politburos, leaders of the United States oftentimes preferred settling matters of concern through diplomatic means even though the behaviors of key holders to the Kremlin may have appeared obstinate and inappropriate.
Lack of rigorous national security arrangements, the failure to infiltrate to the core Soviet-Cuban global conspiracy, and the absence of collective efforts to safeguard United States security from outside dangers by the National Security Council , enabled Khrushchev to clandestinely set base in communist Cuba.
The absence of rigid national security establishment hindered the United States’ determination to restrain the spread of communism and to contain the Cuban missile crisis.
Had there been close cooperation between the various sectors of the national security establishment and had there been profound monitoring of the spread of communism in the Caribbean peninsula, the spate of Soviet aggression would have been curtailed and kept at bay through preemption-a doctrine that came to fore during the reign of George W Bush.
However, after decades of baffling United States political misgivings toward the Soviet Union, it was the reflections and initiatives of George Keenan that gave the United States the strength of character to contain the Soviet Union-a long-term policy espousing fortitude and good judgment that proved productive during the presidency of Ronald Reagan.
George Keenan, the United States Charge d’affaires in Moscow and author of the cable known to history as the “long telegram”, was a bright career Foreign Service diplomat and Soviet expert and a Princeton nonconformist who left significant footprints that benefited several U.S. presidents.
