We came damn close,” said Dino A Brugioni, perhaps the last surviving veteran of the high-stakes meetings on the crisis in the Kennedy White House.
Now ninety, Brugioni served in October 1962 as a senior official at the National Photographic Interpretation Center, a branch of the Central Intelligence Agency.
It was his boss, CIA official Arthur Lundahl, who led Kennedy’s first briefing on the matter.Brugioni’s job back then included preparing the large reproductions of the aerial reconnaissance photographs that revealed the Soviet missiles, and their various supporting structures, arrayed in the Cuban jungle with absurd geometric orderliness.
When I talked with him by phone, he sounded talkative and animated, fastidious about facts, eager to educate a younger man about the direness of the great event.
He was highly decorated before joining CIA in 1948 and served there until 1980.
He even gave me his e-mail address.Also on the list was Ralph Dungan, whom I tracked down in Barbados through his daughter in Wisconsin.
Feisty and acerbic, a charmer at 89, Dungan was one of nine men, alongside the likes of Arthur Schlesinger, Jr. and Lawrence F O’Brien, who held the title of Special Assistant to the President during Camelot; after Kennedy was cut down by an assassin’s bullet, Dungan served three years, under LBJ, as United States ambassador to Chile.
He had first gotten to know Jack Kennedy during the latter’s Senate days, through speechwriter Ted Sorenson.
Initially, as Dungan once recalled, he was recruited to serve as “Kennedy’s spy” on the Government Operations Committee.
Once in the White House, Dungan moved into the empty West Wing office – everyone else thought it was irreparably tainted, and refused to occupy it – that had formerly belonged to Sherman Adams, the disgraced chief of staff to President Eisenhower.Dungan, too, it seemed, was eager to recall the missile crisis, even as he acknowledged that he had had nothing to do with it, professionally.
Fenn was serving on the faculty of the Harvard Business School when he was tapped, in 1961, to work as a staff recruiter at the White House.
His place within the Kennedy orbit grew over time, such that he was named, in 1972, as the first director of the John F Kennedy Presidential Library.
Fenn, like Dungan, will tell you up front he didn’t work on the crisis; but he remembers well the tension that gripped Washington in the days leading up to the disclosure of the missiles on Cuba – people knew something big was happening, but not what, exactly – and then deepened as the crisis unfolded.
Like the others I contacted, Fenn has participated in numerous oral history programs, conducting lengthy recorded interviews with trained historians about his time in Camelot.
We’ve married the snatches of audio to transcripts you’ll be able to read along with, while seeing photographs of the people doing the talking.
You’ll also be able to join our live chat and pose your own questions through your Twitter or Facebook account.
