Burlatsky, ""Karibskiikrizisi ego uroki"" , Literaturnaya gazeta,November 11, 1987,p.
We organize our treatmentby topic-and, where possible, in chronologicalorder-on the assumption thatthe reader will be familiarwith the main events of the crisisitself.We highlightthose areas in which recent discussions have most significantly advanced our understandingofthe event.
The desire to deter an American invasion of Cuba emerged shortlyafter the crisis itself as the officialSoviet rationale for the deployment.Most Westerncommentatorshave dismissed or discounted this motivation,however, because it seemed calculated to justifythe public termson which the crisis was ultimatelyresolved-the missiles in Cuba were withdrawn in returnfor an American pledge not to invade the island.
Although the deploymentposed certainrisksforCuba, the Soviet Union had already taken risks in support of the Cuban revolution.Castro himselfhas made similar statementsin the past.It is clear, however, that Cuba's national pride is betterpreserved by these claims than by the admission that Cuba required assistance from another nation, in the form of a nuclear deterrent,to protect her own sovereigntyand independence.
The Cubans' argument at the Moscow conference,however, serves to highlightthe linkbetween the deploymentof missiles to Cuba and the Soviet desire to redress the strategicnuclear imbalance.General DimitryVolkogdivisions were to be held in reserve.
A successful Cuban deployment could have more than quadrupled the number of warheads that Soviet missiles could have delivered on the United States.Most Western analysts have assumed that some such calculationwas the primary,though not fullyarticulated, initial motivation for the deployment of missiles.Even if KhruAmerican border.
Sergei Khrushchevdenied at the Moscow conferencethat the deploymentof missiles to Cuba was a cost-effective solution to the strategicnuclear imbalance, arguing that stationing ICBMs on Soviet soil, which required nothing extra in the way of conventionaldefenses and involved none of the added expense of dismantling,crating,shipping, and assembling missiles thousands of miles away, would have been a more sensible solution.He thereforediscounts the strategicnuclearrationalebehind the deploymentofmissiles to Cuba.
His argument,however, overlooks the difficultiesthat the Soviets were experiencing in producing three-stagelong-rangerockets.There was simply no long-rangeoption available in 1962.
The crucial question is whether or not the Kennedy administrationintended, at some point, to use American military forceto oust Fidel Castro and establisha regimemore congenial to American interests.Soviet and Cuban fearsthatthis was the case seem to have played an importantpart in the decision to deploy nuclear missiles; disavowals of any such intentionby formerKennedy administrationofficialshave long been received with skepticismby Soviets, Cubans, and revisionisthistorians in the United States.
Ambassador Alekseev explicitlyclaimed that the Cubans had ""precise data"" about Americanplans to invade the island.Althoughoperationalplans and operational contingenciesare not conclusive evidence of politicalintentions, they are nevertheless strongevidence of the worst possible case, and were apparentlyinterpretedby Cuban and Soviet intelligenceas reflectinga policy decision of the Kennedy administrationto invade Cuba and to overthrow Castro.
Sergei Khrushchev reportsthat Anastas Mikoyan expressed strong reservations,cautioning that this was ""a very dangerous step.',37According to Sergo Mikoyan, his fatherhad two misgivings:first,he did not believe Castro would agree, and second, he did not believe it would be possible to 32.
Gromykoreports that he told Khrushchev in May that a deployment of nuclear missiles in Cuba would triggera ""political explosion"" in the United States, but Khrushchev seemed bent on the plan.Though it was not characteristicof Gromykoto object to an idea proposed by Khrushchev,it is quite plausible thathe voiced pros and cons ofthe idea.
When KhrushchevreturnedfromBulgaria,Alekseev was informed of the plan to deploy nuclear missiles to Cuba and was included in the decision-makingcircle.When Khrushchev asked him how Castro would react to the proposal, Alekseev reportsthat he expressed grave doubts that Castro would agree.Khrushchevdecided to send a special mission to Cuba to findout, and to determinewhetherthe missiles could be installedsecretly.
According to Alekseev, Fidel Castro expressed immediateinterestin the proposal, and leftto conferwith the otherfivemembersof the Cuban secretariat.Aragones reportsthatall five-Rau'l Castro, Che Guevara, PresidentOsvaldo Dorticos, Blas Roca, and himself-were unanimously in favorof the idea.
At a meeting of the Presidium on June 10, Biryuzovreportedthe resultsof the negotiations.The Presidiumofficially ordered the Defense Ministryto develop specificplans for the missile deployment,as well as the deployment of associated air and coastal defense forces.
Delegations led by Raul Castro and Marshal Malinovskymet fortwo weeks, with Khrushchevhimselfpresentat meetingson July3 and 8.49The firststep would be to installa networkof the latestSoviet SA-2 surface-to-air missiles around the perimeterof the island, and especiallynear the MRBM and IRBM sites at San Cristobal,Sagua la Grande, Guanajay, and Remedios.The firstSAMs and supporting equipment for the MRBMs were shipped at the very end of July.
Del Valle interview.Sergo Mikoyan believes that Biryuzov'sestimatewas influencedby his ferventdesire to redress the strategicnuclear imbalance.
His amended version declared thatthe purpose of the agreementwas ""to provide mutual militaryassistance"" ratherthan ""to save the Cuban revolution,""and it stronglyaffirmedthe legalityof the deployment.Che Guevara and Emilio Aragones traveledto Moscow at the end of the summer(August 27-September 2) to secure Soviet approval for Castro's changes.While there, they proposed that the agreementbe made public immediately,prior to the deploymentitself,to remove any pretextfora hostile American reaction.
Though skeptical of Khrushchev's promise of naval support, the Cubans deferredto Khrushchev's assessment of the Americans, because of the Soviets' greaterexperience in foreignaffairs,and agreed to let the matterdrop.At the Moscow conference, the Cuban delegation identifiedKhrushchev's judgment as a serious mistake.
Why Khrushchev chose Pliyev is unclear, though one plausible explanation is offeredby Ambassador Alekseev, who suggests that he did so to throw Americanintelligenceoffthe scent.As part of the operation, according to General Volkogonov, over 40,000 Soviet troops were sent to Cuba, under secrecy so tightthat only the commanding officersof the units dispatched knew where they were headed.
Aragones interview.Khrushchev may have believed fromthe startthat the United States would react to the news of Soviet missiles in Cuba with moderation.
Del Valle interview.This figureis much higherthan previous Americanintelligence estimates,which ranged from4,500 to 16,000 in October and November, 1962, and later went to 22,000.
Americanintelligencenever detected nuclear warheads in Cuba, and interpreted the fact that the assembly of likely warhead storage bunkers at the missile sites was incomplete , as evidence thattheyhad not yet arrived.But the Kennedy administration,in the face of uncertainty,operated on the assumption that theyhad.
Mendoza, Directorof the Institutode Historia de Cuba, May 15, 1989, Havana.
See,g., McGeorge Bundy, Dangerand Survival:ChoicesAbouttheBombin theFirstFiftyYears , 425.
Del Valle interview.The details of the deploymentin Cuba evince a high degree of Soviet self-reliance,and an equally high degree of Cuban deference.There may have been a dearth of truston the one side, and an excess of truston the other.
EssenceofRevision 1155 believed that physical mechanisms preventingunauthorized use (such as modern permissiveaction links) were built into the warheads.
Gromykohas since asserted, however,thathe was instructedto be forthcoming if confronteddirectly.At the Moscow conference,he maintainedmerely that he would have given a ""proper answer"" to a directquestion fromthe president;but in a subsequent article,he claimed that he was instructedby Moscow to say that the Soviets were deploying a ""small quantityof missiles of a defensive nature"" to Cuba, and to encourage quiet diplomacy if Kennedy's reactionwere negative.
Neitherthe United States nor the Soviet Union backed away fromits public position, but both sides avoided a confrontation.At 1:00m. on October 26, AleksandrFomin, an officialat the Soviet embassy in Washingtonknown to be the senior KGB officialin Washington, met ABC's State Department correspondentJohnScali, at Fomin's request.Fomin asked Scali to determine whetheror not the United States would be interestedin resolvingthe crisis by pledging not to invade Cuba in returnfor the withdrawal of the nuclear missiles.
The State Department began to receive a private, conciliatoryletterfrom Khrushchevto Kennedy between 6:00 and 9:00m. on Friday,October 26, vaguely proposing to conclude a deal along the same lines as Fomin had suggested to Scali.Most students of the crisishave assumed that the letter merelyformalizedFomin's earliertrialballoon; but it appears now that this assumption is incorrect.The American embassy in Moscow had begun to receive the message at 4:43m.
Moscow time (early Friday morning in Washington), many hours before Fomin's initiative.The Fomin-Scali communicationwould have been too late to influencethe contentof the letter.
In conjunction with the recent revelationof the ""Cordier maneuver,""99and in view of the secrecysurrounding RobertKennedy's October 27 meetingwith Ambassador Dobrynin (several members of the ExComm were unaware even that such a meetingwas to take place), the president's reticencein the transcriptsof the October 27 meetingsstronglysuggests that the ExComm had become largelyirrelevant to thepresident'sdecision-makingat the heightofthe crisis.Crucial decisions were being made by the presidentand a few close advisers,well away fromand unknown to-the ExComm as a whole.
Some have surmised thatthe shoot-down was the unauthorized act of a Soviet officerin Cuba.2 Others have supposed that Cubans had in factfiredthe missile, eitherafter seizing controlof the SAM site in a firefight with Soviets,103 or by exercising theirdiscretionin a dual-controlarrangementof some kind.4Most fantastic is Carlos Franqui's recent report that Castro once claimed that he himself had shot down the aircraft.5 At the Moscow conference,the Soviet side released new details confirming that the U-2 shoot-down was indeed an unauthorized act by Soviet air defense forces.
Del Valle interview.Sergo Mikoyan reportsthat neitherhe nor, so faras he knows, his father,ever heard of any conflictbetween Soviet soldiers and Cuban regulars,fromeitherSoviet or Cuban sources.
Alekseev interview;del Valle interview.Accordingto both Othon Montero and Sergio del Valle, the Cuban Armed Forces had no surface-to-air missiles, only artillery.
Later that same day, an American U-2 on a routine air sampling mission in the Arcticstrayed into Siberianair space as the resultof a navigationalerror.Khrushchevmay have 113.
Personal communicationto BJAand JGB.It is worth noting that Statsenkohimselftold U Thant that Cubans shot down the American U-2.
TheResolutionoftheCrisis At 7:15m. on Saturday,October 27, RobertKennedy telephoned Dobrynin to requestanothermeeting.The two met at 7:45 in the DepartmentofJustice.
International Security14:3 1164 The second respect in which Dobrynin contradictsRobert Kennedy's account of the meeting helps explain the first,and concerns the status of the missile trade.
EssenceofRevision1165 It appears, therefore,that the withdrawal of the Jupitermissiles from Turkeyin the springof 1963 was indeed part of a privatedeal thatled to the withdrawalof Soviet missiles fromCuba in November, 1962.
The U-2 shoot-down and the inadvertentstrayingof another American U-2 over Soviet air space on October 27 indicated thatevents were slippingout of control.But perhaps as important,it appears thatKhrushchevwas influencedby a communication fromCastro throughAlekseev on October 27.
Fomin in proposing termsforsettlingthe crisis; Dobryninin raising the issue of Turkishmissiles; Robert Kennedy in suggestinga deal (with the president'sknowledge, but not the ExComm's); and Scali in deliveringan ultimatum.There is a good deal of discussion about the dangers of unauthorizedand inadvertentacts on the part of the military;these episodes suggest that a certain amount of effortshould be devoted to exploringthe dangers and consequences of inadvertentdiplomatic acts.
The Ambassador reportedthat Castro had given him the reportface-to-face.Castro informedhim that he had reliable information that an American invasion would take place within a few hours.
A confidentialsource informedthe authors thatin February1989, Castro remarkedthathe believed the missiles should have been firedin the event of a full-scaleAmerican invasion, thoughnot preemptivelyor in the event of an air strike;del Valle reportsthatin 1962, he shared this sentiment.This is an understandableattitude;as del Valle put it, Cuba had ""no atomicculture""at the time,meaning Cubans had not yet developed the understanding of the consequences of nuclear explosions thatexistedin the United States and the Soviet Union.
What does seem clear is that,in the telegramin question, Alekseev communicatedto KhruInternational Security14:3 1168 gram fromCastro, then it would stand as one more reminderof the significance of major miscommunicationsduringcrises.
Ambassador Alekseev believes, for example, thatthe troops thattook up positions around the missile sites were in fact Soviet soldiers in Cuban uniforms,and insists that there was no danger of a Soviet-Cuban clash at that time.2Both Sergio del Valle and Emilio Aragones insist that the troops were Cuban anti-aircraft units deployed to protectthe missile sites fromlow-level attack.3 Anastas Mikoyan's success in persuading Castro to accept the United States demand for a November withdrawal of the I1-28light bombers, in addition to the withdrawal of the missiles, was a remarkableachievement.
The American demand that Cuba relinquish weapons intended for the Cuban Air Force, wholly independently of the Soviet missile deployment,only added insult to injury.Mikoyan's success was aided by one of those curious interventions of fate:Castro's initialattitudetoward the Soviet representativewas softened by the sudden death of Mikoyan's wife at the very moment he arrived in Havana.
Aragones interview.The Cuban delegation to the Moscow conferenceadded that Khrushchev's explanationforhis failureto consult Castro-that therewas simplyinsufficienttimewas wholly plausible.
Del Valle interview;Aragones interview.Del Valle explains that between October 24 and batterieswere mobilized fromthe reserves and were assigned to protect 28, fiftyanti-aircraft the missile sites.
International Security14:3 1170 delivered to Cuba, of which only seven had been assembled;145 Sergio del Valle, however, maintains that twelve Il-28s had been delivered, of which only threewere to be transferredto the Cuban Air Force.
The presidentreportedlyintended the message to leak to the Soviets.7However, Emilio Aragones, who was present throughoutthe negotiationsbetween Castro and Mikoyan, does not recall any discussion of theAmericanthreatand does not believe thatitwas communicatedto Castro.
Del Valle interview.According to del Valle, the Cubans planned to use theirIl-28s in a coastal defense role, primarilyagainst mother ships from which smaller craftwould carry subversivesand counterrevolutionariesattemptingto infiltratethe Cuban coast.
EssenceofRevision1171 licly.9But the effectwas to give the United States carteblancheto specify which weapon systemswere to be withdrawn,and the Kennedy administration chose to insist upon the removal of the Il-28s-obsolete, short-range bombers believed to have a nuclear capability,but for which no nuclear weapons had been supplied.
All of the new evidence assembled here, however, has been testimonial.To date, Westernstudents of the crisishave not seen a single Soviet or Cuban document against which to check the recollections of Soviet and Cuban participantsand scholars.
According to Soviet testimony,no writtenrecords of Kremlin decision-makingwere kept prior to October 22, 1962, precisely to avoid breaches of secrecy.The directorof the Instituteof Cuban Historynotes that the Cuban governmentin 1962 was so young and so disorganized thatit had not yet established procedures forhandling paperwork; most relevantdecisions were made in conversationsthat were not recorded.1 The next major step in the historiographyof the Cuban missile crisis will have to await the release of those documents that do exist in Moscow and Havana.
Security14:3 1172 International and politicalscientistsbelieved that theywould have the chance to hear the Soviet and Cuban storiesat all.
