On Thursday, June 11, Lawrence O’Donnell discussed the speech on Civil Rights that President John F Kennedy gave from the Oval Office on that day in 1963.
The purpose of the speech was to propose the Civil Rights bill that passed after Kennedy’s assassination.
Fifty-seven years later, we’ve made some progress, but systemic racism still runs rampant in this country.
Painting by Ekaterina Mateckaya It ought to be possible, in short, for every American to enjoy the privileges of being American without regard to his race or his color.
The heart of the question is — whether all Americans are to be afforded equal rights and equal opportunities.
Whether we are going to treat our fellow Americans as we want to be treated.
Those who act boldly are recognizing right as well as reality… You can watch the entire speech at C-Span.
The comparison between Kennedy and the current occupant of the White House so so glaring.
Not only was Kennedy capable of compassion and empathy, but he also spoke eloquently, in complete sentences and paragraphs.
Today we have a fraudulent “president” who babbles nonsense, effortlessly lies about everything and has no idea how to do the job he holds even if he actually wanted to be a leader.
The most stunning moment in the interview was when Trump claimed to have done more for black Americans than any previous president, including Abraham Lincoln.
This isn’t the first time Trump has claimed he’s done more for the Black community than his predecessors.
Of course it’s not really clear what Trump was trying to say, because his speech is so incoherent.
By Utagawa Hiroshige I would never definitively state that I believed Trump didn’t mean the most racist possible interpretation of one of his often hard-to-grasp word salads.
As my former colleague, Jamelle Bouie, wrote at the time, that statement—apparently that Jackson could have come up with a perfect “deal” to prevent the Civil War—was as dangerous as it was ahistorical.
Based on the context of the question, though, and more recent comments from Trump, I think that is unlikely.
My Admin has done more for the Black Community than any President since Abraham Lincoln.
He even went further, saying that “the concept of chokehold sounds so innocent, so perfect,” if a lone police officer is attempting to detain someone.
TRUMP: I think the concept of chokehold sounds so innocent, so perfect.
Depending on the toughness and strength — you know, we’re talking about toughness and strength.
If it’s a one-on-one for the life … TRUMP: And that does happen, that does happen.
The most relevant part here isn’t the president’s views on the details of self-defense tactics, but rather the lack of empathy in the way he talks about the issue.
The only world in which police using chokeholds could sound “innocent” or “perfect” is a world in which you don’t think about what happens to people when they’re literally being choked — or one where you assume that it won’t happen to people like you.
Black people, who make up 6. percent of the state’s population, were 23 percent of those injured in such holds.
And yet we’re stuck with him, so writers struggle to figure out what the hell he is talking about.
Trump’s Actions Rattle the Military World: ‘I Can’t Support the Man’ NBC News: From ‘beautiful letters’ to ‘a dark nightmare’: How Trump’s North Korea gamble went bust.
A Black Man Was Found Hanging From a Tree—Residents Don’t Buy That It Was a Suicide.
Before the pandemic hit, they struggled to get funding that might have helped us fight COVID-19.
Fired Florida scientist builds coronavirus site showing far more cases than state reports.
In less than two weeks, our nation will mark the 50th anniversary of the assassination of President John F Kennedy on November 22, 1963.
I’ve spent quite a bit of time recently reading books and articles about the assassination and it’s aftermath.
I have wanted to write a post about it, but I just haven’t been able to do it.
For me, the JFK assassination is still a very painful issue–in fact, it has become more and more painful for me over the years as I’ve grown older and wiser and more knowledgeable about politics and history.
I’m going to focus on the role of the media in defending the conclusions of the Warren Commission.
I think most people who have read my posts in the past probably know that I think the JFK assassination was a coup, and that we haven’t really had more than a very limited form of democracy in this country since that day.
We probably will never know who the men were who shot at Kennedy in Dallas in 1963, but anyone who has watched the Zapruder film with anything resembling an open mind, has to know that there was more than one shooter; because Kennedy was shot from both the front and back.
He had angered a number of powerful groups inside as well as outside the government. – Powerful members of the mafia had relationships with JFK’s father Joseph Kennedy, and at his behest had helped carry Illinois–and perhaps West Virginia–for his son.
These mafia chiefs expected payback, but instead, they got Bobby Kennedy as Attorney General on a crusade to destroy organized crime.
In addition, scandals involving his corrupt financial dealings were coming to a head, and the Kennedys were pushing the stories about Johnson cronies Bobby Baker and Billy Sol Estes in the media.
What I know for sure is that after what happened to Kennedy , there is no way any president would dare to really challenge the military and intelligence infrastructure within the government.
Richard Nixon found that out when a number of the same people who were involved in the Kennedy assassination helped to bring him down.
To long-term government bureaucracies, the POTUS is just passing through the government that they essentially control.
People who think President Obama should simply force the CIA, NSA, FBI and the military to respect the rights of American citizens should think about that for a minute.
Twitter is mobbed emoprogs making a concerted effort to ensure that if there is a deal with Russia and Syria to prevent military action over Syria’s use of chemical weapons, President Obama will get zero credit for it.
Meanwhile supposedly “left-wing” pundits Robert Dreyfuss and Robert Scheer are praising Russia’s anti-gay, ex-KGB agent President Vladimir Putin for leading the way to peace.
It’s tempting to enjoy the moment, that is, the humiliation of President Obama and the short-circuiting of his war push by a brilliant coup conducted by Vladimir Putin, that sly old dog and ju-jitsu expert, along with Russia’s ally, Syria.
President Obama might as well not bother giving his Oval Office speech tonight, because the chances that Congress will approve Obama’s Authorization to Use Military Force are zero, and the possibility that the United States will go to war against Syria without congressional support are now less than zero.
You know, I really don’t take pleasure in seeing the President of my country humiliated; and I have to wonder about the judgement of a “journalist” who does–especially a journalist who probably doesn’t want to see a President Ted Cruz elected in 2016.
Dreyfuss can’t imagine a scenario in which Obama doesn’t particularly want to bomb Syria but threatens to do so in order to pressure Russia to respond with a diplomatic alternative.
Dreyfuss even quotes Tucker Carlson and Fox News–of all people!–in support of his belief that Obama is utterly incompetent and incapable of guile.
It was quintessentially an un-Bush moment when suddenly this presidential “decider” seemed possessed of a brain capable of reversing his disastrous course.
Although underscoring the need to “rebuke those who used the weapons, condemn their use, and shun the users … a military strike is not the way, and not the way for America,” she wrote.
The use of chemical weapons cannot be ignored, even though the United States did just that decades ago when then-Mideast special envoy Donald Rumsfeld embraced Saddam Hussein after he deployed those heinous weapons on his own people and in his war with Iran.
At the very least, even if the Syrian government continues to deny responsibility for the chemical attacks, it must abandon its arsenal of these weapons that are inherently inhuman.
Scheer credits Russian foreign minister Sergey V Lavrov with a sudden brainstorm in response to a supposedly off-handed remark from John Kerry.
It was a serious plan, given that it had been previewed in a phone conversation between Lavrov and Kerry and that Syria’s foreign minister, who was in Moscow at the time, welcomed the sentiment.
Scheer truly wants to describe events in such a way that Obama comes out looking like a stupid, incompetent war monger.
Since Dreyfuss’ and Scheer’s diatribes were posted, we’ve learned that Obama and Putin have been discussing diplomatic solutions to deal with Syria’s chemical weapons for months.
United States and Russian officials confirmed Tuesday that they have had discussions about removing Syria’s chemical arms going back months before the August 21st alleged chemical weapons attack outside Damascus, and that the idea was not born out of a stray comment made by United States Secretary of State John Kerry at a London press conference Monday.
Russian President Vladimir Putin said Tuesday that he and President Obama had “indeed discussed” the idea during a meeting on the sidelines of the G-20 summit in St.
He and Obama agreed “to instruct Secretary of State and Foreign Minister to get in touch” and “try to move this idea forward,” Putin told Russia Today in an interview Tuesday.
According to Rozen, Obama and Putin discussed the issue a year ago when the two met at the G-20 summit in Mexico and John Kerry talked about it further with Putin when he was in Moscow in April of this year.
I guess in the time of Wikileaks, Snowden, and Greenwald, it’s now assumed that government are permitted no secrets and diplomacy must be carried out in the glare of TV cameras.
And now, as Sam Stein noted on Twitter, emoprogs are “this close” to hoping for a failure of the diplomatic solution so that Obama can be further mocked and humiliated.
I’m not sure where all the Obama hatred is coming from, but it’s really ugly; and the more I see of it, the more I want to give Obama the benefit of the doubt.
Instead Kennedy set up a blockade around Cuba, and gave both sides some breathing room.
While this was taking place, several Soviet ships attempted to run the blockade, increasing tensions to the point that orders were sent out to United States Navy ships to fire warning shots and then open fire.
I’ve got so much news for you this morning, I don’t know if I’ll have room in a reasonable-length post, so I’ll get right to it.
I’ll begin with some stories on yesterday’s 50th anniversary of the March On Washington.
I saw many, many young people, staffers from the Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee, volunteers.
I saw all these young people up in the trees, trying to get a better view of the podium.
And I saw so many people with their feet in the water trying to cool off.
When we met with him, A Philip Randolph spoke up in his baritone voice we met with the president.
And you could tell by the movement of President Kennedy — he started moving and twisting in his chair.
And President Kennedy said, in so many words, I think we are going to have problems.
We came out on the lawn at the White House and spoke to the media and said, we had a meaningful and productive meeting with the president of the United States.
And in that meeting, we made a decision to invite four major white religious and labor leaders to join us in issuing the call for the March on Washington.
American folk singer and activist Pete Seeger adopted and helped popularize “We Shall Overcome” by teaching the song at rallies and protests.
It has been a civil rights song for 50 years now, heard not just in the United States but in North Korea, in Beirut, in Tiananmen Square, in South Africa’s Soweto Township.
There’s much more about how the song was passed from group to group and changed over time.
Please give it a listen–it’s only about 8 minutes long, but really fascinating.
Not a single Republican appeared at yesterday’s commemoration of the March on Washington and Martin Luther King’s “I Have A Dream” speech.
Bush couldn’t come because of health issues, but John Boehner and Eric Cantor are presumably in good health, but they refused offers to make speeches at the event, according to Roll Call.
That wasn’t a wise choice, said Julian Bond, a renowned civil rights activist, in an interview with MSNBC on Wednesday afternoon.
Cantor’s decision to turn down the invitation to speak is especially striking given his stated commitment to passing a rewrite of the Voting Rights Act in the 113th Congress, and the many opportunities he has taken over the past several weeks to publicly reflect on the experience of traveling with Rep.
And now the United States and its allies are considering another military intervention–in Syria.
Prime Minister David Cameron of Britain, who runs a coalition government, is facing political difficulties from legislators mindful of the experience in Iraq, when assurances from Prime Minister Tony Blair and President George W Bush that Saddam Hussein had weapons of mass destruction proved inaccurate and a false pretext for war.
If you think that NSA domestic spying is invasive, you should take a look at what the NYPD has been up to since 9/11.
Inside the NYPD’s Secret Spying Unit and bin Laden’s Final Plot Against America.
Designating an entire mosque as a terrorism enterprise means that anyone who attends prayer services there is a potential subject of an investigation and fair game for surveillance.
Since the 9/11 attacks, the NYPD has opened at least a dozen “terrorism enterprise investigations” into mosques, according to interviews and confidential police documents.
The TEI, as it is known, is a police tool intended to help investigate terrorist cells and the like.
Many TEIs stretch for years, allowing surveillance to continue even though the NYPD has never criminally charged a mosque or Islamic organization with operating as a terrorism enterprise.
As a tactic, opening an enterprise investigation on a mosque is so potentially invasive that while the NYPD conducted at least a dozen, the FBI never did one, according to interviews with federal law enforcement officials.
Above is a photo of Tsarnaev exiting the boat in which he hid for hours as law enforcement searched all over Watertown for him.
Nearly five months after a bomb almost took his life at the Boston Marathon, John Odom of Torrance was cleared by doctors on Wednesday to finally come home.
Odom’s wife, Karen, who has never left her husband’s side, has been chronicling her husband’s long recovery on Facebook, called it a “monumental” day.
The couple could have never imagined the journey they’ve been on since April 15.
ESPN Quit Its Concussions Investigation With ‘Frontline’ Under Curious Circumstances.
Perhaps it was over-cautiousness on ESPN’s part or perhaps indirect pressure from the League.
I’m running out of space, so I’ll end there, and add a few more links in the comments.
I haven’t really been paying much attention, but I guess President Obama’s trip to Europe didn’t go that well.
I accidentally heard part of his Berlin speech, because I fell asleep with the radio on and woke up listening to a rebroadcast of it.
I didn’t get much out of it, but it seemed as if Obama was lecturing Angela Merkel about her austerity obsession.
The trouble is that Obama has pushed and/or allowed a milder version of austerity here, and he is doing much to lead us out of our own economic doldrums.
There were the snarky words from Vladimir Putin, who expressed an almost Soviet-esque distance from Washington in his views about Syria.
There was the coded warning from Chancellor Angela Merkel about spying on friends, and her and Obama’s continuing frostiness over the issue of economic stimulus versus austerity.
The “peace with justice” line was a quote from John F Kennedy, Obama’s attempt to steal just a little of JFK’s thunder from 50 years before.
He didn’t come away with much, winning just a smattering of applause from a crowd that was one one-hundredth the size of JFK’s.
A crowd that, at about 4,500, was also much, much smaller than Obama drew as a candidate in 2008.
The contrast with President John F Kennedy’s famous “Ich bin ein Berliner” couldn’t have been more stark.
Obama prods, gets share of pushback In Berlin on Wednesday, Obama warned that the European Union could “lose a generation” if it doesn’t adjust its economic policies to tackle high youth unemployment.
German Chancellor Angela Merkel, who has argued for debt-ridden eurozone countries to first deal with their fiscal problems, insisted her government was committed to helping its European partners in the crisis-hit nations.
All her austerity policies have done his harm other European countries.
She countered with her own words of caution over the Obama administration’s secret collection of phone records and surveillance of foreign Internet traffic.
It was a polite punch-counterpunch between vital allies — an exchange that won’t damage a strong relationship.
But it illustrated how in a 21st century world order, Western powers are not beholden to the United States as they once were and Obama’s ability to find agreement or build consensus is often limited and regularly tested.
The centerpiece of Obama’s visit to Berlin was a speech at the historic Brandenburg Gate, once a symbol of the Cold War, where he called for negotiations with the Russians to reduce United States nuclear weapons by one-third and called for cutting the number of tactical warheads in Europe.
The words were barely out of his mouth when a Republican member of the House Armed Services Committee, Ohio Rep.
Michael Turner, accused him of appeasement, and Russian officials were playing down Obama’s proposal.
A foreign policy aide to President Vladimir Putin said any further arms reduction would have to involve countries other than just Russia and the United States.
He doesn’t seem to be able to focus his attention on an issue long enough to get anything accomplished.
I understand that Congress is really the biggest problem, but looking back to past Democratic presidents, Obama seems so passive in comparison.
He seems to enjoy the ceremonial aspects of the job, but not the nuts and bolts.
I do not want to end up with a Republican president and Republican majorities in Congress in 2016.
Phil Gingrey wants American youths to be taught gender stereotypes in grade school classes, so they understand the roles of mothers and fathers — and the importance of allowing only opposite-sex couples to marry.
GINGREY: You know, maybe part of the problem is we need to go back into the schools at a very early age, maybe at the grade school level, and have a class for the young girls and have a class for the young boys and say, you know, this is what’s important.
This is what a father does that is maybe a little different, maybe a little bit better than the talents that a mom has in a certain area.
You don’t have to be a Christian to practice domestic discipline, although many of its practitioners say they believe that domestic discipline goes hand in hand with their faith.
Specifics of the practice vary by couple, though CDDers all seem to follow a few basic principles.
Foremost, that the Bible commands a husband to be the head of the household, and the wife must submit to him, in every way, or face painful chastisement.
When a wife breaks her husband’s rules—rolling her eyes, maybe, or just feeling “meh,” as one blogger put it—that can equal punishments which are often corporal but can also be “corner time”; writing lines ; losing a privilege like internet access; or being “humbled” by some sort of nude humiliation.
Some practice “maintenance spanking,” wherein good girls are slapped on a schedule to remind them who’s boss; some don’t.
Some couples keep the lifestyle from their children; others, like CDD blogger Stormy, don’t.
There’s much more sickening detail at the The Daily Beast link and at Jezebel.
Cristina Torre, 44, said she was sipping coffee outside Little Cupcake Bake Shop on Third Ave. in Bay Ridge when several bystanders spotted little Dillin Miller dangling from the awning of a frozen yogurt shop next door at about 10m.
Torre said she tried to tell the baby, dressed in a white onesie, not to move as another bystander called 911.
Sadly, the child’s parents were discovered asleep in their apartment while their 1-year-old Dillin and his three siblings ages 2, 3, and 5 were on their own.
The children were removed from the home and the parents were charged with reckless endangerment.
There hasn’t been much new on the aftermath of the Boston bombing lately.
Every day I check to see if there is any news on the FBI shooting of Ibragim Todashev in Florida.
The resignation of Richard DesLauriers, the director of the Boston office of the FBI was probably related to the series of f&ck-ups by the FBI in not informing local officials of the previous investigation of Tamerlan Tsarnaev and then the shooting of Todashev, but other than that, the FBI has been mum.
After contradictory stories emerged about an F.B.I. agent’s killing last month of a Chechen man in Orlando, Fla., who was being questioned over ties to the Boston Marathon bombing suspects, the bureau reassured the public that it would clear up the murky episode.
In most of the shootings, the F.B.I.’s internal investigation was the only official inquiry.
In the Orlando case, for example, there have been conflicting accounts about basic facts like whether the Chechen man, Ibragim Todashev, attacked an agent with a knife, was unarmed or was brandishing a metal pole.
But Orlando homicide detectives are not independently investigating what happened.
Here is something President Obama could lead on without Congress blocking him.
He could easily tell Attorney General Holder to appoint an independent investigation.
Fight Back Dammit Lazy Caturday Reads Friday Reads: Losing Constitutional Rights is not an American Value Thursday Reads: Day 4 of Shock and Disbelief Wednesday Reads: United Uterine Front Tuesday Reads: War on Women Monday Reads: Changing your Ways, Changing those Surrounding You Sunday Reads: I’m with Stupid Lazy Caturday Reads Grab our RSS Feed RSS Posts RSS Comments Follow Blog via Email Enter your email address to follow this blog and receive notifications of new posts by email.
Jill Biden pays surprise visit to Ukraine, meets first lady Fox News deals in Kremlin propaganda.
Fight Back Dammit skydancingblog.com/2022/05/08/sun… 2 hours ago Lazy Caturday Reads skydancingblog.com/2022/05/07/laz… 21 hours ago Friday Reads: Losing Constitutional Rights is not an American Value skydancingblog.com/2022/05/06/fri… 1 day ago Follow @SkyDancingBlog Democracy NOW""I Was Raped by My Father.
The work is described as a"" study of typical Tibetan rainbow clouds, that feature in Thanka painting, temple decoration and silk brocades"". dakinikat was immediately drawn to the image when trying to find stylized Tibetan Clouds to represent Sky Dancing.
His updated take on the clouds that fill the collection of traditional thankas is quite special.
He is also a calligraphy artist that uses important vajrayana syllables.
List of XThis Blog Is Not Recommended By WordPressWonderful CinemaShort reviews on high quality films.
No spoilers.Sky Dancinga place to discuss real issuesThe WiddershinsLeft-Leaning Unconventional WisdomThe ConfluenceA weblog for Democrats in Exilewordpress tipstips & advice on wordpress.com blogsHelp with CSSCSS advice, ideas and tutorials for WordPress.com bloggersNot Your SweetieIf you can't change the world, don't let the world change youStill4Hill“RESIST, INSIST, PERSIST, ENLIST.” HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON Sky Dancing Blog at WordPress.com.
