My name is Mohammad Qayum and I am honored to be your head chair for The Cold War Resistance Crisis Committee.
I was offered this committee by my Crisis Director and I accepted because I am always excited to participate in committees that deal with fun, exciting, and creative challenges.
During my free time, I enjoy watching “The West Wing”, a television series created by Aaron Sorkin, which depicts the day-to-day functions of White House Senior Staff and the President of the United States.
In addition to that, I spend the rest of what I have in free time playing soccer and/or watching it.
With that said, I want all of you to know that I look forward to watching you participate in this committee.
I expect a high level of debate, discussion, and formality during the course of the conference and I have no doubt that you will deliver that.
Feel free to email me any questions you may have pertaining to the committee or this background guide.
Sincerely, Mohammad Qayum Head Chair, The Cold War Resistance Crisis Committee, DMUNC XVI dmunc.coldwar@davismun.org 1 Davis Model United Nations Conference XVI May 19, 2018 May 20, 2018 Committee Background Description of Committee This committee is a simulation of a real historical event, with a slight twist in the actual occurrences that took place during the administration of Ronald Reagan.
Delegates can expect to be faced with the challenges of a Presidential cabinet and the surprises of national security events, along with a change in who they are serving.
The cabinet will gather at the start of committee with a briefing of the situation in hand.
Debate Structure The default structure of committee will be a perpetual moderated caucus.
Delegates will have the chance to motion for and vote on various topics as well as sending the committee into an Unmoderated Caucus, Voting Bloc, or a Suspension.
Administration ● Language ​– All debate and conference activity will be done in English ● Devices ​– Delegates will not be allowed to use any electronic device while formal debate is in order.
Delegates are expected to remain in full decorum during moderated caucuses.
When this happens, a directive’s amendment will be separated into its own and voted on separate from the entire directive.
Historical Background The Cold War 3 Davis Model United Nations Conference XVI May 19, 2018 May 20, 2018 World War II was largest interstate conflict in the history of the world.
The expansion of Nazi Germany took Europe by surprise, with major nations like France being over powered.
The United States joined the United Kingdom and the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics to create the Allied Powers, who fought alongside one other.
Yet, the relationship between the two nations was not the friendliest of ones.
The expansion of the USSR in Eastern Europe put fears in many Americans that the Russians plan to control the world.
Meanwhile, the USSR was upset about the fact that the United States was developing their arms in addition to taking on an interventionist role in the international community.
The hostility and strength of both nations led to what the world now knows as the Cold War.
The small island nation was led by Fidel Castro, a dictator who embraced the ideals of communism.
The Best of the Humanities on the Web​, National Endowment of the Humanities, edsitement.neh.gov/curriculum-unit/anticommunism-postwar-america-1945-1954-witch hunt-or-red-menace.
Later that summer, construction and development began in the missile sites on the Cuban Island.
President Kennedy delivered a public warning against aggressive arms development so close to American territory.
Regardless, a few months later, a United States U–2 aircraft took photos during one of its flights to find clear photos of the long ranging areas that included space for both medium range and intermediate range ballistic missiles.
President John Fitzgerald Kennedy gathered a team of close advisors to figure out how the United States could respond to this crisis.
A part of the team of advisors believed that the best option was to bomb the missile sites and follow through with an invasion of Cuba.
Other advisors pushed for a diplomatic route, trying to reach out to the Soviet government and garner a diplomatic agreement to stop this.
Central Intelligence Agency​, Central Intelligence Agency, 18 Apr. 2016, www.cia.gov/news-information/featured-story-archive/2016-featured-story-archive/the bay-of-pigs-invasion.html.
Department of State, history.state.gov/historicaldocuments/frus1961-63v06/d60. 8 ​ lass, Andrew.
While a few ships turned back in the following days, the signs of the crisis coming to an end did not look too hopeful.
The United States slowly began to believe military action would be the only way to settle this once and for all.
However, President Kennedy did not want to give up on the diplomatic side, knowing the causes, he wanted to give it one more chance.
After a series of negotiations, and what was 10 believed to be a letter from Gorbachev , the crisis seemed to come to an end.
With a number of proxy wars taking place along with a divide in Europe, controversy looms as large as ever.
At this current moment, President Reagan has taken office and began work toward a stronger America and a communist-free world.
President Reagan took a tough stance in his campaign for the presidency, with defeating the Soviet Union being a main priority.
His administration is steadfast in assuring that the President reach his goal to make the United States the global hegemon and put an end to any Soviet Dominance anywhere in the world.
His main focus lies on the separation of East and West Europe, primarily in the existence of the Berlin wall.
Khruschev Letter to President Kennedy​, Library of Congress, www.loc.gov/exhibits/archives/x2jfk.html.
Anatomy of a Controversey​, 1995, nsarchive2.gwu.edu/nsa/cuba_mis_cri/moment.htm.
Imagine a group of American government workers, Deputy Secretaries along with some private American business owners getting together to push for the nation to win the Cold War.
The goal of this committee is not to extend American interest, not by the slightest.
Each delegate is in there for one purpose, to serve Soviet Premier Gorbachev and work from the inside to defeat the United States.
That of course, is up to the delegates, to come up with the best and most strategic methods of acting like they are working for the United States, yet really working for the opposite.
GM Exxon Mobil – Born in Omaha Nebraska, the gentleman here quickly learned the ways of how to go about running a business.
He now helps run a multi-million-dollar corporation and looks to use his expertise to advance this committees progress.
GM Boeing – Growing up as a middle class young man from Forks, Washington, nothing fascinated the kid more than the art of flying.
His goal was to become a pilot, but vision problems held him back from doing so.
Instead he went on to get his engineering degree from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
From there he worked his way up the rankings and now finds himself at the head of the world’s largest aircraft manufacturing company.
His knowledge about both business and engineering will be keen to his participation in the committee.
GM CBS – The moment that really caught this young boy by surprise was watching the first ever televised Presidential debate between Senator John F Kennedy and Vice President Richard M Nixon.
Ever since then, he knew he wanted nothing more than to be a television moderator.
He attended Columbia’s School of Journalism, where he obtained a bachelor’s degree.
His expertise in law, journalism, and business will help him contribute to plans this committee may have.
Deputy Secretary of State – Nothing impressed the young deputy more than when he watched Secretary of State John Foster Dulles deliver an impassionate speech about the state of diplomacy in the post-World War II era.
After his graduation, he went on to receive his PhD Columbia Universities distinguished International Affairs school.
He now finds himself strongly in favor of a New World Order, and sits only a footstep away from America’s chief diplomat.
Deputy Secretary of Defense – As a graduate of the United States Military Academy at West Point, this man knows what it is like to rise through the ranks.
Coming from a military family, this deputy has spent his life serving the United States.
Along the way, he realized that there is a chance he may be serving the wrong interests.
He now finds himself amongst the top of the United States Department of Defense, something he will use to the ultimate benefit of this committee.
Deputy Secretary of Treasury – Money, money, money, the number one thing on this boy’s mind.
He started selling whatever he could as a school boy to try and earn some extra cash.
Everyone knew this young man was bound for big things, especially with his entrepreneurial style.
He did not attend college, but found himself successful with his start up “The Financial Assistance Team”, where he consulted Americans on how to best invest and save their money.
After making a lot of money, he sold his fortunes and joined the Department of the Treasury, in hopes of serving the nation and reducing waste amongst the government.
He now sits with this committee, ready to take his revenge on Washington bureaucrats and career politicians.
Deputy Secretary of Labor – Coming from a poor, immigrant family, this man knows what work means.
He studied Political Science with hopes of making a change in the world for the working-class American.
Deputy Attorney General – When you think of the “know-it-all” kid in class, this man can be described as just that.
He had a change in heart and decided to apply for Law School instead of pursuing a career in the Pharmaceutical field.
He received his Juris Doctorate from Georgetown Law and began his work in government.
He is here as a fed-up employee of the Attorney General, whom he resents.
Chief of Staff to the American Ambassador to the United Nations – If you took a kid who spend his entire life studying John Stewart Mill, Adam Smith, and Milton Friedman, this is who you would have gotten.
Now, he grows suspicious of American capitalism, and joins this body to explore options moving forward.
Under Secretary of Defense for Intelligence – This young 42-year-old man’s family immigrated to the United States from Germany when he was just a young boy.
The family escaped because of safety concerns with the growing Nazi government.
So, he applied for an internship with the CIA and began to work his way up the ladder.
Slowly, he exceled in the field of intelligence, and became concerned with how the United States misused their power.
He now stands in this committee, ready to serve whomever he believes holds the world’s best interest.
Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel and Readiness – Snubbed for a higher position, this man is angry.
He is incredibly skilled in diplomatic relations and his anger toward the United States government led him to the meeting today.
He quickly adapted to become one of the best known and most respected detectives in the United States.
He found himself invested in his job but slowly beginning to despise it.
He was bothered by the racial tensions that existed in law enforcement.
He joins this cabinet offering his investigative abilities and his knowledge of the ins and outs of law enforcement.
Chief of Staff of the Army – Another graduate of the United States Military Academy, this gentleman is amongst the most respected service members of all time.
He studied Chinese and through his time in the Army developed relationships with some people from the Asian nation.
He joins this committee today with the hopes of addressing the issues existing against veterans in the United States.
Despite goals to return and pursue a career in journalism, he found himself rising up in the rankings.
His patriotism convinced him to stay on as a service member, but as time went on and he was introduced to various pieces of literature his patriotism began to deteriorate.
Now he finds himself ready in the committee to work for the ultimate good of humanity.
After practicing law with a few private corporations, he became tired of the greedy mentality of corporate giants.
He decided to turn to public service and served on the staff of Governor Ronald Reagan and was recruited to come back for the campaign.
He never seemed to recover from his hatred toward greed in American society, and now finds himself amongst this cabinet.
Deputy Director of CIA for Science & Technology – A young boy from Colorado, he remained close to home most of his life.
He started off working for the Colorado Department of Transportation, where he became a lead engineer.
He decided to expand his service by joining the CIA to help with the manufacturing of some of their intelligence equipment.
He was asked by the CIA Director to remain on and work on making the department the most scientifically advanced of the nation.
He enjoyed working early on, but soon 10 Davis Model United Nations Conference XVI May 19, 2018 May 20, 2018 became resentful of the administration as a whole.
His knowledge of the scientific world in addition to his inside information on the technological advancements will be key to his role in the committee.
After a few years of work in the private sector, he was asked by his friend to come and join him in the mission to make NASA great again.
He now finds himself in this committee, with close inside knowledge of NASA operations.
She began to feel guilty of taking advantage of families with children to sell them overpriced toys, and she was good at it.
She hoped to find a more ethical field of work by joining the public sector.
She finds herself as a key part of the Communications Team in the White House.
Unfortunately, she does not feel loyal to a nation willing to let companies like Toys-R-Us ruin millions of lives.
She sits in this committee ready to have a world for the people and not the companies.
