Canadian Understandings of Revolutionary Cuba to the Missile Crisis of 1962 Caralee Daigle Hau Royal Military College The Cuban missile crisis was a moment during the Cold War when rhetoric, brinkmanship, and politics intersected with notions of masculinity, empire and colonization to nearly disastrous ends.
The crisis occurred at a moment of transition in Canada in which Canadians were profoundly concerned over the state of Canadian–Cuban relations and Canada’s place in the world.
This article examines how previous understandings and preconceptions of “Cuba”—such as feminized and infantilized images of Cuban leader Fidel Castro in political cartoons and editorials in newspapers – influenced how Canadians understood the crisis, their nation and how the Canadian government should interact with other powers.
While both negative and positive images of Castro and Cuba were present in Canadian public discussion, Canadians utilized the same imagery to argue that their government should act in its own best interests after the missile crisis.
From Monday, to Thursday, October 25, Prime Minister John Diefenbaker consulted with his Cabinet about what Canada’s official position ought to be.
Finally, on Thursday, in response to growing criticism about his indecision on the matter, Diefenbaker announced to the House of Commons that Canada stood by its American ally.
Canada’s relationship with Cuba was also debated in public forums throughout the crisis.
On the same day that Diefenbaker made his speech supporting Kennedy’s actions, the Cuban ambassador to Canada, Dr Americo Cruz, held a press conference to air the Cuban side of the story.
When he was asked to verify the existence of the missile sites in Cuba, Cruz confirmed their presence, but insisted the missiles were fully under Cuban control.
He stressed the egregious nature of President Kennedy’s decision to blockade the island, and insisted that all Cuba wanted was confirmation that the United States would not invade the island or continue to support counterrevolutionary forces in Miami.
He confirmed that relations between Canada and Cuba were as good as they had ever been.
Stories covering Cruz’s press conference appeared in many of Canada’s major daily newspapers.
Yes, Cuba had missiles, but they were defensive, not offensive and Canada was certainly not threatened.
There was ambiguity about official Canadian–Cuban relations, but overall, Canada enjoyed more cordial relations with Cuba than did the United States.
The ambassador blamed the scuffle on the United Press International reporter, who was American, commenting “they are ‘always doing bad things to us,’” even though the reporter actually firing questions was Joe Scanlon from the Toronto Daily Star.
This story illustrates a frustrated, temperamental, and of course, cigar-smoking ambassador, a stereotype of Cuban masculinity common in the North American imagination of Cuba as a place of pleasure, indulgence and tropical escape.
The Vancouver Sun ran a political cartoon along with its coverage of the press conference depicting a man with ragged clothes, a sidearm, a bandolier and shotgun slung over his shoulder, overgrown, unkempt hair and, most symbolic, a beard, with an overexcited look in his eyes.
The press conference and its resulting news coverage highlight some important themes about how Canadians understood their official relations with Revolutionary Cuba as they were forming in the early 1960s.
The manner in which Ambassador Cruz was depicted indicates larger discussions at play in the news media and Canadian opinion.
A variety of images of Cuba and Cuban leader Fidel Castro repeatedly appeared in Canadian discourse in these years.
Images of Cuba as childlike, feminized, out of control or simply criminal were most frequent.
Sometimes, the implications of the imagery used were decidedly negative, drawing from anti-communist sentiment to argue for severing ties with Cuba.
Other times, Canadians interpreted these images and, by extension, Cuba’s actions, in a much more positive light.
Ultimately, while there were undoubtedly some who wanted to completely sever Canadian–Cuban relations, many Canadians came to the conclusion that maintaining ties with Cuba was in Canada’s best interest.
This article integrates the role of perception and an analysis of imagery in the formation of policy.
The Canadian–Cuban relationship has been the subject of a number of scholarly analyses.
Trade relations between Canada and Cuba take pride of place in these investigations, since, as Raúl Rodríguez Rodríguez points out, trade and financial relations are a 84 C Daigle Hau significant component of that relationship.
Official Canadian–Cuban relations date back to the late-eighteenth century when, as John Kirk and Peter McKenna remind us, salt fish, potatoes, and lumber were sent to Cuba in exchange for sugar, rum and exotic fruits.
This trade relationship continued steadily until the twentieth century.
Canada and Cuba have also maintained constant trade over the years since the latter’s revolution, which is noteworthy given the American embargo.
Canadian financial and banking institutions also had a significant presence in Cuba and were an important aspect of Canada’s continued involvement there.
The role of perception, image, and imagination in the formation of foreign policy is also a significant consideration in studying Canadian–Cuban relations.
Ryan M Touhey has recently shown how important perceptions of foreign leaders were in Diefenbaker’s foreign policy formulation.
Touhey convincingly demonstrates that stereotypes and perceptions of India and Pakistan’s leaders led to the former’s relegation to the sidelines in Canadian foreign policy because Indian leader Jawaharlal Nehru favored non-alignment.
Touhey’s work demonstrates that Canadian policymakers were just as susceptible to cultural stereotypes as the rest of the populace, and points the way to other studies on the impact of popular opinion and public debate on foreign policy formation, especially in Diefenbaker’s government.
Lana Wylie also utilizes this notion of perception in policymaking; she, however, turns the concept inwards.
In her work, Perceptions of Cuba, Wylie compares American and Canadian perceptions of themselves and demonstrates how these ideas had a role in determining each country’s policy towards Cuba.
American identity was characterized by the notion of Manifest Destiny and control over its own hemisphere.
Canadian identity has been characterized by the idea of the “good international citizen” and a peaceable middle power.
These differing perceptions led to the United States taking a stricter stance towards Cuba whereas Canada wished to explore multilateral and inclusive alternatives.
The Revolution began in earnest when Castro, based in the Sierra Maestra mountain range, began challenging the corruption he saw as inherent in Fulgencio Batista’s regime with guerrilla tactics through the late 1950s, which culminated in Castro’s successful march into Havana on New Year’s Eve 1958.
In the wake of these interviews, Castro became something of a media darling.
Despite this initial interest, official relations between Cuba and the United States quickly deteriorated.
President Dwight D Eisenhower took a dim view of several of Castro’s policies, particularly the show trials of Batista’s people, the suppression of counterrevolutionary ideas, and, most disturbing from the American point of view, communist influences in his government.
By the time Castro visited North America in 1959, Eisenhower decided it would be better not to meet with him in person, and instead went golfing.
Nevertheless, Castro’s 1959 North American visit was a success, at least from a media relations perspective.
In July 1960, Eisenhower suspended American sugar imports from Cuba, which had a significant impact on the island’s economy.
Then, in October, the United States imposed a partial embargo on Cuba, with only American Review of Canadian Studies 85 food and medicine exempt.
While the American–Cuban relationship deteriorated swiftly, the Canadian–Cuban relationship remained stable.
Prime Minister Diefenbaker maintained an official diplomatic relationship and trade ties with Cuba for a variety of reasons.
In a recent work examining Diefenbaker’s policies in Latin America, Jason Zorbas demonstrates that Diefenbaker’s reasoning was entirely logical and consistent.
He was not interested in defying American edicts on trade with Cuba merely for the sake of defiance; rather, Diefenbaker’s promotion of Canadian relations with Latin America was a continuation of trade strategy from the St Laurent years.
Certain goods which were not specifically military in nature but which could be used by a military, such as aircraft engines, were subject to case-bycase review for export permits.
This policy statement also stressed that Canadian restrictions on non-strategic goods to Cuba would make little sense, for it would be holding Cuba to a stricter standard even than the Soviet Union or China.
Goods of United States origin would not be bootlegged to Cuba through Canada as a back-door route.
Almost immediately after Fidel Castro took power, Canadians began to react.
Many of these reactions were negative, and drew from widespread anti-communist sentiment common in the Cold War context.
This anti-communist sentiment helped create the idea that Castro was potentially dangerous, that his Revolution may have been helped along by the Soviet Union, and that North Americans needed to be on guard.
The image of Castro as dangerous, and even criminal, began to appear in correspondence almost immediately.
In November 1960, Jesus Mendez wrote Diefenbaker, accusing him of maintaining relations with Cuba only because Castro had not nationalized Canadian banks.
He pointed out that, as a refugee from Cuba, he knew exactly what the country was becoming under Castro’s rule.
A letter to the editor of the Calgary Herald in the aftermath of the missile crisis expressed similar sentiments.
The author insisted that Canada was a democratic country and continued support of Cuba was criminal.
Castro was also frequently identified as being single-handedly responsible for all the evils in Cuba.
One pamphlet sent in to Prime Minister Diefenbaker is a good example of the role in which Castro was often cast.
Terror is depicted by a man sitting by a ringing phone, with a petrified look on his face.
Kidnapping is shown by a woman attempting to prevent a sickle-and-hammer-tattooed arm from stealing a child, perhaps a reference to the rumors that circulated after the Revolution that Cuban children would be sent to the Soviet Union for nefarious reasons.
Atheism is depicted as a sickle-and-hammer-clad combat boot, tromping on a rosary and crucifix.
This pamphlet was meant to shame those who allowed such travesties to be visited upon the Cuban people.
As soon as Castro became associated with communism, and particularly after Cuba’s relationship with the Soviet Union developed, Canadians began to object to the idea that Canada might continue to trade with a communist country led by an individual with no morals.
Whether or not Canada should continue trading with Cuba was often on the public’s mind, but never more so than when specific incidents brought it to the forefront.
In late 1960, Minister of Trade George Hees met with a Cuban delegation.
As John Kirk and Peter McKenna have pointed out, the Cuban trade delegation came to Canada to secure relations and discuss trade policy.
After the meeting, Hees publicly commented that one could not find better businessmen anywhere.
For this comment, he was treated to such a backlash that he was forced to go on the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation’s television program Front Page Challenge and apologize.
Reaction against his apparent eagerness to deal with Communist Cuba was vitriolic.
This writer assured Hees that he knew what he was talking about, having spent 25 years there.
Again, the reference to criminal behavior is utilized and applied to trade dealings.
Many believed that it was simply wrong and dangerous to try and continue trade with Cuba given its communist leanings.
Thus, there were a number of negative images present in the public imagination in the early years of Canada and Revolutionary Cuba’s relationship, and these ideas entered public discussion about specific issues such as trade.
Then, during the missile crisis of October 1962, these images resurfaced and were frequently present in editorials, political cartoons, and letters to the editors of various daily newspapers.
In these images, the Cuban leader was variously depicted as a pawn, a child having a temper-tantrum, a naïve girl, or an unknowable and unpredictable menace.
A number of political cartoons in Canadian newspapers during the crisis made this point visually.
The first depicts a chess game in which Kennedy and Khrushchev are the kings.
Castro, a pawn placed in between them, is smaller and looks apprehensive as he awaits the next move.
Another cartoon shows an upside-down Castro being used as a slingshot by a much larger and ominous looking arm, clad in a suit and shirt with a sickle-and-hammer cufflink.
While Castro is not literally a pawn in this cartoon, he is nevertheless a tool and weapon in the hands of another.
Another cartoon shows a fly, sporting a beard and army cap, with wingtips spelling out Cuba, perched rather precariously on top of a button—which the caption tells us is the “panic button”—about to be smashed by an enormous hammer bearing the American flag.
Another common way of portraying Castro and Cuba during the crisis was through gendered or youthful images.
One example of this was a cartoon that appeared in the Regina Leader Post on October 25, 1962.34 The cartoon shows a woman sitting in the lap of a Soviet military officer, their arms around one another with obvious romantic intent.
The woman, representing Cuba, is glaring at her younger brother sitting next to the couple on the couch, wearing a cap with “Guantanamo” written on the rim, jauntily dressed in a sailor outfit.
Cuba has little regard for her own self-interest, and even her younger brother, the small slice of American-controlled Cuba at Guantanamo Bay, knows better than she does.
Rather than relying on the Soviet man for her needs, Cuba would do better to keep it within the family, so to speak, and stay close to home.
Cuba was also often portrayed as a child, not responsible for its own actions and prone to temper tantrums.
Louis A Pérez Jr. has shown how Cuba has been represented in 88 C Daigle Hau American political cartoons, using figures such as women or children to show that Cuba was incapable of self-government.
Such depictions reinforced the American sense of moral righteousness which accompanied the expansion of empire.
Certainly these images were also utilized in the Canadian public discussion.
A letter to the editor of the Vancouver Sun drew on this iconography during the crisis, arguing that “I think it is time for the Cuban people to grow up and stop blaming others, the Americans, for their troubles.
The demand to “grow up” and stop blaming others sounds remarkably like an all-knowing parent speaking to a child.
The last common negative image used to describe Castro during the crisis was more powerful and frightening than the tropes of pawn, female or child; sometimes Cuba appeared as an unpredictable entity.
This is the symbol used by the cartoon discussed at the beginning of this article in the context of the Cruz press conference.
That cartoon showed a gun-toting, bearded Cuban with an over-excited look about him, and is, by inference, a terrifying entity to be in control of nuclear weapons.
Castro was an “unstable trouble-maker” who was resistant to Soviet control and unreasonable in his demands.
Castro as an unpredictable and possibly insane rebel was an image which would have struck close to home for many Canadians.
However, this negative and suspicious interpretation was not the only way in which Canadians understood and made meaning of Canada’s official relationship with Cuba.
Indeed, during the missile crisis, some took these same images—Cuba as a child, or a naïve female—and used them to express support, even if sometimes patronizing support, for Cuba’s position and to insist that Canada should maintain its diplomatic ties with the country.
The image of Cuba as too infantile to fend for itself was inverted and that very youth became the reason why it had to defend itself and accept the Soviet weapons in the first place.
A letter to the editor of the Toronto Daily Star conveyed this sense succinctly.
Cuba’s plight is like that of the weak boy attacked by the neighborhood bully . . . once assaulted, a weakling seeks help to prevent further hurt to himself.
It is imperative that Canada not align herself with the US, but maintain friendly and independent relations with Cuba, which, like the victim of any bully, needs friends.
Cuba is depicted as the helpless bullied child, but Canada is a kid on the block big enough to stop American bullying.
In these early years, there was a common belief—perhaps fuelled by Prime Minister Diefenbaker’s sometimes strident nationalism—that the United States was pressuring Canada to follow in its own footsteps and sever ties with Cuba.
Therefore, some individuals congratulated Diefenbaker for maintaining Canada’s independence and standing up to a potential bully.
I feel that the course you have chosen is not only admirable because it displays independent action on the part of our country but will rather promote the cause of freedom in a most effective manner, since unfortunately I feel that our neighbors to the south have at times, perhaps inadvertently, alienated any possibility of maintaining friendly relations with the nations of the world that are struggling for a better standard of living.
In other words, the United States had alienated China and Cuba and attempted to stop Canada from trying to help them help themselves.
However, there are a number of letters in Lester B Pearson’s files from his term as Leader of the Official Opposition which use the same language and express the same sentiments, indicating this was a fairly common sentiment.
McPhee wrote to Pearson to inform him that he opposed Canada losing a customer, merely to “pamper the Pentagon,” and accused the Liberals of changing their policy in an attempt to discredit the government.
Another letter stated frankly that its author pleaded “not for the Cuban leaders.
He agreed with Diefenbaker’s approach to Canada’s Cuba policy, and believed that Cuba should be treated no differently than China or the Soviet Union.
Trade should continue, as long as the goods traded had no military value.
While some of the same images are hinted at in many of these letters—two smaller powers joining forces against a bully—much of the overtly gendered or infantilized language recedes and instead, the language of solidarity and nationalism becomes the central theme.
The Fair Play for Cuba Committee , in particular, organized a number of protests throughout the nation during the week of the crisis.
The Canadian branch was formed by Vernel and Anne Olsen in 1961, who, for the first few years of the FPCC’s existence, traveled to Cuba, helped Cubans who wanted to travel to Canada, 90 C Daigle Hau arranged student exchanges and trips, and produced pamphlets for publication to educate Canadians about what the Cuban Revolution really meant.
The FPCC supported Canada’s continued trade with Cuba after the American embargo was put in place in late 1960.
On the same night that Kennedy announced to the world that there were missiles in Cuba and that the United States planned to blockade the island, the FPCC had protesters in front of the American consulate in Vancouver.
Another FPCC-organized protest in Winnipeg received press attention as well, and although there was no accompanying story, the picture in the Winnipeg Free Press showed well-dressed men and women, some holding the hands of small children.
Here, they were using the image of a child, but rather than casting Cuba itself as a child, these protesters were trying to force the public gaze to recognize that a nuclear war would hurt everyone, including children.
Another protest was organized by the FPCC in Toronto in front of the American consulate on Tuesday, October 23.
No fair-minded person will deny Cuba the right of self-defence against forces being unleashed by the powerful United States.
The ordinary people of Canada and the United States have nothing in common with the US rulers in Washington who, without their consent, are taking the peoples of the entire world to the very brink of nuclear destruction . . . we are not prepared to go to war against the people of Revolutionary Cuba.
Signed by national chairman Vernel Olsen, it was a call to arms for Canadians and Latin Americans to stop the imperialists from instigating nuclear war.
They argued the Cuban situation was not of Castro’s making, and that there was another way to understand what was happening.
Again, the message that Olsen and the FPCC were trying to stress was solidarity.
Cuba, a small power, was simply trying to protect itself against what it saw as a real threat to its existence.
During the crisis, the CCFC also staged a protest, though smaller than those of the FPCC, in Toronto.
Although these solidarity groups had relatively small memberships and their protests were attended by only a few hundred people, they nevertheless successfully made their opinions and views of Cuba known.
Though on the fringes of public discourse, these solidarity groups circulated their version of the truth American Review of Canadian Studies 91 about Cuba, and in so doing, as Cynthia Wright has suggested, widened the scope of public debate about Cuba in Canada.
One interesting example of a newspaper piece which appeared shortly after the missile crisis hints at one of the most important themes present in public discussion on this subject.
In this piece, columnist Bruce West argued that in all this discussion about Cuba and Canada and how Prime Minister Diefenbaker handled the crisis and trade relations, one important issue had yet to be identified.
In other words, Canada’s decision to continue to trade with Cuba was not the problem; rather, West objected to the “almost malicious satisfaction in flaunting our great independence” in making that decision.
On the contrary, we were displaying a kind of adolescence in which certain extremely important moral principles were being sacrificed in the interests of what seemed to me to be a narrow kind of Canadian pride.
Contrary to many others who objected to trade with Cuba, his position was not based on the fact that Cuba and Castro were communist or dictatorial.
His objections were based on the fact that Canada was proudly exerting an independent trade policy, regardless of morality.
In this scenario, the childish tendencies were being displayed by Canadians leaders in their nationalist belief that trade with Cuba was an assertion of independence from American influence.
The West objected to the policy of maintaining trade relations with a country solely to assert independence from another.
However, for some Canadians, this sentiment was the whole purpose behind continued trade with Cuba.
An editorial appearing in Maclean’s magazine after the missile crisis echoed some of the same sentiments.
He claimed that continued relations with Castro had done significant damage to Canadian relations with the United States and it was time to stop.
Like West, this editorial shows there was debate about what the continued relationship with Cuba meant for Canadians.
Both of these commentators were tapping into the burgeoning discussion, which would heat up in the months following the missile crisis, about whether or not Diefenbaker should remain in power.
Canadian–American relations were under significant strain, but, it remained to be seen whether that would in fact cause a significant change in Canadian–Cuban relations.
Although the previous two commentators objected to what they saw as a perverse and self-defeating nationalism behind maintaining ties with Cuba, there were plenty of other Canadians who whole-heartedly subscribed to this particular brand of nationalism, both before and during the missile crisis.
While scholars have recently shown that the American state department may have in fact encouraged continued Canadian ties with Cuba so as not to isolate and force Cuba into an alliance with the Soviet Union, this was 92 C Daigle Hau not well-known publicly and there was considerable support for continued Canadian– Cuban relations.
One letter to the Prime Minister stressed that there was nothing wrong with Canada acting in its own best interest.
This letter questions why so many Canadians think of the United States “as a heaven-sent Big Brother” who only wanted to help Canada.
He stressed that the United States would not act unless it was in its own best interests and neither should Canada.
The central theme here is that Canada perhaps needs to stop acting like a younger brother, grow up, and act in its own best interests.
The imagery of childhood is still present, but increasingly more common in letters from Canadians was the sentiment that Canada needed to assert itself and stop worrying about what the United States might do.
Finally, Ethel Sorenson summarized these views in a letter which condemned the actions of the United States and praised Diefenbaker for maintaining trade ties with Cuba despite American dissatisfaction.
This article has explored how Cuba was represented in Canadian opinion in the early 1960s and how Canadians used those representations to make meaning of their official relationship with Cuba.
While there were a significant number of negative images of Castro and of Cuba, and there were certainly a number of Canadians who might have wished to completely sever ties with Cuba, there were also a significant number of Canadians who understood those same images in a more positive way.
In these interpretations, Cuba was a child in need of protection or a potential ally and another smaller power trying to chart an independent path in a world where superpowers relations required them to take a side.
In the end, these early representations of Cuba soon merged with understandings of Canada and many began to argue that whether or not one agreed or disagreed with Castro’s policies, Canada needed to act in its own best interests.
By examining how preconceived notions and images of Cuba and of Canadians’ view of themselves worked in this period, I suggest that we can more fully understand another aspect of why Diefenbaker—and his successors—stood by this particular policy.
Examining the nature of Canadian opinion of early Canadian–Cuban relations, therefore, reveals more complex issues and relationships of the period.
Raúl Rodríguez Rodríguez notes that the Royal Bank of Canada had 23 branches in Cuba at the time of the Revolution, and the Bank of Nova Scotia had eight branches.
Confederation Life, Sun Life, Crown, Imperial, and Manufacturer’s Life.
For a discussion of Canada’s red scare and Cold War context see Reg Whitaker and Steve Hewitt, 2003.
For a discussion of rumors of child abduction in postRevolutionary Cuba, see Karen Dubinsky, 2010.
Chisholm to Minister of Trade George Hees, Chairman Economic and Foreign Affairs Committee, December 10, 1960, Diefenbaker files, Series VI, Vol.
Letter from Alberta Brown to PMO, June 1962, Diefenbaker files, Series VI, Vol.
Various scholars have examined the role of gendered language in foreign policy formation.
For an excellent comparative analysis of gendered language discussion of the policies of John Diefenbaker and Lester Pearson, see Cavell, Janice.08.
Letter to the editor from Mary Meil, Vancouver Sun, October 26, 1962, 4.
Ottawa Citizen, October 31, 1962, 1; John Walker, “Castro vetoes UN observers,” Ottawa Citizen, November 1, 1962, 13; “U Thant Tries Again To Move Obstinate Castro, Cuban Dictator Causes Difficulties Over Verification Of Soviet Withdrawal,” Winnipeg Free Press, October 31, 1962, 1.
Letter to the editor, signed Dorothea Billing, Toronto Daily Star, October 26, 1962, 6.
Letter to the editor, signed June Black, Vancouver Sun, October 26, 1962, 4.
Letter from Paul J Selverras to PMO, 20 December 1960, Diefenbaker files, Series VI, Vol.
Some were English translations of Castro’s speeches, others were the reports from various Canadians, students and otherwise, who had been to Cuba and described their experiences there.
See, for example, Letter from Taylor Fitzpatrick , January 8, 1961; Letter from Mrs I Lewis, no date, Hamilton, Ontario; Letter from Mrs Gwendolyn A Thonluern, December 31, 1960, Kingston, Ontario; Letter from Michael Brady, December 22, 1960, McLean, Saskatchewan.
These and many other examples of similar sentiments are in Diefenbaker files, Series VI, Vol.
She is working on her manuscript about the Canadian experience of the Cuban missile crisis.
