Learned and polemical articles (and gious of the nation's four war colleges, which occasionally the two go together) on the events trains hundreds of senior military officers and of October 1962, their origins and their consecivil servants for the highest posts in governquences, fill journals as different as Time and ment in 1980 produced yet another instrucInternational Security.
Its author opened torians quarrel over the meaning of public and his work by declaring, ""The Cuban Missile private documents, attempting to unravel some Crisis has become the classic case of national of the many unsolved and significant puzzles security of decisionmaking and management in the crisis.
A Case Study in National Security Mansarily express those of the Naval War College agement (Washington, DC: National Defense or the United States government.
Finally, it exemmay not have taken place) have entered the plifies the incredibly high stakes of policyfolklore of American policy-making.
Like any making in the nuclear age. good play, the crisis has an easily discerned The twists and turns of Kennedy administrabeginning, middle, and end.
Even its length tion policy in October 1962 represent the swayprovides just the right touch of ing of an accomplished tightrope superstitious foreboding.
Moreover, its brevity artist negotiating the way to terra firma over a enables even the casual student to follow events thermonuclear abyss. day by day indeed, hour by hour peering Three clusters of reasons account for this over the shoulders of the great as they play a extraordinary influence of a two-week episode chess game of world-historical importance. that occurred well over two decades ago.
Three years ago, in Schlesinger Jr., McGeorge Bundy, and ofTime magazine, a band of Kennedy administracourse Robert Kennedy are but a few.
Khrushchev puts the missiles in, article suggest a third reason perhaps the most Kennedy confronts him, Khrushchev relents important of all for the prominence of the and pulls them out.
The crisis remains, story line a U-2 spy plane wanders over Soviet quite simply, the last major, indisputable, and air space during the crisis, the president is widely applauded success of American arms shocked at learning that the obsolete Jupitersince the Inchon landings in 1950, during the missiles have not, despite his orders, been withKorean war.
Arresting images abound. ingly successful resolution of the crisis the American warships intercept Soviet freighters, sullen Russian withdrawal of missiles from Adlai Stevenson confronts the United Nations Cuba and the wretchedness of the Vietnam with photographic evidence of Soviet duplicity.war, only a few years later, reinforces this Even untele vised episodes, such as the confron-sense.
Even if those who conThey have argued, variously, ducted that American American policy at that time today statesmen triggered the crisis by misleading deprecate the by nuclear weapons in the role played Soviets; acted with disproportionate the crisis, we may doubt that their Soviet belligerence in confronting counterparts would them; agree with them.
In short, and accepted an outcome that either the crisiscaused occurred theunder what today appears to subsequent Soviet military build-up be an evanescent, or effec-long-gone set of circumtively dismantled the Monroe Doctrine, stances or namely, far-reaching American nuboth.
On the whole, these judgments clear superiority. appear excessively harsh and hindsighted.
The deployment of the missiles, and the well, United States forces had reached a post-war peak accompanying deceit, posed a far from of size, trivial efficiency, and modernity.
In that prethreat to American security by outflanking Vietnam era, American our forces in Europe posearly warning and defensive systems sessed their full and by complements of men and arms; demonstrating a reckless disrespect for Amerinew weapons filled the inventories; the draft not ca's declared policies.
Because of onlythe Kennedy provided top notch manpower, but also administration's mix of coercionhad andcreated a vast mobilizable reserve.
At the prudence, the Soviet Union found itself same time, Soviet conventional compelled to forces had withdraw the missiles without reached receiving their post-war any nadir, thanks to open quid pro quo.
Nor was much given away Khrushchev's in policies of spending vast sums on private.
The Kennedy administration nuclear weapons was andnoeconomic development at more likely before the crisis than in its the expense of aftertraditional arms. math to attempt to overthrow Fidel A thirdCastro unusualby aspect of the crisis lies in force of arms. the virtual absence of the use of force isolated Nor should we fault the standard accounts incidents such as the Cuban downing of an of the crisis for the way in which they describe American U-2 spy plane or the unconfirmed and analyze it.
Rather, we should ask whether depth-charging of a Soviet submarine notwiththe crisis itself can and should serve as an standing.
To be sure, we had faced nonviolent appropriate model either for those studying crises before (the Berlin confrontations, for expolicy or for those conducting it.
We must, in If, however, we accept the view that the ample). short, ask ourselves whether the uniqueness use ofof force changes a whole array of political the crisis does not destroy its value asand anbureaucratic relationships, we may doubt archetype, or worse, make it a profoundly whether, in an age of increasing violence, the misleading subject for reflection.
The difference that the Cuba itself in 1962. serious use of force would have made becomes Finally, the brevity and localized nature of clear if, for example, we reflect on civil-military the crisis made it unique.
The events of Octoand organizations described by Allison and ber 1962 created considerable tension between others, the incessant discussions, consultations, military men seeking to protect those under theirand collective giving of advice, provide much of command, in the event of an outbreak of war, and the raw material for our understanding of the politicians seeking to give the other side time tobureaucratic and organizational aspects of nathink and give in.
Indeed, and contrary to the claims of the spot for permission to engage a threat to theircritics of the Kennedy administration's handling forces eventually overwhelmed the fears of states-of the crisis, we may argue that the American men seeking to win more time for negotiations. presidential system handles such short, intense, The direct clash between Soviet and Ameriand confined crises far better than it does can forces constitutes a fourth unique aspect of thelonger, more variable, and more extensive ones. crisis.
But as of that crisis, or simply for fear of the catastrophic 1986, the threats, and hence the crises, we will consequences that could ensue, American and face will not bring us close to nuclear war (unless Soviet leaders have since attempted to avoid any the conditions of parity change radically), will direct confrontation between their armed forces. occur under conditions of nuclear equality (or Moreover, allies and neutrals played a minor role even slight inferiority) and dubious convenin the events of 1962.
By and large, American tional strength, will involve the use of force, will allies (including the normally fractious General de in all likelihood involve us with Soviet clients Gaulle) fell into line, and certainly no Soviet ally rather than the Soviets themselves, and willy in attempted to use the crisis to defect.
Even Fidel all likelihood, be protracted and politically comCastro, no mere puppet of the Soviets, had little plicated.
The remain singularly unrepresentative of post-war focus of the drama on the two gigantic primary crises, and it offers precious little historical antagonists in no way resembles most post-warguidance for American statesmen today. conflicts, in which coalition politics and the actions of third parties play far larger roles.
Whether one looks at Central America, the Middle East, or WERE applicationapplication IT simplyof the of alessons the matter of hislessons of the of mishisSouthwest Asia, for example, it is clear that localtory, the problem would be bad enough.
But it powers (the Contadora group, the Arab states, oris much worse than that.
Clausewitz, after all, argued ples of crisis management take the actions of the that war is the continuation, not merely the Kennedy administration and generalize them, product, of policy.
During a war, and not making the crisis the pre-eminent example of merely at its outset, political considerations how statesmen should conduct security policy. must dominate all others, because (as The crisis management school, which Clausewitz puts it), war has its own grammar holds that McNamara's denigration of strategy but derives its logic entirely is ""exaggerated,"" but not fundamentally erronefrom politics.
He advocated, therefore, the close ous, argues that ""coercive diplomacy"" and ""sigsupervision of generals and their forces by naling"" have substituted ""politico-military stratpoliticians.
By excludover the selection, timing, and conduct of ing the use of force, or by describing it as a last all military moves, down to the lowest resort, they in fact tactical levels; reject Clausewitz's notion that war , not simply second, the deliberate slowing down of milthe threat of war , is a political use of military itary movements to allow for communistrength.
Clausewitzian would disagree, arguing that even For the crisis management theorist, the if one were to accept the crisis management threatened use of force serves theorist's premises, the statesman must inevitably only as a means of communication with one's fall victim to what Clausewitz called friction, or opponent.
He rejects or ignores other uses of what we sometimes call Murphy's Law the tenforce, for example as a means of affecting the dency of things to go wrong, of people not to get enemy's will, or simply of denying him possesmessages or to misunderstand or deliberately igsion of that which he desires.
This restrictive nore them, of large organizations to fail in their understanding reduces strategy to applied cogmissions for a host of unforeseeable reasons.
If nitive psychology, or even the art of non-verbal misunderstanding or failure to control one's forces communication.
The crisis management theois enough to cause war, Clausewitz would say, rist fears above all else misunderstanding that mankind is doomed to chronic struggle, and inone side will underestimate the resolve or overdeed, in such a case, the forty year nuclear peace estimate the bellicosity of the other.
The es-is an inexplicable accident. sence of international politics and the roots of conflict are not competing interests and seething hatreds, but misperception.
For an example of THE an CUBANan enormous enormousimpetus MISSILE to theimpetus theory CRISIS to the theory gave the catastrophic consequences of such of crisis management, but it shaped equally the misperceptions, crisis management theoristsreal policies of the administrations that inherturn to another favorite case, the eruption of ited its legacy.
Perception had little to do with the issue relationship exists between American politicofor that matter, statesmen understood each military thought and the feebleness of American other better than they later thought.
But for the crisis management theorist, again, the historical record means little.
A third element thus argues that the Athenian historian's attention divides the crisis management theorist from his to the deeper causes of war was misplaced.
He agreed, but he said ""we can do it."" their use, and the tightly controlled escalation of He agreed that it was difficult. the air war over North Vietnam included the At the same time, Kennedy's men took away personal selection of bombing targets by Presifrom the crisis a profound distrust, indeed dent Johnson and his national security advisor, contempt, for their military colleagues.
Vietnamization or pacification, for example But McNamara and his colleagues did not, or civilian leaders paid little attention to the misperhaps could not, understand the strain that conduct of the war.
They preferred instead to crisis management placed on military instituconcern themselves with what they believed to tions by violating the principle of the chain of be the politically significant (if militarily marcommand, for example, or by forcing comginal) activity, the coercion of North Vietnam manders knowingly to place their men in tactithrough aerial bombardment.
Instead, the civilians command in Washington acted as if crisis mantaught themselves that military men were inagement were strategy, trying to get right those trinsically hidebound if not obtuse, and dangerthings the crisis management theorist would ously bellicose to boot.
First, it gave them a tremendous sense of their own competence,6See Stephen P Rosen, ""Vietnam and the Amertheir ability to handle complex politico-military ican Theory of Limited War,"" International situations confidently, and independent of milSecurity 7:2 . itary advice.
Well, the nical achievement, and a thoroughly justifiable only plan was that attrition would wear out the and praiseworthy action, but it meant little in Communists, and they would have had the broader context of America's unacknowlenough.
If, asrage, in which an incident such as the Egyptair McNamara proclaimed, crisis management, by interception will serve as a welcome, but all too definition a short-term outlook, has replaced temporary, sedative.
During the 1960s the American military grudgingly accepted its role in crisis management.
Let policy requires little cultivation; that our instime suggest first that we (by whom I mean tutions of supreme command should be deprimarily the social scientists, of whom I am signed to make fast decisions and exercise absoone) examine a variety of episodes, rather than lute control for extremely brief periods of time; build our theories on the narrow and treacherthat neither civilian statesmen nor military comous foundations of one case, no matter how manders need think through the problems atattractive the building site may appear.
We are not, after all, the first Yet some historical analogies must inform power to juggle farflung political commitments, the decision of the harried statesman, the rea need to control the sea lanes, and a continental searches of the most present-minded social scicommitment against a first-class landpower. entist, or even the musings of the conscientious Great Britain shortly after the Boer war, in the reader of newspapers.
As Ernest May has first decade and a half of this century, found pointed out, we have only the choice between itself stunned by the difficulty and the human using historical analogies and metaphors well and material costs of an inglorious Vietnam-like and using them badly.
It faced the necessity of preparing to things, no possibility of considering every issue fight a land war against Germany on the contiand problem on its merits rather than in light of nent while defending its possessions and depensimilar events in the past. dencies against a host of indigenous and EuroEvidence of this abounds.
In the present pean enemies, and maintaining command of the debate over the Strategic Defense Initiative, for sea.
Arguments about Imperial Defence); the reinvigoration of some protectionold ones (the British Army under the stewardism hark back to certain beliefs about the origins ship of Richard Haldane); the complete of the Depression of the 1930s.
Perhaps our recasting of others (Admiral Jackie Fisher's involvement in Vietnam had something to do ruthless scrapping of old warships, construction with images of the 1938 Munich agreement.
The British realized, as we have debates rely on history, be it their own recolbegun only too recently to see in our own case, lections or their impressions from books.
For that they could not simply outspend all of their the parasitic breed that has flourished on the many opponents; they understood too that they fringes of power in the past three decades the could not accept organizational inefficiencies policy analysts and kindred social scientists with the excuse that tradition forbade change.
This preoccupation with how atically about the problem of coalition warfare. wars begin stems in large part from the theory Without exception, every war the United States of crisis management discussed earlier a thehas fought since the turn of the century has ory concerned with how nations get into wars, raised acute difficulties for this country, which rather than what they do once they get there. was not accustomed to conducting a war within My third suggestion, therefore, is that we study an alliance.
Our public (and all too often, I the middle and ends of wars, as well as their suspect, our classified) thinking about any conbeginnings.
What made World War I so ghastly flict with the Soviet bloc makes entirely unrealwas not so much its outbreak; it was the spread istic assumptions about the cohesion of alliances and intensification of destruction once war had in war.
We would find, from even a cursory begun, the seeming inability of statesmen to review of some relevant cases (the wars against find ways to bring it to an end, and the failure Napoleon, Kaiser Wilhelm II, and Hitler), that of war councils to find strategic detours around even a liberal democratic state leading a coalithe slaughter of the trenches.
This last point is tion finds itself compelled to use force against particularly important.
The crisis management laggardly allies or ambivalent neutrals think of theorists and their students in government have the British assault on the Danish fleet in devised systems of supreme command not unCopenhagen in 1807, for example, or like those of July 1914 in which, after all, the Churchill's order to sink the French fleet at French government was able to ""micro-manage"" Mers-el-Kebir in July 1940, or the skirmishes the deployment of French troops up to ten between American and French forces during kilometers from the border in order to avoid the invasion of Northwest Africa in 1942.
In ""misperception"" of French intentions by the wartime, we might be able to conduct such German government.
Thus far, at any rate, writers importance on in the matter of small wars, the NATO strategy express confidence (misplaced, fourth area in which we might explore a range perhaps) in the uncertain allegiance of East of historical cases.
This history might suggest to induce and support is the only kind of war we have fought since successful mutinies in the event of war. 1945, and I suspect that it will be our lot in the future.
Consideration of our most important post1945 small war, Vietnam, will show how BY AND and and statesmen LARGE, think our statesmen policy ininterms think analystsof terms of little we have understood the issues I have analogies that bear on the beginning of wars is for in Vietnam we failed with respect to raised, this crisis like 1914 or 1941 (meaning, do all we three elements of war mentioned above.
Is the deployment of a Marine 9See Stephen Peter Rosen's ""Mutiny & the battalion to Beirut analogous to the first two Warsaw Pact"" on page 74 Ed.
The war thus exacerbated a All historical events are unique, and all hislatent problem of overextension.
We did our torical analogies are suspect, but some episodes best to avoid seeing Vietnam as a coalition war. are more singular, and some metaphors more We shoved our client state aside in order to fight dubious, than others.
Through their ceaseless the war our way, while, curiously enough, pondering of the events of October 1962, policy refraining from the kind of interference in its analysts have not merely dulled our historical personnel systems and command structure that sense through sheer monotony; they have also our own history helped produce poor ular) had shown to be imperative.
Of course broaddid not think through the problems of sustainening the menu of historical case studies cannot ing the war and ending it, preferring instead to alone enable us to master all our strategic diffihope that by convincing the enemy of our culties.
But widening our investigations may very seriousness we could avoid them altogether.
A well clarify problems we now see dimly or not at serious study of our own small wars in this all.
