I 3~ 12/31/59 Cuba and Communis t China sign trade agreement under .~hich Cuba is to sell Peip1ng 50,000 tons of sugar.
On 2/13/60, Fidel Castro and Mikoyan sign a joint Soviet-Cuban communique describing their conversations as ""carried out in an atmosphere of frank cordiality./l 5.
Castro said this represents only a ""small part"" of the arms which CUba had received from the bloc • .15. 1/3/61 fue United states severed diplomatic relations with Cuba.
Many reports of other secret military installations are being received continuously in my office.
Cuba had the largest ground forces in the hemisphere -at least 10 times as large as those maintained by Batista's and other previous Cuban Governments.
He' ad;nits that he hid his true political ideology during his revolutionary I struggle because he felt that lIif wei when we began to have strength, had been ImoVln as people of very.radical idea's ..unquestionably all the social classes that are mal<:ing war on us would have been doing so ,.> from tha.t time on.
On arrival, male refugees were s,::reened at the Center for intellfgence and counter-intelligence potential.
Chronolo{$y prepared by the State Department a'C ':;he request ' of Senator Morse.) 31.
Spring of 1962 tiThe USSR's decision to develop Cuba as a military base must have been made by the sprin~ of 1~2 and prepara ... tlons within the USSR must have been under way from hat time on.
There also must have been planning activities in Cuba"" in particular, reconnaissance and survey work.
The only indication of these operations which can be found is a single intercepted personal message addr6ssed to a Russian in Cuba who had previously been at the Kapustil1 Yar mi3Sile teet range.
On this date the NPIC began publishlng a series of ~ormal reports dealing with NPIC's evaluation"" from a photographic standpoint, o~ refugee and agent reports on Cuba.
Between 14 August and mia-October one OIA office sent NPIO 13 memoranda ""asking for a check on 25 separate reports containing information which was thought to raise the possibility of Soviet offensive weapons in CUba.
A great many more such reports were .. checked with NPIO informally by telephone.
This recormnendation . was based on a memo from the DD/I to the DCI following a request made of the DOl on 7/10 by General Taylor who had asked for a comprehenoive review of all aerial photography activities.
The justification advancrri for the DOI I S proposa.l that U-2 flights over Cuba '})e . ""continued at their current level II. was that,· eat'lier missions ;.., "" .·over.
This statement was in direct contradiction to NSA's comment on the in e."" that it tended to corrobo~ate D~ a report in Ha.... :na (earlier intercepted by N S A ) USSR to take back excess war materiel •• ~"" CIA Chronology"" 11/7/62) 42.
The resulting difficulties in coordination of items for the Central Intelli~ence Bulletin "" held up publication from 3 Augu~ to 9 Augus of the first item on this subject in that publication.
There were further difficulties resulting from OIA-DIA·differences in the interpretation of photography of aircraft crates deck-loaded on Soviet ships; the record shows that CIA was right.
Prefabricated concrete slabs up to 1~~4x2 feet in size and more than thirty dark . colored cylindrical tanks about 30 feet long and 10 feet in diameter were Off-loaded about 8 A~ust.
Tubular and semicircular shaped concrete forms arrived in ariel during the same period.
Similar items have been photographed at the IRBM sites in the GuanaJay-Bauta area.
One source reported that this material was designed for use in building missile bases, and. that saIne of the cargo was delivered to the Bauta area.
Some 32 vessels are involvedj at least b~lt of these we believe to be carrying arms.
Five passenger ships with a total capacity of about 3,000 persons have already arrived.
Between 14 August and mid-October this office sent NPIC 13 memoranda asking for a check on 25 separate reports containing information which was thought to raise the possibility of Soviet offensive weapons in Cuba.
A great many more such reports were checked with NPIC informally by telephone.
It is not possible to say how soon after 15 September the activity might have been recognizable from the air as .,' an IRBr~ site.
By the middle of August CIA was receiving a large volume of agent and refugee reportin~ which, while understandably garbled ,.--and fragmentarYI enabled its {CIA's) analysts to pinpOint areas of construction and identify some of the eqUipment comin8,. in.
A study should be made of the various military alternatives which might be adopted in executing a decision to eliminate any installations in Ouba capable of launching a nuclear attack on the United States.
A study should be made of the advantages and disad'... vantages of action to liberate Cuba by blockade or invasion or other action beyond the MONGOOSE B PLUS, in the context of an ~""""', aggravated Berlin Crisis.
IBl indicated there would be a further meeting with 'the President about 9/1 to review progress on the above items and that in the event of important new information an earlier meeting would be called.
Furthermore, the President had taken action on the intelligence received.
RBM units had scarcely started en route from the USSR -but the possibility had been discussed by the.
All of them mention the strengthening of coastal and air defenses • • • All of these. articles· relate that the 4.nformation came from United States officials.I 61.
The shipments contained both military and economic 'goods and personnel.
Much of the eqUipment ~s likely to go into the improvement of coastal and air defenses.
These missiles are not adaptable for . nuclear use. ,-"""", IINonmilitary cargo"" l""oughly half of the total"" consists of deliveries, already behind schedUle"" of industrial and agricultural equipment under, aid and trade agreements.
A large nUmber of additional Soviet specialists arrived in Cuba in the same period.
Wit.'} the l""ecent arrivals, the. total number in Cuba or on the way"" both military and nonmilitary may be as high as 5000.
The breakdown between military and technical personnel is not known J but the additional numbers of military specialists are not incompatible with the training and setting up of the . :{. complex military eqUipment which has arrived.
There is no evidence of the arriv~l of Soviet combat' troops from other Soviet bloc countries.
They appear designed to enhance the CL~ban regime's defense capabilities again3t an internal threat"" and to increase the effectiveness of the Cuban military e~tablishment for possible internal use.
The Shipments must have been planned several mcnths ago to have arrived when they did.
The Cuban regime J facing economic deterioration and rising popular discontent"" probably hopes to strengthen its internal position through new demonstrations of Soviet sUPP,ort.
This prompted the DIA to request additional photo'. graphic coverage of this area, but such coverage ~s not accomplished until 10/14 for a variety of reasons including ~oor weather and the .e~uirement that the U-2 not overfly SA-2 installations.
II •••• were quickly overtaken by the photOgraphy which ~~came available after 29 August.
At the USIB meeting of 7 September, further attempts to w-L""ite such a paper were deferred until 19 September, by which date the nevr :l.nforroation could be digested.
II (This action by General Carter in calling General Lemnitzer was the result of an instruction telephoned from out of town by the DCI who had left Washington on August 23 for the West Coast, then left the country on August 30 for the Riviera, and returned on September 23.
I'n installations on periphery of Blo~1 Formosa, etc • • • • affords USSR with opportunity for stepped-up military material and technical buildup.
Department"" that they are going to operE'·_""t~ Nl.::e missiles"" because that information we do not have at this time.
There certainly are technicians there and they may be military technicians.
But on the .,, t 1question of troops"" as it is.generally understood"" we do not have evidence that there are Russian troops there.
The Cubans have had Soviet tanks for some time"" but this is our first indication that they now have boats of this type.
Cuba \'1111 stl1~mgthen critics of th~ :\ciministration'o'""aoftness"" on Cuba.
In sums the expectat:l.on is t11at any missiles w5.11 have a substantial political and ps:rcholoGica1 impact .. vibile surface-to-surface missiles would create a condition of crGaclarm, even in the absence of proc,f thut nuclearwarheads were urrivi_ng with, them.
There is every indication that the naval complement to handle these boats disembarked at the ./ same time.
The convoy moved in military order and contained the first ~phibious vehic~es observed in Cuba; also jeeps, 6x6 trucks, and tracked trucks.
It included tanks"" cannonlike trailers"" and flatbed trailers. ........... liOn August 8 there \lIas observed a night i:lovement of a convoy on Carx'etera Central.
Flatbed trucks were observed transporting concave metal structures supported by tubing~ The convoy included a number :.\ of closed vans.
Mo~e than 20 cargo ships have arrived from Communist ports in the last few weeks.
Between three and five thousand so-called I technicians I have arrived in the course of the past year.
Soviet statistics. reveal that by the end of the year the Soviets will have shipped nearly $1 billion of goods and equipment to Castro.
Cuban trade with non-Communist countries will be down to about 30 percent next year and Cuba will be virtually isolated from the free world--a Communist enclave within the free world where the Soviets can operate unchecked and to a large extent unobserved.
II • • • More ominous reports'suggest that the Soviets are constructing missile bases and sending over technicians and experts to man them.
That supposition"" which our Government has never openly adnlitted or discussed"" is a source of serious concern to the people of ~ll the Americas.
This collateral information indicates that plans to deploy ballistic' miss1.1es in Cuba were being implemented b~ the end of August.
IRBM site construction was apparently under way in September and preceded the MRBM sItes.
Information has reached the Government in the last 4 days from a variety .of sources which establishes without deubt that the Seviets have provided the Cuban Gevernment with a number .of antiaircraft missiles with a shert range of 25 miles which are similar to early models of our Nike.
Along with these missiles"" the Soviets are apparently previding the extensive radar.and ether electronic equipment which is required fer their .operation. lve cal~ also cenfirm the presence of several S.oviet-made meter torpede boats carrying ship-teship guided missiles havingrange of 15 miles.
The number of Seviet military technicians new known to be in Cuta .or enreute -approximate1; ~ 3,500 -is censistent with assistance in setting up and.earning to ~ use this eqUipment.
S, ~,.or~::pf, other .significant off'ensiv(;l' c£!,papll1ty either in Cuban h!',nds or' under Sovl~t dire.ctton' and gu;1.
REM site was negative, but road improvements began shortly thereafter, .and a fIow of construction from the port of Isabela, on the north coast • • • • • • • • • ""the date at which the site acquired a recognizable photographic signature. is not determinable.
I have said that the whole story has not been told the American people.
On 9/10, ""General Carter sent a memorandum to the Secretary of Defense requesting' necessary actions)' including Special Group approva:-,. to provide' for ','tactical-type reoonnaissance"" of the BaneS area) w' en directed bY,higher authority.
Cuba :,:""-' but the Secretary of Defense did not want the opera.tion considered further until there were available the results oflrther U-2 reconnaissance which had been decided upon at a Whi t8 House meeting of 9/10.
Actually"" "" ."" "", these MIG-21 crates had arrived in Cuba about 1 September aboard a Soviet ship which had been photographed en route, but the photographs were not received in Washington for several weeks.
On~ missile station IS being installed neal' the port of Bahia Honda and another near Varadero Beach'in Matanzas Province •• • More than 3000 Russians were landed at Bahia Honda for work on a launching' pad • • • the statement said.I ..90.
General Carter from the Riviera stating:· ""Difficult for me to ............ rationalize extensive' costly defenses ·.being· este.'clishlitl in Cuba. • • appears to me quite possible measures nm'l being taken are for purpose or ensuring secrecy of some offensive capability such as MRBMs to be installed 'by Soviets ,'after present phase completed and country secured from overflights.
The CIA proposed-tvo extended overtlights covering the remainder of the island not covered in the August 29 nod September 5 missions.
September a source was informed by'a resid~nt of the general area. that a rocket pase was being constructed by the Soviets at a location. now identified from photograph;., as Remedios Site 1.
Mid-September"" 1962 ~ At this time there ~ high frequency circuit in operation between Moscow t h r o u g h _ The fact that mE..1us.
Their arrival will raise our estimate of technicians on the scene to about 4)200.
September 19 at USIB, General Carter stated his desire .to see RF-10l's '~-' over Cuba.
Cubans and Soviets conceive to be a danger that the United States may attempt by one means or another to overthrow it.
The Soviets evidently hope to deter any such attempt by enhancing Castro's defensive capabilities and by threatening Soviet military retaliation.
The intelligence publications available to the Board fail to reflect that any particular significance was attached to Dankevich's presence in Cuba until after the President made his public address relative to MRBM~ and IRBMs in Cuba.
On this:::;.da~e:';.the DOl sent a finai cable to ... oIA from the Riviera, commenting·'to Gerera1 Carter on the conclusions of SNIE 85-3 of 9/19 which had been· cabled to the DOl.
This activity is ;puzzling; we have never seen ..:~.~ a5Ything like it before.
This report dovetailed with the earlier report of the 9/12/62 sighting of MRBMs near Havana . ""liThe arrival of the second report led CIA analysts to a tentative conclusion that the two observers had in fact seen the same convoy, and that there~s a possibility of the 88-4 identification being genuine.
Few, if any, CIA analysts working on the Cuban problem , '05 even had~lee.rances.
As 8 result, they did not know that no overflights of Pinar del Rio and Las Villas were included in the September program,' or that this program was seriously delS.yed.
In retrospect, it seems quite ~ss1ble -but by no means certain -that they would have been picked up in the Checklist, but it is extremely doubtful if they '\-Tould have survived'tbe coordination process for the Central Intelligence Bulletin.
This machinery was . ';ttL' '\;~~t;;f(""\;;'~~~~' designed to provide elaborate justifications an~' back-up paper work before each decision was made, procedures reaching back ~nto the early history of the U-2 operations over the US&'R/ They'were intended for the control of deliberate strategic reconnaissance of the~U$SR, and not for a fast-moving situation such as that in Cub!:1., ""Which was ra.p1dlY.'~becoming tac,tical.
P.L-102-526(JFK ACT NARA ~<6~ DA -6 "":', ""~-',."". ~;'';';~:"":''''""';''~';i~~;:bI£i;~~iijiiiiiL~~i.
Iour intel11~ence collection on Cuba has improved s1nce. the first of , :{ £~ih:E:;~~~~~L :;.'.;f,t '~'~l·' """"I~,~ .,~:;:.~i~~a{~f;·e~rtfg:t t~~~~gg~~th~b~~""thira-c,ountry ~ents (mean,lng Alp.-,.::~:~~~~;. ,)jJ'-; , '$'\ 129.
Jl""i pass over Cuba, was made by the Corona vehicle· launched on 9/29/62. ..:'. :.:. "" 'lhe resulting photography was .. good by Corona standards but not of' "" . .. -sufficient qua11 ty to reflect ··.significant photograph1c :!.ntelligence ::;c!,f on MRBM or IRBM developments '.m the island.
Further \'Test, in Pinar del Rio Province"" a triangular pattern of SA-2 sites cannot be connected with any significant ini1itary installation.
Information. on the deployment, of Soviet military pe,rsonnel.,' I~ ~ and ""te..::hnicians ll in Cuba is derived from unevaluated refugee sources.
Significantly"" the greatest concentration of Soviet personnel, activity and camps is in the western end of Cuba indicating a greater interest by the Soviets in Pinar del Rio than in other Provinces.
This report is unconfirmed and there are no other reports of such lnissiles.
Howev.er "" it is, significant to note .thatty taking the approximat~ genter of the, trapozoid-shapedestr;tcted area p'reviously referred.to"" as the~oint of .0rigin··for,:a:radius~:0f.
CIA analysts had naturally come to view all such reports with a high degree of suspicion.
A substantial proportion of these dealt mth the deployment of defensive missiles 'and relatedctivities.
The CIA analytio apparatus, however, recognized and oorrelated the first authentic reports of MREM equi:pment ever to be received' in Washington, and took action upon them.
The Joint Resolution expres'sed the determination 9f the United States to prevent by necessary means, including use ........ of force, the.Marxist-Leninist regime in CUba from extending by force · or. threat of force,its aggressive .or subve.rsive activities in this Hemispherej prevent in Cuba.'.the creation or use of externally supported military ca'pabi11ty:-eridangering United States security; and work with the OAS and with freedom-loving Cubans to support the aspirations of the Cuban 'people for self'-de.termination.
But ·it.. must .. be·.stated. that the current need is extremely urgent,·.and the .. risk),nVC)lved should be very thoroughly weighed before this coverage·:·is~,.q.enied.
Recommeridat~~~::~' :',:><if:~.r'{;~,':~t·~:~~ended that reconnaiss~ce programs be initiated ,to satisfy'.. these requirements.
DC:C ',' , '. :flights· were now res tric ted by the prenence of:SAM'sit astern:quadrant of Ouba.
Fortunately the planned and actual paths crossed over San Cristobal,ud the primary mission was accomplish-eu.
On 12/7/62 SAC representatives exhibited .to. a Panel ot the President's Foreign.
Melt. menacing shift in the '\'lOrld balance of power • • • I trust that·all:of.us 1 regardless o~ party, are . ,~ united in the hope that this.
Groundesolution ··of 2-5 feet or better will .. suffice for this purpof:e.
J able IL-28 crates which later showed np in U-2 photography ·of 10/17 at San Julian aix>fie1d -lI a10ng l'lith a number of others which must have come in on \lnphoto'graphed ships.
During the period ilnm.ediately preceding and following the Presi~ential decision, CIA personnel expressed considerable concern relative to the transfer on the ground that SAC did not have capability or experience to effectively operate such U-2 photographic missions.
SAC established the 4080th Wing in May 1956, and U-2 aircraft began to arrive 'Ihe The 4080th flew ted from varie of in_ in ~ anlo;llld~against the Kamchatka Peninsula, the Russian land mass in the East Siberian Sea, and the Laptev Sea area of Russia, obtaining thereby the first photographs of these area.s available to Air Force planners.
The 4080th has flo'WIl uhcter every conceivable ~ather condition including sno. . . . , ice, fog and desert.
In addition to photographic missions, it has flown U-2 ELINT missions during'1961 and 1962 in the Far North and Far.
The 4080th I S crews average 3500 hours~' of,:which . . 600;hours· is in U-2 aircraft.
J 156. lO/J.5/62 In thd::~'~~iy> ~ven'ing the read-out of SAC IS ini tial U-2 Ih.lssion over Cuba'''l'irst became available.
It reflected identification of an MRBM site, in ,the San Cristobal area.
Bundy reffirmed the deoision made on 10/12 and indicated that SAC should continue to fly thes~ missions.
Mr Scoville was ~ritical of SAC's flight plans for upcoming micsions l and he complf.l.ined toot his office had not received the ELINT iake from the first SAC mission of 10/14.
Keating's charges of know MREM,sites in c,'uba -Le., ""General Carter s::..l~ that .... -. there were refu~e rellOrts but no hard ~vidence"". , 159.
A message passed wi thin CUl:>a :from fLas Villas to Placetas suggested an int'ent to conceal lI equipment ll and ffuel station"" in a railroad tunnel in an area south of the F.amedios IRBM site.
Knox, in a conversation held n the ""catesoricallr stated"" Rremlin)--mat lithe WE:Cl.PO Cuba included antiaucra f£ whicn:-tne Soviet Union had furnished to issiles and ballistic missiles with both conventional and thermonuclear warheads.
First) many people find it hard to believe :that .the .offensive Soviet missile' sites in Cuba suddenly mushroomed oye·r"",:,the:Yleekend.
Elnd .any.;1nfor-. mation we had we knew was available to the administration· and ·.to ;,:the ..:~ President.
Conunlttee admitted that a Soviet arms·buila-up was' '\/. going on in -Cuba.
SovIet union •...:We have in our hanos sufficient information that there exIst on iCuba.ri--:·te~ritor;v.
Cuban terri t sufficient missiles ·:to· des half 9 alroady assembled or in the process of assembly at st.
He . noted that DIA received no signiffcant information from agent sources '"" concerning the Soviet missileb.uildup.
The need for,':establishing an improved capability for the evaluation of indicators :as, distinguished from the procesG of pre~ :.' paring intelligence estimates;, The need for getting across to top "". ::, I2i\ level officials the full brur1?,::Af:.stlch indicators.
Ille island is alive with rumors p and it is difficult to sift the facts out of the stories of the big Russian militarybuildup still going on.
IIWe express plorticula.r thanks to you for your 'WOrk of the last, ttv..a weeks.
The reconnaissance flights 'Which. enabled us to determine Yrl.th prEicision ,the offensive build-up in Cuba. contributed directly to the 'secur:l.ty of the United States in ·the most important and significant 'Way.
