K76 2003 364.15'24'097309046—dc22 2003015447 Printed in the United States For Matthew, James, and Margaret Kroth Acknowledgments I would like to thank Trudy Burrows for her inspiration and my wife Anya, Bill Burton, and Jo Ann Vasquez who were there during the darker hours, Frank Cichowicz for his support, and Maya Kroth for editorial assistance.
Love’s Body, often forms the deep structure which organizes these thoughts, along with the insights of Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis for a remark which appears as the display quote for Chapter 7.
It served as an important beacon in directing this work to its inevitable conclusions.
Autopsy evidence impugned by the following witnesses present at Kennedy's admission to Parkland Hospital in Dallas 40 3.
Suspicious deaths of HSCA and Senate Intelligence Committee witnesses 67 3.
Significant individuals named in the literature as withholding information or engaged in disinformation about the assassination.
Eight 'soft 1 lines of evidence connecting Oswald to the CIA and military intelligence.
Schools, hospitals and colleges named after Kennedy, Lincoln, Jefferson, and Nixon 17 3.
Cause of death in Kennedy sample compared to national mortality norms 58 4.
Case Closed 23 Evidence Against Oswald 24 Physical Evidence 24 Circumstantial Evidence 26 Dr.
It is one of the most imposing stories of the American twentieth century.
With the recent release of thousands of pages of classified assassination documents, the American fascination — or perhaps we should say obsession — with the Kennedy assassination knows no bounds.
In high-energy physics there is a theory known as “super symmetry,” in which two sub-atomic particles are predicted to appear in high-energy collisions.
At the Fermilab, which houses one of the most expensive colliders, scientists were unable to find them.
As the machines get bigger, the particles get smaller, and the seemingly endless search marches forward relentlessly.
Super symmetry is somewhat a metaphor for the American fixation on the Kennedys and particularly the assassination.
There is a sense that more books need to be written, more interviews held, more documents examined — and surely, then, this enormous massing of data will ultimately deliver the elusive 1.
Oswald Jim Moore, a minority voice among Kennedy assassination aficionados, claims that the Warren Commission was actually correct, and Lee Harvey Oswald was the sole conspirator.
Moore says he has spent more time in Dallas than any other author and has traced and retraced Oswald’s movements countless times.
Instead of getting out where he should have, he had the cabbie drive him past his rented room by a few blocks and then walked back.
Lucien Sarti Steve Rivele researched the CIA’s Executive Action program.
It led him to a Frenchman called Christian David, a 58-year-old serving time in Leavenworth, Kansas.
David was a member of the Corsican network in South America and a drug trafficker.
He was awaiting extradition to France in connection with a murder of a Moroccan politician.
He wanted to avoid extradition to France and was willing to deal with the United States government and reveal the true Mafia-connected killers of the President.
According to David, Antoine Guerini, the Corsican Mafia boss in Marseille, accepted a contract to kill the President.
Corsican drug trafficker and sharpshooter Lucien Sarti took the contract, instead.
Sarti and two assassins flew from Marseille to Mexico City in the fall of 1963, crossing into Texas.
The murderers lay low in Dallas for two weeks and were flown out of the country to Montreal.
Despite his attempts to talk his way out of extradition, Christian David was sent to France, and the story seems to have gone nowhere since then 2.
Introduction to the Dream despite the fact that a Brazilian associate of Sarti corroborated the story in all of its essential details.
Frustrated with organized crime, Robert Kennedy ordered him deported to Guatemala.
J Edgar Floover wiretapped Marcello and obtained evidence that Marcello had ordered a hit on President Kennedy.
Floover did not pass this information on to either the President or the Secret Service, however, and author Mark North alleges that Floover knowingly permitted the contract to take place.
Floover’s antipathy for the Kennedys, particularly Robert Kennedy, was well known.
In this paradigm, the origin of the assassination begins with the angry, resentful, harassed Mafia kingpin, Carlos Marcello.
J Edgar Floover, instead of informing the Secret Service, acts as a silent co-conspirator and accomplice.
North’s book, Act of Treason, points the finger directly at Floover for failing to prevent JFK’s assassination.
Kennedy intended to withdraw troops from Vietnam and close down covert anti-Castro operations, especially after his confrontation with Khrushchev during the 1962 Cuban missile crisis.
The result was that anti-Castro CIA-inspired mechanics who were angry and felt betrayed by Kennedy took down the President.
Mark Lane provides evidence in Rush to Judgment that the killer of John Fitzgerald Kennedy belonged to this group.
Marita Lorenz, former undercover operative for the CIA and FBI, told the News that her companions on the car trip from Miami to Dallas were Oswald, CIA contract agent Frank Sturgis, Cuban exile leaders Orlando Bosch and Pedro Diaz Lanz, and two Cuban brothers whose names she does not know.
She said they were all members of Operation 40, a secret guerrilla group originally formed by the CIA in 1960 in preparation for the Bay of Pigs invasion.
She said Oswald later visited an Operation 40 training camp in the Florida Everglades.
Lorenz claimed that Sturgis, Oswald, Bosch, and Diaz Lanz, former Chief of the Cuban Air Force, attended this meeting.
A few days after this story came out, Sturgis was arrested in Lorenz’ apartment, where he had gone to discuss matters with her.
Lorenz, in her testimony... adds that Sturgis had also fired at the President.
He held a pistol to his head, but then reluctantly surrendered to authorities.
In his dazed ramblings, he confessed to the ambush of Judge John Wood in San Antonio, Texas and the murder of John Kennedy.
Harrelson was an associate of Carlos Marcello’s brother and was indicted with him for the murder of Judge Woods.
His story of murdering Judge Woods was anything but the ramblings of a coke addict.
He provided information substantial enough to result in an indictment and a conviction.
Some say Harrelson was one of the “tramps” picked up near the grassy knoll on the day of the assassination.
A forensic anthropologist held that photos of the tramps matched a photo of Harrelson with a 90% likelihood of accuracy.
Career criminal Chauncey Holt said that he was with Harrelson in Dealey Plaza on the day of the assassination.
Harrelson later said that he was on cocaine and out of his mind when he made the confession, and despite this interesting aggregation of evidence, his Kennedy admissions were considered maniacal ravings and were dismissed.
But authorities were less nonchalant when it came to the Judge Woods murder.
Let us further assume that Hintz left a note hidden in his personal safe confessing that he was the grassy knoll gunman and that he killed President Kennedy.
In his posthumous confession, he names his superior, another former military man, and a former CIA contract agent.
Corroborating evidence is given that this superior did exist, that Mr Hintz worked for the CIA, that he was in Dallas at the time, and that his confession along with all other supportive information is so strong that the media itself begins believe that a second gunman has finally been found.
The fourth shot heard on the motorcycle tape dictabelts by the House Select Assassination Committee is now explained once and for all.
This hypothetical scenario represents the ultimate discovery of the elusive particle, the smoking gun, the end of the mystery, the final solution to the greatest murder mystery of the twentieth century.
We have physical evidence, circumstantial evidence, witnesses, and corroborating witnesses.
The problem in this completely made-up example is that, in a very short time, those who felt the Mafia was involved, from Marcello to Trafficante to Roselli and Hoffa, would be printing new texts suggesting that Hintz could not possibly have been the second gunman.
Wiretaps of Mafia figures ordering a contract hit on the President and further 6.
This example was created arbitrarily and with an intent to be ludicrous.
However, in the research for this book, an almost identical example was unearthed.
Ricky Don White, of Medville, Texas claimed that his father, Roscoe White, was one of three CIA operatives ordered to kill Kennedy.
His claims came from his father’s diary, which has now allegedly disappeared.
White claimed that his father was a CIA operative with a partner known as Saul.
McDonald claimed he learned that Saul, operating independent of any organization, was hired by certain private American citizens to execute Kennedy in Dallas.
The only major difference between White’s and McDonald’s claims is that Chief McDonald was allegedly told by Saul that the contract on Kennedy was a private “hit"" paid for by people who wanted Johnson to be President, while White believed that his father and Saul participated in Kennedy’s murder as possible CIA agents.
The killer was allegedly contacted in May of 1963 for a meeting in Haiti to discuss a privately arranged hit of President Kennedy.
According to McDonald, the Warren Commission acted as if it did not realize the significance of the exhibit.
Gerald Ford would restate, as he predictably has done, that Oswald was the lone gunman and that the Warren Commission report was the only authentic and truthful rendering of the event.
The point of this hypothetical discussion is that, in the vast energy expended to locate the truth and to find the elusive particle, we may have made a very large mistake.
That blunder was originally described by Heisenberg, the physicist, who alerted us to the fact that the object observed is determined by the instrument used to observe it.
We pay little attention to the instrument, and are so preoccupied with the object we forget about the assumptions inherent in the instrument we are using in the first place.
The nature of this text is not to simply look at the assassination as an object, but also to examine the instrument used to process the information.
Not only will this book look at the Kennedy assassination at an unprecedented level of detaif and depth, but it wili also consider some of the elements of mass psychology and myth, which obtain to this four-decade old collective American obsession.
The mysterious Mister X in Oliver Stone’s movie JFK was actually L Fletcher Prouty, a career intelligence officer who himself has written a book on the subject.
In that business, the “mechanics” are faceless and have chameleon identities that are skillfully shielded by the system/ Like Prouty, some may believe the answer will never be known.
Others, like Gerald Posner, already think the case is closed and nothing more needs to be written.
The intent of this text is to review all the evidence, to do so meticulously, and yet not to 7.
Introduction to the Dream lose sight of the instrument we are using to observe this data.
When we understand the Kennedy assassination not only as an historic event but also as a myth that is deeply embedded in American psychology, perhaps we shall construct a fuller picture.
Numinosity and Archetype John Fitzgerald Kennedy represented something far more unconscious than conscious to the American psyche.
Kennedy was in office for a thousand days; his popularity at the polls for the upcoming election in 1964 was rising, but never overwhelming.
Kennedy’s charisma was meagerly felt at the conscious level, while he was alive, compared to the virtual deification that happened after his death.
Americans now rate John F Kennedy one of the best presidents in history.
Kennedy’s speeches, his rhetoric, possessed not only “vision” but also carried an element of the prophetic.
A Newsweek poll published results showing Kennedy to have been the country’s most popular president.% rated his presidency as good to great and 30% wished he were still president.
However, American Heritage published a poll of 75 prominent historians and journalists, who ranked him the most overrated pubhc figure in American history.
JFK ranked second among the last eleven presidents, in a nationwide poll of over 1,012 respondents.
And those who look only to the past or the present are certain to miss the future.
There were always one or two catch phrases that were not only inspirational, they seemed gauged to be memorized by the listeners — as if his speech writers wanted Kennedyisms carved in granite across the doorways of a dozen public buildings.
It is the fate of this generation... to live with a struggle we did not start, in a world we did not make.
For beneath today’s surface glass of peace and prosperity are increasingly dangerous, unsolved, long postponed problems that will inevitably explode to the surface.
Kennedy’s Peace Corps challenged Americans to dream and to bring a new meaning to their lives by rolling up their own sleeves and putting into practice their deepest sentiments.
There was always a need to see the new world order with care, caution, and above all, intelligence.
Every man, woman and child lives under a nuclear sword of Damocles, hanging by the slenderest of threads, capable of being cut at any moment by accident or miscalculation or madness.
Introduction to the Dream We have the power to make this the best generation of mankind in the history of the worid — or to make it the fast.
There was a certain pacifism in his words, as if with his election came a Zeitgeist of peace, rationality, problem-solving, compromise, eschewing arrogance and bellicosity.
Those self-appointed generals and admirals who want to send someone else’s son to war ought to be kept at home by the voters and replaced in Washington by someone who understands what the twentieth century is all about.
Kennedy’s words were not only a new voice and vision, but his charm, ease, and encyclopedic fluency with facts were spellbinding.
Americans remembered Truman’s proletarian clarity, Eisenhower’s mumbling unintelligibility, and Nixon’s humorless monotone.
In 1954 the dictator of Venezuela was awarded the Legion of Merit by our ambassador.
In 1955 our Secretary of the Navy went to Argentina and made an eloquent address comparing dictator Peron to Lincoln — to Peron’s advantage.
We have dumped more than $500 million worth of arms and ammunition into Latin America over the past eight years, much of which has been used to strengthen the hand of dictatorships.
Although the Cold War will not be won in Latin America, it may very well be lost there.
Congressman Baring of Nevada, a Democrat, said you would do much better if you got rid of some of yours — and he named Bowles, Ball, Bell, Bunche, and Sylvester.
And 1 would not add Congressman Baring to that list as I have a high regard for him and for the gentlemen that he named.
But congressmen are always advising presidents to get rid of presidential advisers.
That is one of the most constant threads that runs through American history, and presidents ordinarily do not pay attention, nor do they in this case.
I sat next to Cardinal Spellman at dinner the other evening, and asked him what I should say when voters question me about the doctrine of the pope’s infallibility. “1 don’t know.
Introduction to the Dream Eisenhower would open a press conference wearing a drab gray suit and stumble through the reading of a prepared statement to the press; Kennedy, by contrast, rarely read to his audiences at press conferences.
Mr Krock has been to every major dinner in history — except the Last Supper — and he had a relative at that one.
Kennedy’s wife, in contrast to her predecessor Mamie Eisenhower, seemed comfortable in the star-like role into which she transformed the position of First Lady.
When the Kennedys went to France, Parisians swooned over Jacqueline; and when she spoke French, an immediate sense of kinship developed which did not spare President de Gaulle.
I do not think it altogether inappropriate to introduce myself to this audience.
I feel as a Catholic that I’ll get my reward in my life hereafter, although I may not get it here.
The Republican National Committee recently adopted a resolution saying you were pretty much of a failure.
The search is narrowing, but there are other fields that are still to be considered, including even a postal background.
I see nothing wrong with giving a little legal experience before he goes into private practice. or on his father: I just received a telegram from my father.
A New Idealism Kennedy inspired a new kind of liberalism in this country and set many on a journey in pursuit of their own ideals and dreams.
Our job is to turn the American vision of a society in which no man has to suffer discrimination based on race into a living reality everywhere in our land.
Next week I shall ask the Congress of the United States to act, to make a commitment it has not fully made in this century to the proposition that race has no place in American life or law.
The rights of every man are diminished when the rights of one man are threatened.
Introduction to the Dream These were not the tired, dusty phrases of a political hack, but a spark that ignited a new vision of self and country including a newfound altruism.
Kennedy became a figurehead for a renaissance in American idealism and commitment.
Americans were gradually falling in love, seduced by a romantic figure who seemed to be saying just what they wanted to hear and in the loftiest phrases.
A mystique began to surround the presidency that seemed to touch every American and much of the rest of the world as well.
Few Americans were aware the President suffered from Addison’s disease or that he needed large doses of cortisone.
The drug tended to make Kennedy gain weight and gave his skin an ever-present sun-tanned look.
The Kennedys were probably the bestlooking presidential couple ever to occupy the White blouse, and Washington D.C. began to look more like Hollywood than the political center of the country.
Journalists began writing about the frenzy that swept through audiences and of the female “jumpers,” “leapers,” “clutchers,” “touchers,” “screamers,” and “runners” who worshipped the new celebrity.
Indeed, at the conscious level Kennedy’s intense charisma and charm had not made much of a dent on opinion polls.
He was favored as he approached the 1964 election, but over 40 percent of the electorate were not planning to vote for him.
There was such a rush on leopard skin coats that the price jumped to $40,000 per coat and the animal soon went on the endangered species list, where it remains today.
People froze in their tracks, forced by some unknown process to photographically record where they were and what they were doing on November 22,1963.
In 1963 the worst tragedy since Pearl Harbor struck at the United States.
It was a stunning blow that affected nearly everyone in America and a large part of the world.
The night of the tragedy, the big bell of Westminster Abbey in London tolled for one hour, as though the King or Queen had died.0,000 people marched by torchlight in Berlin, and all radio programming was cancelled in Ireland.
Every store in Paris closed up and the Champs Elysees was almost deserted on a Friday night.
Thousands of people gathered on the lawn in front of Bethesda Naval Hospital in utter silence for hours.
At the moment President Kennedy was pronounced dead, 68% of all the people in the United States knew of the shooting, and shortly almost every single person in America knew of it, and no one would ever forget what they were doing at the moment they heard of his death.
No other President’s death since Lincoln so deeply affected the country.
Introduction to the Dream Kennedy’s coffin was on dispiay in the Capitai Rotunda.
Photographers hounded her, not merely during her grieving but well into the thirtieth year after the assassination.
His thatch of brown hair looked as though it had grown extra thick the way our wood animals in Connecticut grow extra fur for winter.
And he looked as though it was fun to be alive, to be a politician, to be President to be a Kennedy, to be a man.
It felt good to have a President who read his mail, who read the papers, who read books and played touch football.
It was a pleasure and a cause for pride to watch him take the quizzing of the press 30.
He’d parry, thrust, answer or duck, and fire a verbal shot on target, hitting with the same answer, the segregationists in a Louisiana or a hamlet or a government in South East Asia He made you feel that he knew what was going on in both places.
It felt good to have a President who looked well in Vienna, Paris, Rome, Berlin and at the podium of the United Nations — and who would go to Dublin put a wreath where it did the most good and leave unspoken the satisfaction of an Irishman en route to 10 Downing Street as head of the United States government.
Our future is more hopeful because of his work but our future is not safe nor sure.
They phoned and phoned and we cried and we were not ashamed of crying but we are ashamed of what had happened.
Elvis Presley was terribly popular, more so after his death than while living.
To quantify the difference we can look at the number of articles written about both Kennedy and Presley in the five years after their respective deaths.
His significance to the American psyche was different, deeper, greater.
Indeed in the five years after Presley’s death, which was 20 years after Kennedy's , there were still more articles written about Kennedy than the King of rock and roll.
JFK’s objective accomplishments or failings would be easily over-shadowed by the records of Harry Truman, Ronald Reagan, even Calvin Coolidge.
He is not an objective heavyweight like Albert Einstein, Martin Luther King, or Jonas Salk, because his achievements are exiguous by comparison.
But as a psychological heavyweight, he is probably the most preeminent American in the twentieth century.
In fact, he may easily be one of the four or five most significant psychological figures in American history; and yet, rarely has this aspect of Kennedy been explored.
Like Charles Lindbergh, John Litzgerald Kennedy became an object of American mass psychology, a fixation, an obsession, and it is time we looked not just at the assassination drama and the attendant detective story, but at the psychological and mythological dimension of this story as well.
We will address these matters in the final chapter of this book, but by way of introduction, let us get a preview of some of the issues.
Lee Harvey Oswald and John Wilkes Booth are remembered; Leo Czolgosz, President McKinley’s assassin, is not.
The pattern and vividness of these memory traces suggests that Kennedy and Lincoln have been adopted as archetypal figures; McKinley and Garfield seem not to have satisfied the conditions, they seem not to match up to the paradigms.
Many connections have been drawn between John Kennedy and Abraham Lincoln.
John Kennedy drew connections himself, frequently invoking Lincoln in his speeches, especially at important, emotionally significant, and historic moments of his presidency.
It is in this spirit that we must go forth in the coming months and years j5 Harry Truman, one of his very first visitors in the White House, asked him if he was ready for such a responsibility.
I am reminded that one hundred years ago Abraham Lincoln, not yet President and under fire from veteran politicians, wrote these words.
In the election of 1860, Abraham Lincoln said the question was whether this nation could exist half slave or half free.
In the election of 1960, and in the world around us, the question is whether the world will exist half slave or half free, whether it will move in the direction of freedom, in the direction of the road that we are taking or whether it will move in the direction of slavery.
The parallels between the Lincoln and Kennedy tragedies are far more intricate and intriguing than we have ever appreciated.
Obviously, some parallels and bridges were intentionally drawn, to boost Kennedy’s image; but the plethora of coincidental linkages is staggering.
Each had a friend named Paine, with whom he spent time just before the assassination.
Both stayed in New Orleans, visiting their uncles, shortly before the assassinations.
Kennedy'Lincoln Correspondence • Both Kennedy and Lincoln were succeeded by their Vice Presidents named Johnson.
Lincoln tried and failed to be nominated for the Vice Presidency in 1856; Kennedy tried and failed for the same office in 1956.
The night before Booth shot Lincoln, he was with a friend named Paine who was also held for questioning.
Introduction to the Dream • Conspiracy theorists suggested the real Booth was not buried in his grave and asked that he be exhumed; conspiracy theorists thought the same about Oswald and similarly called for his exhumation.
As if to underscore the synchronicity of these two figures, it might he useful to emphasize that Kennedy 's secretary, Evelyn Lincoln, was married.
Sources for this listing include O'Donnel & Powers, Johnny We Hardly Knew Ye ,219;Compendium of Coincidence, (Time, August 227,1964), 19.
This type of coincidence or correspondence can be fun, and can be drawn out further and further.
John Fitzgerald Kennedy met a real person named “Abe” Lincoln, the husband of his personal secretary, Evelyn Lincoln.
Certainly Brutus, the assassin of Julius Caesar, is also a name associated with traitors; he is the historical, archetypal traitor.
John Wilkes Booth was an esteemed actor but he had two brothers, one of whom was namedjunius Brutus Booth.
Indeed, John and his brother played together in a memorable performance of Shakespeare’s Julius Caesar in March 1865.
Junius Brutus Booth did not change his name to make it more theatrical, nor did he adopt “Brutus” as a name because he was about to play the role in Julius Caesar.
Brutus appears on stage rather innocently in the psychodrama we are now studying; he is neither manufactured nor manipulated.
Indeed, one wonders what role John Wilkes Booth played when he performed Julius Caesar alongside his brother in 1865, shortly before he assassinated Lincoln.
This information is not available, but it would not be utterly surprising if he were cast in the role of Brutus.
The story of the Kennedy assassination now like a surrealistic dream, tantalizing, intriguing.
It has taken on a life of its own, as a cultural event, as piece of theater, so troubling to the American psyche that we are compelled to investigate further and even to seek some kind of mystical meaning in it.
But we are like lost souls wandering 21 Conspiracy in Camelot around in some inverted Platonic cave, focusing on the figures without noticing that the atmosphere is in fact created by the disturbing shadows they cast... and shadows are everywhere.
As the event has taken hold in our imaginations, it seems to take on new psychological dimensions that in fact reflect on American society and our sense of who we are as a nation.
In order to have the widest and most comprehensive picture of this moment in American history, our last chapter will focus on this dimension.
But first, we must examine the myriad pages of assassination literature with fresh eyes and an unbiased, dispassionate objectivity.
So if we begin a dream interpretation, or start “free associating"" to draw out connections, we never cease to stumble on to interesting clues.
Certainly Brutus is also a name associated with traitors, the assassin of Julius Caesar, the historical, archetypal traitor.
If one uses a dream-interpretation approach, and follows out these associations, sometimes we are very surprised indeed.
Indeed John Wilkes Booth and his brother played together in a memorable performance of Shakespeare’s Julius Caesar in March 1865.
Junius Brutus Booth was baptized Brutus, and took the name of his father, also named Brutus.
Brutus appears on stage in this psychodrama rather innocently, unconsciously, if you will, neither manufactured nor manipulated.
Indeed it causes one to wonder what role John Wilkes Booth played when he performed Julius Caesar alongside his brother in 1865, shortly before he assassinated Lincoln.
This information is not available, but it would not be utterly surprising if he were cast in the role of Brutus in this play.
Case Closed “I'm a patsy!” — Lee Harvey Oswald At 12 seconds past twelve thirty on November 22,1963, a convertible limousine carrying President Kennedy, his wife Jacqueline, and Governor and Mrs.
Directly in front of the President, Governor Connally heard one shot and was then hit himself.
The President fell violently backwards and to his left, his head exploding in a halo of brain tissue, blood and bone.
Thus began a collection of evidence which resulted in the attribution of this killing to a sole gunman firing from his sniper’s nest in that building, Lee Harvey Oswald.
The following is a list of the “best evidence” collected against him these last 30 years.
Evidence Against Oswald Physical Evidence 41 • Three empty cartridge cases were found in the sniper’s nest.
It was a bolt-action Mannlicher-Carcano Italian rifle of World War II vintage.
The rifle, stamped with serial number C-2766, had been ordered eight months earlier from a mail-order company in Chicago, Klein’s Sporting Goods Company.
Signet, 1992; Groden, Robert J., with Livingstone, Harrison E Higli Treason, Baltimore: Conservatory Press, 1989.
Case Closed • Four days after the assassination, the FBI found a palm print on the barrel of the rifle, and the print matched Oswald’s right hand.
Oswald and his Russian-born wife Marina were separated and Marina lived with Ruth Paine in Irving , where these possessions and the rifle were kept.
On the morning of the assassination, and upon his return to Dallas with Frazier the next morning, Oswald brought a large paper bag to the Depository.
When asked by Frazier what he had in the paper bag, he said he had some curtain rods.
At the time of the discovery of the sniper’s nest, police found a brown paper bag large enough to have held the rifle.
Later the FBI found a right palm print and left index finger print on the bag; they matched Oswald’s.
The Warren Commission decided that the man in the photo was Oswald and the rifle in the picture identical to the murder weapon.
Testimony from Oswald’s Russian-born wife, Marina, verified that she had taken the pictures with his Imperial Reflex camera some months earlier.
Although many witnesses heard fewer than or more than three shots, the majority of witnesses in Dealey Plaza heard three.
The Carcano rifle can be operated with 2. seconds between shots, and the period of time of firing was 7. seconds; it is possible Oswald could have fired three shots in the required time by himself and with no other conspirators.
Oswald was seen on the sixth floor shortly before noon, filling orders for books.
Very shortly after the assassination, he was sitting in the second floor lunchroom.
Critics have argued that it would have been impossible for Oswald to kill the President and run down to the second floor lunchroom to establish an alibi in such a short 42.
The House Select Assassinations Committee decided the photos were authentic.
Another piece of evidence putatively signaling Oswald’s guilt is the neutron activation analysis of bullet fragments found in the limousine.
These results lend support to the notion that the fragments also came from Oswald’s rifle.
He watched spellbound as the gunman fired the final shot and then disappeared from view.
This completes the physical evidence that might be used against Oswald in a hypothetical trial for the crime.
However, circumstantial evidence could also be persuasive in convicting this assassin.
Most curious individuals would have stayed, milling around the assassination scene.
Oswald departed from Dealey Plaza quickly, allegedly because there would be “no more work” that day.
However, when the bus he was on was stalled in heavy traffic, he hailed a cab to take him past his house.
This transfer from bus to cab occurred less than eighteen minutes after the assassination.
This suggests Oswald wanted to size up the area and deliberately had the cabbie drive past it before he got out.
Officer Tippit was cruising on 10th Street and had passed the intersection of 10th and Patton.
He saw Oswald and pulled to the curb asking him to come over to his car.
Tippit then opened his door and stepped out of the car, walking toward the front of the vehicle.
Oswald allegedly pulled a revolver from his pocket and fired several shots, four of which hit Tippit, killing him instantly.
Of twelve witnesses to the Tippit shooting, five or six identified Oswald as the man they saw.
Oswald was arrested in a theater with the revolver still in his possession.
When arrested in the Texas Theater, Oswald reached for his pistol with his right hand and punched the 43.
Even had there been no eyewitnesses to the Tippit shooting, the apprehension of Oswald less than forty-five minutes after the murder with the murder weapon in his possession was certainly strong evidence that Oswald was the killer.
Oswald, according to his wife, attempted to assassinate General Edwin Walker in the months prior to the assassination of Kennedy.
Such evidence, if true, adds Texas Theater shortly after Oswald’s arrest 44.
Moore, ibid., 68 27 Conspiracy in Camelot weight to the idea that Oswald was unstable and violent.
If 1 am alive and taken prisoner, the city jail is at the end of the bridge we always used to cross when we 46 went to town.
He left his wedding ring in a porcelain cup on the day of the assassination of Kennedy.
He left his wife $170 on the morning of the assassination, as much if not more money than they had ever had in disposable cash up to that time.
However, the day before the assassination, local Dallas newspapers first published the President’s route; employees of the Texas School Depository were excited and buzzing that the President would be passing them the next day.
Today, the evidence against Lee Harvey Oswald would be persuasive enough for an indictment.
Although there were no unassailable eyewitnesses to the murder of the President directly pointing to Oswald (Brennan could not identify Oswald in a lineup) there is strong physical evidence linking Oswald to the location of the crime scene, to the weapon used in the killing, to the purchase of the weapon, and to a second murder that same afternoon where eyewitnesses positively identified him as the assailant.
Oswald’s weapon was on his person when he was arrested, and the pistol was used in the murder.
The sum total of evidence against, both physical and circumstantial is not just poppycock.
Kostikov, ostensibly a vice consul at the Soviet Embassy . .. coming to the Paines’ home and retrieving his rifle the day before the assassination and carrying it disguised as curtain rods when he hitched a ride to work on November 22,1963 — and. . . his post-assassination path to Oak Cliff, where he murdered Officer Tippit in cold blood — an act witnessed by five people — and then, in the movie theater, tried to take a second shot at an officer with the same 46.
Indeed, some evidence has not been made public as late as thirty-eight years after the event.
Fie denied that he used it, under oath; but subsequently he was exposed by a tape recording of an interview he had held months earlier where he is heard saying the “n word” numerous times.
This apparent perjury convinced the jury that if he was willing to lie under oath about the “n” word, perhaps he was also willing to lie under oath about the bloody glove; and thus “reasonable doubt” existed.
The Obsession Begins The publication of conspiracy texts leaves the dispassionate observer astonished at the high level of detail that has been developed.
One author, Anthony Summers, believes that Oswald could not have shot the President by virtue of the fact that he was seen by two witnesses sitting in the second floor lunchroom at 12:15m., fifteen minutes before the motorcade passed the Depository.
In fact, Oswald naively asked a fellow workmate why the crowd was gather47.
A total of four witnesses say they saw Oswald in the second floor lunchroom between noon and 12:15.
Later, after the assassination, motorcycle patrolman Marion Baker ran into the Depository with his gun drawn, climbed the stairs, confronted Oswald in the second floor lunchroom — about one and a half minutes after the shooting — and then proceeded upstairs.
To Summers, it was highly unlikely that Oswald could have been in the lunchroom at 12:15, run upstairs to shoot the President, and then run back down to be seen again in the lunchroom at 12:31 to assure himself of an alibi.
The published program of the President’s itinerary indicated that he would pass the Depository at 12:25m.
Oswald would not have known that fact and would have had to be in place five minutes earlier.
To attempt to establish an alibi by first placing himself in the lunchroom at 12:15 and hoping to place himself there again after the killing at 12:30 without having exact and specific knowledge of when the President’s motorcade would actually pass is difficult and improbable.
Assassins do need some set-up time, especially when they are targeting a head of state.
Arnold reliably placed Oswald on the second-floor lunchroom before the shooting, and patrolman Baker reliably placed him there after the shooting.
Thus, the first of an infinite number of pieces of evidence begins to contradict the Warren Commission findings that Oswald was the killer.
After the encounter with Baker and Truly in the lunchroom, Oswald (displaying icy calm, even though Baker was holding a revolver at Oswald’s midsection) put a nickel in the soda machine and selected a Coca-Cola.
It may be that this single action on Oswald’s part holds the key to his guilt.
There can be only one realistic explanation for a miser like Oswald to fail to select his soft drink of choice — he was nervous.
Gerald Posner in Case Closed argues that William Shelley, Eddie Piper, and Carolyn Arnold were all mistaken and were contradicted by other witnesses.
Nonetheless, he and others have interviewed 3 witnesses who placed him on the first and second floor prior to the shooting, and their testimony was not included in the Warren Commission report.
In establishing a case of “reasonable doubt,” one must take into account these witnesses who contradict the official view, the fact that no one incontestably identified Oswald as the sniper in the window, at least in the opinion of Jesse Curry, and that no one saw Oswald running down the stairs from the sixth floor as he is reported to have done in the official version of the event.
Case Closed Moore’s deductions are interesting, but Priscilla Johnson’s Marina and Lee tells a different story; not only did Oswald frequently drink Coke, he liked Coke, and was not as thoroughgoing a habitue of Dr.
Maybe; but we should also observe that such a knot of hard-towerify details can drive us very quickly into an obsessive neurosis, forever ruminating over what may be trivia without any hope of coming to a final conclusion and closing the books on this case Many, like author Gerald Posner, have argued that indeed it is time to close the case.
To him, the evidence is clear and unambiguous, and all the obsessive talk about Coca Cola and Dr.
Pepper merely obscures the “obvious” truth that Lee Harvey Oswald, alone, shot the President of the United States.
Before we accept Oswald’s guilt, however, it is time to present the case for the defense.
We are happy to report that the judge in this case has allowed any and all pertinent evidence — which suggests that the Warren Commission version of this case is not as clear cut and solid as it seems.
In the next chapter, we will bring into focus the best evidence collected by conspiracists for these last 40 years.
Reasonable Doubt Ironically, it was President Johnson — the man who succeeded John Kennedy and appointed the Warren Commission — who eventually dropped the heaviest official hint that Lee Oswald was more than he appeared to be.
That was quite an understatement, but the former President felt he had said too much.
It is doubtful that Lee Harvey Oswald could be convicted of the murder of the President.
Perhaps he could be convicted of murdering Officer Tippit, insofar as eyewitness testimony could be provided to place him at the scene, to corroborate that he pulled the trigger, to identify the weapon as his own, and to show that the bullets used were fired from the pistol he was carrying.
There were witnesses who saw two men at the Tippit shooting and others who could not identify Oswald specifically; but the weight of evidence would certainly have given the prosecution a very good chance at conviction.
The only witness to have identified Oswald as the shooter in the sixth floor window of the Depository failed to identify the color of Oswald’s shirt properly.
Evidence Favoring Oswald • Oswald said he changed his shirt after leaving his apartment to go to the movie theater.
Depository witnesses also identified the color of Oswald’s shirt as reddish in color, while he had been arrested after the Tippit murder in a white shirt.
Strangely, a tuft of cotton fibers found in the rifle butt that was found in the Depository matched Oswald’s white shirt — the shirt he was wearing at the time he was arrested, not the shirt he wore at the Depository that morning 53 This suggests evidence was planted.
Oswald’s print was found on the bag, but the absence of any oil from the weapon was unusual.
The location of the print was such that it could only have been made while the rifle was disassembled.
Indeed, the print was not positively identified as Oswald’s until after his death.
His mother contended that the FBI planted the print after visiting his coffin.
Earlier, Dallas laboratory tests had failed to find any of Oswald’s fingerprints on the weapon.
More recent information suggests a print was lifted in Dallas , and by virtue of the process used, the same print was not visible to the FBI laboratory in Washington.
Neither were any prints found on the spent shells nor on the live round remaining in the chamber.
Marina Oswald testified that Oswald owned that rifle and that she had taken that photograph herself with Oswald’s camera.
Oswald, as mentioned in the prior chapter, said that someone had pasted his face on to the photograph and that it was a fake.
Reasonable Doubt Marina Oswald thus represents a highly important witness for the prosecution, but her testimony is dismaying.
Her “recollection” of events has been documented as faulty to the extreme.
For example, she said to the Warren Commission that she and Lee arrived in the United States by airplane.
One crucial piece of evidence linking Oswald to the rifle was a tuft of cotton fibers found in the butt of the rifle.
It was examined microscopically by the FBI laboratory and was reported to match the fibers in the shirt Oswald was wearing at the time of his arrest.
However, before this information was developed, Oswald had said that after leaving the Depository and before his arrest, he had gone home and changed shirts.
Yet, Officer Baker’s testimony (III.263, 257) does seem to corroborate Oswald’s statement that he had changed into a darker shirt.
While the matter remains unresolved, it clearly was not white or light-colored — and that is the color shirt reported by those observing a window gunman.
However, Jim Moore, the pro-Warren Commission researcher, reports that Oswald’s bus transfer ticket was found in his shirt pocket when he was arrested.
First, it has been argued that he was actually going to meet a contact in the Texas Theater.
Others have said that Officer Tippit actually beeped his car horn at Oswald’s house and Oswald’s confrontation with him had something to do with a glitch in the plot that Oswald was only partially privy to.
A third theory holds that Oswald was on his way to Jack Ruby’s house, which was on the same street where Tippit was murdered, approximately 2/3 of a mile away.
One of the more intriguing theories suggested that his bus transfer could have taken him to a Greyhound station, where he might have caught a bus for San Antonio and the Mexican border, a journey he allegedly had once made previously.
If he changed shirts, as he alleged, it would be rather suspicious that the FBI laboratory would find fibers in the rifle butt which matched his shirt at the time of the arrest, since this would not have been the shirt worn by the person who fired the Mannlicher-Carcano rifle; in other words, it indicates a conspiracy to set up Oswald as a patsy for the murder.
Oswald changed shirts (thus rendering suspicious the forensic evidence tying fibers in his second shirt to the rifle), Oswald fled about his shirt and did not, in fact, change it.
This would be a consistent explanation, but again, it would contradict forensic evidence tying his shirt to the rifle.
Furthermore, it would ask us to try to determine his ultimate destination; if he switched transfer tickets from one shirt to the next, he intended to use that transfer ticket in some way.
Thus, Marina, the single witness who could verify Oswald’s ownership of the weapon, is easily impugned.
Handwriting experts have shown it to be Oswald’s script, but surely other handwriting experts could be found to allege the opposite if Oswald were to be tried for this crime.
Oswald spent very little time in his apartment on Beckley Street and changed shirts but did not wash his face, he said.
Eyewitnesses Favoring Oswald A second example of material evidence that would serve to exonerate Oswald involves eyewitness accounts, which place him elsewhere.
At 11:50m., co-worker Givens saw Oswald in the domino room of the first floor of the Depository.
Bill Shelly, a foreman, saw Oswald about ten minutes before noon in the same room.
Warren Commission lawyer Wesley Liebeler noted that no one clearly saw the rifle nor could identify the rifle which was alleged to have been stored in the Paines’ garage.
This is the rifle that is said to have been carried into the Depository disguised as a bundle of curtain rods.
Oswald was sitting in one of the booth seats on the right-hand side of the room as you go in.
D/ These comments also were not contained in the Warren Commission Report.
At 12:31-12:32m., Oswald was confronted in the second-floor lunch room, finishing a Coke, by superintendent Truly and Dallas Police Officer Marrion L Baker.
Thus, if Oswald were put on trial, there would be witnesses Truly, Baker, Arnold, Piper, Shelly and Givens putting Oswald on the first and second floor of the TSBD both before and after the shooting.
If a “conviction” requires proof beyond a reasonable doubt, this phalanx of witnesses would certainly march in this direction.
In terms of “material evidence,” therefore, the case against Oswald is weak.
Even the Warren Commission was unable to determine “motive” and, if a trial were held then, many witnesses, could have been brought forward to show Oswald genuinely liked Kennedy.
Nobody’s yet been able to put him in that building with a gun in his hand.
Perhaps Oswald was hired by outsiders to deliver a rifle to the Depository building, to be used by contract killers on the sixth floor while he dutifully waited in the lunchroom.
There are a number of “perhaps” arguments, but the hard, material evidence, which would convict him of the assassination of President Kennedy, is absent.
Even at the time it was anything but an open and shut case, and since 1963, the evidence that “something else” 57.
While Oswald was under arrest, he claimed that he was eating in the first floor lunchroom at the time the President was shot.
There is, of course, circumstantial evidence that points the finger at Oswald.
He may have tried to shoot General Walker, if his wife’s testimony can be believed.
He left his wedding ring on the dresser for Marina on the morning of the assassination, a ring he never took off; and he left money for her as well, $170 — a meager sum, but still more than she had ever seen before.
He kept a Life Magazine photo spread on the Kennedys on his coffee table.
Oswald had fathered a baby that was born in October, and he loved his children — of that there seems little doubt.
In October 1963, Oswald had written to the IRS that his withholding exemptions should be altered so that his subsequent checks from the Depository would allow him more net pay.
This is clearly peculiar behavior for someone who does not plan to be around after November 22, much less for someone who had premeditated the murder of a head of state.
As for General Walker’s attempted assassination, the bullet found in Walker’s home did not match the Mannlicher-Carcano rifle Oswald allegedly used.
Our next task is to review the evidence that some conspiracy may have existed in the killing of America’s 34th President.
The literature on this topic is so voluminous it is easily the subject of an entire book, not a single chapter.
Millions of pages of evidence, from the Warren Commission reports and appendices to the House Select Committee on Assassinations inquiries, are summarized here.
In no case was significant evidence or data ignored for the purposes of a smooth, easy read.
The table in the middle of this chapter, for example, seems to go on endlessly; yet it is important to present the seminal research without cutting corners.
Reasonable Doubt One minute after the assassination, spectators continue to run towards and look at the grassy knoll.
Photographic evidence from films shot at the moment show a number of spectators orienting themselves or looking toward the area of the grassy knoll to escape or shield themselves from subsequent shots.
One of these witnesses, Jean Hill, who was standing directly across the street from the grassy knoll, said she saw a man moving rapidly away from the knoll toward the railroad tracks immediately after the shots rang out.
Robert Groden’s research on the strange autopsy results on the President is significantly at variance with the recollections of Parkland Hospital staff in Dallas.
The following table lists the witnesses Groden and Livingstone supply in Dallas who contradict the official autopsy findings out of Bethesda.
Autopsy evidence was impugned by the following witnesses present at Kennedy’s admission to Parkland Hospital in Dallas 65 Dr.
Since this gathering of names, Livingstone has added another witness, Diana Bowron, a British nurse who was with JFK’s body the entire time it was in the trauma room at Parkland.
Bowron contests the locations for the wounds in the autopsy photos with those she saw.
She said there was a gaping wound in the back of the head, suggestive of a frontal shot, and little brain was left in the skull.
Strangely, some of the most recent evidence about inconsistencies in autopsy photos, their origin, and their veracity comes from Eisenhower Medical Center’s David Mantik, who subjected copies of government photos to a technique called optical densitometry.
The result shows “powerful and quantitative evidence of alteration to some of the skull X-rays.
Reasonable Doubt A shot striking the President where the autopsy report placed it, at or near the hairline of the back of the head, would not, and indeed could not, have blown out the portion of the head which was in fact blown away.
Groden’s 1989 research on Parkland hospital inconsistencies has been corroborated by the most definitive study of this controversy.
This Board published five major findings, one of which speaks clearly to the issue of the autopsy.
Doctors who conducted the autopsy on President John F Kennedy may have performed two brain examinations in the days following his assassination, possi65.
Another piece of evidence gathered from medical witnesses at Parkland Hospital deals not with the autopsy inconsistencies but with the magic bullet and fragments thereof.
Anthony Summers reports that far more bullet fragments were removed from John Connally than could have possibly been attributed to this pristine bullet.
Nurse Audrey Bell, the operating room supervisor, told Summers that she handled “four or five bullet fragments” after their removal from Connally’s arm.
These two Parkland witnesses raise very serious questions regarding whether the bullet found on the stretcher at Parkland could possibly have been the source of both Kennedy and Connally’s wounds.
A recent, pro-government position on this issue is given in Posner’s Case Closed, but it does not effectively deal with Bell’s and Finck’s testimony.
According to Summers, “... the Parkland medical staff handed ‘more than three’ other fragments to a patrolman guarding Connally’s room.
X-rays, moreover, show that one fragment remained buried in Connally’s thigh.
The doctors chose to leave it there, and it was still in his body when he died in 1993.
Clearly, the assumption that these suspicious autopsy issues have tried to cover up a frontal shot cannot be easily rejected out of hand.
Ballistics Inconsistencies An interesting ballistic analysis (an analysis of the character of the bullets and the type of wounds they inflicted) has led one researcher, Howard Donohue, to conclude that different ammunition was involved; that evidence supports the idea that there was more than one shooter.
Connally and wound up on a stretcher in Parkland Hospital, the so-called “pristine bullet,” is a full metal-jacketed bullet specifically designed not to fragment or expand.
The startling fact was that the bullet that hit Kennedy’s head had not behaved like a full metal-jacketed round at all.
We saw nearly forty fragments throughout the right cerebral hemisphere and embedded in the interior of the skull.
A lot of them were no bigger than the point of a pen, and the largest was about the size of the nail on your little finger.
Reasonable Doubt Ballistics/Autopsy Inconsistencies There is a further problem in reconciling the ballistics evidence with official autopsy evidence.
The official bullets, which hit Kennedy and were certified as coming from Oswald’s rifle, were heavy metal jacketed 6.5-millimeter rounds.
However, one entrance wound in Kennedy’s skull measures only 6 millimeters by 15 millimeters.
How Oswald’s 6. millimeter bullet could cause an entry wound smaller in diameter than the bullet itself is an inconsistency that the Warren Commission had to acknowledge.
A smaller caliber bullet — like an AR-15 .223 bullet, suggested by one author — might explain the contradiction.
Acoustic Evidence of a Fourth Shot The significance of the putative fourth shot should not be underestimated.
Even in an arena this rich in hypotheses that stretch credulity, no one suggests that a lone gunman could have fired more than three shots in the time that elapsed.
In its original tests, the Warren Commission used three professional marksmen and Oswald’s rifle to try to duplicate this feat.
Only one was able to fire three shots within the required amount of time.
This implies that either Oswald, using this weapon, was the quintessential marksman, or that not all the shots were fired by one gunman.
Now, if a fourth shot were fired in this same interval of time, no one has ever duplicated that feat, and the existence of a fourth shot surely implies that there was more than one shooter.
JFK archivist Mary Farrel, of Dallas, gave to FISCA Chief Counsel Blakey an audiotape made from a motorcycle patrolman’s Dictabelt.
Farrel was uncertain what the recording might prove, since its quality was so poor, but she hoped a well-equipped acoustics laboratory might make more sense out of the recording.
The FISCA sought recommendations from the Acoustical Society of America and selected the firm of Bolt, Beranek and Newman to analyze the recording.
The firm concluded in 1978 that four detectible shots had been discerned from the tape.
It was one more shot than the Warren Commission had found, but much more significant was the fact that the third shot followed far too quickly after the second to have been fired by Oswald’s weapon.
The tape seemed to prove that at least two gunmen fired in Dealey Plaza.
A second, corroborating acoustical analysis was then sought, and two other Acoustical Society of America scientists, Professors Mark Weiss and Ernest Aschkenasy of Queens College, reviewed the evidence.
Weiss and Aschkenasy studied echo patterns and concluded that not only were four shots fired, but that the third shot came not from the Depository but from the grassy knoll.
The House Select Committee on Assassinations concluded its mandate shortly thereafter and issued its report with the conclusion that evidence for a fourth shot, and thus a conspiracy, was valid.
The Justice Department and National Science Association later reviewed this evidence, however, and contradicted it.
They said a “delay effect’’ was noted on the tape, invalidating those conclusions of the committee.
More recent reviews also challenge the findings of a fourth shot, yet the tell-tale visual “fingerprint” of a fourth shot which has over twenty points of correspondence linking it to a gunshot (and simultaneously differentiating it from any other possible noises, motorcycle backfires, etc.) has not been explained away.
The Zapruder Film A final piece of evidence suggesting that a fourth shot occurred comes from the Zapruder film.
Abraham Zapruder, using his home movie camera, filmed the assassination in its entirety and sold it to Life Magazine for $25,000.
Reasonable Doubt film were ever permitted to be shown to the public until the mid'1970s.
It was precisely this printing “error” that obscured for over a decade the fact that the President is thrown violently backward as part of his head explodes, and that the shot that killed him seems to have come from the front.
Revisionism Great efforts have been made to allege that the President was killed by only one gunman, and thus very difficult matters needed to be explained.
The Warren Commission concluded that the first shot did this remarkable feat.
Still, the Warren Commission and the ""magic bullet” theory gained official credence and challenged Connally’s own memories.
If only three shots could be fired and they had been fired by Oswald, then Connally had to have been hit by the same bullet that hit Kennedy.
First, the theory has it that Kennedy is shot in the throat by the same bullet which entered Connally.
First, a frame-by-frame study of the film showed that Connally was indeed not hit until between 1/2 and 1 1/2 seconds after Kennedy was.
Given that the minimum firing time between Carcano shots was 2. seconds, the governor’s wound came too late to be from the same bullet and too soon to have been a second bullet from the same rifle.
According to the single bullet theory, the pristine bullet coursed through JFK and Connally’s torso and wrist and later found in virtually undamaged condition on a stretcher at Parkland hospital.
The bullet to the right is identical to the one Oswald is said to have used and was shot into the wrist of a cadaver.
Well, in my judgment, it just couldn’t conceivably have been the first one because I heard the sound of the shot.
In the first place, 1 don’t know anything about the velocity of this particular bullet, but any rifle has a velocity that exceeds the speed of sound, and when I heard the sound of that first shot, that bullet had already reached where I was, or had reached that far, and after I heard that shot, I had the time to turn to my right and start to turn to my left before 1 felt anything.
When the governor comes into view from behind the sign, he turns slightly to his right and then again calmly faces forward, hat in hand, seemingly unhurt.
It is not until frame 238, a second and a half later, that Connally reacts to his wound.
Critics therefore asked, if a single shot had penetrated Kennedy and Connally, how could this mysterious time lag between the two men’s reactions be explained.
The single-bullet theory and all its ramifications have many evidentiary hurdles to mount if they are to be even marginally persuasive.
But the Warren Commission appears to have had an incentive to stick to the assertion that there was one shooter with only three shots.
These inconsistencies have become more apparent over the years, as people have had more opportunity to think through the twists and turns of logic.
Reasonable Doubt Other difficulties also had to be explained, particularly, why the President fell backward in the limousine at the rate of many hundreds of feet per second when he was supposed to have been shot from behind.
The rationale provided was that a “neuromuscular reflex” propelled the President backward.
Newton’s second law of motion [namely, that the rate of change of momentum is proportionate to the impressed force, and is in the direction in which the force acts] has remained inviolate for three centuries.
Not even the advent of relativity and quantum mechanics has disturbed its validity.
Thus, if someone is shot, and the shot strikes bone, the general direction of recoil will be away from — not toward — the marksman.
In other words, if Kennedy was thrown backward, the shot had to come from his front.
Furthermore, a sizable piece of skull was found 10 to 15 feet to the left rear of the limousine.
Two motorcycle patrolman had their windshields covered with debris, also to the left rear of the car, and a portion of President Kennedy’s occipital region was found 25 feet to the left-rear of the vehicle’s path — all quite inconsistent with a shot fired from behind.
Kennedy crawling out the back of the limousine to retrieve a piece of the President’s skull.
Similarly, if a piece of skull was found behind the car, and considerable material was, including a sizeable portion of Kennedy’s skull, then it is equally logical to assume this tissue came from a frontal shot.
Thus, in the last generation of inquiry, research on the Kennedy assassination has produced an impressive array of evidence pointing to the existence of a fourth shot and very likely a frontal shot.
This represents the best physical evidence of second shooter from the grassy knoll area of Dealey Plaza.
Deaths of Witnesses Many have heard rumors of the loss of lives shortly after the Kennedy assassination and the death of prime witnesses who testified or were to testify before the Warren Commission.
Based on the deaths of twenty-one individuals, one actuarial firm calculated that the probability of their combined occurrence was some one trillion to one.
Any death that seemed to be either directly or indirectly related to the assassination and its major participants is listed.
A few of the examples are described below, to give the reader a sense of how names were included.
Deaths associated with the Kennedy Assassination Deaths are coded M , S A or N 1.
Zangretti,Jack a Based on 78 deaths in which cause of death was determined.
Most of the deaths in the Kennedy sample occurred in the 1960s and 70s; thus, 1970 norms were used for this chart.
Some deaths were insufficiently documented or otherwise too tangential to be included.
One such death was that of Henry Marshall, Agricultural agent, who investigated wrongdoing in the case of President Johnson’s friend, Billy Sol Estes.
It is a death relevant to the Johnson-based conspiracy theory, but it is not listed here because it occurred before the assassination.
Jose Aleman, a reluctant witness before the HSCA, who recanted his testimony that Santos Trafficante knew of a contract on JFK, committed suicide in 1983.
His death was not included in the list and subsequent statistical analysis, but probably should be.
The author learned of this suicide after data analysis had been completed.
Antonio Veciana, a Cuban, told HSCA investigators that the CIA officer involved in the assassination and in numerous activities involving Howard Hunt and Frank Sturgis was named Maurice Bishop.
Richard Rudolf Carr saw a heavyset man in the Depository leave in a Rambler station wagon; the FBI told h im to keep quiet.
His apartment in Dallas was searched; later two sticks of dynamite were found under his car.
Finally, two men attempted to kill him in Atlanta and he shot them both.
Another suspicious death which could have been included in this table but was obtained after the statistical analysis had been completed, was that of Dallas policeman Maurice “Monk"" Baker.
Baker shot himself to death on December 3,1963 a few weeks after the assassination.
He was a friend of Jack Ruby and lived in Oak Cliff on North Berkley, the street where Oswald lived.
Kennedy, as will be shown later in this text, had numerous mistresses in the White House.
One of his last was Mary Pinchot Meyer, Bobby Kennedy’s next-door neighbor.
After JFK had broken off ties with Judith Exner, the Mafia-connected bedmate of Sam Giancana, he took up with Mary Meyer.
Meyer visited Kennedy in the White House secretly about 20 times between January 1962 and November 1963, sometimes two to three times per week when Mrs.
Reasonable Doubt juana with Kennedy in the White House shortly before a major conference on narcotics.
She was related to Ben Bradlee of the Washington Post, who admitted that he read of Meyer’s clandestine visits to the White House in her diary.
White House employee Traphes Bryant also kept a diary about these and other White House liaisons.
Her death was included in this table because it is either directly or indirectly related to the Kennedys or the assassination, and this was the criterion used.
A policemen who took custody of her, former Lieutenant Lrancis Lruge, told me in 1978 that Cheramie said she had been pushed from a car by two men, apparently of Latin extraction.
On the way to a hospital, Cheramie — Lruge told me — mentioned that she had heard the two men discussing a plot to kill the President in Dallas.
Lruge thought little of this — given that his charge was suffering from withdrawal symptoms — until he heard the news of the President’s death.
He then arranged to interview Cheramie in hospital as soon as possible.
In essence her story was that, as a result of associations while working for Ruby, she was involved in a drug run from Louisiana to Houston, Texas.
It was before her two companions dumped her, said Cheramie, that she overheard them discussing an assassination plot.
In 1979 an Assassinations Committee report corroborated some aspects of the story.
In particular, a former doctor at the hospital, Victor Weiss, recalled being told by a Dr.
Bowers that Cheramie had stated before the assassination that President Kennedy was going to be killed.
It is Cheramie’s supposed comments before the assassination which are of course the most significant aspects of the episode.
Cheramie’s two companions appear to be a Cuban exile named “Osanto” and exile activist Arcacha Smith, and linkage with the CIA and David Lerrie occurs between these names.
Carol Felsenthal, “Portrait of a Marriage,” Vanity Fair, February, 1993, 174.
Hollywood was considering making a movie of the book, but there were pressures from organized crime not to go ahead with the project.
The producer of this controversial film unexpectedly died in his Beverly Hills home, and the film was cancelled.
Although this death occurred before the assassination of the President, it is included here as having a direct or indirect link to the Kennedys and a possible Mob involvement.
Kilgallen from her frequent television appearances and her daily newspaper column.
She had attended the Jack Ruby trial, and as a gossip columnist she had numerous inside sources on Washington matters, similar to the Jack Anderson-Drew Pearson columns with which contemporary Americans are perhaps more familiar.
Kilgallen been privy to facts about Jack Ruby, but she may also have been prepared to make revelations about Jack and Bobby Kennedy’s affairs with Marilyn Monroe.
A related piece of testimony comes from Marita Lorenz, one-time mistress of Fidel Castro and later a CIA operative with anti-Castro forces in Miami.
Lorenz relates a rather chilling conversation she had with Frank Sturgis in 1977.
With Sturgis spilling the beans so freely, Lorenz cranked up her nerve for the $64,000 question.
Reasonable Doubt David Ferrie and E del Valle Feme had severe alopecia and therefore had virtually no body hair.
Ferrie was raised a strict Roman Catholic, had studied for the priesthood, and later became a very active homosexual and pedophile.
Some conspiracy literature argues that he was the pilot who brought Carlos Marcello back from Guatemala after Robert Kennedy had deported him.
Ferrie was closely allied to the Cuban anti-Castro movement and frequently seen entering Guy Banister’s office in New Orleans on Camp Street, the same address that Oswald used when he passed out his “Fair Play for Cuba” literature.
Ferrie was questioned by the FBI shortly after the assassination, not only because of the library card but because an associate of Guy Banister, Jack Martin, had phoned in a tip implicating Ferrie in the killing of President Kennedy.
He later came under the suspicion of Jim Garrison, the New Orleans District Attorney.
Garrison indicted him in 1967 for the conspiracy to murder President Kennedy.
When he heard of the indictment, Ferrie called Garrison’s office and said, You know what this news story does to me, don’t you.
Four days after the indictment, Ferrie was indeed found dead — victim of a massive brain hemorrhage.
I find nothing in it that is desirable, and on the other hand, everything that is loathsome.
That same day, less than 30 minutes later, Ferrie’s friend and employer E del Valle was found dead in a parking lot in Miami.
State Department Officer A curious state department officer who is unnamed in the literature went to Mexico to check out a story by an Elena Garro.
Garro alleged that Oswald and two companions had attended a party at the home of her relative, Sylvia Duran, a secretary from the Cuban consulate in Mexico City.
Garro said she had wanted to come forward with her story shortly after the assassination but that she was “sequestered” in a hotel by a Manuel Calvillo.
One author has indicated that she is suspected of numerous liaisons with CIA sources.
A State Department officer tried to investigate the Garro matter in 1964, apparently on his own initiative.
No further information is given about this death or even his name, but it likewise has been included in the above table.
In very brief synopsis, here is a partial summary of those cases; Marguerite Oswald, Oswald’s mother, died of natural causes.
Jack Ruby, and Guy Banister, the leading suspect in Jim Garrison’s New Orleans inquiry, also died of natural causes.
William Harvey, a leading CIA suspect who worked on anti-Castro covert assassination activities, died during heart surgery.
The photographer who developed the tramp photos from Dealey Plaza died of a heart attack the week after their publication.
Reasonable Doubt the major deaths by natural causes listed in the table.
However, there are numerous accidental deaths, murders and suicides that deserve more serious attention.
William Whaley, the cab driver who helped Oswald get away from Dealey Plaza, died in a freak car accident in 1965.
James Worrell said he heard a fourth shot and saw a man in a dark sports coat run out of the back of the Depository; he died in a motorcycle accident in 1966.
Karyn Kupcinet said she had foreknowledge of the Kennedy assassination, and was a friend of Jack Ruby; she was murdered two days after the assassination.
William Hunter, a newsman, wrote a story about Jack Ruby and a year after the assassination he was found shot through the heart in Long Beach, California.
Koethe was later killed with a karate chop to the throat as he came out of a shower in his Dallas apartment, ten months after Kennedy’s murder.
James Richard Worrell said he was standing directly below the sixth floor window when he heard a shot.
After James had run around the Depository, he crossed the street and paused for a moment to catch his breath after a mad dash from the corner.
He came out and bolted alongside the building parallel to Elm and then he cut to his right.
One of his friend said James’ motorcycle was parked on the kickstand and the motor was still running when they found him.
Jack Beers of the Dallas Morning News took two photographs of the tramps arrested after the assassination.
Beers died of a heart attack a week after the photographs were published ; Weberman, ibid., 73.
Mariiyn Moore Walle, a dancer empioyed by Jack Ruby, had pianned to write a book on the assassination; she was shot to death September 1, i966.
Another of Ruby’s strippers, Teresa Norton , was shot to death in Houston ten months after the assassination.
Harold Russel, a witness to Officer Tippit’s murder, said he was “going to be hit;” he was killed by a policeman in 1967.
Lee Bowers, the railroad control tower official behind the grassy knoll, died in a car crash in 1966.
Nicholas Chetta, for example, the New Orleans coroner, performed the autopsy on David Ferrie and was prepared to testify at the Garrison investigation; prior to testifying, in 1968, he died of a heart attack.
Mary Sherman, similarly connected to David Ferrie, was found shot in the head and set afire.
Gary Underhill, a former CIA agent, left Washington shortly after the assassination.
He said that the Far Eastern Group of the CIA was involved in the President’s murder.
He was shot execution-style in the left side of his head six months after Kennedy’s death.
There is an incredible list of Mafia-connected murders linked directly or indirectly with the Kennedys.
Johnny Roselli, the Mafia figure who is said to have quietly arranged a Kennedy divorce and had been in on the CIA-Mafia plots to kill Castro, was found quartered and floating in a drum off the coast of Miami.
Sam Giancana who had personal contacts with Kennedy and visited him in the White House was shot to death; also murdered were Action Jackson, Salvatore Granello, Jimmy Hoffa, John Martino, Leo Mocieri, and Charles Nicoletti.
Jack Ruby called a Hoffa thug named Barney Baker shortly before the assassination; Baker, in turn, contacted Dave Yaras of Miami on November 21.
Each of these stories is really a novel in its own right, the seeds of a great murder mystery , full of intrigue, suspicion, drama, innuendo and, obviously, conspiracy.
However, such an anecdotal approach is of very little value in proving or disproving anything.
Aside from the calls Ruby made to Barney Baker, the calls Barney Baker made after he talked to Ruby represent another set of connections.
Yaras had been suspected by Bobby Kennedy of corrupting a Teamsters’ local in the Miami area.
Howard Brennan, who saw Oswald fire the fatal shot, lived twenty years after the assassination.
Phil Willis, who may have taken the most important photo related to the assassination, is still alive and well.
Statistics are often misleading, and a naive interpretation of the evidence will not prove whether there was a conspiracy.
Deputy Sheriff Roger Craig killed himself; he was a major figure in the assassination inquiry.
A CIA officer in charge of a high-ranking KGB defector who crossed sides to say that Oswald was not a Soviet mole killed himself under mysterious circumstances.
These pieces of evidence are the stuff of enticing television programs, but they do not constitute any serious evidence proving a conspiracy.
We could also make a table of witnesses to the assassination who are still alive, and such a table would neither make news headlines nor be of much interest.
Statistical Analysis The assemblage of data in the table takes on significance only through statistical analysis.
If these deaths were related to the Kennedy assassination only as “coincidences” or artifacts of some sort, the statistical analysis would at some point reveal the lack of genuine connectedness.
There were 29 murders, 19 accidental deaths, 13 suicides, and 17 deaths from natural causes.
When these deaths are compared to mortality rates in the general population, they add up to one of the leading pieces of circumstantial evidence that Kennedy was killed as part of a conspiracy.
By comparison, if we put together lists of 78 individuals randomly selected from obituary columns across the nation, sta87.
Probably the most important statistic is the least dramatic — namely, natural causes.
The national average was 89% from natural causes ; but in this sample only 22% died of natural causes.
This is not only startling; statistically, it is enormously atypical and significant.
They are directly or indirectly related to the Kennedys and the assassination.
The measure by which we calculate “differences” from what is normally expected is called Chi Square.
The Chi Square statistic reveals that the Kennedy sample is tremendously at odds with national norms.
The probability that this variation could simply be the result of coincidence, chance or random occurrence is less than one in 10,000.
This suggests that there is some anomalous factor, something extraordinary, that would account for the distribution of the causes of these deaths.
Sheriff Roger Craig’s suicide in 1966 may have been the result of depression and alcoholism, unrelated to the Kennedy matter.
David Ferrie’s death may have been caused by a brain hemorrhage and have had nothing to do with the ruminations of Jim Garrison’s conspiratorial obsessions with the Kennedy killing.
Reasonable Doubt cide may have been the result of a long, slow, and gradual unfolding of a personality disorder, which had little to do with Kennedy’s assassination or any international or national conspiracy.
But statistical analysis of these and the other deaths in question shows that they share an anomalous feature that is statistically significant; they share some common characteristic that sets them apart from “normal"" deaths.
However much we might like to explain away each death individually or idiopathically — and Gerald Posner’s Case Closed makes the best attempt at that — the global relationship of these deaths points to something aberrant, to something far outside the realm of chance.
These deaths in toto are wholly at odds with the pattern of death that occurs in the United States, and that discrepancy is the single best circumstantial evidence that Kennedy’s death involves a conspiracy.
The cause of death of individuals who had a direct or indirect linkage to the Kennedys sketches a pattern that is so unusual, so atypical, so statistically significant, that it suggests a conspiracy.
There are many unstudied and un-researched parameters in this table of suspicious deaths.
Average age at time of death, for example, in a random sample of 78 Americans in that time period would have been close to the mid-60s and 70s; but very few of the people in this sample reached their normal life expectancy.
Jerry Wald was 48; Marilyn Monroe, 36; Jack Ruby, 54; James Worrel, 23.
The mean age at time of death is a dozen years earlier than what might be expected based on actuarial data.
If the sample were “normal” or “neutral,” that is, if the fact of being linked to the Kennedy assassination did not increase the likelihood that they would have an early death, then we can compare the sample to any other set of people who just happen to share a relationship to any other person or event.
Say we had a list of individuals who directly or indirectly knew Elvis Presley.
Let us further assume that 78 of these friends, neighbors, acquaintances, doctors and advisors had died over the last two decades.
Marilyn Monroe allegedly died by suicide prior to the Kennedy assassination; it seems rather ludicrous to consider her death part of the assassination conspiracy.
William Sullivan, a major advisor to J 59 Conspiracy in Camelot Edgar Hoover and an individual suspected of being part of the FBI’s own cover-up operations, died in a hunting accident.
Lieutenant Commander William Pitzer, who had been present at Kennedy’s autopsy and had taken photos of the autopsy committed suicide in 1966.
Marilyn Monroe had no association with Mr Sullivan and probably never met Commander Pitzer.
However, taken together, their deaths all belong to a very skewed, significantly atypical statistical sample that is extremely unlikely to occur at random or by coincidence, and that in itself must raise questions.
Nationwide, about 9% of deaths per year are expected to arise from accidents, mostly auto accidents.
But here, accidental deaths represent 23% of the entire sample — three times the national average; and they are statistically atypical and unusual, even freakish, in nature.
Hugh Ward, the partner of Guy Banister (whom Jim Garrison had tried to indict for the murder of President Kennedy), belongs to this group.
He was killed in a private plane crash just before Garrison could question him.
Maurice Brooks Gatlin, another associate of Guy Banister, was the legal counsel to the Anti-communist League of the Caribbean.
Just an accidental death, but one which would cause a statistician or an investigator to begin raising an eyebrow.
James Milteer, the ultra right-wing fanatic who was planning the assassination of the President, according to information gathered by FBI wiretapping, died when a heater exploded.
This information raises questions about the circumstances surrounding Pitzer’s death.
Reasonable Doubt William Sullivan, the FBI official already mentioned, died when someone mistook him for a deer and shot him.
Thomas Davis, a gunrunner who had a connection to both Jack Ruby and the CIA, told his wife that he knew who killed Kennedy.
He died by electrocution while trying to steal wire from a supply dump.
A Dallas bus hit Mona Saenz, the Texas employment clerk who interviewed Oswald, 17 months after the assassination.
The deviations from statistical probability in this sub-sample alone paint a picture that is very far from “normal” in any sense.
Airline disasters, particularly commercial airline fatalities, are extremely rare.
The probability in 1973 of dying in a commercial airline accident was 1/10,000.
Congressman Hale Boggs and Dorothy Hunt both died — in two separate crashes.
Hale Boggs was the only Warren Commission member to reject the Commission’s findings, and he demanded that a footnote be placed in the report before he signed it.
Dorothy Hunt was the wife of E Howard Hunt, the Watergate conspirator and former CIA agent.
Hunt was the CIA station chief in Mexico City at the time Oswald allegedly went to Mexico before the assassination.
One conspiracy researcher alleged that Dorothy Hunt was carrying papers that implicated Richard Nixon in the JFK assassination.
The plane crash that took her life occurred at the time of the Watergate episode that involved her husband.
Jack Ruby had stated to Ray McKeown that he was planning on entering a deal with Davis.
Davis was a charming, tall Texan who was entangled in anti-Castro efforts.
In September 1973, Davis was attempting to steal three-quarter-inch copper wire from an abandoned rock yard when he was electrocuted and died.
What is argued here is the dizzying improbability of these two events occurring in a single sample of 78 people.
If an epidemiologist were hired to look at the pattern of death in a particular neighborhood to see if there were any toxins or unusual environmental pollutants which might be affecting the community’s health, the first thing he or she would do would be to investigate causes of death and patterns of mortality.
If children were dying from kidney failure at rate 10 percent greater than the national norms, or developing leukemia 20 percent more frequently than expected, a warning would be issued immediately and experts would try to find out what was wrong; they would seek to isolate the particular toxin that was affecting the community.
In the Kennedy context, there is also something “wrong,” and “conspiracy” is the best term anyone has come up with to describe the unlimited possibilities of just what that is.
In the Kennedy sample, the patterns of mortality and accidental mortality are incredibly skewed from normal expectations; no epidemiologist would call this data a statistical fluke.
To walk away from this sample and dismiss it as some kind of statistical artifact would be quintessential epidemiological malpractice.
Death of Witnesses Prior to Government Hearings In 1977, the House Select Committee on the Assassination of President Kennedy was formed under the chairmanship of Henry Gonzalez; it issued its final report in 1979.
It called a number of witnesses, many of whom were never called by the Warren Commission.
Prior to this, the Senate Intelligence Committee held similar hearings.
In the course of these investigations, many of the witnesses died — in fact, an astonishing number, and rarely were the causes of death natural.
Our third criterion of “best evidence” that the Kennedy assassination involved a conspiracy involves the untimely death of these individuals.
George deMohrenschildt Lee Harvey Oswald made a friend after he had returned from the Soviet Union.
The deMohrenschildts helped the Oswalds re-orient to the United States after their arrival, and Oswald and the “Baron” often had quiet chats about politics and the international situation at the deMohrenschildts’ residence.
According to deMohrenschildt, Lee was an admirer of Kennedy and never said anything hostile or derogatory about the President in all the time he knew him.
Reasonable Doubt DeMohrenschildt had numerous prior involvements with the CIA and United States Army Intelligence.
He was an eccentric and toward the end of his life appeared to become increasingly emotionally labile.
The Baron did not believe Oswald shot Kennedy and had prepared a manuscript entitled I’m a Patsy.
An investigator for the Assassinations Committee calfed to arrange an interview, but on the morning it was scheduled to take place, the Baron was found dead in his home, shot through the mouth with a 20-gauge shotgun.
Carlos Prio Prio was alleged to be a top Mafia figure and had been the President of Cuba from 1948 until 1952,when he was deposed.
He had also been linked to Jack Ruby and former Watergate conspirator and CIA operative Frank Sturgis.
He was listed as a witness the Assassinations Committee wanted to interview.
A week after Baron deMohrenschildt’s suicide, Prio also killed himself.
Prio was seated in a chair, with a pistol beside him, outside the garage of his Miami home.
Charles Nicoletti The Assassinations Committee staff had also listed Charles Nicoletti as a witness to interview.
He may have been connected to Eugene Hale Brading, who was held for questioning on November 22,1963.
On the day before the Assassinations Committee planned to contact Nicoletti, he was found in a Chicago parking lot with three bullet wounds in the back of his head.
His foot was jammed against the accelerator, causing the engine to overheat.
The car burned and obliterated any possible fingerprints or other material evidence that could have been of use in solving this murder.
By the early 1960s, he had ascended to be one of the most powerful Mafia dons in the United States.
He received between $65,000 and $300,000 in monthly proceeds from gambling operations in Las Vegas alone, 96 but he had his hands in many more criminal activities as well.
His girlfriend, Judith Exner, was also involved with President Kennedy, and Giancana is alleged to have had many contacts withJFK’s father Joseph Kennedy.
Giancana putatively attempted to kill Fidel Castro; the Senate Intelligence Committee had asked to question him about the CIA’s scheme to get Castro.
A few days after that interview, Giancana was found dead, shot once in the back of the head and six times in a neatly stitched circle around the mouth.
Obviously, someone did not want Sam “Mooney” Giancana to talk any more than he had already.
Leo Moceri Moceri told a government agent that Giancana and Hoffa were murdered in order to stop them from talking about CIA-Mafia plots and associations.
Moceri was an Ohio syndicate figure who had had one meeting with a government agent.
After his second meeting, Moceri vanished, and his car was found abandoned.
Moceri, like Nicoletti, had been in Dallas and allegedly was associated with Eugene Hale Brading97 John Roselli Roselli was a Las Vegas gangster alleged to have taken a leading role in CIA assassination plots.
Hoffa, Trafficante, Roselli and Carlos Marcello were very disturbed over Bobby Kennedy’s attacks on organized crime.
Numerous rumors persisted that a Mafia contract had been ordered on the President, primarily to remove Bobby from his aggressive role as Attorney General.
Roselli had informed the government that he believed his former associates in the Castro assassination schemes had gone on to murder President Kennedy.
Reasonable Doubt after these meetings, Roselli dined with Santos Trafficante.
When the Senate Intelligence Committee sought to reach Roselli, he was out of reach in Costa Rica.
Roselli was last seen alive on a boat owned by an associate of Trafficante.
In July, 1976, Roselli’s body was found floating in a container near Miami, shackled, stabbed, quartered, and squashed into an oil drum.
Regis Kennedy Kennedy was a senior agent in the FBI assigned to New Orleans; but he informed the Assassinations Committee in 1978 that Carlos Marcello, the alleged Mafia boss in New Orleans, was not affiliated to organized crime and was a tomato salesman.
He was scheduled to be questioned by the Assassinations Committee in 1978.
As mentioned earlier, he was found shot dead having been mistaken for a deer.
He had been head of the FBI’s Division Five, which handled the King and Kennedy investigations.
William Pawley and John Paisley Pawley was a former American diplomat who had allegedly collaborated with Mafia figure John Martino in the CIA operation to prove that Soviet missiles were still in Cuba.
Pawley was instrumental in persuading Clare Boothe Luce of Time Life to finance anti-Castro operations.
During the Congressional inquiry into the Kennedy assassination, Pawley shot himself.
John Paisley was a CIA operative who had been in charge of KGB defector Yuri Nosenko.
Paisley died under mysterious circumstances at the time of these hearings, but his death ruled a suicide.
An associate of William Pawley, Martino died at this same time of an apparent heart attack; his wife disputed that conclusion.
Oswald was to meet his contact at the Texas theater in what appears to have been a setup to kill him while he would try to escape.
All these witnesses were to testify, had already testified, or were to he called back for additional testimony.
No statistical argument is raised here, but the curious nature and the timing seems noteworthy.
Paisley was a CIA executive whose wife alleges that he had been placed in charge of Soviet KGB defector Yuri Nosenko.
In 1978, the House Assassinations Committee broke the story of Nosenko’s defection.
A body washed to shore, which was badly bloated; it was identified as Paisley; and it had been weighted down with ballast.
Paisley’s son found his father’s apartment badly disturbed and ransacked.
Paisley sharply disputes the matter, even alleging that the body that floated to shore was not that of her husband.
Her husband had a beard, whereas the badly bloated body was bald and had no beard; furthermore, it was not the right height.
The story of John Martino has taken on greater significance in recent years.
Martino had been in touch with former United States ambassador William Pawley, a champion of Cuban exiles.
Martino also worked closely with Trafficante’s liaison with the CIA, John Roselli.
We were talking about President Kennedy; and he said ‘Flo, they’re going to kill him.
Florence questioned her husband briefly, got no meaningful response, and went out for a while.
She was home again by the time Edward, who was 17, heard the news of the assassination on television.
Martino’s version is that Oswald was involved with another shooter who was in the Texas Theater when Oswald was arrested.
Martino told him “he had himself met Oswald several weeks before the assassination, in Miami.
It is doubtful that American history can produce any other comparable concentration of deaths of witnesses called before a government committee.
There is physical evidence suggestive of a frontal shot to the President; The causes of death of over 78 individuals connected with JFK or the assassination are statistically anomalous; and A startling sum of eleven deaths are clustered about two sets of government hearings on the Kennedy assassination in the mid-1970s.
The fourth pillar supporting the theory of the existence of a conspiracy is more psychological in nature.
It is fair to assume that if one invests a great deal of time and energy defending oneself and/or covering up one’s tracks, there is probably something genuine to defend against or to cover up.
The fact that there was a cover up after the assassination indicates that something existed that needed to be shielded from view; a significant cover-up effort becomes an indirect piece of evidence that a conspiracy existed.
This database is so large and wide in scope it is almost impossible to summarize.
Cover-up activities, witnesses who refuse to testify or speak, or actions taken by others to withhold information can be found from Flollywood to Washington, from the CIA to the darkest circles of the underworld.
In the following table only the most reliable data has been included and many wilder, more irresponsible assertions have been omitted.
The table is generally representative of what is contained in the most widely recognized “conspiracy” texts.
The information is merely summarized here; this author does not maintain that it is inherently corroborated or valid.
A discussion follows, analyzing some of the ways this data might be sifted to render some meaningful conclusions and to try to determine what is bona fide and reliable.
Newspaper columnist, aware of Kennedy infidelities (some of which occurred in his own home), did not disclose such information for many years after Kennedy’s death. a 2.
Haldeman to have erased all connections between CIA and Oswald ; suspected of shredding a document which showed Howard Hunt (of Watergate fame) present at Dallas on November 22,1963. b Angleton also crossed paths with Mary Pinchot Meyer.
Meyer visited the White House on numerous occasions and was mysteriously murdered in 1964.
Meyer and a correspondent for the Washington Post , reported that her diary had been destroyed by CIA official James Angleton.
Angleton is also thought to have withheld information on the death of John Paisley.
A final incident was that of Winston Scott, former CIA station chief in Mexico.
Upon Winston Scott’s death, Angleton personally removed the contents of Scott's safe.
Angleton also alleged to have had access to or possessed a photo of J Edgar Hoover having oral sex with his longtime companion, Clyde Tolson; Angleton aware that mob figures used this information to ""fix"" Hoover from persecuting mob—never revealed to Warren Commission or subsequent inquiries.
Anonymous; a senior FBI agent who wished to have his identity concealed, admitted to author Summers that the FBI removed telephone numbers from Marilyn Monroe’s bill.
Bureau personnel, who normally wouldn’t have been there — agents from out of town.
They were on the scene immediately, as soon as she died, before anyone realized what had happened.
Arledge, Roone, past president of ABC, and executive producer Av Westin both played a role in censoring a “20/20” documentary on Marilyn Monroe and her relationship to Kennedy.
The specific parts they wanted cut were references to Kennedy and Giancana, and Kennedy’s relationship with Judith Exner , among others.
Suppression of this program became national news. g 69 Conspiracy in Camelot Tabic 3.
Belin, David, Chief Counsel to the Warren Commission; numerous witnesses accused Belin of changing their testimony for the final report, including Dallas policeman Roger Craig.
He was apparently responsible as well for failing to include Hale Boggs’ objection to the Warren Commission conclusions in the form of a footnote in the final draft, as Boggs requested.
One of those fired by Kennedy after the Bay of Pigs fiasco, along with Allen Dulles and General Cabell.
Bissell was CIA’s deputy for planning, had recruited Roselli, Giancana and Trafficante to assassinate Castro offering $150,000 bounty.
Blahut, Regis; CIA liaison officer with HSCA — fired for trying to steal autopsy photo from HSCA files.
Knew of Kennedy’s liaisons with women, including Mary Pinchot Meyer, yet never revealed this information at the time of the assassination or during later government inquiries.
Was aware that James Angleton of the CIA broke into Meyer’s apartment after her death and similarly did not come forward with this information at the time of the Senate and House investigations.
Buckley, William F; conservative columnist, historically negative toward any conspiracy theory of the assassination.
Conspiracy literature cites Buckley as allegedly having undisclosed CIA ties, and ties with Howard Hunt , and, through Pantipec Oil, having worked “on a deep-cover operation in Mexico in the early 1950’s.
Whether Buckley withheld information or sincerely was opposed to the perceived paranoia of conspiracists is a matter of debate.
Burkley, George; Navy admiral to whom autopsy notes were ultimately forwarded; also was present at autopsy and aware of photographic evidence.
The President’s missing brain, failure to preserve film and photos taken at autopsy, pressures on Dr.
Humes to destroy his notes. . . all of these issues had a connection to Admiral Burkley’s authority over autopsy doctors.
Burkley has never been called to “answer any questions about anything.” k 11.
Charles; fired by Kennedy; was involved in CIA plots to kill Castro; his brother, Earle Cabell, was mayor of Dallas at the time of the assassination and was in the motorcade with the President.
Cabell may have been the CIA operative who canceled the air strikes in support of the Bay of Pigs operation for which Kennedy ultimately took blame; other texts dispute this assertion.
Assertions of Cabell’s role in withholding any information are not considered reliable.
Cesar Diosdado, a known anti-Castro exile with allegedly important CIA contacts.
De Brueys, Warren; New Orleans FBI agent denied he had contact with Oswald; facts were subsequently proven otherwise.
Dulles, Allen, former CIA Director, member of Warren Commission; refused to testify for Garrison on Clay Shaw, David Ferrie; kept mum on CIA-Mafia plots to kill Castro during Warren Commission hearings; also kept mum on the work of the Cuban Study Group that reviewed the ill-fated Bay of Pigs operation in 1961. m 16.
Egerter, Ann; CIA employee who handled Oswald’s files for the last 3 years of his life.
She refused F1SCA requests to interview her in the mid 1970s and was threatened with a subpoena.
Newman’s Oswald and the CIA considers her quite informed but one of the more unwilling people he has encountered.
Flynn Charles, FBI agent who had over 9 meetings with Jack Ruby beginning in March 1959; did not disclose that he used Ruby as an informant; this information was released only in 1975 n 18.
The correspondence was only released to the public 11 years after the Warren Commission closed its business T Ford reportedly was privy to Jack Ruby’s 9 contacts with the FBI in 1959-1960, information that was withheld from the public.
Recently released records — held secret for over three decades — show that Ford played an “editorial” role in shaping the final Warren Commission report.
Flarold Weisberg, a longtime critic of the Commission, commented on Ford’s editorial recommendations that “what Ford is doing is trying to make the single-bullet theory more tenable.
Gill, G Wray; personal attorney for gangster Marcello, in New Orleans; also represented David Ferrie, who was arrested on August 11,1961 for indecent behavior with a 15-yearold boy; many writers on this topic consider that he had significant information about these individuals that has ever been publicly revealed.
Hall, Loran; CIA connections with Cuban activities; gave disinformation about Odio evidence.
Helms, Richard, former CIA Director admitted withholding information on Clay Shaw’s involvement with CIA; thought to have withheld significantly more information from the public on CIA-Mafia plots to kill Castro, Project ZRRIFLE, Howard Hunt’s presence in Dallas, and other matters.
In the mid 1970s’ Helms admitted Ferrie had ties to the CIA; this has also been corroborated by former CIA agent and author Victor Marchetti. v At the time of the assassination, Oswald was carrying Feme’s library card.
Guy Bannister’s associate, Jim Martin, called the FBI to inform that Ferrie played a role in the assassination.
Feme’s association with Cuban anti-Castro exiles as well as Feme’s investigation by the FBI four days after the assassination were not disclosed by the Warren Commission, nor to the public.
Helms was the first CIA director to be sentenced to a maximum of two years in prison for lying to Congress.
Journalist Seth Kantor saw and spoke to Ruby at Parkland Hospital, but Ruby denied it, and Kantor’s testimony was rejected by Warren Commission.
Kantor investigated, tried to get copies of his own phone records made in the hours after the assassination.
He was unable to obtain them until 1975 and discovered the reason they were withheld for so long was that he had called Hal Hendrix at 6 pm on the day of the assassination, and Hendrix’s number was the ‘national security’ matter that was the likely source of the censorship. w On the day of the assassination, Hendrix already had a great deal of information on Oswald and was disseminating it to the media.
Hoover, J Edgar; withheld information on Mob contracts on Kennedy from the Warren Commission.
Hosty claimed that reports on Oswald in Mexico had been removed from the FBI’s Dallas office after the assassination.
Long held to be a major figure in the cover-up, Hosty finally wrote his memoirs in 1996.
Further Hosty corroborates much in the conspiracy literature identifying individuals implicated in various elements of the cover-up; mentioned prominently is Gordon Shanklin who told Hosty about the Oswald note to the FBI “Here, take these.
Hosty also implicates the following individuals in various aspects of the cover-up; the FBI’s Johnnie Mohr, close to Hoover, Gerald Ford, Jim Malley, Harlan Brown, andjim Gale , and the CIA’s Winston Scott.
J M.D; primary forensic pathologist who worked on Kennedy autopsy at Bethesda; Dr.
Michael Baden who reviewed the autopsy results “the qualifications of the pathologists.. . the failure to inspect the clothing ... .the inadequate documentation of injuries, lack of proper preservation of evidence, and incompleteness of the autopsy” were areas of major deficiency.
Humes admitted that his preliminary draft notes of the Autopsy Report he burned in his fireplace. ac Another less credible source cites Commander Humes was involved in the discovery of a fourth bullet.
Humes’s explanation of these allegations is that he burnt his notes of the autopsy because they were stained with blood and likely to be put on public display.
Isaac, Don Levine; CIA employee, who spent an intensive week with Marina Oswald prior to her testimony before the Warren Commission, allegedly prompting and/or coaching her responses.
Argued with Kennedy on Thursday evening Nov. 21,1963 in Kennedy’s hotel suite.
Johnson wanted his friend, John Connally, governor of Texas, to be in another car and his nemesis, Senator Ralph Yarborough, to be seated in Kennedy’s car.
Johnson denied the story, but it has been documented by Kennedy advance-man, Jerry Bruno; Johnson may have also withheld far more information on the Billy Sol Estes and Bobby Baker scandals in which he was embroiled at the time.
New Orleans FBI agent investigated Oswald prior to assassination but did not inform Warren Commission When approached by Kennedy researcher.
Many individuals associated with Kennedy have published allegedly historical treatments of his Presidency and life withholding highly significant information about both national security, anti-Castro assassination efforts and personal data such as his Addison’s disease, promiscuity, etc., while many had knowledge of these matters.
These idolater-publicists, often referred to as the “Camelot school,"" are Arthur Schlesinger, Kenneth O’Donnell, David Powers, Ted Sorensen, Pierre Salinger, Walt Rostow, Evelyn Lincoln, and Theodore White. af 32.
Kennedy family, Jacqueline Bouvier and Edward; family members likely far more familiar with Kennedy associations with Exner, Giancana, and Joseph Kennedy’s connections with the Mafia than have ever revealed to the American public.
Kennedy is alleged to have known about her husband’s liaisons with her press secretary, Pamela Turnure; may also have known Baron deMohrenschildt, friend of Oswald.
Kennedy was personally responsible for attempts to suppress numerous articles and books on Kennedy or forcing, through litigation, suppression of William Manchester’s family-commissioned book, particularly the portion describing the argument between Lyndon Johnson and Kennedy the day before the assassination.
Caroline Kennedy has also been quoted as asking the media to leave her father’s memory alone.
Kennedy’s only son has also taken a position that inquiries are of no interest to him.
Several historians have requested permission to examine this material (Richard Reeves, Nigel Hamilton, Seymour Hersh, and others), but Max Kennedy, son of Robert, has steadfastly refused to open these papers for inspection.
Beverly Oliver (known in the literature as the “Babushka Lady”) claims she took an 8mm film of the assassination which she alleged FBI agent Kennedy took it from her.
Lardner, George, correspondent for the Washington Post, consistently negative about the Garrison inquiry.
Allegedly Lardner was with David Ferrie, Garrison’s principal witness, the day Ferrie died.
President Kennedy’s brother-in-law allegedly arranged numerous soirees for the President while Kennedy was in office; withheld considerable information on the Kennedys until his death, partially revealed by his third wife to author Anthony Summers; unavailable for testimony on the death of Marilyn Monroe and was sequestered at the Kennedy estate in Hyannisport at the time of the inquest.
Lawrence, David; of the Herald Tribune ; disinformation; provided information on Oswald apparently before the authorities possessed such details of his life.
His article appeared in the Christchurch Star within the first moments following the assassination.
Prouty suggests Lawrence couldn’t have known what he knew at that time and implies Lawrence had advance knowledge on Oswald.
Luce, Clare Boothe, wife of the chairman of Time Inc, often associated with CIA-supported activities, involved in anti-Castro activities, even funding some, and owner of the Zapruder film which was altered and suppressed for over 10 years. 1 On Dec 6,1963 Life published a memorial edition of the Kennedy assassination captioned “All of Life’s Pictures,” yet key frames of the Zapruder film were withheld.
McCone, John; former Director of the CIA admitted that he knew of Maurice Bishop, the mysterious figure in Kennedy assassination literature.
McCone said he believed that Bishop was a senior agency employee, that he had met him 2-3 times, but that he could not identify who he was.
Bishop was a pseudonym and his name appears in virtually all Kennedy assassination literature in which CIA complicity and the Cuban connection is involved.
McMillan, Douglas, FBI agent, compiled reports on Frank Sinatra and his dealings with Sam Giancana as well as Kennedy, Sinatra and Marilyn Monroe.
Merletti, Lewis, Director of the United States Secret Service, admonished two agents for speaking to a reporter about JFK’s extramarital activities in the White house.
Moore, Dallas Walton; a CIA agent who knew and cleared George deMohrenschildt to associate with Oswald when he first came to Dallas; this fact was never disclosed to the Warren Commission.
Newcomb, Pat; friend of Marilyn Monroe, described as a person who knew more about Monroe’s association than anyone else.
Nixon, Richard; ordered attorney General John Mitchell to withhold ballistics evidence from the Kennedy Assassination “on the grounds of national security.” acl Denied being in Dallas on the day of the assassination, but later admitted it. ar Nixon’s whereabouts on November 22,1963 were “deleted” in articles he wrote.
O’Neal, Birch an assistant to James Angleton, the CIA counterintelligence molehunter.
John Newman’s Oswald and the CIA, a review of recently released records, states “O’Neal is possibly the person most knowledgeable about Oswald’s CIA files alive today.
Guy Banister’s secretary, Delphine Roberts, said Marina and Lee visited Banister’s office.
Phillips, David, CIA chief of Western Hemisphere Division in Mexico City; allegedly said no photos of Oswald visiting Soviet embassy in Mexico city existed.
Tapes of conversations inside the embassy were “routinely destroyed” said Phillips.
Was considered such an unreliable witness the HSCA considered indicting him for perjury. au 49.
Quigley, John, FBI special agent interviewed Oswald in New Orleans on Aug 10,1963.
In 1961 after Oswald’s arrival in the Soviet Union, the FBI in New Orleans, the city of his birth, had reviewed his Navy file.
Rogano, Frank; attorney for Jimmy Hoffa and is reported to have knowledge that Hoffa, Carlos Marcello, and Santos Trafficante plotted the JFK hit. aw Stayed mum until early 1990s and then wrote a ‘tell-alT expose.
Rankin had been told that the FBI had contacted Jack Ruby nine times in 1959-1960; when J Edgar Hoover was being asked questions at the Warren Commission hearings, Rankin failed to ask Hoover about any of these contacts.
Rather, Dan; CBS; first and only journalist to view Zapruder film in mid-70s who incorrectly said President “fell forward” with considerable violence — disinformation. ay 53.
Jack Ruby had told his psychiatrist that he was” framed to kill Oswald.” and told Dr.
Rocca was the CIA individual who was assigned to investigate Buchanan and/or discredit his work.
William Buckley published an article attacking Buchanan’s book as well.
Roselli, John; Mafia figure who allegedly was passing false information on to Jack Anderson on Oswald’s acting as Castro’s agent in the killing of Kennedy.' 3a 55.
Salinger, Pierre, Kennedy’s press secretary, TV journalist, has not publicly revealed Kennedy’s liaisons and promiscuity while in the White House although he was aware of some of this activity.
Appears as well to have withheld information about the frequency with which President Kennedy used a cane and crutches.
Said CIA had delivered from Mexico only a photograph and typewritten reports.
However, FBI Director Hoover made mention in a five page document to the fact that these agents had listened to a sound recording.
Shanklin was warned before the Judiciary Committee that he might be open to prosecution for perjury.
Robert Jones of the 112th Military Intelligence Group shortly after the assassination.
Sinatra, Frank; frequent partygoer with JFK, also allied to Mob figures, and Marilyn Monroe.
Did not reveal what he knew of these matters in any significant detail prior to his death.
Sturgis, Frank; CIA linked anti-Castro militant, Watergate burglar, spread false story to Jack Anderson linking Oswald to pro-Castro intelligence.
James Buchanan wrote an article on Oswald’s Miami Fair Play for Cuba actions; the story was false, and Buchanan said Sturgis was the unnamed source of the story; Sturgis denied it; Sturgis is deceased.
Surgeon General, United States Navy, threatened all present at the Kennedy autopsy with court martial if they revealed the nature of the events surrounding the Kennedy autopsy.
Warren Commission investigator, Griffin, had been assigned the Jack Ruby portion of the investigation.
He felt that Sergeant Dean in charge of basement security where Oswald was shot had made false statements.
Griffin felt that Ruby may have come in to the basement area where Oswald was shot by another entrance.
Pressure from Henry Wade’s office got Griffin off the back of Sergeant Dean.
Westin, Av; ABC TV executive producer; see discussion of Roone Arledge.
The Luce Family and spokespersons for Life sharply dispute that the Zapruderfilm ever showed the president falling forward or that Clare Boothe Luce had any role in obtaining or publishing the pictures.
Mr Stolley was apparently acting on behalf of the Luce family when he replied to my query. al.
How to Look at this Data Much Kennedy assassination literature is unreliable.
Much of it is self-published, or virtually so, and has not been verified or vetted to any degree by any outside editor.
Nixon’s men funneled money to the Nazis and Nixon himself voiced admiration for Albert Speer.
The sometimes overpowering bias of various writers obviously requires we maintain a healthy distance and skepticism about the assertions that come from these sources.
The suggestions of a cover-up that is revealed in our table above, therefore, need to be sifted through in an effort to separate gossip, rumor, and innuendo from genuine hard evidence.
Probably the first, if not the most reliable, evidence of cover-up activities involved FBI agent Hosty.
Acting under the direction of his superior, Gordon Shanklin, Hosty destroyed a letter written to him by Lee Harvey Oswald, complaining of Hosty’s attempts to talk to Oswald’s wife, Marina.
The destruction of this letter was revealed years after the Warren Commission report.
Although members of the Warren Commission may have known about the deletion of Hosty’s name from the notebook, this fact was not revealed to the public.
Also disturbing is the evidence of FBI cover-up activities in withholding information on Jack Ruby’s “informant” status from 1959 onward.
Ruby met with FBI agents nine times, and admitted this fact to Warren Commission counsel Rankin; Hoover asked that in the interests of national security, the information be withheld; it 103.
Hoover successfully hid one of his own memos to the State Department from the Warren Commission, and it did not surface until many years later after he was dead.
Dated in June of 1960, when Oswald was in the Soviet Union, Hoover warned that someone might be using Oswald’s identity.
Evidence existed of an Oswald imposter even before Kennedy became president.
There are numerous other instances of FBI activity to cover up evidence in this case, but this is one of the most incontrovertible examples, well documented, and admitted by Agent Hosty himself.
It is incontrovertible confirmation that cover-up activities were carried on within the FBI, and that in itself is reason enough to question the credibility of the Warren Report.
The “under-publicized” story of Regis Blahut is another irrefutable piece in the puzzle.
The brain, along with other autopsy materials, including X rays and photographs, was apparently first delivered to President Kennedy’s former secretary for safekeeping.
In 1966, after the materials had passed into the care of the National Archives, it was discovered that the President’s brain was missing.
Also absent were tissue sections, blood smears, and a number of slides.
Nor have any photographs of the interior of the President’s chest survived, even though the chief autopsy doctor and an official photographer remembers them being taken.
In 1979 the Assassinations Committee failed to discover any trace of the missing brain or of the other material.
It favored the theory that the President’s brother Robert Kennedy disposed of it to avoid tasteless display in the future.
The Assassinations Committee Chief Counsel possessed X-rays and ballistic evidence that were housed in a separate safe in a special room for the time the HSCA was holding its hearings.
This was granted separately on each date of access, and items studied were meticulously logged in and out.
One day in June, 1978, however, an interloper found a loophole in the precautions.
A staff member, on legitimately taking photographs to a nearby office, left the safe closed but not locked.
By the time the researcher returned, the safe had been opened and the sensitive material seriously disturbed.
A folder had been taken out of the safe and one photograph of the dead President ripped out of its cover.
A fingerprint check showed that the only unauthorized person who had handled the files was a CIA employee.
He was Regis Blahut, a liaison officer who had been assigned to supervise and assist with secret CIA material stored in the Committee premises.
He worked in a secure area quite separate from the room where the photographs were held and had no business being in that room at all.
At first he denied the whole thing, and then — faced with the incontrovertible evidence — Blahut simply maintained there was an innocent explanation.
One of the pictures which had attracted his specific interest was a photograph of the late Presidents head.
The matter was to have been further investigated in Congress, but has since been quietly forgotten.
New testimony released yesterday about the autopsy ... says a second set of pictures was taken of Kennedy’s wounds — pictures never made public . . . believed taken by White House photographer Robert Knudsen during or after the autopsy at the National Naval Medical Center in Bethesda, Md.
Added David Lifton, author of Best Evidence , “It’s of tremendous significance that there’s another camera and its existence and its product have been concealed all these years.
We’ve got a credible paper trail about another camera and film, but no picFrom the burning of autopsy notes in a fireplace to the purloining of autopsy results, scientific evidence of tainted “composite” photographs, disclosed government 109.
Reasonable Doubt admissions that autopsy photos are missing and clear evidence that CIA personnel attempted to steal autopsy photos from a Congressional Committee — all this points to a conspiracy.
It was withheld from the Warren Commission and kept secret for 13 years.
The document reported that Jack Ruby had visited American mobster Santos Trafficante while he was in prison in Havana under Castro.
Trafficante was linked in numerous texts to Mob plots to assassinate the President, and his linkage with Giancana is copious.
Had the American public been made privy to JFK’s sexual liaison with Judith Exner, her closeness with Giancana, Giancana’s connections with Trafficante, and, in turn, Trafficante’s relationship with Ruby, it is doubtful many would have believed that a single deranged assassin named Lee Harvey Oswald killed President Kennedy.
Somewhat less thoroughly documented is the destruction of Oswald’s Military Intelligence file.
Robert Jones of the 112th Military Intelligence Group (based in San Antonio, Texas) urgently requested information from his men at the scene of the crime.
Jones was interviewed by the Warren Commission and found to be a credible witness.
We do not know who is most culpable here, but it is indisputable that many writers, historians and Kennedy associates purported to write objective biographies while egregiously withholding highly significant information about this period — from Pierre Salinger to Ben Bradlee of the Washington Post.
Kennedy’s liaisons with women in the White House, his machinations with Giancana in particular, his argument with President Johnson the night before the assassination, his awareness of and/or participation in plots against Castro, even his singular luncheon meeting with J Edgar Hoover — where he was confronted about his affair with Judith Exner — were withheld, omitted, unmentioned, distorted or rationalized away.
We must also include CIA Counterintelligence Chief James Angleton’s admission that he destroyed the diary of one of Kennedy’s mistresses shortly after her murder in 1964.
How these personal relationships played into the assassination is unknown, but to consider them irrelevant is quite another matter.
Neutron activation analysis allows for precise definition of ballistics evidence.
At the time of the assassination, this process was new and few had heard of it; but if we had the results of the tests that were performed, they could tell whether the bullet fragments in Kennedy’s brain came from the same source or different sources.
In 1973 a previously unknown letter from J Edgar Hoover to J Lee Rankin, chief counsel for the Warren Commission, surfaced.
The letter, dated July 8, 1964, revealed that in addition to spectrographic analysis, another kind of test had been conducted on the bullet fragments.
This was an extraordinarily precise and, at the time, relatively new procedure known as neutron activation.
The process involved irradiating organic or inorganic materials — in this case the bullet fragments — with nuclear particles.
The specimens would then emit gamma rays which could be counted, compared, and analyzed to reveal the exact composition of the substance down to parts per billion.
Hoover’s 1964 letter blandly noted that “minor variations” were found in some of the Dealey Plaza bullet fragments, including those recovered from the limousine as well as those removed from Kennedy’s brain, but that the differ114.
These specific test results, beyond Hoover’s suppressed letter, were never disclosed.
All the above casts doubt on the government/Warren Commission conclusions.
In sum, evidence that spectrographic evidence as well as neutron activation tests on fragments in Kennedy’s brain were completed but never released is widely accepted as strong evidence of a government conspiracy to cover-up important evidentiary material.
That the government would hold what appears to be an innocuous memo secret for so long shows the degree to which a forced unanimity was sought in the promulgation of the Warren Commission Report.
These pieces of “hard evidence” for a cover-up are presently not disputed.
They occurred; they have been documented, and they do not constitute rumor, innuendo or hearsay evidence.
They are in themselves neither benign nor merely tangential to an objective inquiry regarding the death of President Kennedy.
Each conspiracy theorist tends to assemble his or her own 'best evidence, 1 and this chapter has tried to get as close to all this evidence as possible.
If we do not disabuse ourselves of the notion that Lee Harvey Oswald killed President Kennedy and Officer Tippit, and we do not dismiss the notion that he may indeed be the lone assassin of the President, there is still a vast body of literature with which any objective scholar must deal.
Given that the motorcade was five minutes late from its published arrival at Dealey Plaza, there is considerable doubt that Oswald could have effectuated this assassination and yet be in the lunchroom fifteen minutes prior to and one minute after the killing while simultaneously being able to correctly identify the two individuals who walked into the lunchroom during these critical 15 minutes.
A Fourth Shot Substantial evidence exists that a fourth shot struck the President.
And a fourth shot could not possibly have been fired from Oswald’s rifle.
Reasonable Doubt • The Zapruder film, long censored from the American public by Life Magazine, shows the President accelerating backward as the result of the frontal headshot.
The evidence for a frontal shot on the President is substantial and persuasive; it is an important clue that others in addition to or in place of Oswald may have been involved.
Pattern of Suspicious Deaths A second rich source of evidence for a conspiracy is statistical, and involves the study of over 84 deaths occurring with individuals directly or indirectly related to the Kennedys and the assassination in Dealey Plaza.
The pattern of these deaths is statistically significant and at extreme variance with the natural profile of mortality etiology in the United States.
From an empirical analysis of this data, it is far more absurd to assume the deaths arose from random and unrelated causes than to assume they arose from a systematic process,e., a conspiracy of some sort, which obtains to this assassination event.
Corroborating this finding is a sub-sample analysis of the accidental death of two individuals in this study, which similarly show a probability of occurrence of one in 33,000 that such deaths could have occurred by chance alone.
Deaths Associated with Congressional Witnesses • In addition to this statistical data, another table presenting eleven deaths, mostly of Mafia figures contacted by the Senate Intelligence and House Assassinations Committees in the mid-1970s.
This also points dramatically to an underworld conspiracy of silence on this matter.
Virtually no set of Congressional inquiries in all of United States history can detail such an enormous clustering of witness deaths occurring either shortly before or shortly after testimony was either sought or taken.
Cover-up Actions as a Predictor of Conspiracy • The pattern of ""cover-up"" that has manifested itself over the last 30 years also suggests a conspiracy.
Conclusion Reviewing this information, we draw the same conclusion as the Flouse Select Assassinations Committee.
We do not yet know who is involved in any conspiracy, to whom any alleged conspiracy may be attributed; but that there was a conspiracy in the killing of President Kennedy is a well-founded conclusion.
To hold otherwise, to cling to the notion of a single assassin, is scientifically untenable.
That the pattern of these 78 deaths happened by “coincidence,” as a statistical anomaly, has one chance in ten thousand of being valid.
The argument that a fourth shot did not occur has less than a 5% chance of being accurate.
To say that FBI cover-up activities were motivated out of director Hoover’s vanity and urge to protect the “image of his agency,” or that Regis Blahut stole an autopsy photograph merely because he was “curious,” would smack of a neurotic denial syndrome more than an objective assessment.
Indeed, the absurd “crackpots” whose speculations are the most outlandish and scientifically unforgivable are not paranoid malcontents; they are precisely those mainstream protagonists of the status quo,e., those who have historically backed the Warren Commission findings.
This is the group that holds stubbornly to what is improbable, unsupported and rationally untenable, namely the assertion that Oswald acted alone, that no conspiracy ever existed, and that magic bullets, strange neuromuscular spasms, and sheer coincidence should be the working concepts used to explain the contradictory data.
Reasonable Doubt There is simply too much contradictory data to dismiss on those terms, and too much psychic energy is needed to engage the denial process for very long.
The world has been asked to naively and innocently accept, as ""unfortunate” trifles, that the president’s brain was never examined, his throat wound was ignored, autopsy physicians were sworn to secrecy , his brain is mysteriously missing from the National Archives, and a lieutenant commander who took autopsy photos committed suicide; and that otherwise we have seen the accurate and credible results of a serious post mortem examination.
While that bullet did all its damage and remained unblemished, we are asked to believe that another bullet exploded on impact, leaving over 40 fragments in Kennedy’s brain; and that another one left a hole in the President’s skull which was smaller than the diameter of the bullet itself... and yet all the bullets were from the same gun and the same assassin.
Furthermore, for a generation the public has been asked to dismiss the notion of a “conspiracy to cover-up” the assassination as nothing more than a symptom of cynical and paranoid writers trying to make money by exploiting this national tragedy.
The fact that Sam Giancana testified before the Senate Intelligence Committee and then was found slain with bullet holes neatly stitched around his mouth should not convey to the average American that “silence is golden” when it comes to discussing any conspiracy.
The CIA concealed from us the fact that they were involved in efforts to assassinate Castro which could have been of extreme importance to us.
Warren Commission members Hale Boggs, Senator John Sherman Cooper, and Senator Richard Russell also expressed their doubts about the conclusions.
A CBS poll taken in November, 1993 revealed that 81% of Americans believe there was a cover-up, and 89% believe JFK died as a result of a conspiracy.
Another non-believer to add to this list is the discreet personal secretary of JFK, Evelyn Lincoln.
Still, the most impressive anecdotal evidence supporting a conspiracy comes from none other thanj.
Edgar Hoover, the imperturbable supporter and advocate of the conclusions on the Warren Commission.
Hoover died in the mid-1970s, but in 1994 a researcher, Anthony Summers, released a stunning story purporting to describe a conversation between Hoover and a trusted friend.
If I told you what I really know, it would be very dangerous to this country.
Anthony and Robbyn Summers, “The Ghosts of November,” Vanity Fair, December 1994, 92.
A more recent CNN poll conducted by CNN and broadcast on the History channel on November 18, 1998 continues to show a majority of Americans believe JFK died as the result of a conspiracy.
Liz Smith on Evelyn Lincoln, “Grapevine,” San Jose Mercury News, May 12,1997.
Summers, Anthony &r Robbyn, “The Ghosts of November, Vanity Fair, December, 1994, 100.
Reasonable Doubt It seems that a conspiracy in the assassination of John Fitzgerald Kennedy is a very plausible, rational, and tenable conclusion to draw.
The next task that faces us is to look at the origin of the conspiracy, to review the most salient theories, and to see if anything conclusive comes from our efforts.
Some assert it was a “get-even-with-Bobby” vendetta, featuring the Mafia in the lead role.
There is a more Dostoyevskian drama, emphasizing the themes of retaliation and perfidy, spotlighting the CIA and angry anti-Castro Cubans.
And finally, we have what might be called the “what-goes-around-comes-around” theme, played out by Fidel Castro — who is said to have endured eight separate assassination attempts before striking back.
This chapter will confine itself to examining the most persuasive theories.
I’m a gamblin’ man, darlin’, and this is the only chance I got.” — Lyndon Johnson in a conversation with Clare Boothe Luce, after accepting the Vice Presidential nomination in 1960.
It is only when you pause and look at what the theory does not explain that shortcomings emerge.
One ol the most recent theories that is both convincing and yet has quite a few unfilled holes comes from Craig Zirbel, author of the Texas Connection.
Essential Ideas Lyndon Baines Johnson gained the most from the assassination of President Kennedy.
He rose to power from the comparatively impotent position of Vice President.
Prior to Kennedy’s victory, Johnson had been majority leader in the Senate, one of the most powerful men in government.
Graduating to the Vice Presidency actually placed him in a position in which the office could be exploited far less than his prior positions in government; but he made up for the lost time.
When Republican Senator Barry Goldwater was asked his recollections of LBJ, he hesitated; then he crowed, finally, that Johnson had made more money as president than any other president in history.
He is known to have used his office on many occasions for his own private gain.
And despite Austin’s size and position as the Texas state capital, the FCC for decades refused to allow any other televisions stations in Austin (aside from LBJ’s), thereby protectingjohnson’s television monopoly in the region.
There were few important appointments he could make — except for the Secretary of the Navy.
Johnson’s major appointment, in other words, was a clear act of patronage, and a criminal one, to boot.
Not only did J ohnson lose some of his power base as Vice President, there were clear signs that Kennedy was not going to have him on the ticket in 1964.
In fact, the last words Kennedy dictated to his secretary, before his assassination, were to that effect.
Further, Johnson’s own political career was increasingly threatened as Kennedy’s presidency marched forward.
Billy Sol Estes, a personal friend of Johnson, was arrested in March of 1962 and charged with defrauding the government.
He had been blessed with government contracts to store surplus grain in his warehouses.
Johnson attempted to intervene on January 31, 1961, defending Estes’ practices.
On June 3,1961, Marshall was found dead in a ditch in Franklin, Texas, with five bullets in his head from a bolt-action rifle.
Marshall’s widow remonstrated against “Texas justice” for years afterward.
Billy Sol Estes refused to talk, and thus protected Johnson from exposure.
While Estes did not ultimately escape jail, he was never charged with the murder of Agent Marshall, which was later determined not to have been a suicide.
The results showed that in addition to the five bullets to his head, before his death Marshall also received a severe blow to his head, and was asphyxiated with carbon monoxide.
While this did not solve the question of who killed Marshall, 23 years after his death it was at least determined that the suicide story was a cover-up for murder.
In March of 1984, one year after his release from prison, Estes was subpoenaed to testify before a grand jury concerning the death of Agent Marshall in 1961.
Because grand jury testimony is secret, only reports of his testimony and not actual transcripts are available.
However, the reports of Estes’ sworn grand jury testimony show that, decades after the murder, Estes linked Vice President Johnson and two other men to the execution of Henry Marshall.
While it is entirely possible that Estes in his old age decided to lie about the event, it is also possible that after years of silence — with Johnson dead, and nothing to fear — Estes perhaps decided to tell the truth.
Another death related to the Belly Sol Estes scandal was his accountant, George Krutilek.
Interviewed by FBI agents on April 2,1962, on April 4 til Krutilek was found dead in the town of Clint, Texas with a hose from his exhaust stuck in the window.
This death was not listed in the prior chapter’s table on suspicious deaths since it occurred prior to the assassination.
He was also involved in influence peddling related to a vending machine company servicing federal contractors in California.
The media began publicizing stories of Johnson’s direct links to Bobby Baker.
The Senate Rules Committee voted to continue pursuing the investigation.
Baker resigned on October 7,1963; Johnson flew to Dallas, and remained there in seclusion; he did not return to Washington until after Novemher 22.
On the day of the President’s assassination, the Bobby Baker scandal was still one of the leading headlines of the Dallas Herald Tribune and other papers throughout the country.
If Jack Kennedy had not been murdered, the Baker investigation would not have ended.
If Jack Kennedy had not been murdered, the Baker scandal would have either destroyed or tarnished Johnson’ image so completely that he would not have been on the 1964 ticket.
Some wonder why JFK asked him to serve as Vice President in the first place.
Seymour Hersh, in The Dark Side of Camelot, contends Johnson knew of JFK’s sexual excesses and threatened to expose him if his name were not on the ballot.
Recent conspiracy literature — perhaps a more questionable source, — alleges Estes implicated Malcolm “Mac” Wallace, an LBJ crony, in numerous murders.
Conspiracy Zirbel, in The Texas Connection , provides a startling array of facts to buttress his case.
He wanted Kennedy to remove John Connally from the President’s limousine and have Senator Yarborough sit in Connally’s seat instead.
Hunt (not to be confused with E Howard Hunt) and industrialist Clint Murchison.
The actions of the Dallas Police Department . . . defy all logic and common sense.
The only one who gained by the shooting.. , B1 In addition, Johnson had major personality problems, and some of his aides felt he was not merely a buffoon but mentally unbalanced.
Two had privately consulted with a psychiatrist about his mental stability.
His dogs and household as well as his ranch in Texas all fell under the LBJ logo.
After he became President, the Space Center in Texas was named the Johnson Space Center.
When J ohnson visited the Vatican, he presented the Pope with a bust of himself.
This author has never visited the Johnson estate, but a friend related the following story.
On his drive from California to Florida, he passed through Texas; the vastness and emptiness of the landscape impressed him.
Suddenly a two-lane road became a major freeway with stunning and impressive directional signs, overpasses, etc.
The sign pointed passing drivers to the exit leading to the Johnson ranch.
A few miles later, the expressway suddenly ended and the driver was back on a two-lane road passing through vast, empty stretches of landscape.
This freeway was likely another of Johnson’s pork barrel adventures in the service of his megalomania.
The two LBJ aides who sought advice from a psychiatrist about LBJ were Goodwin and Bill Moyers 98 Chapter 4.
The first was a woman named Alice Glass, and their affair began in 1938 after he had been married for four years.
Brown claims that she had a son by him and that Johnson supported her for decades.
Not infrequently, he would order his secret service men to form a shield around him so that he could urinate outside during a White House gathering.
Since grade school he had told his friends he wanted to be President of the United States.
As Vice President, Johnson would have his chauffeur drive him to the White House each morning, whereupon he would walk through the White House, 133.
He actually met with President Kennedy for less than two hours in the entire last year of the Kennedy presidency.
Johnson had Jackie Kennedy removed from the White House by the Monday following the assassination.
Johnson wanted to be sworn in as Chief Executive on “Texas soil,” so the plane carrying the grieving widow was held up for 90 minutes so that he could be sworn in with a Texas federal judge conducting the ceremony.
Johnson took over Air Force One rather than return to Washington in the vice presidential plane.
He told the Warren Commission that Kenneth O’Donnell told him at Parkland Hospital to take Air Force One back.
According to O’Donnell, “Later, a lawyer for the Warren Commission pointed out to me that Johnson’s testimony that I told him to board Air Force One disagreed with my own testimony before the commission about our conversation at the hospital.
The Johnson egoism, megalomania, and drive for power are well documented and provide good reason to consider him a prime suspect.
His dealings in government for personal profit, his waning political prospects just prior to the assassination, JFK’s desire to dump him as Vice President, and his ascent to power after the assassination would lead any outside observer to at least consider Johnson to have both motive and opportunity.
Furthermore, there has been much controversy about the autopsy in Bethesda Naval Hospital vis-a-vis results obtained at Parkland Hospital in Dallas.
Conspiracy argued that a proper autopsy should have been conducted in Dallas, not Washington.
Earl Rose, had to be physically restrained by Kennedy aides to get the President’s body out of Dallas and onto Air Force One.
The major decision maker in permitting the body to be taken to Washington was a personal friend of Lyndon Johnson, District Attorney Elenry Wade.
Zirbel makes an excellent point in his analysis of the make up of the Warren Commission.
If there was anyone in a position of power to defuse, defeat, and squelch any inquiry into Johnson’s involvement, it was Johnson himself.
An inquiry into the assassination of President Kennedy could have been headed by his brother Robert, the Attorney General.
By creating the Warren Commission, Johnson placed the investigation under his own authority and removed it from Bobby Kennedy’s control.
By making Allen Dulles the CIA liaison on this Committee — a man Kennedy had recently fired —Johnson further rigged the Committee in his own favor.
Johnson was never deposed, never considered a suspect, and never had to testify under oath before the Commission.
Another strong point favoring this theory has appeared only recently with the release of documents withheld by the government for over 35 years.
Based on these released materials, one conspiracy-based newsletter reports on how LBJ might have had Oswald placed in the Texas School Depository.
DeMohrenschildt also had personal associations with LBJ and wrote to him on April 17,1963.
George Brown, LBJ’s chief financial sponsor, had previously employed deMohrenschildt.
Such associations provide ample room for an LBJ plot to be hatched with Oswald-the-patsy properly placed in the right place at the right time.
Connally, Korth, the billionaire Hunts, Chief Curry, District Attorney Henry Wade, and wealthy Texans like Clint Murchison are all listed as part of the conspiracy, but documentation is weak.
If Connally were implicated as one of the plotters, it would seem ludicrous for him to be a sole voice disagreeing with the Warren Commission findings that there were only three shots.
If Connally conspired with Johnson, and the Warren Commission was simply Johnson’s personal “clean up” brigade, then Connally’s disagreement with the Commission makes little sense at all.
Connally did not waver on his insistence that the magic bullet theory was harebrained.
Oswald, says Zirbel, would have had to move of a ton of book cartons in the Depository to create his sniper’s lair, implying that others would have been needed to create the nest.
Author Jim Moore has shown that these book cartons weigh less than 50 pounds each and has himself accomplished the task with ease.
Overall, Zirbel’s case against Johnson is very interesting and not easily dismissed.
Fred Korth, the Johnson appointee indicted for conflict of interest as Secretary of the Navy, had represented Lee Harvey Oswald’s mother, Marguerite, in a divorce action.
Texas District Attorney Henry Wade and Dallas Police Chief Curry, clearly involved in botching the case against Oswald, were personally close to Johnson.
The 12-page letter, addressed to a Dallas police officer friend named Joe, reiterates Ruby’s theory that Johnson was involved in the assassination.
Conspiracy For Europeans, who suspected President Johnson had engaged in a coup d’etat from the very beginning, it is curious that the American effort to examine this idea took over 30 years before an indictment ever reached the book seilers.
There are many twists and turns of intrigue and machination here, however.
Essential Points Kennedy’s father, Joseph Kennedy, is said to have made over $100 million in the stock market crash of 1929 by selling short.
He had multiple contacts with bootleggers and illegally imported scotch whiskey during Prohibition.
When JFK became a Congressman from Massachusetts, Joseph Kennedy maintained a low profile.
His son, however, was in touch with him constantly, often many times per day even when he was President.
Joe Kennedy was a major force in priming and securing the vote for his son, and was actively involved in all his son’s campaigns.
One “deal” made behind the scenes was to get the Illinois vote for Kennedy over Nixon.
Kennedy beat Nixon with fewer than 200,000 votes nationally, in one of the closest presidential races to that date; the Illinois vote, particularly the Chicago vote, was engineered by notorious Mayor Richard Daley and gangster Sam Giancana.
John Kennedy may or may not have been aware of his father’s actions on his behalf.
There is also a possibility that Johnson may have some connections to Carlos Marcello of New Orleans.
A Texas mafia figure named Jack Halfen allegedly had contributed a portion of Carlos Marcello’s Texas slot machine profits to Tyndon Johnson’s political campaigns.
In 1988 Judith Exner, the woman who became the mistress of both President Kennedy and Chicago mobster Sam Giancana, claimed she had been used as a courier between the White House and Giancana, and that President Kennedy had gone so far as to meet Sam Giancana.
Going far beyond her testimony to the Senate Intelligence Committee, Exner said, “I lied when I said that President Kennedy was unaware of my friendships with mobsters.
For eighteen months in 1960 and 61 Exner said she repeatedly carried envelopes from the President to Giancana and Roselli.
There were, she calculated, some ten meetings between the President and the Chicago mobster, one of them at the White House.
Kennedy told his father, and within a few days Joseph Kennedy had a massive stroke from which he never fully recovered.
In 1961, John Kennedy had been accused of adultery in a California divorce suit.
Robert Kennedy, the Attorney General and J Edgar Hoover’s boss, had very difficult relations.
Bobby had difficulty even reaching his star employee and, frustrated at constantly having to deal with Hoover’s secretary, he placed a red phone directly on the Director’s desk and ordered him to answer it whenever he called.
Hoover’s fiefdom was only temporarily interrupted by Kennedy’s presence on the scene.
Conspiracy Hoover did not believe in a “Mafia” and always placed the term in quotes in any communications.
Bobby Kennedy, on the other hand, was making a concerted effort to wage a war on organized crime through the Justice Department.
Racketeering prosecutions were up by 300% over 1961 rates, and 700% over 1960 rates.
It is odd indeed, if true, that Giancana helped the President win Illinois and yet Robert Kennedy was massing a phalanx of federal agents to put Hoffa, Giancana, and Marcello behind bars.
When RFK served on the McClellan Committee investigating organized crime, prior to the election of his brother to the presidency, Giancana was placed in the position of having to take the Fifth Amendment over thirty three times.
An added factor here is that President Kennedy and Bobby were both attempting to force J Edgar Hoover to resign.
As late as March 15,1963, however, Hoover said he had no intention of submitting to their requests.
Hoover Wiretaps In the interim, through wiretap programs named ELSUR and COINTELPRO, J Edgar Hoover garnered pivotal information from Mafia figures; the information was held in his personal files and not provided to the Attorney General or the President.
Until the commission meets and puts its foot down, things will be at a standstill.
Conversation between Gilbert Beckley, functionary of Eddie McGrath, and a woman identified as Jeane.
If I could just hit Bob Kennedy.... some kind of bomb that will explode I would gladly go to the penitentiary for the rest of my life, believe me.
His report, summarized for FBI files and withheld from the Attorney General by Mr Hoover, says, in part.
The first plan, the one Hoffa’s then leaning toward, involved fire bombing Hickory Hill, Robert Kennedy’s Virginia estate, with extraordinarily lethal plastic explosives.
Robert Kennedy would be shot to death from a distance away; a single gunman would be 149.
Philadelphia FBI ELSUR wiretap records Angelo Bruno in a conversation about Carlos Marcello of New Orleans.
Bruno reveals that Marcello had again approached Sinatra through Trafficante, calling upon him to use what influence had had with President Kennedy’s father.
This recording reconfirms the close relationship shared by Marcello and Trafficante.
An FBI report on Frank Sinatra’s Mob associations is sent to President Kennedy.
President Kennedy breaks all contacts with Sinatra from that moment forward.
Sinatra is reportedly so angry that he personally destroys the helicopter-landing pad he had installed at his Palm Springs home for JFK’s occasional visits.
Some time later, Sinatra meets with Giancana and Roselli.j September, 1962.
During the summer and fall, Marcello associate Trafficante is recorded by ELSUR on four occasions, the Mafioso expressing tremendous bitterness toward the Kennedys over the disruption of his gambling operations.
Hoover receives information showing President Kennedy leaving the house of Pamela Turnure at 1m.
Hoover keeps the information, but does not share this material with the Attorney General or the President.
John Roselli, Sam Giancana and Santos Trafficante were recruited by the CIA to assassinate Castro.
They mutually had an interest in the prior gambling, drug, and prostitution operations they had enjoyed prior to Castro.
He considered Trafficante’s Sicilian family as the key element in Mafia circles in Tampa.
Trafficante told Aleman that Kennedy would not make it to the election.
However, Aleman says that he informed the FBI of the impending fate of the President prior to the assassination.
The FBI, says Aleman, did not take him seriously until it was too late.
The FBI denied the accuracy of this story, but Mark North suggests, in his book, that Hoover wanted this hit on Kennedy to take place and did nothing to stop it.
Marcello Carlos Marcello, born Calogero Minacore, was the head of the Mafia (or Cosa Nostra) in the southern United States.
His syndicate was estimated to be grossing $1. billion annually — in effect, it was the largest industry in the state of Louisiana.
He lived on a 3,000 acre estate outside New Orleans called Churchill Farms.
On the personal orders of Bobby Kennedy, he was seized, handcuffed, rushed to the airport, and flown to Guatemala — since his forged birth certificate made him a Guatemalan national.
Marcello was disoriented in Guatemala and, walking through the jungle in suit and tie, he fell and broke a rib.
He returned surreptitiously to his estate outside New Orleans — once again to fight extradition — and said to three friends, 159.
But Marcello left no doubt about his meaning as he talked on in his Sicilian-accented Southern drawl.
Referring to the Kennedys, he said “The dog will keep biting you if you only cut off its tail,” but if the dog’s head were cut off, the entire dog would die.
According to Becker, that is the way it is done in Sicily all the time.
The leading theorist of the Mob School is Chief Counsel of the HSCA Committee, Professor Blakey.
This theory also does not definitively answer who killed Kennedy, but it comes far closer than many of the others.
Christian David’s information, given in Chapter 1, provides a plausible hypothesis.
Marcello, in this theory, conscripts sharpshooters from the Corsican Mafia.
Antoine Guerini, the Corsican boss in Marseilles, accepts the contract.
One of the shooters was Lucien Marti, who was shot dead in Mexico in 1972.
Sarti used an explosive bullet; his was the third shot, and it struck the President in the head, killing him.
When he was released from prison, he quietly retired to Metairie, Louisiana where he progressively succumbed to Alzheimer’s disease.
Conspiracy Christian David was asked who could corroborate the story, and he named Michele Nicoli.
Author Steve Rivele finally found Nicoli and met with him over many months.
Nicoli finally told Rivele that Christian David’s rendition of the story was correct.
Oswald was arrested in New Orleans for passing out “Fair Play For Cuba’’ leaflets; his uncle Dutz, who had contact with two Marcello associates, posted bail.
One of those associates was present at Oswald’s bail hearing — Nofio Pecora.
Pecora not only was one of Marcello’s oldest friends but phone records show that, three weeks before the assassination.
David Ferrie, too, has been linked to the Marcello organization as well as to Oswald.
Ferrie was in the courtroom during Marcello’s acquittal in New Orleans on the very day JFK was shot, and drove to Texas later that day.
Ferrie piloted an aircraft out of Guatemala, returning Marcello to New Orleans after Robert Kennedy ad deported him.
It was through this linkage that Oswald was set up to be the patsy for the contract hit.
Even if the Sarti assassination connection is untrue, there were other underworld figures present at Dealey Plaza that day.
He was arrested at the Dal-Tex building and gave a false name; his true identity was not discovered until the late 1960s.
Brading was an associate of Meyer Lansky, the Mafia kingpin to whom Trafficante reported.
Information suggesting that Oswald’s second uncle also had underworld ties is recent and comes from Summers, “The Ghosts of November,” Vanity Fair, December, 1994.
David Feme’s presence at Carlos Marcello’s acquittal is corroborated in R Goldfarb, Perfect Villains, Imperfect Heroes, ibid.
Ill Conspiracy in Camelot In all likelihood the actual assassins of John Kennedy were contract kihers brought in from other parts of the country in typical gangland fashion.
These people may have been supplied through the cooperation of gambling network functionaries like Saia, Campisi, di Piazza, Nolan, Beckley, Ruby, Me Willie, and McGrath who were the common thread between men like Marcello, Trafficante, Giancana, and Lansky.
A third assassination scenario is proposed in a book written by the younger Sam Giancana and Giancana’s godson.
This plot involves virtually everyone, principahy Sam “Mooney” Giancana, but Johnson and NLxon as well.
In this text the assassins were Charles Harrelson and Jack Lawrence , two unnamed Cuban exile friends of Trafficante, plus Richard Cain, Chuckie Nicoletti, and “Milwaukee Phil,” Giancana’s men from Chicago.
Ruby’s role was to take out Oswald after his arrest and clean up what Tippit failed to do, namely to hit the patsy, Oswald.
The government of this country was overthrown by a handful of guys who did their job so damned well... only one American even knew it happened.
A derivative of this scenario was presented by Floffa’s personal attorney, Frank Rogano, on the television program Hard Copy , on the occasion of Carlos Marcello’s death in March 1993.
Rogano also reported at another time that shortly after the assassination Floffa took Rogano aside and said, “I told you they could do it.
In this variant of a Mob hit, Oswald continues to be the patsy, conscripted for the assignment by his uncle Dutz from New Orleans who was a father figure to Oswald, and at the same time a lieutenant of Marcello and a bookie.
Roselli arrived at 6:30 m. that morning on a private flight from Miami, flown by Robert “Tosh” Plumlee, a CIA pilot.
Mr Plumlee testified before the Senate Foreign Relations Committee on August 2, 1990 and his testimony was held as Top Secret.
Strongest Points Here are the strongest elements supporting the theory that the Mob was behind the assassination.
He is not the assassin at all — thus his presence in the lunchroom before and after the hit.
The Mob does not typically use highly visible, vocal players for its contract hits; and Oswald had recently appeared on New Orleans TV, debating the cause for Cuba.
He rushed home, took a cab past his own house, went inside, grabbed his revolver, and ended up shooting Officer Tippit.
Rather than acting like an assassin on the run, it seems he realized that he had been set up and that the police would be looking for a “commie kook” in a matter of minutes, thus the panicky behavior.
President Kennedy’s association with Giancana, plus his father Joseph’s past relationships, define a scenario in which the Kennedy brothers may not have been fully cognizant of the paradoxes in their own behavior.
John was sleeping with Giancana’s girlfriend, while Bobby was trying to put “Mooney” in jail.
Joe Kennedy had used Giancana to secure the Illinois vote, but Bobby arrested him at O’Hare International Airport.
Roselli helped Kennedy cover up an embarrassing divorce suit and had worked with the CIA plots against Castro, but Bobby similarly persecuted him.
The extremely private and elusive Trafficante had been involved in CIA sponsored plots to murder Castro and was rewarded — in his eyes — by nothing short of harassment and persecution by the relentless tactics of Bobby Kennedy.
He did not like the Kennedys, did not like the racial overtones of the liberal administration, and certainly did not like being pressured into retirement in his generation-long job.
There is good evidence that the Mafia also had compromising information on Mr Hoover, which he did not want exposed, so Bobby’s campaign against the Mob threatened Hoover at an even more personal level.
Richard Cain, Action Jackson, Chuckie Nicoletti, Milwaukee Phil, and Dave Yaras.
The organized crime program just stopped, and Hoover took control back.
The best “patsy” is a dead patsy, and in this scenario Oswald had to be silenced.
Ruby’s background was largely whitewashed by the Warren Commission; indeed, the Warren Commission concluded that it “could not establish a significant link between Jack Ruby and organized crime.” 17j Ruby operated a striptease club; his association with organized crime is not at all difficult to establish.
Following is a partial list of Ruby’s more significant contacts, which have come to light in research since the 1964 Warren Commission report.
Arthur Schlesinger reported that when Bobby Kennedy learned that the CIA had used Giancana, Bobby was visibly upset.
Cooke was later murdered and Ruby’s picture appeared in the Chicago Tribune in connection with the unsolved killing.
Jones and Alex Gruber held meetings with Ruby, both associated with organized crime and ex-convicts.
Jones was guilty of attempted bribery, and convicted in Kansas of murdering a state’s witness.
Gruber had a police record, was born in Chicago, met with Ruby a few days before the Kennedy assassination, and had a longdistance conversation with Ruby minutes after Kennedy was pronounced dead at Parkland Hospital.
Patrick had a long record, was a convicted bank robber, and had been arrested many times on suspicion of being a triggerman in numerous gangland killings.
Before Baker called David Yaras in Miami, Baker called Victor Emanuel Pereira, on Oct 9,1963.
One was Earl Shieb, who had of a national chain of auto paint shops and was father of Philip Earl Shieb, a machine-gun toting leader in the extreme-rightwing secret military movement, the Minutemen.
The other partner was Eugene Hale Brading, who hooked up with Pereira in El Paso, Texas in 1950.
On the day of the assassination, Milteer was allegedly photographed in Dealey Plaza at the assassination site.
Frank Rogano’s revelations in 1992 Nick Pileggi, a Mafia historian, brought Frank Rogano's revelations to a focus for a PBS Frontline documentary.
Rogano was Jimmy Hoffa’s attorney and later became closely involved with Santos Trafficante and Carlos Marcello.
Rogano confirms that Hoffa, Trafficante, and Marcello all had independent motives for wishing Kennedy removed.
Floffa had been under two indictments at the time of the assassination.
Trafficante, Marcello, and Rogano met at the Royal Orleans Hotel in New Orleans and Rogano told both men that Hoffa wanted Kennedy hit.
Rogano's impressions were that Trafficante and Marcello acted as if the matter were already in progress.
Ed Becker, a Las Vegas promoter, also recalls being with Carlos Marcello in New Orleans and discussing the Kennedys.
On the day Kennedy was assassinated, Rogano came to his office in New Orleans and all his secretaries were crying.
That evening Rogano met Trafficante at the International Inn in New Orleans accompanied by his wife Nancy.
Trafficante wanted to toast the assassination, was very happy, and Mrs.
Rogano, feeling he had something to do with it, couldn't take the party atmosphere and left.
Four days before Trafficante died in 1987, Rogano went to speak to him.
To Rogano that meant Carlos Marcello should have killed Bobby instead of having killed Jack.
Professor Blakey of Notre Dame believes Rogano's story to be the single most credible explanation of the assassination.
He says that three independent witnesses corroborate much of what Rogano says, FBI informant, Jose Aleman, who killed himself in 1983, Johnny Roselli, a mob figure murdered in 1976, and Ed Becker, the Las Vegas promoter, still living.
The widow of one of Trafficante's associates, however, says he was in his north Miami Beach home then.
Jack Hodus, a pharmacist, also places the mobster in Miami on that day.
Hospital records show Trafficante treated for dialysis the prior day; thus Rogano's alleged meeting with Trafficante is questionable.
Rogano replies in turn that he has three other witnesses to this event which he will produce if necessary or if he is sued for libel.
Also Summers, ""The Ghosts of November, Vanity Fair, December, 1994, 106.
Despite Bobby Kennedy's heroic efforts to put Hoffa away, he was released from prison on December 23,1971.
Conspiracy • Ruby was a longtime friend of Lewis McWillie, a gangster whom he visited in Havana where McWillie worked as a pit boss in the Tropicana gambling casino.
Ruby’s Toll Calls in 1963 Toll calls Gerald Posner in Case Closed, like the Warren Commission, attempts to make the case that Ruby was not significantly involved with the underworld.
Obviously Ruby’s behavior changed from September through to the assassination.
Not only did his use of the telephone dramatically increase, but his contacts with mobsters accelerated significantly.
Just eleven days before the assassination, Ruby signed a power of attorney over to his lawyer.
In fact, Ruby actually had two chances to kill Oswald, perhaps even three — the first being a “silent” press conference where Oswald was paraded in front of reporters but not permitted to answer questions.
The most plausible explanation for the murder of Oswald by Jack Ruby was the Ruby had stalked him on behalf of organized crime, trying to reach him on at least three occasions in the forty-eight hours before he silenced him forever.
After finishing, he walked across the street and down the ramp and ran into Oswald as he was being transferred.
If he had stayed in line at Western Union another 30 seconds, he would have missed Oswald altogether.
And, if Oswald had not asked to change shirts just before leaving his cell, he would have been transferred while Ruby was still at Western Union.
He also told his tax lawyer on November 19,1963 that he expected to receive money soon to cover his debts.
Indeed, Oswald applied for unemployment compensation twice in 1963 after losing two separate jobs.
When he needed bail after his New Orleans arrest, the $10 fine was paid by his uncle Dutz.
Oswald’s complicity in this affair does not seem to have earned him any pay-off.
In some of the Mob-based theories, Oswald is reputed to have known Ruby.
In fact, one researcher suggesting that when Oswald was walking toward the Texas theater, he was really walking to Jack Ruby’s house less than a mile away.
He didn’t drink, he didn’t smoke, he didn’t go to nightclubs and besides he was sitting home with me all the iso time.
The various bestsellers promoting Mob-based assassination scenarios reveal confessions of various parties, and there is considerable inconsistency when these books are taken together.
Clearly, this theory is a leading alternative to the explanation offered by the Warren Commission.
Like the Johnson model, the Mob attack on Kennedy shows motive, method, and opportunity.
When Sam Giancana was found shot to death with five bullet holes around his mouth, Santos Trafficante said, “Now there are only two people who know who shot Kennedy.
The CIA Thory Time magazine and CNN conducted a survey . . . in January 1992.
The poll revealed that 73 percent of the American people believed there had been a conspiracy to assassinate the president, and that 50 percent of the American people believed that the CIA was responsible for the murder.
A certain person is said to have known or associated with another, who, in turn, worked for Mister X, a former employee of Mister Y, and so on, ad infinitum.
The theory reads like a Russian epic novel, and guilt by association is everywhere.
Frank Sturgis, for example, worked at the Tropicana Hotel in Havana and thus has a Cuban connection.
Sturgis’ real name was Fiorini, and his contacts with the Tropicana and Jack Ruby’s friend, Lewis McWillie (who also worked at the Tropicana), give both gentlemen a connection to Santos Trafficante and the Mob.
Sturgis, however, worked for E Howard Hunt, and so had a CIA connection.
On August 10,1963, Oswald was arrested for passing out FPCC leaflets in New Orleans.
Another figure was Nofio Pecora, who joined Uncle Dutz at the hearing where Oswald’s fine was paid on August 12,1963.
Sam Termine, another underworld figure, was friendly with Oswald’s mother, Marguerite.
Termine had served as a bodyguard and chauffeur for Carlos Marcello and was a close friend of Dutz.
Dutz was married to Marguerite’s sister, Lilian, and was involved in illegal bookmaking activities.
He was an associate of Sam Saia; the IRS identified Saia as one of the most powerful gambling figures in Louisiana; he was very close to Carlos Marcello.
Thus Oswald may connect to Marcello through his uncle and his uncle’s associations with Emile Bruno, Nofio Pecora, Sam Termine, and Sam Saia.
Conspiracy Thus, in the end we can link Sturgis to Trafficante, Nixon, the Mob, the CIA, even to Jack Ruby.
An individual falls under suspicion because he knew someone who knew someone else who was implicated in some kind of wrong doing by yet another third party.
This theory is so complex and interwoven that it is very difficult to keep the facts and personalities in any kind of perspective.
Some of Tolstoy’s novels help the reader along by listing all the characters up front, and it might help if we did the same.
There are generally considered to be 39 major players involved in this scenario.
Banister, Guy, former Chicago FBI and Military Intelligence agent, heavily involved with anti-Castro Cuban exiles; accused by Jim Martin of plotting the death of the President.
Banister was also a member of the John Birch Society and of the paramilitary Minutemen; he abhorred the United Nations and was a rabid anti-communist.
Bissell was a high-ranking CIA officer fired by JFK after the Bay of Pigs.
Barnes was involved in covert operations against Castro and was connected to E Howard Hunt.
Newman’s Oswald and the CIA does not link Tracy Barnes in any significant way other than to corroborate that he worked for the CIA under Bissell.
On the one hand it is an extraordinarily dramatic fictionalized work, and one would be hard pressed to believe it was true.
On the other hand, there are very “testable” assumptions one of which, for example, is the mention of Tracy Barnes as Robert Morrow’s CIA case officer.
Oswald gave Bringuier his Marine Corps manual and attempted to convince him that he was trained in guerrilla warfare and willing to train Cubans to fight against Castro.
Veciana was involved in Alpha 66, the largest active anti-Castro operation the CIA has identified.
Several CIA officials, including John McCone, did admit to knowing that Bishop was a CIA senior agent.
Maurice Bishop played David Phillips, thought by roles in the assassination attempts on Castro, and in some t0 be Maurice Bishop efforts to remove Salvador Allende in Chile.
When questioned by HSCA, David Phillips said he had never heard the name of Maurice Bishop.
A major Cuban exile leader with Pedro Diaz Lanz, and a member of the secret Operation 40 unit, an assassination squad originally formed by the CIA in 1960.
Cabell, General Charles involved in anti-Castro CIA operations, the Bay of Pigs, and fired by Kennedy after the fiasco.
It is alleged that General Cabell was rabidly right wing, and that his brother Earl, mayor of Dallas, was instrumental in arranging the motorcade route.
A somewhat fictionalized text on the assassination, First Hand Knowledge, also accuses General Cabell of criminal involvement in continuing to counterfeit Cuban currency to destabilize the Cuban economy in direct violation of Kennedy’s order specifically discontinuing all counterfeiting operations.
Cain, Richard, operative of the CIA and simultaneously connected to the Mafia; implicated by Giancana as one of the shooters in Dallas.
She was also linked to Alexander Rorke, Gerry Patrick Flemming, and Frank Sturgis.
Newman’s Oswald and the CIA suggests Cobb might have been a double agent, but precisely what could have been her role in the assassination drama — beyond innuendo and multiple associations — is unclear.
Fie befriended the Oswalds, joined with the Dallas Russian community in helping them, but reported to J Walton Moore of the CIA on his contacts — a fact that has only been disclosed in recent years. deMohrenschildt shot himself to death as soon as he learned the F1SCA wanted to interview him.
DeMohrenschildt had other CIA contacts, however, which have only come to light in the last ten years.
Nicholas M Anikeef acknowledged that he had a close and continuous friendship.
Still, in 1992 Anikeef “stubbornly refused to disclose what part of the Agency he had worked for, even when told it is publicly known.
DeMohrenschildt also had a business contact in Fiaiti named Charles Thomas.
Generally, the government’s position is that George deMohrenschildt was a Russian emigre who innocently helped the Oswalds in Dallas.
These latter two names only became known since the release of JFK records in 1992.
Cuban exile implicated by Marita Lorenz as on the JFK assassination team.
Dulles played a role in overthrowing the left-leaning Arbenz government in Guatemala.
Two weeks before the assassination, Oswald wrote a letter to a Mr Flunt and had checked out a library book describing the Arbenz operation in Guatemala.
Ferrie, David anti-Castro right-wing soldier of fortune, CIA contract agent, and affiliated with the Marcello crime syndicate.
Accused by Jim Martin, Banister associate, of plotting to kill the President.
Ferrie was making telephone calls from an ice rink in Galveston on the day of the assassination, and may have been a co-conspirator.
The only evidence supporting such contact was that Oswald was in the Civil Air Patrol and Ferrie had once served as an instructor.
Gerald Posner, in Case Closed, argues that Ferrie and Oswald’s connection is sheer fantasy.
Subsequent to Posner’s work, however, an author produced a photo showing Oswald and Ferrie together in the Civil Air Patrol in 1956.
Another source believes David Ferrie was the most important single individual to know the truth of the assassination conspiracy.
Ferrie, a homosexual pedophile, lived with Raymond Broshears from August 1965-1966.
Broshears, whose testimony has been impugned, said Ferrie admitted to him his participation in the conspiracy, said that four shooters were involved (from the grassy knoll, from behind, and from a sewer opening) and that Oswald did not kill the President.
Hall knew Trafficante in prison in Cuba and left Cuba with him when released by Castro.
He also worked in the Capri Hotel, in Havana, controlled by Trafficante.
Harrelson was on probation for armed robbery and embarked on a new career in the execution-for-hire business.
In 1980, Harrelson had taken an overdose of cocaine and confessed to killing Kennedy and a Judge Woods.
Conspiracy was successfully prosecuted for the contract killing of Woods and is currently in prison.
He is alleged to be a CIA contract agent who worked with Charles Rogers as one of the two grassy knoll gunmen.
A major suspect in planning the assassination of Kennedy, according to author Anthony Summers.
Harvey was a member of the CIA’s Executive Action Program, and closely in touch with people like Lucien Sarti.
He was head of Task Force W, which was involved with antiCastro operations, and with mobsters Roselli and Trafficante.
He was transferred to Italy because, during the height of the 1962 missile crisis, he sent commando teams into Cuba without the President’s knowledge.
As late as June 1963, Harvey was still meeting with Roselli in the United States and had even visited anti-Castro camps in Florida.
Former Director of CIA; is alleged to have attempted to cover up Hunt’s presence in Dallas plus the “Company’s” relationship to Guy Banister, David Ferrie, and Clay Shaw; highly uncooperative with the Warren Commission in the eyes of many conspiracy writers.
Associated with James Jesus Angleton, Director of Counterintelligence, and known to have incarcerated KGB defector Yuri Nosenko.
Angleton destroyed important assassination -related documents and a tape of Oswald held in the personal files of CIA Mexico station chief Winston Scott.
Angleton removed Scott’s personal effects and no such tapes were ever found.
Angleton also destroyed the diaries of Mary Meyer, a JFK mistress and former wife of CIA official Cord Meyer, Jr.
Helms was more than likely aware of at least some of Angleton’s activities as well as the alleged debriefing of Oswald by CIA Domestic Contacts Division agent Andy Anderson, a fact which the CIA denied and which Helms most recently denied in a 1993 interview on Frontline.
Holt has been an informant and was said to be one of the three tramps arrested in Dealey Plaza.
Implicated by Marita Forenz as one of the members of the JFK assassination team.
Hemming was also, through Interpen, an associate of Frank Sturgis and Loran Hall.
Elsewhere Anthony Summers mentions a “Gerry Hemming,” a man who knew Oswald and had worked with Naval Intelligence; whether it is the same person as Gerry Patrick Hemming is unknown.
Gerald Posner, mention a Gerry Patrick Hemming connected to the same military base in Japan to which Oswald was assigned.
Hunt, Howard CIA station chief in Mexico City in August-September, 1963, when Oswald visited the area.
Hunt is alleged to have been the “old man tramp” arrested at Dealey Plaza on the day of the assassination.
Hunt holds these allegations are defamatory, has sued, and says that he was in Washington, DC at the time of the assassination.
The litigation resulted in Weberman’s ability to depose Hunt and ask some telling questions.
Maheu, Robert, former employee of Howard Hughes, later operated a detective agency, allegedly had close ties to CIA and Charles Cabell; implicated by Giancana as part of the Kennedy assassination conspiracy.
French mercenary and assassination expert alleged to have been on the CIA hit squad with Jean Soutre; that is highly speculative accounting by an unreliable conspiracy author.
He was suspected by FBI agent James Hosty of being connected to right-wing interests and the Sylvia Odio incident.
Roberts, Delphine, the secretary of Guy Banister, interviewed by author Anthony Summers.
Roberts remained taciturn during the Warren Commission inquiries, but indicated to Summers that Oswald frequently came to Banister’s office on Camp Street and that Oswald and David Ferrie had spent considerable time together.
Alleged to have been the grassy knoll gunman and a CIA contract operative operating under various aliases; also alleged to be one of the three tramps arrested near Dealey Plaza.
Rogers lived with his parents in Houston and disappeared for many weeks after the assassination.
His parents received strange calls leading them to believe their son had had a hand in the assassination.
Rogers allegedly killed both his parents and tried to dispose of their bodies.
It is by no means certain that Delphine Roberts has told the whole truth or revealed all she knows.
Shaw, allegedly acting under the alias Clay Bertrand, tried to find Oswald an attorney.
Shaw was found innocent of conspiracy to kill JFK, but in the late 1970s CIA Director Flelms allegedly admitted Shaw had CIA connections.
Gerald Posner argues that Clay Shaw was entirely innocent of any association with the assassination and that Garrison destroyed him.
Jim Garrison tried to get him extradited to New Orleans, but Governor Connally of Texas refused Garrison’s request and Smith remained under the protection of Texas authorities.
Later Sturgis was a Watergate conspirator along with Howard Hunt; this team was originally put together under Nixon.
Sturgis is alleged by Weberman and Canfield to be one of the “tramps” arrested in Dealey Plaza.
Rather stunning photographic similarities are provided between Sturgis and one of the tramps.
He was a CIA anti-Castro Cuban exile; he leaked two stories, one to Jack Anderson, the other to author James Buchanan.
In each he was an “unnamed source” who said Oswald was a pro-Castro agent.
Sturgis denied his involvement as the unnamed source, but both Jack Anderson and James Buchanan independently said he was.
Veciano was shot in the head but survived to testify at the HSCA; still fears for his life.
One approach points to anti-Castro Cubans, another to the power brokers of the Vietnam War.
Conspiracy the Weberman-Canfield scenario, the intrigues proposed by Mark Lane, and another scheme presented by Craig and Rogers.
Garrison was the New Orleans prosecutor who indicted individuals for the assassination.
Craig and Rogers base their work on three informants, two of whom remain secret.
The works of Summers, Groden, Livingston, Posner, Newman, and Mailer are also included.
Top-secret U2 flights originated there, and Oswald had a security clearance.
It could fly at an unprecedented 90,000 feet on secret photographic missions.
During the Eisenhower years, U2 flights regularly invaded Soviet airspace, flying well into the heartland of the country.
Francis Gary Powers was the first pilot shot down — just before the failed summit meeting between Eisenhower and Khrushchev in 1960.
At the United States Embassy in Moscow, he renounced his United States citizenship.
The Soviets sent him to Minsk, Byelorussia, where he worked in a radio plant and married a pharmacy student named Marina Prusakova.
With his apparently desultory personality, however, he changed his mind about the USSR rather quickly and sought to return to the U.S., wife in tow.
To the surprise of many, he experienced almost no difficulty coming back, despite his security clearance, his defection, and the renunciation of his citizenship.
Anthony Summers shows Oswald was granted access to the two top floors of the American Embassy in Moscow, where only individuals with clearances were ever permitted.
As noted earlier, I know from personal experience that access to the top two floors of the embassy was tightly restricted.
Not all CIA'Conspiracy proponents accept the idea that Oswald’s leftist FairPlay-for-Cuba image was a CIA cover.
It was, however, the position of his mother Marguerite, and of Mark Lane in his books Rush to Judgment and Plausible Denial.
In Minsk, Marina , . . . noticed that he had photographs and a ground plan of the radio plant.
To make matters worse, he would not let her near the papers and refused even to say what he was doing.
George deMohrenschildt befriended the Oswalds upon their arrival in Dallas.
Fie was friendly with the Shah of Iran and a personal friend of “Papa Doc” Duvalier, the corrupt leader of Fiaiti.
In the early years after the assassination, the role played by Baron George deMohrenschildt appeared to be that of a casual friend, someone who enjoyed political palaver with Lee, and a representative of the Dallas Russian community which took an interest in helping them.
This image changed at the time of deMohrenschildt’s suicide in the mid-1970s.
Shortly before killing himself, he admitted to writer Edward Epstein that he was asked by CIA’s Walton Moore to contact and befriend the Oswalds.
Some help from the United States Embassy in Haiti would be greatly appreciated by him, he suggested to Moore.
Some have asserted this text is not credible and question Johnson-McMillan’s objectivity.
On the morning of the interview with Epstein, an investigator for the House Select Committee on Assassination also wanted to talk and left his card at the residence.
He had written a book on Oswald, entitled I’m a Patsy, which his wife turned over to the HSCA shortly thereafter.
Conspiracy never have contacted Oswald in a million years if Moore had not sanctioned it,” he explained to me.
In fact, they revealed that Moore had interviewed him numerous times over a course of years and prepared reports based on this information.
Moore himself testified that he had ""periodic” contact with deMohrenschildt for “debriefing purposes” and, although maintaining he could not recall any discussion about Oswald, acknowledged that these contacts may have extended to 1962.
It had a connection to him through deMohrenschildt, who kept J Walton Moore closely apprized of events almost immediately after Oswald’s return to the U.S.; deMohrenschildt seems to have known that Oswald made an attempt on the life of General Walker.
Paine was alleged to have had a CIA connection through the Agency for International Development, a suspected CIA front organization where her father was employed.
Oswald went to New Orleans, the city of his birth, and stayed with his cousin Dorothy Murret.
When Oswald passed out Fair Play for Cuba leaflets, he used the Camp Street address.
Gerald Posner believes the Paines’ involvement with Oswald was innocent and unfortunate; others suggest that since their background is still classified, there must be something of interest there.
Banister and Oswald present quite an unusual juxtaposition of leftand right-wing politics to be occupying neighboring offices.
Martin, in turn, called the FBI and reported that David Ferrie, an associate of Banister, was involved in the Kennedy assassination.
The only admission Banister ever made to the FBI was that Arcacha Smith of the Cuban Revolutionary Council had an office there.
Recently released documents show that the CIA funded the CRC, but that Kennedy stopped CIA support for it as of May, 1963.
Jim Garrison claimed the shadowy Clay Bertrand was really Clay Shaw, a well-connected businessman affiliated with the International Trade Mart in New Orleans.
Garrison indicted Shaw as part of a conspiracy to assassinate the President, but was unable to prove Shaw was Bertrand.
Over a decade later, Victor Marchetti, a former assistant to the Director of the CIA confirmed that Clay Shaw was indeed Clay Bertrand.
Banister, Ferrie and Shaw became Jim Garrison’s leading conspirators in the assassination.
The facts that Ferrie died mysteriously four days after Garrison indicted him, that Banister died within ten days of the conclusion of the Warren Commission hearings, and that CIA Director Helms and assistant Director Marchetti, many years after Shaw was acquitted, admitted Shaw was a CIA agent prevent us from dismissing Garrison’s theory out of hand.
Gerald Posner, author of Case Closed, however, believes Oswald chose this address only to rile Banister and Arcacha Smith.
He told Bringuier that he wanted to be an anti-Castro freedom fighter and gave Bringuier a copy of his Marine Corps training manual.
Later, Bringuier saw Oswald passing out leaflets for the Fair Play for Cuba Committee.
Oswald’s arrest provides us with more information about the nature of activities on behalf of Castro.
Oswald sent clippings about the incident to the chairman of the Fair Play for Cuba Committee to enhance his credibility with them.
Bringuier, however, was linked to David Ferric, and David Ferric to Banister and Arcacha Smith, according to a 1961 New Orleans police report.
As mentioned in a prior chapter, Ferrie’s friend and employer Eladio del Valle was found shot dead on the same day Ferrie died.
Ferrie appears to have lent his library card to Oswald and came into money both before and after the assassmation.
Note that Ferrie had an office in New Orleans and that Eugene Hale Brading had an office next door.
A prior defector from the U.S., a man under scrutiny by the FBI, and undesirably discharged from the Marines had no difficulty getting a passport within 24 hours.
This, in turn, fuels those conspiracists who think Oswald had some covert intelligence function all along.
Floward blunt, the CIA agent (and future Watergate burglar) is alleged to have been the station chief in Mexico City at the time of Oswald’s trip.
This period is totally omitted from his autobiography and all that is known about it is that he was the CIA Chief of Station in Mexico City during August and September, 1963.
The Cuban officials told Oswald he could get a visa to Cuba if he first got a visa from the Russians.
He then called upon the Soviet Embassy and was told there would be a delay of four months.
His strident behavior, however, made an impression on the staffs of both embassies.
It twists and turns at every corner, laced with innuendo, impostors, suspicions, and intrigue.
Oswald attempted to pose an anti-Castro soldier of fortune in his contact with Bringuier.
Bringuier knew and associated with David Ferrie, and Oswald knew Ferrie.
The CIA was apprized of Oswald’s comings and goings all along by George deMohrenschildt, a man who posed as a friend of the Oswalds’ in Dallas, yet met regularly with a CIA contact named Walton Moore — facts never revealed to the Warren Commission nor by the Warren Commission.
Conspiracy The Odio Incident and Loran Hall As the Warren Commission was winding down, a credible witness, Sylvia Odio, reluctantly came forward to disturb the momentum the investigation was gathering.
She declared that Oswald was the lone assassin and had leftist, prO'Castro sentiments.
Many have considered the Odio incident as the best proof of a conspiracy to kill the President.
In late September, 1963, Silvia and Annie Odio were living in the Crestwood Apartments in Dallas.
They were wealthy daughters of a prominent Cuban family that had been involved in revolutionary politics.
Their father supported Castro, but was a democrat, and when Castro’s revolution devolved into Marxism-Leninism, Mr Odio worked against the regime.
Silvia, 26, and Annie 17, were part of the growing exile community in Dallas.
This group was against Castro and Communism, but was made up of nonviolent social democrats.
Two Latinos and an American stood at the door as Annie opened it a crack.
They said they were supporters of JURE; they also knew her father’s underground name in Cuba, so Annie let them in.
They wanted the young women to translate into English a number of fundraising letters addressed to American businessman.
Her father had warned her to take the utmost care in the Byzantine intrigues of exile politics, and she was leery of dealing with strangers.
The men left, in their red car, supposedly about to embark on another long journey.
He brought up the request for help again, but he also seemed keen to discuss something else.
Odio, thinking how quiet the American had been, said she had not really formed an opinion.
Then Leopoldo made a number of remarks which — even at the time — Odio found chilling.
Both sisters realized that the American who visited their apartment in September was Oswald.
They were terribly frightened and decided not to say anything to anyone about it.
I do not have any friend who might be here, through Dallas, so reject this friendship until you give me his name.
The Warren Commission had to struggle with the veracity of the Odio testimony just at the time it was concluding its business.
Suddenly, J Edgar Hoover reported that his agents had found Loran Hall, “a participant in numerous anti-Castro activities,” who said he was the man who had visited Odio along with two of his colleagues.
The Warren Commission report went to the printers with Loran Hall’s story impugning Odio as part of the final copy.
When FBI agents traced down the two other men Hall named as his companions, both said Odio’s story was untrue.
Finally, and after the Warren Commission Report was already released, Loran Hall admitted he had lied.j3 Years later when the House Assassinations Committee tried to investigate this matter, Hall was highly reluctant to give evidence to the Assassinations Committee.
When he eventually did so, on a basis that assured him against prosecution arising from his testimony, Hall maintained he had never claimed to have visited Silvia Odio.
He was a leading member of “Interpen,” a tough anti-Castro group made up of exiles and CIA contractors.
He was a member of the International Anti-Communist Brigade that trained Cuban exiles at Lake Ponchatrain outside of New Orleans — a camp where Oswald is supposed to have traveled with David Ferrie.
Hall had a connection with Santos Trafficante, was detained in Cuba with him, and released at the same time.
Finally, Hall had been arrested towing a trailerload of arms to the Interpen training camp at No Name Key in Florida, part of the anti-Castro guerrilla activity Kennedy was trying to stop.
She was shown photos of Loran Hall and his two associates and said these were definitely not the men who visited her.
Odio also told her priest about the incident, and through painstaking research, Weberman and Canfield tracked him down in a Florida nursing home, corroborating her testimony yet again.
Silvia Odio, the daughter of a Cuban millionaire, attended Catholic school in Philadelphia.
The FBI spent much time looking into her past mental health record, particularly her proclivity to fainting spells.
The agent who interviewed Odio and helped to put the Hall fabrication in place was James Hosty, a man whose name has appeared earlier regarding destruction of evidence, erasures from Oswald’s notebook, etc.
She has written no bestsellers, never sought publicity or monetary gain, and her testimony has been consistent and corroborated.
Loran Hall’s effort to discredit the Odio sisters adds to the intrigue.
He testified under immunity from prosecution before the HSCA that “rightwing radicals in league with CIA operatives offered him money to take part in the Kennedy assassination.
Posner takes the position that Odio is not credible and that Oswald had no connection with Ferrie, Bannister and Shaw.
A lengthy review of this controversial text as well as these allegations and counter-allegations is provided in Ch. as a sidebar.
One answer to the Loran Hall fabrication, that is still consistent with a CIA plot, is that after the assassination the “cabal"" decided it was better to peg Oswald as a lone assassin rather than as a member of a communist conspiracy.
The Loran Hall testimony was offered to help establish the “lone nut” approach.
Interestingly, Allen Dulles, the former CIA director who sat on the Warren Commission, passed out a book to each member.
The book was a historical accounting of prior presidential assassins, and the thesis was that each assassin was a lone nut acting on his own passions.
Dulles’ distribution of this book show that the CIA was already invested in the “lone nut” hypothesis.
One of the cases the book described was an attempt on the life of President Roosevelt in Florida.
The assassin missed Roosevelt, and hit the former mayor of Chicago instead.
Giancana’s book explains that the man who was the “lone nut"" in that assassination attempt was in fact in debt to the Mob — he never intended to kill Roosevelt at all, only the other passenger, whom he indeed succeeded in killing.
And as far as I'm concerned we’re both going to stay alive because I ain’t gonna say shit.j9 Thus the tale of a cabal of anti-Castro Cubans and right-wing CIA contract agents — and perhaps Mob affiliates — is not easy to dismiss.
Anti-Castro Cubans felt betrayed by Kennedy during the Bay of Pigs invasion.
The Cuban missile crisis was resolved — in their minds — by Kennedy again betraying their cause by making a secret deal with Khrushchev never to invade Cuba.
Since the CIA bankrolled most of these organizations, this may have become the seedbed for the assassination.
Mexico City There is a problem with Oswald’s trip to Mexico in September, 1963.
Possibly Silvia Odio was mistaken with respect to the dates Oswald visited her, but considerable evidence shows Oswald, or someone posing as Oswald, visited the Cuban and Russian consulates.
The nature of the interview, who taped it, and to whom the interview was given, are not clear.
The source of this information is Summers, “The Ghosts of November,” I bid.
A CIA photo said to be of Oswald leaving the Soviet embassy is not Oswald’s image.
A tape recording of Oswald talking on the phone with a Soviet diplomat is not Oswald’s voice.
A Cuban diplomat who had three angry confrontations with Oswald said repeatedly and in detail that the Oswald of Mexico City was not the Oswald of Dallas.
The one eyewitness who said she saw Oswald in the Cuban consulate could not describe him correctly to blouse investigators.
As the theory goes so far, the CIA or right-wing Cuban exile forces were systematically setting up Oswald as a leftist, pro-Cuban, pro-Soviet, assassin, someone who had applied for a passport to leave the country, visited Silvia Odio to announce assassination plans, applied for visas to Cuba and Russia in Mexico City, and whose obstreperousness would be remembered by all.
We don’t know if Oswald went to Mexico or was represented by an imposter.
Originally, Marina did not disclose to the FBI that her husband had been to Mexico — for whatever reasons — but later she said he did make the trip.
Tier most prized possession from her husband was a miniature straw donkey, which she says he brought her from Mexico.
Anti-Castro Cubans or not, Sylvia Odio or not, Mexico City or not, we have barely scratched the surface of this mercurial conspiracy theory.
One of his strongest suits, however, may be the evidence he brings supporting Oswald’s trip to Mexico.
Posner cites Soviet personnel in Mexico City, Nechiporenko, Vatzkov, and Kostikov, Cuban employees Sylvia Duran and Alfredo Diaz, and another witness, Oscar Contreras, all testifying that the man they met in Mexico City was the man they saw arrested for the assassination.
Posner’s case is convincing, and his evidentiary rationale is impressive.
Still another source of evidence on the issue of whether Oswald went to Mexico City is FBI agent James Hosty.
Conspiracy The Vietnam Connection Another version of a CIA-based plan to assassinate Kennedy focuses on the significance of Vietnam in the overall motive.
In Oliver Stone’s film JFK, a mysterious figure provides Jim Garrison with inside details of the machinations of the plotters.
Fletcher Prouty, who served as Chief of Special Operations for the Joint Chiefs of Staff during the Kennedy years.
The CIA, Vietnam and the Plot to AssassT natejohn F Kennedy, implicates Richard Nixon but takes a very different approach from Weberman and Canfield: Flad Kennedy lived, asserts Prouty, the United States would not have become embroiled in Vietnam.
Kennedy’s intentions were to remove 1,000 troops from Vietnam initially and to begin a full-scale withdrawal prior to the 1964 elections, to be completed by the end of 1965.
P Cabell, who was fired by Kennedy after the Bay of Pigs fiasco, was a zealous CIA right-winger.
Cabell had interests in the Textron Corporation’s acquisition of Bell Helicopter Company that profited greatly from the “Huey” and other choppers used in Vietnam.
General Dynamics in Fort Worth, Texas was the leading contender, and Lyndon Johnson’s appointee, Fred Korth, was indicted for conflict of interest trying to secure the contract for them.
To the chagrin of many Texans, General Dynamics was not given the TFX contract.
Another drama opens with the assassination of Ngo Dinh Diem, the first president of South Vietnam, on November 1,1963.
Kennedy himself favored the removal of Diem, but not by murder; he was very disturbed by the news.
Its role in the Bay of Pigs and in the Diem assassination, plus his inability to get control over it, bothered him.
He authorized a Cuban Study Group, an outgrowth of the Bay of Pigs; the highly secret study was chaired by Robert Kennedy.
His directives were quietly placed in the bureaucratic files and forgotten.
There have been few times in the history of this nation when the limits of the power of the President have been so nakedly exposed.
I was the briefing officer for the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, to whom NS AM #55 was addressed.
I know exactly what he was told about that series of documents, and I know what he said about them during that meeting.
During that meeting, 1 was told to have them put in the chairman’s file, where they remained.
On the day of President Kennedy’s assassination his entire Cabinet departed for Hawaii on an unprecedented trip to Japan.
Prouty does not provide a very perspicuous theory but an array of facts, spiced with ample amounts of conjecture and innuendo.
It is not easy to deduce whether it was Nixon or Johnson behind the ‘high cabal’ or how the conspiracy enunciated itself in the person of any specific assassins.
In reviewing the CIA-based theories of the assassination, the question of who actually shot the President generates four very different responses — all quite hypothetical and convoluted.
One approach, suggested by Summers and others, seems to go as follows: A disturbed CIA agent known as William Harvey had been a “can-do’’ operative involved with anti-Castro activities.
Even during the global tensions around the Cuban missile crisis, Harvey sent a team of commandos into Cuba without Kennedy’s knowledge or consent.
He cozied up to organized crime in his desire to see Castro assassinated — most notably John Roselli and, through him, Marcello, Giancana, and Trafficante, He may have been part of the so-called Corsican contract hit on the President carried out by Lucien Sarti 245.
Harvey may have been the “rogue CIA officer” David Phillips referred to when he died.
How Harvey is supposed to have set up Oswald as the patsy stretches the imagination.
In this model, Oswald thinks he is part of a covert operation to “infiltrate” Cuba once his pro-Castro credentials have been developed.
He starts a fictional Fair Play for Cuba chapter , gets arrested passing out pro-Cuban leaflets, has a made-for-TV fist fight with an anti-Castro exile , appears on television debating the socialist cause for Cuba ... all as part of an effort to establish Oswald’s prO'Cuban facade.
This is one explanation of how the crime was carried forward under the rightwing banner of anti-Castro Cuban exiles and disaffected, rogue CIA officers.
Oswald served as the dupe, the patsy, who sat out the assassination in the second floor lunchroom of the Depository building, unaware that sharpshooters had killed the President and left his rifle on the sixth floor to incriminate him.
Nixon was in Dallas on the day of the assassination and lied about it, before finally admitting it.
Watergate involved the arrests of Howard Hunt, Frank Sturgis, and others.
This was not the first time Nixon used this team, and his involvement in covert activities can be dated to his time as Vice President under Eisenhower.
E Howard Hunt was in Dallas on November 22, 1963, according to these authors.
Both Sturgis and Hunt denied it, but Marita Lorenz testified under oath in 1975 that she had driven from Miami to Dallas in November of 1963 with Frank Sturgis.
One of Banister’s secretaries, Mary Brengel, was tracked down by Anthony Summers.
She told him that one day when she was taking dictation from Banister, he referred to his work in helping Marcello fight deportation.
This leaves open the connecting links between CIA Harvey, through Marcello, Banister, Ferrie, and ultimately to Oswald.
Hunt’s photo appears as an acetate fold-over which seems to exactly fit over the face of the tramp on the right.
Hunt sued Weberman for libel for his allegations, and Weberman welcomed the litigation because it would finally give him an opportunity to depose Hunt under oath.
Hunt later dropped his suit and this, in turn, continued to fuel conspiracy theories that Hunt was involved.
To summarize, after the assassination three individuals were arrested and later released by the police.
The TV program A Current Affair announced that the three tramps had been tracked down.
All turned out not to have been involved, but Weberman and Canfield challenge such assertions and allege the tramps were none other than CIA agent Howard Hunt, Frank Sturgis, and Daniel Carswell.
The photographic forensic evidence they cite is uncanny, especially in relation to Howard Hunt.
A book by Craig and Rogers — based upon anonymous informants — gives another twist.
Rogers vaguely resembled Oswald and was the ""imposter” who used Oswald’s identity papers in Mexico City.
The only difficulty was that Oswald’s Russian was excellent, but Rogers’ was very poor.
Sylvia Duran, the Cuban Counsel, said that the obnoxious Oswald she had met at the Consulate in Mexico City did not resemble Lee Harvey Oswald.
The Cuban Counsel, Eusebio Azcue, also told the HSCA that the man who was so obnoxious with him was not Oswald.
There was also the incident, investigated and documented by the Warren Commission, of a Lee Oswald who had taken a car for a test drive.
He behaved obnoxiously, drove the car through Dallas at high speeds and left an “unforgettable” impression on the car salesman, Albert Bogard.
Bogard could not remember what his Oswald looked like, but his boss, Frank Pizzo, said that the Lee Harvey Oswald who had come to the car dealership was not the Oswald arrested for the assassination.
After the assassination, Rogers and Harrelson met Chauncey Holt and planned to take a train out of town.
Holt was to meet Eugene Hale Brading and Morgan Brown at the Cabana Hotel and get a plane out of the country.
Rogers and Harrelson were to have another plane waiting for them, presumably David Feme’s; he was at an ice rink in Galveston at the time of Kennedy’s death.
The Grassy Knoll Gunman gives such detail as to dates, times, motel safe houses, bus numbers, etc., that either the informants were very much in the know or were highly skilled writers of dramatic fiction.
The Gerharts reported the incident to the FBI twice after the assassination, but nothing 250.
His parents became concerned when he did not show up for a number of weeks after the assassination.
They received mysterious phone calls and began to conclude their son had a hand in the assassination.
When Charles finally returned home and was confronted by his mother about her suspicions, he murdered both his parents.
He dismembered both bodies, attempting to destroy the evidence of the crime, but left town without completely cleaning up the home.
Rogers has not been seen since, is still thought to be alive, and is wanted for the murder of his parents in Houston.
Still, the origin of the conspiracy is unclear in this model, and one is left in the murky waters between the CIA, the Marcello organization, anti-Castro Cubans — or some combination of the above.
Rogers worked for the CIA as a contract agent and had worked with David Ferrie and Guy Banister.
Ferrie had contacts with the CIA and the Mob , and Banister had these same contacts in addition to his membership in the Minutemen.
Thus, even if Rogers was the grassy knoll gunman, we still have no idea who hired him.
Marita Lorenz testified that she left Miami, in one of three cars heading for Dallas.
Gerry Patrick Hemming — who said that Guy Banister in New Orleans offered him a contract to assassinate President Kennedy at the request of the CIA — gave very scanty corroborating testimony.
Lane speculates that the two Cuban brothers were Guillermo and Ignacio Novo — both later sentenced for crimes related to the murder of two Chilean officials in Washington.
Conspiracy Clues From Oswald Himself These four different CIA assassination scenarios leave many questions unanswered.
Oswald’s Dyslexia Oswald mastered Russian but had a spelling deficit, which caused writing errors and dropped a trail of clues along the path we are trying to follow.
This is an atypical mistake and one that implicates him in the writing of a strange letter that appears after the assassination.
On November 8,1963, he misspelled this word in a mysterious letter written to a Mr Hunt.
The letter surfaced in 1975 and was sent to Kennedy assassination researcher Penn Jones, by an unknown source.
Dear Mr Hunt, November 8,1963 I would like information concerding my position.
I am asking that we discuss the matter fully before any steps are taken by me or anyone else.
It was in 1975 that the Watergate matters concluded; Nixon resigned August 9, 1974.
Howard Hunt’s wife, Dorothy, died in a mysterious plane crash in December, 1973.
Researcher Sherman Skolnick believes that Dorothy Hunt was carrying documents that linked Nixon to the Kennedy assassination.
We do not know if Dorothy Hunt was carrying such documents, but we do know that the plane went down under mysterious circumstances and that Mrs.
Hunt was carrying $10,000 in cash, allegedly “hush money” for the Watergate burglars.
If we speculate that the letter was to E Howard Hunt, the Mexico City CIA liaison, a man Oswald may have had contact with only weeks earlier when he was in Mexico, we begin to see the faint outlines of Oswald as a CIA functionary, an aspiring spy, a low-level CIA contract agent or an unwitting fool being set up as a patsy for a crime.
He sought clarification — “I am asking that we discuss the matter fully before any steps are taken by me or anyone else” — two weeks before the assassination.
Oswald checked out a number of books from the Dallas Public Library on November 6, 1963.
The books should have been returned on the 13th to avoid late charges, but one was still overdue months later and was not found among his effects.
Eventually, someone anonymously returned it, and who that person is remains one of the infinite number of mysteries surrounding the whole assassination drama.
Arbenz, the overthrown Guatemalan leader, was close friends with Arevalo, the author.
Posner asserts the library card issue was a rumor started by Jim Garrison.
Garrison in turn based his arguments on selected Secret Service documents; the case of the missing, classified, or non-existent library card remains open.
Oswald’s favorite television show as a young boy was, “I led three lives,” a serial drama of an FBI informant who had joined the communist party.
Conspiracy In 1954, in association with a CIA team, including Howard Hunt as Political Action Officer, Phillips played a leading part in the overthrow of the anti-American, left-leaning Arbenz government in Guatemala.
It was a remarkably cunning operation in which Arbenz was panicked into resignation as much by propaganda as by actual force of arms.
Oswald’s reading is a list of spy thrillers fictional and real — some of them engineered by CIA officers who were now possibly his associates.
The list looks like it could have been recommended to Oswald by the very owner of the library card he used, David Ferrie.
Recommending the Arevalo book would be tantamount to advising Oswald to read about an event Feme’s colleagues had carried off with pride and precision nine years earlier.
In late September, Oswald supposedly makes a trip to Mexico City, where David Atlee Phillips and E Howard Hunt have recently been.
On November 6,1963, Oswald checks out a book about the overthrow of a Guatemalan president in which Howard Hunt had played a role, and two days later he writes his “concerding” letter to a Mr Hunt requesting more information before any further steps are taken.
The official versions of history, and particularly of these associations, begin to come apart at the seams.
The issue of the overthrow of the Arbenz government has now been corroborated.
In 1997 the CIA released 1,400 pages of classified material, some of which indicated that the CIA actively planned assassinations and had specifically tried to train and create military force of exiled Guatemalans to overthrow the Arbenz government.
The propaganda efforts against Arbenz were sufficient to topple the regime.
The Shark and the Sardines, a book about the collapse of the Arbenz government, clearly creates an interesting link between Oswald, who checked the book out, and Hunt, who allegedly was the propaganda mastermind for the CIA project to oust Arbenz.
The official version of the myth insists on leaving this trail of unlikely concurrences to sheer coincidence; anything else impinges on the credibility of the Warren Commission.
Back in New Orleans when Oswald left his job at the Reily Coffee Company across the street from Banister’s office, he made a friend at the garage, Adrian Alba.
He was a former pilot for Eastern Airlines and lost his job because of charges of homosexual pedophilia.
He was a CIA contract agent — of that, there is little doubt, in the literature, and in 1963 he made such a vile speech 259.
For the coincidental times of Ferrie and Oswald’s New Orleans demonstrations, see Summers, 301.
Conspiracy that he had to be removed from the podium by those who had invited him.
Ever a booster and member of the Warren Commission spirit squad, Gerald Posner, spends page after page lambasting Jim Garrison’s case against Clay Shaw, David Ferrie and Guy Banister as totally off the track, because Oswald did not know David Ferrie.
The issue of whether Oswald knew the adventurer David Ferrie is equally important, since Ferrie had extensive anti-Castro Cuban contacts and also did some work for an attorney for Carlos Marcello, the New Orleans godfather.
Dean Andrews, a New Orleans lawyer; Jack Martin, Banister’s associate who contacted the FBI after the assassination; and Delphine Roberts, Banister’s secretary and mistress.
The reliability of these witnesses has been the subject of debate for two decades, but finally the question was solved with a single photograph.
Of the dozens of issues and debates, this is one appears to be ended, with Gerald Posner the loser.
With the photo of Oswald and CIA-Mafiosi Ferrie together, the testimony of Sylvia Odio telling us that Oswald posed not as a pro-Castro but as a CIA-sponsored anti-Castro mercenary, Carlos Bringuier’s tale about Oswald trying to join up with CIA-connected anti-Castro forces, Oswald’s James Bond books, a book about Hunt and the CIA undermining a leftist government — all of this followed by Oswald’s letter to Hunt — It looks very much like Lee Harvey Oswald was linked with this CIArelated group, was known to this group, or was seeking to be part of it. 7w.
The first is his original letter to the American Embassy written in 1959 renouncing his citizenship.
The letter is found in the original Warren Commission Report on page 24.
EtSCA investigators said the handwriting similarities show that the Nov., 1963 letter to Mr Hunt was Oswald’s handwriting.
Photograph of a facsimile copy of a hamhvriten letter to Mr Hunt. letter.
Furthermore we can still see his spelling deficit in “concerding” in the 1963 letter.
Hunt, Weberman and Canfield hold that it was sent to E Howard Hunt, the CIA station chief in Mexico City in September and October, 1963.
Hunt was one of the Watergate burglars, was a high official in the CIA under General Cabell, and his wife had recently perished in a mysterious commercial airline disaster in 1973 when the letter surfaced.
Hunt is said to have had a close relationship with Guy Banister in New Orleans.
Two weeks before the assassination Oswald checked out a library book by Juan Arevalo, The Shark and the Sardines , in part about the overthrow of the Guatemalan government in 1954.
Howard Hunt was a CIA operative at the time played a role in that governmental overthrow.
Two days after checking out the Arevalo book, Oswald wrote this letter to Hunt, and two weeks after that Kennedy was assassinated.
The CIA overthrow of the Arevalo government was directed by Allen Dulles, then head of the CIA and later a critical member of the Warren Commission investigating the assassination.
Dulles and his brother, John Foster Dulles, were alleged to have ties to United Fruit Company.
It is a notable coincidence therefore that the man Oswald writes to was a CIA agent who participated in the same covert operation which Oswald is reading about in his library book, and that the man who would later sit on the Warren Commission to investigate the assassination was Hunt’s boss.
Between October of 1962 and April of 1963, his behavior becomes suspicious, secretive, and hard to track.
At that time he sends $10 in cash from Mercedes Street and follows it with a money order for $9.71 on September 5, and another money order for $10 on October 10, and still another $10 on November 19,1962, a picayune total of $39.71 eked out over fourteen weeks.
As soon, however as we take away $396 for the State Department debt, he is now $118 in arrears, and even this figure depends on there being no other expenditures than those that were noted by the Warren Commission.
It is highly unlikely that every cent he spent in those three months was recorded.
The reference to Oswald’s talking in his sleep is from McMillan-Johnson, 161, and Mailer, 558.
Conspiracy A more telling incident occurred later, the week after he received his passport, June 24,1963.
Lee was sitting in the dark with his arms and legs wrapped around the back of a chair and his head resting on top.
Marina held him for about a quarter of an hour and he told her between sobs that he was lost.
Recalling that night thirty years later, she said that if he had wanted to tell her about his problem he would have, but it was better not to ask.
There was something so heavy he had been carrying, and she didn’t know what it was.
It was sad, she said.j Oswald’s emotional behavior is not evidence, but it tells us that much is unknown and unexplained, and that five months before the assassination he was teeming with anxiety, fear, and trepidation.
He decided that he would ask the Soviet Embassy if he could return, with Marina.
On the weekend of June 29th, together they wrote Comrade Reznichenko of the Soviet Embassy in Washington, saying they wanted to go back.
He obviously trusted her enough to confide such issues to her, but this time he avoided telling her what was going on.
That suggests something else was afoot, something too big for him to handle himself, something too big to confide in Marina.
Although perhaps repetitive, a table attempting to summarize and condense the material may be useful.
Teachers, wives, and dependents of embassy employees were never allowed to enter these highly restricted floors.
Elis cousin, Dorothy Murret, with whom he stayed in New Orleans, allegedly had a CIA connection.
Oswald knew Michael and Ruth Paine and George deMohrenschildt in Dallas.
DeMohrenschildt, particularly, but the Paines as well, had intelligence connections.
De Mohrenschildt admitted that he befriended Oswald for the government and reported to the CIA about his contacts.
This information was not known to the Warren Commission and only came out after De Mohrenschildt’s suicide.
Walton Moore, Domestic Contacts Division, Nicholas Anikeef, from the CIA’s Soviet Russia Division, and Charles Thomas, a CIA covert operations agent.
Charles Rogers, confronted by his parent’s suspicions of involvement in the assassination, murdered them and has been a fugitive ever since.
These individuals are Marita Lorenz, Sylvia Odio, Annie Odio, and Carlos Bringuier.
She also now suspects he was involved in intelligence gathering in the USSR, too.
Two days after checking out a book about Elunt’s CIA triumph, Oswald appears to have written a letter to a Mr blunt; the letter implies that the two had prior contacts.
Conspiracy • Oswald knew David Ferrie in the Civil Air Patrol and likely met Ferrie in New Orleans.
Oswald was said to have been working for Guy Banister when he was distributing Fair Play for Cuba leaflets.
He used Banister’s Camp Street address, an address which housed CIA-sponsored anti-Castro organizations, most notably the Cuban Revolutionary Council under Arcacha Smith.
Years later Richard Helms, Director of the CIA, made admissions that these individuals did have a relationship to the CIA; Victor Marchetti, former CIA Assistant Director, corroborated Ferrie’s CIA associations.
If Oswald can be linked with Ferrie in 1963, he can be linked with the CIA, anti-Castro Cubans, and/or the underworld — Ferrie and Banister were connected to all three.
Fletcher Prouty said that President Kennedy, highly disturbed over CIA planning of the Bay of Pigs operation, and over his inability to get control of the organization, sought, after his re-election, to dismantle it.
This would be motive enough, within the agency; but motive also comes from CIA-backed anti-Castro Cubans, whose bases Kennedy tried to shut down.
The Cubans felt betrayed by his secret dealings with Khrushchev and felt the United States would no longer support their efforts to overthrow Castro.
The CIA itself, the CIA officers fired for the Bay of Pigs fiasco, and CIA-sponsored anti-Castro exiles all may have shared a desire to remove the President.
The Mob lost a great deal of gambling, narcotics, and prostitution revenue when it lost Cuba to Castro, and it was being persecuted on dozens of fronts by Attorney General Robert Kennedy, as well.
The relationship of William Harvey, an unstable CIA figure who worked under General Cabell, and Harvey’s repeated contacts with John Roselli, Giancana, Marcello, and Trafficante, makes a Mob-CIA plot plausible.
Not only was there motive and opportunity, but plenty of assets to carry out such a crime.
The CIA’s history of generating disinformation, withholding real information, loss of documents, and recalcitrance in dealing with investigative committees is indicative of something.
CIA officer Regis Blahut’s attempt to purloin autopsy photos from the HSCA is the most stark example, but equally important is how strenuously the CIA attempted to disassociate itself from Oswald.
Efforts to deny any contacts, any relationship, any debriefings with Oswald and to spread rumors that he was an agent of Castro through “unnamed sources” show that the CIA had a compelling interest in creating the impression that Oswald was working for someone else.
Frank Sturgis, a CIA contract agent associated with Howard Hunt, and an anti-Castro Cuban exile, leaked two stories to jack Anderson and author James Buchanan.
In each hew as an “unnamed source” that said Oswald was a pro-Castro agent.
Sturgis denied his involvement in circulating these rumors, but both Jack Anderson and James Buchanan independently said he was.
John Roselli, a Mafia figure working closely with CIA agent William Harvey, was also a source of disinformation about Oswald.
Loran Hall came forward to say it was he, not Oswald, who visited Sylvia Odio.
Hall was an anti-Castro exile and CIA contract agent who made these admissions under immunity from prosecution.
Richard Helms, who became Director of the CIA after the assassination, was suspected of being involved in numerous instances of withholding information from the Warren Commission and other investigative agencies.
His most recent denial centered around an alleged “debriefing” by CIA agent Andy Anderson.
The CIA long held that despite Oswald’s defection to the USSR and his Fair Play for Cuba activities, it did not have any files on him at the time of the assassination.
The debriefing memo discovered only in 1993, an event which occurred prior to the assassination, still looms as a contentious issue.
Lyndon Johnson’s mistress, Madeline Brown, said that Johnson had fathered a child with her after their long association and that, one New Year’s Eve, she asked him if he had had anything to do with the assassination.
Weak Elements This theory is based chiefly on conjecture and does not give us much more than anecdotal testimony, innuendo, and associations to form a basis for suspicion.
Conspiracy Bosch, and perhaps James Angleton and/or Richard Helms (for obstruction of justice), but there isn’t enough to successfully prosecute anyone for the assassination.
The mistress of Lyndon Johnson, Madeleine Brown, related a chilling anecdote to author Dick Russell on August 4,1992 regarding this implication.
Then, as 1963 passed into history, they were together at a New Year’s Eve party.
Carrol &r Graf, 1993) mentions Madeline Brown in the following context: ""I know Madeline Brown, a former mistress of Johnson, rather well and find her mostly credible.
Brown has, in the past, maintained that LBJ told her that John Kennedy was going to be assassinated in advance of it happening.
In my talks with her, she confirms the portrait given in The Texas Connection, and then some.
She says that Johnson was a totally amoral man who slept with any woman who came along, betrayed all his women, and who was often drunk and abusive.
As the author of this text, I have attempted to base all conjecture and speculation on evidence gleaned from one published sort or another.
In the matter of Kennedy mistresses I felt a need to be particularly careful about making claims of affairs, which others had published, and I tried to independently confirm some of these allegations.
One text suggested that Pierre Salinger’s secretary slept with Kennedy, so I wrote Salinger about this.
Salinger denied JFK slept with his secretary, but did acknowledge JFK's womanizing.
At the same time, he revealed that one of his employees took up with LBJ after the assassination.
Kennedy pushed me to have mistresses, which convinced me he was having mistresses.
During the campaign, I got side information from journalists (who in those days were not interested in publishing that information) that John F Kennedy was having an affair with Pamela Turnure, who later became Jackie's press secretary.
There were rumors in the White House about Fiddle & Faddle, but I did not get specific information.
And, finally, no employee assigned to my office had an affair with the President.
Madeline Brown s allegations first given to author Dick Russell, therefore, seem to be corroborated in part, at least, by two other independent sources, Harrison Livingston and Pierre Salinger.
Let us not forget another suspected conspirator from the right, Frank Sturgis, the unnamed disinformation source of Jack Anderson's early writings linking Castro to a Soviet plot.
We should also remember mobster Roselli as another deep-throat source for articles linking Oswald to a leftist conspiracy originating with Castro.
Hunt, Sturgis and Roselli each contributing disinformation to support the hypothesis of a leftist conspiracy to kill the president.
Sturgis threatened Marita Lorenz, but did not seek to litigate while he was alive.
Others, like David Phillips, clearly could have initiated defamation suits but did not do so.
The entire aura of obsessiveness about this event has caused the original players in the drama to become larger than life.
Ruby, the great “Mob chieftain,” might really have been just a small-time Dallas striptease hawker who was $39,000 in arrears on an IRS debt.
Oswald, the “super-assassin, double-agent, and James-Bond-master-spy,” earned $1.25 an hour, and his 1962 tax return revealed an income of less than $1,000.
Although Mailer has brought convincing evidence that Oswald’s expenditures were greater than his earnings, there is still considerable difficulty showing him ever having more than a few hundred surplus dollars.
The characters of our drama tend to be magnified and are probably far less interesting than collective fantasies make them out to be.
No one could have known Kennedy’s motorcade route prior to October 4, and that was after Oswald met with Odio.
Yet to take the position of Gerald Posner — that this whole line of inquiry should be dropped — is nonsensical.
Until a thorough-going inquiry is made into the actions of Richard Helms, Howard Hunt, James Angleton, Richard Bissell, Tracy Barnes, James Hosty, the entire cast of the anti-Castro Cubans and their CIA-associates, 265.
In Dallas the Oswalds were invited to a Christmas party organized by deMohrenschildt.
By 1995 researcher John Newman meticulously analyzed the paper trail on Oswald reviewing some 2 million pieces of paper.
Flere is a brief synopsis of his major findings which may not be incorporated elsewhere in this text.
In November, 1960 the State Department requested a list from the CIA of American “defectors"" in Eastern Bloc countries.
On November 21, Bissell signed this letter with the defectors list attached.
This correspondence occurred in 1960, but in 1964 during the Warren Commission the CIA continued to assert it had no information on Oswald before the assassination.
Another interesting research coup was in sorting through all of Oswald’s New Orleans behavior.
It is here that he cultivates both a pro-Castro and an anti-Castro identity.
During this spectacle [when Oswald was arrested for disturbing the peace in his confrontation with Carlos Bringuier], Oswald actually insisted on seeing an FBI agent while in jail, to supply him, Oswald said, with information on his FPCC activities.
They withheld the fact—for quite some time—that Special Agent Quigley had interviewed Oswald in jail (p.
Newman’s greatest contribution seems to be unprecedented, namely that Oswald did go to Mexico City and so did an impostor.
Newman sorts all of the documentary information and transcripts into a table, interviews witnesses, cites declassified portions of the still-classified Lopez Report, and quotes surviving, fugitive sections of deceased CIA officer Winston Scott's manuscript which James Angleton took from Scott’s safe after his death and apparently destroyed.
Flis conclusion is that the Soviet and Cuban consulates were dealing with two Oswalds, the real one and the impostor.
There may be weak spots in the theory, but it certainly deserves the most serious attention, especially the Oswald-David Ferrie link discovered in 1993.
That is perhaps the most significant research breakthrough in a decade.
Indeed, when one considers how many pies Banister and Ferrie had their fingers in, it is not at all preposterous to assume that Oswald, through them, could have been connected to the CIA, the Mob, anti-Castro Cubans. . . or all three simultaneously.
Oswald’s relationship to the Soviet Union, his activities, marriage, and departure from that country paint a picture sharply divergent from my own experience there.
A firstperson account may be of interest, at least in the early part of this section.
In the mid-1960s, I had just received my Masters degree in psychology and not yet earned my doctorate.
I thought that teaching abroad might give me valuable experience, and so I applied for numerous teaching positions. was hired by the Moscow Diplomatic School, an elementary school on Kropotkinskaya Street, part of the United States Embassy school system.
I earned a salary of $4,500 plus free round-trip transportation from the United States I thought it would be a great adventure — my first trip to Europe.
Life in Moscow was extremely difficult for this spoiled American bachelor.
It snowed on October 11, but the heat in my building was not turned on until November.
For a few days in February, the thermometer dipped to 37 degreesbelow zero.
Conspiracy When 1 went to work, a chauffeur-driven embassy car picked me up in the dark.
When I left school at 3:30, the embassy car dropped me off at my apartment, and it was dark again.
I was told on orientation day that teachers had no diplomatic immunity; we had to be careful of our associations, because the embassy could do little to rescue us if we got in any compromising situations.
Fraternizing with members of the opposite sex, if they were not part of the diplomatic community, could get us in serious trouble, and we were apprized early that the embassy would discontinue our contracts and send us home if that happened.
Close to the end of my teaching contract, I fell in love with a Soviet citizen, Anya.
Anya is now my fully Americanized wife and the mother of our two children, Anya and Maya; but things did not go quite as easily for us as they did for Lee Harvey Oswald.
First, the embassy consular section pointed out that my contract was almost up and said they wanted me out of the country as soon as possible.
The consul said my chances of marrying this woman were virtually nil, and if I did succeed in getting the Soviets to permit it, my chances of getting her out of the country were a solid impossibility.
He said that in the prior year, only three Russians were let out of the Soviet Union who were not on some sort of official mission.
It was many years prior to the Helsinki accords, many years prior to the waves of Jewish emigrants, but still six years after Oswald had married Marina and emigrated with her to Texas.
Undaunted, I finished up my contract and left injune, 1966, returning from Paris, in August, no longer affiliated with the embassy.
I thought my fiancee and I could be married now that I was just a plain old American tourist and not part of a diplomatic mission; not quite.
One of the myriad Catch 22s was that if one wanted to marry a Soviet citizen, it had to be done in the legal residence of the bride.
My bride-to-be lived ten miles outside of the Moscow City limits — an area closed to foreigners.
Since I could not legally visit the area where the marriage bureau was located, there was no way to permit a wedding.
Another obstacle was that the bride had to have notarized permission from both her parents.
Furthermore, any notary “authorizing” a Soviet citizen to marry an American was placed in a dicey situation.
After thirty exasperating days, my visa expired and I had to leave the country, unsuccessful and disappointed.
I returned to the United States to start my doctoral program and vowed I would figure out this system and return.
With help from a Moscow attorney, I received permission to enter her “forbidden city” in the Moscow suburbs and we were married.
Over a year had passed, and two trips in and out of the USSR were necessary to get that far; but we finally succeeded.
Permission to leave the cloistered fortress of Soviet Russia involved OVIR, the dreaded passport agency.
OVIR would refuse an application to leave the USSR on virtually any technicality.
My wife secured a pejorative letter of recommendation from her job, her mother’s notarized permission, and, from my side, a few letters from congressmen and senators requesting humanitarian consideration.
In the USSR of old, if your husband or wife had served in the military in the prior five years, indeed, if they worked for the telephone company — any reason could be construed as a security reason for refusing to issue an exit visa.
The only telephone book in existence in Moscow was a small handbook published by the American embassy.
In reading the literature about Lee Harvey Oswald, I find myself experiencing high levels of disbelief regarding his Russian years and his marriage to Marina.
The woman who married us, for example, said that she had once married a foreigner to a Soviet citizen under Stalin.
When she was finally “told from above” that she had to marry us, she read off a paragraph in Russian, informed us we were now man and wife and abruptly asked us to leave.
In this short ceremony, she broke out in hives and her eyebrows, cheeks, and forehead turned puffy and red.
Our entire marriage ceremony was a secular, ten-minute reading of a passage in Russian, two signatures, and a taxi ride back to Moscow.
Conspiracy Oswald’s marriage to Marina, the niece of a lieutenant colonel in the Ministry of the Interior, thus raises some issues for me that someone without this kind of experience might overlook.
The following items summarize some of the more “curious aspects” of Oswald’s Russian connection.
The Office of Naval Intelligence attempted to recruit as many as forty young men who might be sent into the Soviet Union.
They were trained at various naval installations, but the operation was managed primarily from Nag’s Head, North Carolina.
When I worked as a schoolteacher in the mid-1960s, I had no diplomatic immunity.
This is where the more official embassy business was conducted, and it was highly protected.
Two Marine guards stood out in front, and in the ten months I was associated with the diplomatic mission, I was never invited in this area, even though I knew quite a number of people attached to the embassy and, in fact, had their children in class.
The official story has it that when Oswald defected he went to the American Embassy in Moscow only once, visiting only the consular office on the ground floor.
Yet the widow of the assistant naval attache, Joan Hallet, who worked as a receptionist at the embassy, says Consul Richard Snyder and the security officer 267.
If there is a reasonable explanation for the ease of the Oswald’s marriage, it may have been that Uncle Ilya believed Oswald genuinely wanted to stay in the USSR, and thus he supported the marriage.
He did not support the Oswald’s leaving the USSR, however, and expressed concern that his pension might be affected.
A visitor would never ever get up there unless he was on official business.
According to Hallet, Oswald came to the embassy “several times” in 1959.
She was “never” up there, even to visit her husband, and neither was I The consular offices were on the ground floor, as she mentioned, and if Oswald did, in fact, enter the two top floors, he certainly had a status far different than those of us who did not have high-level clearances.
Even after I announced my intentions of marrying a Soviet citizen, a physicist who worked in a Soviet optics factory, the United States embassy never thought my particular situation warranted a trip to the two top floors.
One member of HSCA was quite concerned about the nature of this attempted call, however.
It is possible Oswald entered the Soviet Union as a military intelligence “plant,” thus perhaps the North Carolina connection.
This is a point of view now held by Oswald’s widow, Marina in 1996, although as she says, she has no proof.
Conspiracy Oswald’s Soviet Diary While in Moscow, seeking to renounce his citizenship and remain in the USSR, Oswald learned that the Russians did not want him.
He was rescued by Rimma Shirokova, his Intourist guide and taken to Botkin Hospital.
Again, based on my own experience, this diary seems glaringly inauthentic.
My wife still has trouble with it after 30 years, despite her incredible fluency in English and having earned an American doctorate.
To see my wife’s habitual mispronunciation in Oswald’s diary smacks of forgery; it strongly suggests that the diary was composed by an English-speaking Russian.
It would be uncharacteristic for Oswald to compose such a tear-jerker (and if he did, 272.
Suspect as well is the term “petty official,” so often used in Russian parlance and on the tongues of virtually all Soviet citizens, but not a phrase frequently used by Americans.
It sounds especially peculiar and arcane in the vocabulary of a man from the South.
There are simply too many literary allusions, a vocabulary far too complex, using such words as splendid, abound, unobtainable, especially enthusiastic and so on, all spelled quite correctly, to have been written by someone with such bad grammar and spelling as the diary attempts to portray.
Alongside numerous known letters and handwriting samples of Oswald’s, the handprinted diary is clearly fake.
After the assassination, some wanted to exhume his body to make sure that the signs of this suicide attempt were still there.
Either the diary itself is suspect and replete with errors or his wound was little more than a scratch — which would be the only reasonable explanation how almost a whole day could pass before he was taken to the hospital.
Contrary to the findings of conspiracists — and this author — the HSCA felt the diary to be genuine.
Conspiracy There are also many other problems with the descriptions, dates and times in his diary.
He referred to getting paid, for example, in “new rubles,” but the ruble was not revalued until a year later.
Rimma gave him a copy of Dostoyevsky’s The Idiot , when he first arrived.
However appropriate the title, at that time Dostoyevsky was very difficult to get and was considered highly anti-Soviet; it was rarely sold in bookstores and would have been an extraordinary gift for a new acquaintance in many ways.
And his salary in Minsk was greater than the director of the factory’s.
Further, Oswald was given an apartment in Minsk overlooking the river, at a time when people lived doubled up in communal apartments shared by two to four families.
Indeed, when I was in Moscow, as a bachelor, I was given a one-bedroom apartment in the embassy compound.
The few Russians who ever visited were amazed that a single man could have such splendid accommodations.
He had no domestic passport and was formally a “stateless person,” meaning that he had approximately no rights at all.
I personally knew a Georgian who wanted to live and work in Moscow; he paid the ruble equivalent of $10,000 to a woman to marry him so he could get the requisite documentation on his domestic passport to legally qualify to live in Moscow.
He applied to get married as a stateless person and was granted permission to marry within 10 days.
Oswald, again without benefit of a domestic passport, applied to join a gun club, and in no time at all had a hunting rifle.
He was an engineer and a lieutenant colonel in the Ministry of the Interior.
The MVD was a highly sensitive bureau; Prusakov was a party member of high standing.
It was unimaginable that someone could get an exit visa in the early 1960s, in only four months’ time, with a relative in such a high position.
If her uncle had merely been a private in the infantry four years earlier, that would have been sufficient grounds for OVIR to refuse Marina’s departure entirely.
That Marina was permitted to depart the Soviet Union while her uncle was in the MVD is suspicious in the extreme.
She stopped by on her way home from work and was informed that both she and her husband had been granted exit visas.
When I was in Moscow, each Saturday the faculty from my school would go to the embassy, shop at the PX, buy American cigarettes, have a hamburger at the cafeteria, and share the latest news.
He left Russia for a book fair in Helsinki, Finland, and wanted to have his picture taken at the border.
As he turned around to smile for the camera, he was arrested by Soviet border guards.
This “imperialist spy” spoke no Russian at all, and was imprisoned in the Soviet Union for 18 months.
Prison life was so unbearable that when he finally got permission to go to the bathroom alone, on a prison train, he slit his throat when the guards were not looking.
One Saturday when we were gossiping over our weekly hamburgers, his body was delivered to the embassy grounds for shipment back to the States.
The ability of a young pharmacist — not from the relatively cosmopolitan, international capital of Moscow but provincial Minsk — to secure permission to marry an American defector and simply leave with her husband is mindboggling.
The fact that she lived with her uncle, a colonel in the MVD, and neither his career nor her exit visa was compromised, is baffling.
Norman Mailer makes the point that both Uncle Ilya and his wife Valya told Marina that this would make things difficult for them.
A KGB report also shows that Ilya promised the KGB that he would continue working to convince Oswald and his 278.
These tidbits make the story more human, but the hard facts remain categorically and exceedingly abnormal.
The poet Yevtushenko got permission to leave the USSR for poetry readings in the West only on the condition that he leave his wife and children behind.
It was common practice for the Soviet Union to treat one’s spouse and children as hostages in order to guarantee that famous ballerinas, poets, or sports personalities would not defect.
For Marina to simply come home one day with a visa is entirely outside the range of the normal.
If the Soviets saw no way to exploit Oswald in an intelligence function and thought he was mentally unstable — and this has been their historic position — then the most likely response would have been to place him in a psychiatric hospital.
Under Yeltsin, Americans were discovered who had been tucked away in Soviet mental institutions for the majority of their lives, some since the 1950s.
The next most likely reaction would have been to expel or imprison him, but certainly not to let him emigrate with his educated wife, the niece of a colonel in the Ministry of the Interior.
There are other incongruities to mention, but whether they, in toto, add up to a conspiracy theory is another matter.
After the assassination, Marina was offered lucrative book contracts and apparently signed some.
She rapidly became wealthy, remarried, and lived on a 15-acre estate near Dallas — but never wrote her account.
In 1963, she barely had money to feed her children, but as early as she 1964 was reported to be worth over $250,000.
There are several documents about Marina’s wealth and relationship with her attorneys that are still classified.
Marina Oswald may have received up to $70,000 in donations from Americans concerned with her fate and future.
Nonetheless, the overall, composite, historical picture of Marina Oswald 280.
He informed them that he had instructed Marina to conduct herself in the United States in a worthy manner and not to partake in any anti-Soviet propaganda.
Even United States Ambassador Thompson testified to the Warren Commission that it was highly unusual to get it so quickly.
There are very many unanswered questions about how she left the USSR, how she obtained her wealth, and most important, why she testified before investigative committees with such unreliability.
Marina told an acquaintance that her husband had defected to the Soviet Union after working at an American exhibition in Moscow.
At a public hearing a few weeks later, Marina’s memory had gone wholly blank.
Marina Oswald could not remember the time that Oswald had asked for her hand.
Later she identified the Mannlicher-Carcano rifle as her husband’s and said her husband had wanted to kill General Walker and Richard Nixon.
She said nothing about the Walker shooting until confronted with a note found among Oswald’s effects.
Marina said she stopped Oswald from shooting Nixon by locking him in a bathroom.
Flowever, there were no published itineraries showing Nixon coming to Dallas, and Warren Commission investigators found that the bathroom locked from the inside, not the outside.
Unfortunately, the city had not been named Severodvinsk until 1957; Marina was born in 1941.
The CIA found no references to Prizentsev in their computer, but his address at Kondratyevsky Prospect, 63 was the same as a Robert E Webster, a former Navy man who defected shortly before Oswald and returned at the same time as Oswald, in May 1962.
On November 29,1963 and again on January 17 and 22,1964, Marina denied any knowledge of Lee’s trip to Mexico, although soon afterwards she told what she knew about that, too.
She explained her reluctance on this score by saying that she loathed the FBI for pestering her, and, in her bad moods, she could not refrain from showing it.
She lied on her visa application, saying she had never been a member of the Communist party, but had in fact been in the Komsomol.
Conspiracy Marina Oswald is an important witness in the State’s case against Lee Harvey Oswald.
If the State were unable to connect Oswald with the rifle, its case against him would dissolve.
The bullets found in General Walker’s home could not be matched with the Mannlicher-Carcano.
The validity of the photographs tying Oswald to the rifle similarly requires that her testimony be believable, since she said she was the one who took them.
Had Oswald gone to trial, his defense attorney could easily have impeached this allimportant State’s witness; she left a legacy of inconsistent testimony trailing behind her.
To believe a woman was introduced to her future husband by a man who’s name she forgot, that he proposed to her on a date she cannot remember, that she emigrated from her country but could not recall whether it was by plane or by ship, that she first said he did not go to Mexico and then said he did because of her “moods” . . . such matters are simply too much for any hypothetical jury to believe.
And if her testimony is not judged credible, then the photos of Oswald with the rifle, the attack on General Walker, and the Mannlicher-Cancano rifle all become questionable.
The Yuri Nosenko Affair Another suspicious episode emanating out of Soviet Russia occurred in 1964, but the Warren Commission made no reference to it.
It used to be unthinkable, unimaginable, that a person could be held without trial, without bail, in fact held hostage in a building for over three years, often deprived of food and water or any contact with the outside world, including reading materials, and that this could all happen inside the United States of America.
Two months after Oswald was killed, a high-ranking KGB officer defected to the United States from Geneva.
His name was Yuri Nosenko; he was 36, in the prime of his career in Soviet Intelligence, and held rank in the KGB’s Second Chief Directorate, counterintelligence.
Nosenko left his wife and children behind and claimed that he had been compromised, that a cable came from KGB headquarters ordering him home, and rather than risking prison he wanted to defect to the United States The CIA had no choice but to honor his request.
According to Nosenko, the KGB knew nothing about Oswald until he was already in Moscow.
When Oswald threatened suicide in order to stay, the KGB “washed its hands” of him.
The fifteen documents the Soviets forwarded to the Warren Commission obviously exonerated them from any involvement.
Nosenko’s defection produced the same effect, but senior CIA officers did not believe the story.
United States agencies had a capability to intercept all cables between Moscow and Geneva.
Finally, Nosenko admitted that he had made it up to make the United States accept him.
A second KGB defector, Major Anatoli Golitsyn, told the CIA Nosenko had been in the KGB but was not the lieutenant colonel he made himself out to be.
Nosenko gradually admitted this, too, and said he exaggerated his rank to enhance his chances of getting asylum.
However, Nosenko had brought documents with him showing him to be a lieutenant colonel.
Nosenko said he handled the case of an American military attache in the early fifties.
If Nosenko was the KGB officer-in-charge, he certainly would have known that.
He provided the United States information about two Soviet spies, a British clerk and an American Army soldier.
However, CIA analysts felt both of these sources had already been compromised and he was not passing on information of genuine value.
Conspiracy The CIA team groped its way across this minefield of Soviet falsehood and bluff and looked in vain for a definite motive.
None of this dealt with the immediate problem in the wake of the Kennedy assassination.
The problem became submerged in feuding within the American intelligence community.
J Edgar Hoover liked what Nosenko had to say, but one faction within the CIA was extremely suspicious and theorized that Nosenko had come to quash suspicions that a Soviet mole existed within the intelligence community.
For up to four years, Nosenko was treated more like a prisoner of war than a prize defector.
He was kept in a single room, watched 24 hours a day, and often forbidden to he down during daytime.
The HSCA heard of these interrogation techniques, as did a few politicians, and shock waves rippled through Washington.
Strange as it might seem, Nosenko never cracked and stuck to his story.
Virtually all intelligence analysts say it is implausible, indeed impossible, that the KGB would not have interrogated Oswald extensively.
Either way, Nosenko’s insistence that Oswald was not questioned at all is transparent nonsense.
While we can still only speculate at Moscow’s reasons for priming Nosenko with a phony Oswald story, embarrassment in the wake of the Kennedy assassination is an inadequate explanation.
Soviet Motives The Cuban missile crisis concluded a year prior to Kennedy’s assassination, and it was not until a year after that Khrushchev was ousted from power.
Even Castro felt Khrushchev backed down, and accused the Russian of cowardice.
The global perception of the Russian-American confrontation was that the United States had won and the Soviets lost.
Kennedy, in fact, had made a deal with the Soviets, agreeing to remove United States Jupiter missiles from Turkey in return for Soviet compliance in removing missiles in Cuba.
Without ever resolving the contradictions, the CIA later hired him as a consultant.
The secret protocol also promised that the United States would stop its efforts to overthrow Castro.
However, Kennedy had great difficulty getting control over covert operations, and attacks on Cuba continued well after the missile crisis agreements were in place.
Humiliation, embarrassment, and betrayal might have ignited a fire of revenge in Khrushchev.
In almost all other respects, a Soviet conspiracy theory makes no sense.
Oswald as a mole called upon to shoot the President on orders from Moscow, a la the “Manchurian Candidate,” is absurd.
When the KGB wanted to “hit” a diplomat in England, a man with an umbrella walked behind him, nonchalantly touched his leg, excused himself, and walked on.
The diplomat died from shellfish toxin that had placed on the tip of the umbrella.
KGB hits were high-tech, very discreet, and often carried out under layers of cover.
To have him carry out the assassination using a World War II vintage rifle moves it from indiscreet to stupid, and to select a man who cannot drive a get-away car brings it into the territory of demented.
The KGB operated through Bulgarian intelligence services and then hired a Turkish extremist as the shooter.
If caught, he would have pointed directly to them, and besides, this “assassin” had never succeeded in shooting anyone before in his life.
Indeed, one co-worker in Minsk recalls that Oswald could not put film in a camera without help; he pulled out the wiring in a new radio because he put the batteries in improperly, and couldn’t tune in the Voice of America without Pavel 288.
Those who feel Oswald may have been a Soviet hit man sometimes cite Oswald’s contact with Valerie Kostikov in Mexico City.
Norman Mailer’s Oswald’s Tale confirms Kostikov was a KGB officer assigned to “wet jobs,”e.
John Newman garnered a precious interview with historically recalcitrant James Hosty, who corroborated this.
Hosty said that Kostikov was the “Soviet officer in charge for Western Hemisphere terrorist activities including and especially assassinations.
So, when Oswald visited Mexico City, he was not simply visiting the consular at the desk.
That Oswald could have been a Soviet mole or a KGB hit man is a farfetched notion that cannot be taken seriously.
Inconsistencies in Soviet Behavior But it is also true that Soviet behavior does not compute, and for that reason suspicions are justified.
One possible explanation is that the Russians felt vulnerable after the assassination, embarrassed, and wanted to provide evidence for their non-involvement.
They forged Oswald’s diary and quickly sent Nosenko over to defuse any anti-Soviet attributions of guilt.
Nosenko did not have enough time to prepare (less than two months), and the forged diary was also done in haste.
The Soviets wanted all this information in the hands of the Warren Commission, and it was their haste that explains why the diary and Nosenko were so unpolished.
Not only is this a reasonable explanation, but also it allows us to come to an innocent conclusion.
The Soviets had nothing to do with the assassination, but out of embarrassment swiftly created a few documents and witnesses to save face.
If we grant this possibility, it answers a great number of questions; but there are still problems.
The incident of the Helsinki book salesman who slit his throat happened five years after Oswald’s adventures in Minsk.
After all, he was a defector who may also have provided the USSR with vital information, and he was sympathetic to the communist philosophy.
Thus the plush accommodations in Minsk, the 5,000-ruble bonus, even permission to marry.
If he gave the Soviets precious U-2 secrets, enhancing their ability to shoot down Gary Powers, were they so grateful they granted Lee his most whimsical fancy, even if 289.
See Oswald’s Tale, ibid. for more information on Oswald’s life in Minsk.
If Oswald was an intelligence asset, it is doubtful the Soviets would ever have let him return — if only to protect the secrets they obtained.
To return Oswald would give the Americans an opportunity to find out what Oswald had told them.
This question has never been satisfactorily answered and, to anyone who has experienced Soviet bureaucracy for both marriage and exit, the explanations which have been given are not typical of cold war Soviet behavior and make little sense.
One possibility exists that might make this sense of the bizarre anomaly, and that is if Oswald were “exchanged” for someone.
There is absolutely no proof for this, of course, but if that were the case, it could explain some of the incongruities.
If there was a secret, high-level exchange, Oswald in the USSR for “someone” held in the U.S., then we can understand why he was allowed to take his wife to Dallas.
The idea of an exchange also explains why he received State Department help, even though he was a defector who had tried to renounce his citizenship and may have surrendered American secrets.
This hypothesis handles a few inconsistencies, but it also generates a problems of its own.
This would also explain how he was able to take his wife out with him , but then, once again, new problems are created.
Going undercover in the USSR, collecting data in Minsk, and getting out alive in a swap would be risky business worthy of rather substantial rewards.
To be working the Reily Coffee Company for $1.25 an hour while receiving an undesirable discharge from the Marines would be a curious reward for valiant service to your country.
Oswald applied for unemployment compensation twice after he arrived back in the States.
The “exchange for a traitor” scenario has problems; the “exchange for an ‘intelligence asset’” has problems, too; but no exchange at all has even more problems.
At the same time that Rudolf Nureyev and others were defecting from the Soviet Union, leaving loved ones behind with the prospect of never ever seeing them again as the price for their freedom, Lee Harvey Oswald effortlessly left Russia with the niece of a MVD Colonel.
Conspiracy Our United States Marine, with a security clearance, who had formally renounced his citizenship, defected, and possibly given U-2 secrets to the Soviets, effortlessly came back to the United States . . . without being arrested, interrogated, or debriefed, and with a $480 advance from the State Department.
The Cuban Communist Conspiracy The Soviet conspiracy theory is admittedly weak, but a communist conspiracy originating in Cuba is quite another matter.
The source, a Washington lawyer, reported that one of his clients had sensational information.
It was that Fidel Castro, learning of the American plots against his own life, had retaliated by having President Kennedy murdered.
In March 1967, the allegation came to the attention of President Johnson, and he ordered an FBI inquiry.
The investigation failed to come up with hard facts or names, but President Johnson was clearly impressed.
Fie later confided to one newsman, “I will tell you something that will rock you.
Daniel’s reaction was that Castro was genuinely astonished and set back by the news.
Let us be skeptical for a moment and rephrase the communist conspiracy model in Cuban terms to see how the data organizes itself.
James Hosty’s Account Conspiracists long considered FBI agent James Fiosty, the man who interviewed Oswald before the assassination, as a key figure in the cover-up.
Fiosty corroborates what most of the conspiracy community always suspected, namely that a systematic cover up and destruction of documents within the FBI about Oswald, Ruby, etc., all are not fabrications.
Fiosty raises important points about the ease with which Marina Oswald left the country.
Marina supposedly learned that Lee desired to return to America shortly after their wedding.
In amazingly short order, the Soviet immigration agency, known as OVIR, which was part of the MVD and known to be under the control of the KGB, approved Marina’s exit visa.
In a similar case, an American, James Mintkenbaugh, lived in the Soviet Union in the late 1950s.
When he said he wanted to return to the United States, the KGB approached him to ask if he would marry a young Soviet woman and take her back with him to America.
Fiosty makes a similar suggestion about Marina Oswald with the suggestion she may have been originally targeted to be a “sleeper” agent.
Oswald probably read the Dallas Times Herald article that Kennedy was virtually inviting a Cuban coup.
Fiosty does not believe the Soviets or Cubans would have co-conspired with such a malcontent to carry off the assassination.
Fiosty’s theory is interesting except that some of his most salient quotes, especially those attributed to Calderon, seem based on unreferenced documents, apparently CIA materials Hosty has been exposed to but which are unavailable to anyone.
One flaw in his theory is that Oswald already hated JFK on Sept 23, when he left for Mexico, but the Dallas article about Kennedy inviting a Cuban coup did not appear until November 19.
Indeed, there is a dearth of evidence that Oswald hated JFK, and Hosty’s suggestions do not add much to this compilation.
For example, when Oswald left New Orleans for Dallas in September, he walked out on his rent.
It is not plausible that an assassin in search of an effective cover would call attention to himself in this way.
Hosty’s text is laudable for its admissions about the cover up, but it seems to have been conditioned by all-too familiar and historic anti-communist rhetoric, which skews many of its interpretations in that direction.
Conspiracy Castro conveniently had a Western journalist present at the time that the news broke so the journalist could credibly inform the world of Castro’s surprised reaction.
Castro also made statements to a hushed public hearing which he recorded, vehemently condemning the murder of Kennedy.
John Roselli, the gangster, who disseminated the rumor about Castro killing the President, was himself murdered for talking too much shortly after it became known that he was the source of the rumor.
Add to this scenario that Castro had a relationship with Mafiosi Santos Trafficante, who had smuggled guns to him during his fight against Batista.
Even though Castro had Trafficante imprisoned, his prison accommodations were plush, and he was allowed to leave Cuba with relative ease.
Castro was the object of assassination and poisoning attempts and may have beheved Kennedy could not be trusted to honor his commitments to Khrushchev.
In his anger, he found an unexpected ally in the Mafia, which wanted nothing more than to see Kennedy and his brother Bobby put out of commission.
In Efimov’s view, Castro began a sinister relationship with the Mafia through Trafficante.
In 1982, four Cuban officials were indicted on drug smuggling charges; one of them was a Cuban admiral.
Castro was not above being involved in the United States drug trade, and his ties to the drug cartels (as well as suspected ties to the deposed drugdealing Panamanian leader, Manuel Noriega) also suggest that Cuba maintained significant Mafia connections.
It is Efimov’s conjecture that Castro, through agents Pino Machado and Moleon Cassera, plotted the assassination of Kennedy and may have used the Trafficante connection to accomplish it.
One piece of evidence from the Mafia that supports this hypothesis is that the Mafia never was very serious in its so-called association with the CIA in trying to hit Castro.
Tie simply agreed to go to jail for them allowing them to think that fellows risked their lives infiltrating Cuba, that their boats are sewn through by bullets and all such fucking shit.
Efimov relates another alarming tale, namely that on the day of the assassination, Castro’s man in Dealey Plaza was Miguel Cassas Saez, a friend of Castro’s brother Raul.
An Air Cubana plane out of Mexico City was delayed in departure for Havana for five hours until Saez allegedly arrived and boarded.
He sat in the pilot’s cabin for the entire flight to Havana on the day of the iqt. assassination.
To amplify Efimov’s theory, we might suppose that John Roselli was killed not by Castro’s agents, but by the Mafia.
Suppose that Roselli, through his attorney, was sincere in his attempt to “leak” information that Oswald worked for Castro.
That is the conventional conspiracist interpretation of Roselli’s behavior.
Maybe what he leaked through his attorney was true, and that Castro was indeed behind the hit.
If Trafficante hit Kennedy not only for his own reasons, but for Castro as well , then killing Roselli to keep him quiet about the actual Cuban-Mafia plot could be seen as a logical Mafia maneuver.
Castro may have had a double-agent, Rolando Cubella, informing him that the CIA was trying to kill him.
Cubella was originally a CIA hit man and met with his CIA contact, Desmond Fitzgerald, in Paris on November 22, 1963, the very day Kennedy was assassinated.
Cubella was tapped by the CIA to assassinate Castro and accepted the assignment.
Before meeting with Fitzgerald, however, Cubella made great efforts to make sure that Robert Kennedy knew of the arrangement to kill Castro.
If Cubella needed to know that Bobby had approved of the hit against Castro — and Cubella was sending this information back to Castro — it is plausible that Castro 293.
This getaway plane’s behavior is partially corroborated in Hosty’s Assignment Oswald, ibid.
Conspiracy was seeking “confirmation” that indeed Kennedy, not just the CIA, was behind the attempts on his life.
Strong Points • One of the strongest elements of this theory is motive.
Cubella’s “contract” was proof to Castro that nothing would stop the Kennedy brothers from trying to kill him.
If one can suppose a Castro-Mafia “shared desire” to eliminate Kennedy, one can also see that the Mafia had the means to carry this off more easily and could operate more effectively on American soil than Castro.
Weak Points • If we conjectured that Castro with the United States Mafia conspired to hit Kennedy, Oswald makes no sense here.
Oswald may have been a sharpshooter, but the KGB or the Cubans would have used someone with more experience, and would have equipped him with far better shooting gear.
The Johnson White House Tapes, 196T64, by Michael Beschloss, reveals that Johnson thought Castro was to blame for JFK’s death, but that any retaliatory strike would invite a nuclear confrontation with the Soviets.
There is no cover, no subterfuge; the man charged with the crime looks too much like a Castro sympathizer who was on television passing out leaflets in support of Castro back in New Orleans.
So either Castro was not involved or, if he was, then Oswald was in no way supposed to be a patsy for the crime.
Either we reject the Cuban origination of this plot or our next best assumption would be that Oswald, one of the triggers, was just not supposed to be caught.
Perhaps he was supposed to be on the plane that left Dallas, headed to Mexico City, and then went on to Cuba, the same one that carried his alleged co-hit man, Miguel Saez, to Havana.
If Oswald was an actual assassin, then this model still makes some sense.
The Texas theater was a reconnoiter point and part of the getaway plan which Officer Tippit foiled.
The only way out of this dilemma is that we suppose that Castro was in league with the Mafia; without a Mafia source, it is unlikely that Castro would have such early information on the travel itinerary to Dallas.
Most of the evidence developed in Chapter 3, pointing to a conspiracy, would be hard to explain if one assumed the origin of the conspiracy was in Havana.
An association between the two might be logical in the 1980s, when cocaine cartels were operating from Columbia, Panama, and throughout the Caribbean — and when a Cuban admiral was arrested for drug dealing — but back in 1963, Castro and the Mafia were not on the friendliest of terms.
Cubans and Mafiosi make inimical bedfellows, despite their shared desire to see the Kennedys eliminated.
Cuban army and navy units had been placed on alert on the evening of 296.
According to Martino, Oswald was on his way to meet his fellow-trigger at the Texas Theater, but officer Tippit got in the way.
When Oswald was arrested, the other “trigger” was in the theater and escaped.
Martino, however, said the man Oswald was to meet was a CIA anti-Castro Cuban, not an agent of Castro.
Secondly, Castro appeared “frightened, if not terrified,” after the assassination and felt it could trigger a United States invasion of the island.
While that is only circumstantial evidence, it is inconsistent with the view that Castro was the mastermind of the plot.
In sum, there are many intriguing aspects to a Cuban plot and particularly a Cuban-Mafia plot, but it is still very hypothetical and sketchy to warrant much cred' ibility.
The CIA and the Mob The theories presented in this chapter generate a panoply of potential conspirators, co-conspirators, disinformation and cover-up figures, plus a horde of assassins.
We have treated these theories as relatively separate and discrete, but there is room to develop synergies.
Giancana, Roselli, and Trafficante had all been enlisted by the CIA to assassinate Castro.
Mooney stood up from his chair, cigar in hand, and marched across the room.
There was a deadly silence in the room as Mooney [Sam Giancana stalked back to the comfort of his chair.
He finally knew for certain what he’d secretly feared all along; his brother had been right — the government and the Outfit were really two sides of the same coin.
Mooney said that the “alleged lone gunman,” Lee Harvey Oswald, like Ruby, had ties to both the CIA and the Outfit , Oswald had been connected to the New Orleans Mob from the time he was born; his uncle was a Marcello lieutenant who had exerted a powerful influence over the fatherless boy.
Early in life, Oswald had formed a powerful alliance with the United States intelligence community, first as an impressionable young man during a stint in the Civil Air Patrol with homosexual CIA operative David Ferrie — a bizarre, hairless eccentric whom Mooney said he and Marcello frequently used to fly drugs and guns out of Central America.
And later, when serving in the Marines during the late fifties, when Oswald attended a series of intensive intelligence training sessions run by the Office of Naval Intelligence in a top secret Japanese spy base.
Mooney said both Richard NLxon and Lyndon Johnson knew about the whole damned thing.
Although much of the Giancana text tends toward the fantastic, perhaps we should not so easily dismiss the idea that the CIA and the Mafia, together, may have played simultaneous and mutually advantageous roles.
Of course, one wonders what the motive might have been for a combined CIAMafia plot against Kennedy.
The Mob, at least in the person of Sam Giancana, felt double-crossed by the Kennedys.
However, CIA motives have never been well established other than resentment over the moves Kennedy made to dismantle the organization after the Bay of Pigs fiasco.
A few right-wing former CIA officials were embittered by Kennedy’s action with Khrushchev and his failure to proceed properly during the Bay of Pigs invasion.
Allen Dulles, General Cabell, and Richard Bissell were three CIA figures fired by Kennedy over the Bay of Pigs.
William Harvey, the rogue CIA operative who became cozy with organized crime, was 298.
Also, Cuban television reported that “the same group of mobsters and right-wingers that tried repeatedly to kill Fidel Castro” was behind the assassination of President Kennedy.
Three American mobsters and two anti-Castro Cubans were identified as responsible.
Conspiracy demoted and transferred for unauthorized covert operations against Cuba.
Perhaps, when we view this list of disgruntled, demoted, or demoralized CIA figures, we can construe a motive, and to that extent there is some merit in thinking both organized crime and embittered elements of the CIA could have joined white and black hands in this historic unfolding of events.
On close inspection, this book is simply far too dramatic, if not fictionalized, to merit serious, scholarly attention.
There is a scene, for example, of Morrow picking up $250,000 in cash from a Bimini bank, being followed by two tails, picking up a stray motorcycle with the key conveniently left in the ignition, and fleeing to the airport where a waiting plane takes him off the island.
In another scene, Morrow arrives in Puerto Rico at the lavish home of a United States Congressman and is greeted by a sultry house guest, Francoise, who later meets him for a rendezvous in Miami — where she is murdered.
Morrow makes a daring flight with David Ferrie deep into Cuba, measures wave emanations from a hard Soviet missile silo, and then steals off to Florida from a deserted airstrip.
Ferrie is wounded and faints, yet Morrow, not only an expert scientist, inventor of the VCR and accomplished counterfeiter but also a pilot, takes the controls from Ferrie and finishes the mission.
The James Bond-like elements of this text suggest that much of it was written with a Holly wood screenplay in mind.
Oswald is treated as a government plant during his stay in Minsk and is alleged to have been working for the United States all the time.
On the other hand, he includes a considerable amount of ostensibly factual material.
Some of the essential points of his work in linking CIA and Mafia forces to the plot against Kennedy are summarized below.
They have not been included in the body of this text because they are simply too suspect.
The James Bond-like elements of this text suggest that much of it was written with a Holly187 Conspiracy in Camelot wood screenplay in mind.
If true, Cabell’s behavior is treasonous since Kennedy issued orders specifically discontinuing all counterfeiting operations against Cuba.
Barry Goldwater is alleged to have known about the counterfeiting operation.
Helms informed neither the Attorney General, the head of the CIA, nor the President of his actions.
Thomas Luchese, a Mafia don, played a role in the Mafia-CIA plot against Kennedy.
He ordered Morrow to purchase four 7.35 surplus Mannlicher-Carcano rifles intended for use in the JFK hit.
His close associate Eladio del Valle (who was murdered in Miami on the same day that Ferrie died), is much more fully developed in this text than in most others.
According to Morrow, William Harvey became the coordinator for CIA plans for assassinating Fidel Castro.
Clay Shaw is alleged to have recruited other hit men from the Minutemen.
Jose Aleman, an FBI informant, was told by Trafficante of the impending hit.
Conspiracy mation went to Aleman’s FBI contacts, George Davis, and Paul Scranton, and Hoover learned of the plot on November 4,1963.
The topic of discussion was what would happen if Kennedy were assassinated.
The bullet was handed over to FBI special agents Francis X O’Neill and James W Sibert.
Morrow says that “O’Neill and Sibert his escorts took the shell, signed a receipt for it, and gave it to Humes.
She married Lyndon’s sidekick, Jack Valenti, now the president of the Academy of Motion Picture Arts & Sciences.
Morrow suggests that the reason Kennedy was killed was to inspire the American government to attack Cuba.
Oswald was set up as a pro-Castro figure; the thought was that having a pro-Castro Marxist tabbed with the murder of the President might lead to a declaration of war against Cuba.
The Mafia, CIA, and anti-Castro Cubans were very interested in that outcome.
No text has really ever addressed how her murder might be related to the assassination, but Morrow says that her former husband.
Meyer allegedly became friendly with Bobby Kennedy after the assassination and wanted to pass on information to him.
None has been included in the tables in the present text, but might be included in the future, pending verification.
Harold Eugene Orr, president of an Amarillo Text company, was found dead of carbon monoxide poisoning and had played a key role in Estes’ finance frauds.
Howard Pratt, the Chicago office manager of one of Estes’ fertilizer suppliers, was similarly found dead of carbon monoxide poisoning.
O’Hare killed Quesada and Gilberto Rodriguez Hernandez because they were suspected of forwarding information to the Kennedy Administration regarding the counterfeiting operation.
None of these deaths have been listed in the tables presented in this text.
Further research verifying these murders might eventually lead to their inclusion.
It is important to keep in mind that conspiracy research literature is heavily laden with defamation, innuendo, and guilt by association, and that factual, hard evidence is lacking to the extreme.
Hunt, Carlos Bringuier, Gen Edwin Walker, Richard Nixon, Orlando Bosch, Pedro Diaz, James Milteer Gerry Patrick Hemming, Pedro Diaz Lanz, Frank Sturgis, Alexander Rorke, Guillermo Novo and Ignacio Novo USSR and/or Castro Nikita Khrushchev arranged through Trafficante via Marcello for Castro; hit man Miguel Cassas Saez Castro Pino Machado/ Moleon Cassera Lee Harvey Oswald, perhaps aided by Valerie Kostikov * Fired or transferred by Kennedy after Bay of Pigs invasion.
Two assassins not listed above come from a source deemed too fantastic and unreliable for inclusion.
The assassins were alleged to be part of a CIA conspiracy, French mercenary, John Michael M ertzand Jean Soutre.
Conspiracy Appendix An intricate controversy emerges from some of the substance of this text when compared to the work of Anthony Summers.
In September, 1963, an African diplomat contacted Attwood and informed him that Castro wanted to talk to Kennedy.
Given the extreme risk of appearing to be soft on Castro or seeming to be seeking a rapprochement with him, Kennedy instructed Attwood to approach these discussions with great respect for secrecy.
Attwood was in contact with the Cubans as late as November 19; only RFK and the President, along with very few others, were aware of these discussions.
The meetings were coordinated through the help of an ABC correspondent, Lisa Howard.
While these steps were being taken, the CIA was involved in another, quite opposite, set of actions.
In late September 1963, the CIA contacted Cubella and sought to enlist him in an effort to kill Castro.
Efimov argues that Cubella was a double agent and was informing Castro of these machinations against him.
Anthony Summers, who interviewed Cubella, disagrees and asserts that Cubella never informed Castro of his CIA connections.
In fact, RFK knew nothing of these events and Desmond Fitzgerald was a CIA official.
He met with Cubella in Paris on November 22,1963 and gave him a poison pen with which to assassinate Castro.
Cubella says that the CIA pen was returned and that he did not want to personally assassinate Castro.
Others argue the pen was requested by Cubella and that it contained a very lethal poison.
Ultimately, Castro arrested Cubella, but he was never charged with any crimes prior to 1964.
From a psychological perspective, it is of interest to note the paradox of these events.
We know for certain that Castro was aware of Attwood’s efforts, but we do not know if Castro was aware of the CIA-Cubella plot to kill him at this time.
For a discussion of this interesting twist to the whole conspiracy matter, the reader is directed to Summers, ibid., pp 344, 395,401-402 and Efimov, Igor, 258.
If true, then the Kennedy brothers were playing both ends against the middle, negotiating a peace through Mr Attwood and initiating an assassination plot against Castro all within a few days of each other and similarly within a few days of the assassination of Kennedy.
Rusk seems to imply that the Kennedy brothers knew of both the coup and the peace effort and were behind both.
Asked if this was not “the height of duplicity,” Rusk replied, “It was just an either/or situation.
Paradox There was the door to which I found no key, There was the veil through which I might not see. — Omar Khayam So far, we have attempted to stay close to the published literature.
Lee Harvey Oswald may have shot President Kennedy, but he may not have.
Some mysterious set of events has lurked behind the scenes, and the full facts of the Kennedy assassination have not become known.
A conspiracy from some quarter is a very sound and reasonable hypothesis.
Any other scenario is unlikely, problematic, and contrary to the best evidence on the subject.
The most likely conspiracies involve the Mafia or the CIA and anti-Castro Cubans.
A plot originating with President Johnson, the Soviets, or a conspiracy born in Havana are plausible but have significantly more difficulties to overcome to be more credible.
Interpreting The Facts Once the homework is done, speculation must take over.
Having added up what can be known for sure, the next step is to draw out implications and associations, engaging in creative thinking.
Let us try to look at the material without being limited by any inherited, vested interest of one conspiracy “school” or another.
By taking a closer look at the cover-up, we ought to be able to get closer to the source of the conspiracy.
The media has been a leading source of cover-up and disinformation; but it is also a source of genuine, valid, and compelling information.
After alf, many mainstream sources as well as the underground literature on the Kennedy assassination have published very incisive pieces.
Thus, this media sample is probably an artifact of information dissemination and not to be weighed too heavily.
Another disclaimer is that the Mafia does not regularly use publicists and has limited disinformation capabilities.
Its modus operandi is to enforce silence through intimidation and murder.
Mafia-related murders, therefore, have been included as examples of cover-up even though they were not originalfy listed in the table in Chapter 3.
If the intent is to enforce silence, then such murders ought to be tabulated.
Categorizing the leading sources of deception leads us back to the FBI, the CIA and the Mob, again, and shows that each is about equal to the others.
If there is a conspiracy of silence — and we exclude the media from our focus — then these three are the major players.
We already know that the FBI, the CIA and the Mob have an interest in keeping the truth about many events buried.
The conspiracy to cover up the truth about this event originated from inside the United States.
Paradox “Cover-up” includes murdering people to prevent them from talking.
Included in the figure are the Mafia-related murders of Sam Giancana, John Roselli, Carlos Prio, Jimmy Hoffa, Charles Nicoletti, Leo Moceri, Richard Cain, Salvatore Granello and Dave Yaras.
Circumstances make two of the “suicides” questionable and the heart attack , as well.
All of the murders had some connecting point with the Kennedy assassination.
Dealey Plaza Another way to look at this information might be to place the names of all the assassins in some order.
Joseph Milteer, the ultra right-wing leader of numerous racist groups, who had been on the phone to FBI informant William Somersett was reported as knowledgeable of the upcoming assassination.
Some said he was photographed in Dealey Plaza among the spectators; others dispute that.
Howard Hunt, Frank Sturgis, and Daniel Carswell are alleged by Weberman and Canfield to have been the tramps arrested in the railroad yards and Marita Lorenz implicated them, but both denied being there.
Possible Assassins In Dealey Plaza, November 22,1963 a Lee Harvey Oswald Joseph Milteer Eugene Brading Morgan Brown Howard Hunt Frank Sturgis Daniel Carswell Lucien Sarti Harry Wetherford Roscoe White Pedo Diaz Lanz James Powell Loran Hall Charles Harrelson Charles Rogers James Sutton Charles Nicoletti Chancey Holt Guillermo Novo Ignacio Novo Gerry Hemming Alexander Rorke Orlando Bosch Miguel Sawz Johnny Roselli Desmond Fitzgerald Malcolm “Mac” Wallace John Michael M ertzand Jean Soutre have not been included.
His true identity, Eugene Hale Brading, did not come out until 1969 when a television producer discovered it.
Brading stayed with his associate Morgan H Brown at the Cabana Hotel in Dallas.
Brading was also associated with the Mob and Marcello through connections with Nofio Pecora and James Dolan.
James Powell has not been accused, in existing literature on the assassination, but he was found in the Dal-Tex along with Eugene Hale Brading building after it was sealed off following the assassination.
He was an army intelligence officer, and what he was doing there has never been fully explained.
Harry Wetherford was a Dallas police officer on top of the Dallas County jail during the motorcade.
Decker had a crackshot rifleman — Harry Wetherford — on top of the Dallas County Jail Building during the motorcade, close by Oswald’s alleged sniper’s nest.
A young researcher tried to talk to Wetherford once and asked if he had shot at Kennedy.
J Marita Lorenz said Bosch and Diaz Lanz accompanied Frank Sturgis to Dealey Plaza, plus two Cuban brothers who she could not identify.
All were part of Operation 40, a secret anti-Castro guerrilla group formed by the CIA in 1960, an assassination squad.
The two Cuban brothers Marita Lorenz could not identify might be linked to Sturgis, Pedro Diaz Lanz and Eduardo Diaz Lanz.
Others say Rorke was deceased by this time and could not possibly have been in this entourage.
Desmond Fitzgerald, a CIA employee, was listed in a conspiracy-based assassination newsletter as the grassy knoll gunman using a directionally silenced rifle designed by Mitch WerBell using frangible, explode-on-impact bullets.
The same periodical, citing testimony by Billy Sol Estes, implicates Malcolm Wallace, an LBJ crony, as the assassin.
He confessed to the killing of John Kennedy and a Texas judge; he later retracted it, saying he was on cocaine.
Harrelson’s confession about JFK was dismissed as the ramblings of a maniac, yet his confession involving the judge led to a successful prosecution; and he is currently serving time for that murder.
Authors Craig and Rogers say that CIA contract killer Charles Frederick Rogers and Harrelson were the two sharpshooters at the grassy knoll who assassinated Kennedy.
They were two of the three tramps arrested and then released; the other was Chauncey Holt, who did not take an active part in the assassination but confessed his involvement.
In 1994, private investigator Joe West was alerted by an “anonymous FBI source” to a man serving a 50-year prison sentence in Joliet State Penitentiary.
The man finally consented to an interview, after the death of investigator West.
A full and uncensored version of this video 7 was distributed in 1996, based on a lengthy interview held in March of 1994.
The publishers of the video remain elusive and are listed as MPI Home Video and UTL Productions.
He alleges that he was the loyal assistant, bodyguard and driver of Chuckie Nicoletti, Sam Giancana’s primary hit man.
He met Lee Harvey Oswald and said Oswald was not likely aware ol any plot against the President.
He also says that even though Oswald did not have a driver’s license, he had driven military vehicles and could drive a car.
West says that he was a “back up” hit man who was to shoot Kennedy if the shots which came from behind did not succeed in killing him.
The major CIA person who liaisoned with the Mafia for this hit was David Attlee Phillips.
He saw JFK had been hit, but that the headshot had not been accomplished.
He believes that he and Nicoletti hit JFK from the front almost simultaneously.
He knows that David Ferrie was murdered but also refuses to identify his killer.
His lack of intelligence and erudition makes his story surprisingly credible.
He did not mention or appear to implicate Roscoe White, Charles Frederick Rogers, Loran Hall, Howard Hunt, Daniel Carswell, Richard Cain or other notable figures.
He did implicate deceased Mafiosi Giancana, Roselli and Nicoletti, however.
Furthermore, he said that Cuban exile Frank Sturgis was also present at Dealey Plaza.
There are no murder weapons associated with any of these individuals, no fingerprints, no empty cartridge casings, 8 no physical evidence of any stature, no witnesses observing their shooting.
Apart from some sworn testimony, conspiracy theories simply have not come up with the physical evidence needed for any prosecutions or convictions.
On the one hand, it is clear that some kind of conspiracy is an extremely likely possibility; and on the other, there is little evidence to indict or convict anyone for the century’s greatest crime.
This drama is deeply frustrating, almost as if it unfolded according to a plan that inherently generates the mystery that foils all attempts to solve it.
Among the 26 suspect individuals in Dealey Plaza that day, the closest one can get to identifying an alternate assassin might be Eugene Hale Brading.
Jim Moore, who spent over 10 years going over Dealey Plaza, holds that the first bullet fired actually missed.
It hit the curb on Elm Street and ricocheted, splattering a spectator, James Tague, with concrete.
Tague was injured and reported the matter to the police; Moore points out that there were five witnesses to Tague’s injuries.
Thus, while most people thought the first shot hit Kennedy in the throat (and Kennedy quickly brings his hand toward his throat on the Zapruder film), Moore says the first shot missed and hit Tague.
Let’s draw a line from the point of impact on that curbstone back to a position within a circle with an eighteen-inch diameter around the President’s head and shoulders.
If we project that line back to some firing point, we have placed that gunman in a window on the second floor the DalTex Building, behind the President’s car.
It is unfortunate that Fletcher Prouty does not make the next logical deduction.
Moreover, the scientific acoustic evidence presented to the HSCA also shows that some of the shots may have come from the DabTex building where Brading was arrested.
Shieb, in turn, was the person called by Barney Baker of the Teamsters shortly after the assassination.
Paradox convict only recently released from prison; Jack Ruby had called him, a few weeks before the assassination.
Thus Brading is tied in with the Teamsters, the Mob, and the right-wing Minutemen, and has a third-party association with Jack Ruby.
Brading stayed at the Cabana Hotel in Dallas the night before the assassination.
Ralph Meyers was staying in that hotel — an Army Intelligence agent with a crypto-clearance who had been stationed at a top-secret base in Turkey.
Another military intelligence figure appears with Brading as well —James Powell — since both were caught in the Dal-Tex building after it had been sealed.
Thus, Brading can be linked with Ruby, the right-wing Minutemen, and the Mob, and via two circumstantial linkages, with military intelligence.
James Tague had stopped his car at the location indicated on the map and stood on the south curb of Main Street.
A piece of cement from the curb flew up and injured Tague, who reported the incident.
He was hit after the first shot, by his recollection, but before the last shot.
It is 22 feet over the President’s head and as much as 33 feet off to the right.
However, if one draws a line from Tague through the motorcade route, as Fletcher Prouty suggests, it leads directly to the second floor of the Dal-Tex building where Eugene Hale Brading, the ex convict, was arrested and then let go.
And TV investigative reporter Daniel Schorr put an “Agent X’’ on CBS in silhouette.
He said he fought in the mountains of Cuba with Frank Sturgis and Loran Hall.
He said Hall was in Dallas on November 22 and was part of the assassination squad directed by Eugene Hale Brading.
So Brading has been linked with anti-Castro Cubans, via Schorr’s anonymous informant.
Similarly, Hunt’s son, Nelson Bunker Hunt, partially paid for a full page black-bordered advertisement in the Dallas Morning News attacking the President as a pro-communist traitor.
Hunt, Earl Shieb and the Minutemen, yet manages to find the time to connect to antiCastro Cubans through David Ferrie and Frank Sturgis.
The result of our inquiry is that we have a pastiche of associations and innuendo, and little else.
Brading was a charter member of the La Costa Club, located twenty miles south of San Clemente.
Financed by the Teamsters and owned by Meyer Lansky’s front man, Moe Dalitz.
La Costa was frequented by many organized crime figures as well as Nixon’s close friend Murray Chotiner.
Haldeman met to get their stories about the Watergate cover-up synchronized.
Hunt was a very close personal friend of LBJ’s and a major supporter of his bid for the Presidency.
We have incredible associations, phenomenal opportunities for guilt by association, but no proof of anything.
The Kennedy assassination is certainly a paradox, but it is also like a fractal image, in which each portion of any detail of the figure seems to contain a view of the whole figure.
Instead of looking at Dealey Plaza, let us focus on metropolitan Dallas as a whole.
It took some time before all of these names were properly identified in the literature, but that they were all present on the eve of the assassination now seems well established.
Hunt is the Big Man in Texas, the Giant, the richest and the stingiest, the most powerful and the most solitary of the oilmen.
One curiously suspicious quote came from this event and is often touted in conspiracy circles.
Madeline Brown, LBJ’s mistress, said he was at the party with Nixon, Hoover, Hunt and Murchison.
As with so many facts and quotes in this drama, one must be critical of the veracity of each piece of the assassination puzzle.
More recent conspiracy literate also implicates LBJ-appointed Warren commission member, John J McCloy, as also present at that party.
Paradox Hunt made much of his fortune from the oil depletion allowance, and Kennedy had threatened to remove it.
When Kennedy threatened to retract the depletion allowance, the rightwing-John Birch hate machine was cranked up against him.
Conspiracy authors have implicated Hunt, either directly or through innuendo.
Hunt watched John Kennedy ride towards Dealey Plaza, where fate awaited him at 12:30.
A few minutes later, escorted by six men in two cars, Hunt left the center of Dallas without even stopping by his house.
At that very moment, General Walker was in a plane between New Orleans and Shreveport.
He joined Mr Hunt in one of his secret hideaways across the Mexican border.
It was not until Christmas that Hunt, Walker and their party returned to Dallas.
If Hunt were involved in the assassination, it would seem his behavior would have been far more discrete than it was.
Carrol & Graf, 1993), mentions Madeline Brown in the following context: “I know Madeline Brown, a former mistress of Johnson, rather well and find her mostly credible.
As the author of this text, I have attempted to base all conjecture and speculation on evidence gleaned from one published source or another.
Hunt, reported to be the wealthiest American in 1966, was associated with sponsorship of extreme right-wing causes and in no uncertain terms said that Kennedy should be shot.
It has always been a speculation that one of the shots fired at JFK came from the DalTex building.
George Butler, a Dallas police officer with some responsibility for Oswald’s transfer, was also once Hunt’s head of security.
Butler was described as an extreme right-winger who gave the “all clear” to transfer Oswald just before he was killed by Jack Ruby.
Richard Nixon Grodin and others intimate that Richard Nixon and J Edgar Hoover were also present in Dallas the night before the assassination, meeting with Texas industrialist 25.
Nixon went to great lengths to be oblique about his whereabouts on November 22.
He was a lawyer representing Pepsico at a Carbonated Beverages Convention and Great Southwest Corporation at the time.
Perhaps only a little white lie, but a lie nonetheless, contained in Warren Commission exhibit 1973, on page 280.
Clint Murchison Not much in conspiracy literature covers Clint Murchison, but there is enough to raise eyebrows.
She was hidden away — much to the consternation of her friend, Ruth Paine — in a motel owned by the Great Southwest Corporation, which was controlled by the Wynne family of Dallas, partners of Clint Murchison.
George deMohrenschildt traveled to Haiti with a large sum of money shortly after the assassination.
And it was Haiti’s notorious Papa Doc Duvalier who remarked, before the assassination, that Kennedy would not be in power long.
A more recent text corroborates that this party at the Murchisons’ did in fact take place.
Madeline Brown and Penn Jones Jr. are the major sources for this information.
To make matters all the more interwoven, Bobby Baker, Johnson’s right hand man, lobbied in Washington for the interests of this racetrack.Murchison, in fact, was about to be investigated with respect to his relationship to Baker.
Senate investigators hinted that the Murchison brothers of Texas might be called upon to testify about the activities of Johnson’s protege, Bobby Baker.
If we similarly graph the known associations of suspect individuals who were in Dallas on the eve of the assassination — Nixon, Hunt, J Edgar Hoover, and Clint Murchison — in the same way that we graphed the known associates of Jim Braden, the resulting figure reproduces virtually the entire spectrum of conspiracies.
While no one has come up with an explanation of a plot involving all of these elements, it does make it all the more difficult to dismiss the idea of some conspiracy.
Given the apparent contradictions, the usual approach to the situation has been to do more detective work.
It is human to feel that, if we gather more data, one day the controversy will be resolved.
Marina was questioned over 48 times by the FBI; testified on Dec 26, 1963, and was under constant FBI “protection"" during this time.
With the Kennedy assassination, the more we discover, the less we know.
In fact, new twists, revelations, indeed whole new conspiracies seem just waiting in the wings to be born, Suzy Chang and Maria Novotny One new theory could be embedded in the Profumo affair.
In 1963, the War Minister of Britain, John Profumo, was embroiled in a sex scandal with Christine Keeler, a call girl who also happened to be consorting with a Soviet spy; she was under the wing of one Stephen Ward, who had a penchant for introducing powerful men to attractive women.
Tier second encounter with Kennedy occurred with two other prostitutes on West 55th St.
Ele did not record all phone conversations, only about 12 hours in toto.
One call recorded was from Arthur Schlesinger, his historian, who spoke to him about the Profumo scandal.
Paradox being recorded, nor did he have any idea why FJK would have such an avid interest in the Profumo case.
Indeed, the FBI sought to question Kennedy about these interludes, but he was assassinated firstd 9 One might put quite a spin on the Soviet-Profumo-JFK trysts and turn it into a full-fledged conspiracy theory.
As it stands, at the time of this writing, it is an almost irrelevant piece of trivia, nothing more than a footnote in the present compendium of literature on the subject.
M ary Pinchot Meyer and the CIA Another theory could be woven around Kennedy’s last lover.
An American socialite, blond, intelligent, risk-taking, is married to a senior CIA official in Washington.
After divorcing him, she takes up with the President of the United States and secretly enters the White House two to three times per week when the First Lady is away.
She introduces the President to marijuana and hashish, perhaps even LSD, in her torrid afternoon escapades.
Her roommate, also a former mistress of the President, is involved as well.
Her diary details her affair with the President and a senior CIA Director becomes privy to the documents.
He destroys the diary, and keeps these secrets to himself for well over two decades.
It sounds like a preposterous tale from the National Enquirer, but the scenario happened.
William Safire, “Kennedy Set Flistoric Precedent,” NY Times News Service, December 27,1994.
Only one JFK conspiracist, Robert Morrow, held out the theory that Mary Meyer was ready to turn over to an inquiring Bobby Kennedy important documents from her former husband, Cord Meyer, a high ranking CIA officer, about the assassination and that that is why she was murdered.
Morrow, however, has been considered reckless in his speculations, certainly by this author and by others as well.
She was married to a career CIA officer, Cord Meyer, and divorced in 1959.
Kennedy’s press secretary, had an ongoing White House tryst with Kennedy.
She moved into Mary Meyer’s Washington apartment after her former landlady photographed the President leaving Turnure’s apartment late at night.
She met Kennedy between twenty and thirty times at the White House, her art studio, and in the homes of friends.
After his assassination, Mary Meyer was found shot to death in Georgetown , not far from her studio.
Her diary was discovered by the wife of Washington Post publisher Ben Bradlee.
The Bradlees brought it to the attention of CIA official James Angleton.
One wonders, of course, what the reactions might have been if the Warren Commission report had published even a speck of this information at the time.
In 1995, Ben Bradlee published his memoirs, corroborating firsthand most of what has been said.
She was walking along the towpath by the canal. . . when she was grabbed from behind, wrestled to the ground, and shot just once under the cheekbone as she struggled to get free.
Two telephone calls that night from overseas added new dimensions to Mary’s death.
Anne asked if we had found any such diary, and we told her we hadn’t looked for anything, much less a diary.
We didn’t start looking until the next morning.. . when Tony and I walked around the corner a few blocks to Mary’s house.
It was locked, as we had expected, but when we got inside, we found Jim Angleton, and to our complete surprise he told us he, too, was looking for Mary’s diary.
Paradox Now, James Jesus Angleton was a lot of things, including an extremely controversial, high-ranking CIA official specializing in counterintelligence, but he was also a friend of ours, and the husband of Mary Meyer’s close friend Cicely Angleton.
We felt his presence was odd, to say the least, but took him at his word and with him, we searched Mary’s house thoroughly.
Later that day, we realized that we hadn’t looked for the diary in Mary’s studio, which was directly across a dead-end driveway from the garden behind our house.
Never mind the fact that the CIA’s most controversial counterintelligence specialist had been caught in the act of breaking and entering, and looking for her diary.
The story said that Mary and Jack had met twenty to thirty times in the White House during their romance from January 1962 to November 1963; that they had smoked grass on one occasion ... that Mary had kept a diary of the whole affair.
This incident is at best considered minor, irrelevant, a mere footnote to the whole story.
It is another illustration of the Kennedy assassination as a riddle that can iterate an infinite array of new edges and interpretations.
Mary Meyer did exist; the only questionable assertion in this whole litany is whether she and Kennedy smoked hashish in the White House.
Perhaps her diary could corroborate that, but it is gone; from Ben Bradlee’s long withheld revelations, it all happened as stated.
A black laborer was apprehended at the scene of her murder, but was acquitted of all charges; her murder remains unsolved.
Ben Bradlee said she not only saw the diary but also surrendered it to Angleton.
He was the officer in charge of investigating KGB defector, Yuri Nosenko.
At his level, he would have known far more about the assassination than was ever revealed.
Angleton connects to many segments of this mystery, to the KGB, to Oswald, to Nosenko, to Mary Meyer, to Oswald’s Mexico City visit, to the destruction of documents in Mexico City, to CIA intrigues with anti-Castro Cubans, and to assassination plots against Castro.
Yet, other than Oswald, none of these names even appears in the index of the Warren Report.
The National Enquirer broke the story of the Mary Meyer-JFK liaison in the late 1970s.
Bradlee was a major player in the forced resignation of Richard Nixon during Watergate.
Woodward and Bernstein, virtually brought down the President; but when it came to matters that might disturb memories of JFK, there was only a deadening silence.
There were no wild voices accusing the CIA of complicity in the murder of Mary Meyer or its cover up, and few credible voices breaking the news to the public that their fallen President might not have been quite what they thought.
Ben Bradlee finally ’fessed up in a very circumscribed revelation in 1995 in his memoirs.
I am appalled by the details that have emerged, appalled by the recklessness, by the subterfuge that must have been involved, [he writes.
That just seems unforgivably reckless behavBradlee was profiled by Vanity Fair in 1995, and it is remarkable how few seem to hold him in contempt for his silence.
His indignation over Kennedy’s behavior and shock at discovering Kennedy’s affair with his sister-in-law were not new in 1995.
Bradlee knew of the affair in 1964 and in fact was privy to the diary found in Meyer’s 42. 1 bid., 376.
It was Bradlee himself who caught James Angleton breaking into her apartment, and her art studio, in 1964 Bradlee’s sense of shock and outrage do not seem to surface in his books on Kennedy which appeared a decade later, either.
Fie was paid $36,000 for the hit and was accompanied by Johnny Roselli and Nicoletti, who were in the Dal-Tex building.
Nicoletti and Johnny Roselli were in the Dal-Tex Building and hit the President from behind.
Final orders to quash the assassination had to come from Tony Accardo, not the CIA, however; and Accardo did not cancel it.
Three Interviews with Inmate N-14006 Excerpts from three interviews follow, with the author’s comments to assist the reader in understanding why such questions were asked.
A “Nicoletti used only one rifle, 7.62 or 30.06, which is basically the same caliber.
Nicoletti worked for Sam Giancana, Sam Giancana took his orders from Tony Accardo.
I don’t give a shit what all of your so-called crime specialist say, but Tony Accardo still gave the orders and no one shit without his permission and that is a fact.
When Sam’s daughter, Antoinette, tried to tell me that it was her father who gave all the orders and called the shots I told her that she was wrong and her new husband, the old Mob lawyer [Robert McDonald] was with her and he also told that I was right.
I asked him about a number of figures mentioned in assassination literature and asked that he comment on them.
Brading was arrested on the day of the assassination in the Dal-Tex building and gave a false name to the Dallas police.
Richard Cain “Yes, I knew Richard Cain, very very well and his death has nothing to do with the JFK Assassination.
Nofio Pecora “Yes, I knew who he was, but 1 only met him on two occasions and only said hello and shook hands.
Paradox knew Jack Ruby, but more importantly, a person present at Lee Oswald’s bail hearing in New Orleans.
Conversely, assassination literature generally does not mention Pecora’s drug dealing.
Murret was described by the Warren Commission as not in any way connected to organized crime, but subsequent research showed connections to Carlos Marcello.
Campisi was a Dallas mobster and was the first person to visit Ruby in his Dallas jail cell after he killed Oswald.
I was with'in 2 feet of him, but he never knew that I was there with Roselli.
But due to the fact that there is no statue of limitation on murder, I cannot give you that name, as he is still alive.
Mainstream writers believe Ferrie committed suicide after Jim Garrison indicted him, but conspiracy writers believe he was hit, along with his associate.
I will try to make a copy of the paraffin test that was givin to Oswald and send it along with this if possible.
For example, in the book entitled Mortal Error, analysis of JFK’s skull shows a bullet hole that is 6 millimeters by 15 millimeters.
Oswald’s bullet was 6. millimeters, and thus the hole is too small to have come from that bullet.
The author also said that the entrance wound showed it could not have come from Oswald’s rifle above the President but had to have come from close to ground level and from directly behind the President.
The author even suspected that a secret service agent “accidentally” shot the President from that location.
In reviewing this information, however, we discover that the DalTex building where Nicoletti and Roselli were allegedly shooting is consistent with the skull wound.
Obviously, the diameter of the shell is larger than the measured wound in JFK’s skull, so we have the same problem of veracity as with Oswald; with Oswald’s gun or Nicoletti’s, the shell is much larger than the skull entry wound.
You would have to ask Eugene Brading that question, as he was the one who got them inside the Daltex building.
Q Morgan Brown A 11 Q Clay Shaw A 11 Barney Barker was an associate and bodyguard of Jimmy Floffa; Clay Shaw was indicted for the conspiracy to kill JFK by Jim Garrison in New Orleans; and Morgan Brown was the individual with whom Eugene Flale Brading was staying in Dallas — he left, right after the assassination.
The fact that he doesn’t have anything to say adds to his credibility — in this author’s view.
Fie clearly is not familiar with much that is written about the assassination and yet his answers have an uncanny consistency.
I selected the weapon for Nicoletti when 1 took everything to Dallas and at that time I had no idea Oswald even knew what was happening.
Most assassination literature seems to agree that Oswald got his job at the Depository through Ruth Paine, a friend of Marina Oswald.
His testimony at the HSCA was so inconsistent that the committee considered citing him for perjury.
His name is not well known except among those who have studied the assassination in detail.
Bonar Menninger, author of Mortal Error, suggests, based on autopsy findings, that both frangible and non-frangible bullets were used.
Frangible bullets explode on impact, leaving numerous fragments, while non-frangible bullets pass through the victim almost unscratched.
The bullet that hit JFK and was supposed to have hit Connally too was non-frangible, yet Menninger says that at least one frangible bullet hit JFK, leaving numerous fragments in his skull.
Yes, headshot, over right eye, by temple, and yes, frangible, and Remington brand.
Flowever, he said that a non-frangible heavy metal jacketed bullet also hit Kennedy.
Such a bullet would pass right through the tissues and not explode on impact.
JFK seems to have been hit by at least one bullet that exploded and another that went through him. . . likely the favored “pristine” bullet, that passed through Connally as well.
Sam’s daughter was here to visit me and ask me that and 1 also told her that it was Johnny.
But she left here and told friends of mine he she thought that 1 took part in her father’s death.
In the case of JFK, he said that a bullet casing should be found in a particular location with bite marks on it, and in the early 1980s such a casing was found and identified, where he said it would be.
Flowever, such a branch was never identified and it always remained a conjecture.
These are the thoughts of one Kennedy researcher; however, the Altgens’ photo of the motorcade , shows some windows apparently open.
It is possible that he hopes that his testimony and promise of evidence might help him win early release; if that is the case, the testimony he currently provides to authors like myself must be seen as suspect.
The Brothers Karamazov The Dostoyevsky novel is not and never was a detective story.
The suspense of a murder mystery exists in The Brothers Karamazov, but to read this great work as a whodunnit will never reveal more than a superficial meaning.
The novel conveys a far deeper meaning than the mere solution of a murder.
Well, it took Bobby Kennedy years to put Floffa away, but Nixon pardoned him and there were very strong rumors that Nixon accepted a hefty donation from the Teamsters (Floffa’s union) for his presidential campaign in return.
And if we agreed that Carlos Marcello killed Kennedy for Hoffa, there are a few other implications to tease out.
For example, James Flosty, Floover’s FBI agent in New Orleans, was suspiciously adamant in saying Carlos Marcello was a tomato salesman.
Attention would shift to yet another President, Gerald Ford, who, in turn, pardoned Nixon of all crimes, sat on the Warren Commission, and served a major disinformation function.
He perennially argued that Oswald alone killed JFK and that no conspiracy existed, past or present.
Prosecutorial tentacles would reach out to those involved in lying to Congress, withholding information from investigative committees, and obstruction of justice.
New indictments would touch J Edgar Hoover’s accomplices, former CIA Directors, and perhaps James Angleton for breaking and entering.
And George Burkley, the Navy Admiral who seems to have lost the President’s brain, but still had the presence of mind to swear his staff to secrecy about the autopsy — well into their retirements.
All of these could be served and indicted by our fantasized grand jury as well.
Dan Rather’s rendition of the Zapruder film, in 1975, about the President being thrown violently “forward” would come under intense scrutiny, and instead of asking the questions Rather might finally be required to answer a few; so would the owners of the Zapruder film, the Luce family.
There were other passengers aboard that aircraft, and prosecutions, indictments, and trials would extend ever outward.
Hale Boggs did not want to sign the Warren Commission report; he, like very few others of his time, spoke out courageously about Hoover bugging the phones of congressmen, and shortly thereafter his commercial plane crashed in Alaska, taking the lives of a quite a few others with him.
But it is more than a fantasy, more than the childish wish of a naive believer in the American way.
To fall into a trance, a vindictive reverie of the impossible, is absurd, doomed, and futile.
Hunt, William Sullivan, David Ferrie, Guy Banister, Chuckie Nicoletti, Dave Yaras, James Milteer, Jack Ruby, Roscoe White, James Angleton, David Phillips, John Roselli, Jimmy Hoffa, and Lee Harvey Oswald.
Robert Kennedy, Marilyn Monroe, Peter Lawford, Hale Boggs, Billy Sol Estes, John Paisley, Dorothy Hunt, John Connally, Joseph Kennedy, George de Mohrenschildt, Clare Boothe Luce, Clyde Tolson, Jose Aleman, General Walker, Earl Warren, Jacqueline Kennedy, Dorothy Kilgallen. . . even Jim Garrison.
Most of those who are hypothetically responsible are dead, and most of the witnesses whose testimony would be crucial to convict them are dead as well.
After 38 years of research and effort, both at concealing and at uncovering the truth, we are no closer to a solution now than we were in 1963.
Like the Brothers Karamazov, this mystery forces us to swim in a sea of paradox.
The less we knew — back in 1963 — the more we sensed and believed intuitively that something fishy was happening and some conspiracy was afoot in the assassination of President Kennedy.
The more we have come to know and learn of this conspiracy, the less able we are to find the truth, much less see justice done.
Well, we have done our homework, but this is not a drama that will yield a convenient realistic solution.
Lyndon Johnson’s mistress says that on New Years Eve, a drunken LBJ told her the CIA and Big Oil did it.
The use of the terms conspirator and “potential conspirator” in this text should be perhaps defined.
Sufficient evidence exists to indicate these individuals had information about the events which was not fully released by the Warren Commission.
Nixon, for example, was never queried extensively about his presence in Dallas and his “alleged” meeting with Hoover.
Giancana’s godson said that Sam told him that he had met Nixon in Dallas, but certainly Nixon never admitted to any such meeting.
Thus, the evidence that Nixon met with some unsavory characters and was present in Dallas before the assassination is hearsay.
To call Nixon a “conspirator” would be inappropriate, based merely on such evidence; but to call him a “potential conspirator"" groups him with others who, like him, should be or should have been questioned under oath in order to clarify substantial questions about their conduct; and it is a way to referring to these individuals who indeed have been treated as conspirators in the conspiracy literature on the subject.
This text does not seek to proliferate libel, but to point to the vast number of individuals who have been insufficiently questioned and investigated regarding the assassination.
And before Thomas Eli Davis III was killed, he told his wife he knew who killed Kennedy.
John Martino, on his deathbed, confessed that he was the paymaster and that anti-Castro Cubans did it.
Marita Lorenz swore under oath that Eloward blunt was the paymaster and Frank Sturgis did it. . . and then there is always Gerald Posner, who insists that Oswald and only Oswald did it.
In spite of repeated Freedom of Information requests by California researcher Bill Adams, the FBI has not revealed how its investigation of the gun was concluded.
Whether or not the weapon has any significance, it is a scandal that the public had to wait 30 years to learn that a second gun was found at the scene of the crime.
The Kennedy assassination refuses to be closed and defies any efforts at resolution.
We need to recognize that this as an ouroboros eating its own tail, leaving us exactly where we started.
Before that, however, there is another way to look at this, and that is to consider in depth the psychological profiles of the main characters in this drama.
Dark secrets relating to this historical event are held not only in the heavily redacted CIA documents sealed away from the prying public, but in the deeply twisted, secret personal lives of the major figures.
Now, we will peer down those dark alleys to see what answers can be found.
Shadows and Secrets I'm not done with a girl until I’ve had her three ways. —John Fitzgerald Kennedy 45 In this chapter we examine the psycho-biographies of the main characters.
Here is a world of secrecy, liaisons, and psychosexual intrigue; it may hold more clues.
No review of the assassination can dispense with this aspect of the drama , because here are some of the most poignant reminders of the deception, lies and cover-up that permeate the event, and signs that members of the family were in denial about what was going on, refusing to admit the truth or reality, even to themselves.
Conspiracy Schools Probably the greatest difficulty to surmount in teasing out the truths behind the Kennedy myth is the questionable literature one has to review.
Thomas Reeves, in A Question of Character, refers to the latter as the “Camelot School” of 45.
I watched him go out of the room, stopping and looking back at us rather wistfully, as if he was reminding himself that this was the end of his last carefree night on the town, the last time that he would be able to enjoy himself in a public restaurant for years to come.
The President thanked him and drove away smiling to spend his first night in the White house sleeping soundly in the Lincoln bedroom.
Angie Dickinson was there, along with actresses Janet Leigh and Kim Novak.
When he returned to Jackie, he looked rather sheepish and carried a copy of the Washington Post under his arm, as if he had just stepped outside to buy a newspaper.
Later, at the end of festivities on Inauguration Day, Jackie returned to the White blouse.
Jack carried on alone, attending two more balls and a party at the Georgetown home of columnist Joe Alsop.
There Kennedy enjoyed a brief sexual encounter with a beautiful young woman who wept as he left, fearful that her relationship with the president was finished forever.
In this way, more like an irresponsible playboy than a mature and idealistic chief executive.
Shadows and Secrets Kennedy took Angie Dickim son as his lover sometime before the Inauguration.
J Edgar Hoover monitored JFK’s relationship to Dickinson and other dalliances including Marilyn Monroe and confronted Kennedy with this information in 1962.
The first author covers the inaugural period as if Kennedy wistfully longed for the days of his youth yet dutifully accepted his heroic responsibilities, ever mindful of the need to sacrifice personal friendships and the simple pleasures of dining in a public restaurant for the public good.
O’Donnell mentions church and, of course, sleeping soundly in the Lincoln bedroom with the First Lady.
Photo: Angie Dickinson at Inauguration with JFK I’m not going to talk about Jack and his broads... but... all I will say is that 1 was Frank’s pimp and Frank was Jack’s.
Jack invited Judith Campbell Exner, another Kennedy mistress, to sit next to his family on Inauguration Day.
Furthermore, Kenny O’Donnell recorded and monitored detailed logs of White House visits, including Exner’s.
O’Donnell and Powers would seem to have been privy to far more information about Kennedy’s trysts than their “discrete” historical treatments ever had the courage to discuss.
Before calling it quits, President Kennedy attended two more balls and a party at the home of Joe Alsop.
The Alsop “do” was also the last stop for a halfdozen Hollywood starlets imported for the inauguration by Peter Lawford.
This menage a trois brought his first day in office to a resounding close.j Thus, the Conspiracy School makes very bold claims, while the Camelot School completely denies it all.
One text says Kennedy was alone with a woman, and another alleges that he finished the evening in a menage a trois.
Posner, in Case Closed, appears as a Warren Commission advocate and heavily criticizes the conspiracy schools for omissions and factual misstatements.
Surprisingly, a more conspiracist writing in the 1990s, Harrison E Livingstone, also accuses his conspiracy cohorts of manufacturing and spreading false information.
When this author queried Janet Leigh about her relationship to JFK and that evening, she became livid at any suggestion of inappropriate behavior.
She claimed to have been with her husband, Tony Curtis, and never alone with the President that evening.
Another clash between these extreme and divergent schools surrounds the March 22, 1962 meeting between Kennedy and Hoover.
According to Kennedy’s secretary, Evelyn Lincoln, J Edgar Hoover had never spoken to the President on the phone and had not visited the White House since the Inauguration.
The Kennedy Library says it has no record of what was said at the lunch.
Nor does the FBI, even though Hoover normally wrote a memo following a visit to the White House.
Apparently, Hoover confronted Kennedy with his knowledge of the GiancanaJudith Exner connection.
Criticism is often leveled at the decorous mainstream treatments, but conspiracy authors too have notable difficulties with respect to credibility.
It offers a tantalizing historical treatment replete with made-up dialogue and cleverly suspenseful writing.
The book claims that Sam Giancana masterminded the murder of Marilyn Monroe, Jack Kennedy, Bobby Kennedy and Jimmy Hoffa, plus countless others — and met with his co-conspirators Richard Nixon and Lyndon Johnson in Dallas, to boot.
The braggadocio of the work is awe-inspiring, and yet it is persuasive, since many of the names which pop up in conspiracy literature are appropriately linked.
In other words, there is a remarkable internal consistency in this book, which suggests that either the authors are telling the truth, firsthand, or they have mastered the conspiracy literature so well that they are able to piece together a suspenseful “fiction” which is nothing more than a skillful fabrication.
Maybe Giancana’s relatives are not bound by the same oath of silence; or, maybe, they are masterfully generating disinformation.
Even if we assume this was simply a venal effort to sell books, then we must assume these and many other conspiracy texts are wantonly flawed.
Judith Campbell Exner’s 1977 My Story, now virtually unobtainable, opened a door that had been closed for fifteen years.
After this work, people started to come forward with ever more damaging revelations about the President.
Kitty Kelly, author of Jackie Oh!, does not enjoy a reputation for reportorial accuracy.
Bearing that in mind, we will consider the psychology of the main protagonists.
J Edgar Hoover’s Homosexuality and Paranoia Hoover is one of the major players, and his background is central to the story.
He became director of the FBI in 1924 and continued to head that fiefdom until his death in 1972.
He spanned half the American 20th century and was not only directly involved in investigating the Kennedy assassination of 1963, but also the Lindbergh kidnapping thirty years earlier.
Hoover was hidden, inaccessible, a mysterious paranoiac — a voyeur, it would seem, who lived in a very dark cavity of the American experience.
Hoover was idolized and worshipped by a small but vocal minority of right-wing Americans, who viewed him as a man of courage and decency, a freedom loving, loyal, “true” American.
Hoover never voted; he failed to demonstrate even that minimal interest in democracy.
In 1938, Hoover took up with Clyde Tolson, and the two enjoyed a lifelong association until Tolson’s death.
Tolson was a high official in the FBI, lived near Hoover, ate lunch with him practically every day, and probably also knew the vast spectrum of secrets Hoover kept in his personal files on most major American public officials during those fifty years.
Shadows and Secrets “homosexuals” never seemed to dawn upon anyone in the media nor the public, although Washington insiders must have had their suspicions.
Ruffin said that Hoover was fearful about being discovered and did not see the psychiatrist for a long while, but as late as 1971 returned for treatment.
Hoover’s homosexuality was common knowledge in the underworld, however; Frank Costello, Meyer Lansky, Jimmy ""the Weasel” Fratianno, Frank Bompensiero and Carlos Marcello all knew.
Hoover was arrested in the 1920s on a homosexuality charge, and John Roselli, the West Coast representative of the Mob, learned of it.
When Bugsy Siegel was murdered under Meyer Lansky’s orders in 1947, nothing came of it.
Anthony Summer’s research indicates that CIA counterintelligence chief James Angleton also had a photograph.
There was more than one shot, but the startling one was a close shot of Hoover’s head.
Cohn was the lead counsel for Senator Joe McCarthy’s notorious persecution of the media and the “communist menace” in the 1950s.
Cohn, described by many as a sleazy opportunist, died of AIDS; he used to arrange homosexual trysts for Hoover.
He was wearing a fluffy black dress, very fluffy, with flounces, and lace stockings and high heels, and a black curly wig.
It was a very short skirt, and he was sitting there in the living room of the suite with his legs crossed.
I couldn’t believe it, that I should see the head of the FBI dressed as a woman.
That same evening Hoover was joined by two boys, one of whom read from the book of Leviticus while the other manipulated his genitals.
Kennedy’s administrative assistant was harangued first about the way a leading newspaper was supposedly infiltrated by Communists, then about Adlai Stevens’ alleged homosexuality.
For the first time, perhaps, men in power dared voice the notion that Hoover was not entirely sane.
The relationship of Hoover to RFK, the Mob, and both President Kennedy and his father’s alliances with the underworld is very poorly understood, but Hoover’s emotional instability as an outgrowth of Robert Kennedy’s anti-Mob crusade is even less understood.
Waiting for him were a phalanx of FBI agents, including Bill Roemer, one of the mobster’s most dogged pursuers.
He knew, he told the agents, that everything he said would get back to J Edgar Hoover.
Giancana piled abuse on both brothers, then snarled, “Listen, Roemer, 1 know all about the Kennedys, and Phyllis knows more about the Kennedys, and one of these days we’re going to tell all.
Also, Clyde Tolson, Hoover’s long-time companion, suffered serious health problems in 1962, further increasing Hoover’s stress.
One author who reviewed FBI wiretaps says Hoover knew about the Mob contract on Kennedy and did nothing to stop it — not merely because he hated the Kennedys, but because he was afraid Kennedy’s vendetta against the Mob might expose his homosexuality.
The official mask was of a J Edgar Hoover, the titular head of the Boy Scouts of America, a man every American could trust, and a dedicated soldier in the eternal struggle against the powers of darkness and criminality.
J Edgar’s “G men” would track down the ten most wanted and bring them before the bar of justice, of that all America could be sure.
And Summers makes reference to another incident of Hoover in drag, in Washington, in 1948.
The most powerful police official in the United States of America at the time of Kennedy’s assassination was — deep inside his personality — a woman, mentally unstable, sexually dysfunctional, paranoid over the insidious menace of communists and “pederasts” in American society, racist, 64 and obsessively protective of the “image” of the Bureau... for obvious reasons.
Hoover bugged the homes of Kennedy, Marilyn Monroe, and scores of Mob figures and learned about the contract on the President.
Neither the Attorney General, the Secret Service, nor any other agency was made privy to the Marcello, Trafficante, Giancana wiretaps that show a contract on the President to be imminent.
To author Mark North, Hoover’s treason was the most immediate cause of John Fitzgerald Kennedy’s death.
Hoover was being pushed against a wall by Bobby Kennedy’s vendetta against the Mob, which threatened exposure of Hoover’s most fundamental secret; and Bobby had little way of knowing that his own behavior against the Mafia was, through Hoover, perhaps leading to his brother’s demise.
While, in the prior 30 years, mention of Hoover’s homosexuality was almost seditious, it is now reaching widespread currency and is the butt of jokes at the highest level of government.
Even conservative Bob Dole of Kansas chimed in when complimenting UPI reporter Helen Thomas for her lovely new dress.
His persecution of Martin Luther King, Jr. and his disdain for the March on Washington are well known, but a recent trial of Thomas Blanton for a Birmingham, Alabama church bombing which killed four black children brings even more starting revelations.
Blanton, successfully found guilty of the bombing (38 years later!), could have been prosecuted much earlier based on evidence held in FBI files but never released on orders from Hoover himself.
Shadows and Secrets Kennedy Silence And Secrets Most Americans felt ineffable sympathy toward the 34-year-old widow, Jackie Kennedy, as her little son saluted the funeral procession carrying his father’s body.
That picture touched hearts around the world, and close to a million letters poured in to Mrs.
Kennedy should be more forthright in telling the story and certainly no suspicion that the injured Kennedys were withholding substantial facts about this event.
Grieving widows, however, have often loudly protested that the government did not tell the whole story about their husbands’ deaths, and demanded a full accounting of how they perished.
When Henry Marshall, the agricultural agent who was killed investigating the suspicious dealings of Billy Sol Estes, was shot numerous times in the head and his death was ruled a suicide, Marshall’s wife howled — year after year — until she finally succeeded in having her husband’s body exhumed and the death declared a murder.
It is also not unheard of for a son or daughter or brother to thunderously demand justice be served.
Bobby Kennedy did not stand up, in the years after the assassination, demanding that the Warren Commission findings be challenged.
Her daughter, Caroline, has not asked that the CIA or Mafia dimensions of this crime against her father be investigated but, instead, has asked that defamatory studies of her father stop.
John Kennedy, Jr., the little boy who saluted the caisson, was elected to public office and rather than pursuing an agenda of justice for his father, said he had no interest in the various conspiracy theories and wished it would all stop.
Kennedy exerted strong efforts to quash many publications about her husband.
For example, the Kennedys hired William Manchester to write an accounting of the events, and upon finishing his work he was sued by Mrs.
The argument between Lyndon Johnson and Kennedy the night before the assassination, in which Johnson argued to have Senator Yarborough sit in the Presidential limousine rather than Johnson’s friend, Governor Connally, was the point of contention.
Be that as it may, the Kennedy family has not been a force to bring out the truth.
Apparently, the family thinks it has more to gain by preventing disclosures than by uncovering the truth about the assassination.
Shadows of the Father Jack and Bob will run the show While Ted’s in charge of hiding Joe.
It is fair to assume that people who seek to prevent disclosure may have something to hide — family secrets, if you will; and there appear to be many levels of secrecy within the Kennedy family.
Most Americans assume John Kennedy told Bobby everything, that Bobby confided in Ted, and that the boys confided in their father, Joe, especially when they needed help.
Few speculate about whether there were secrets between the brothers and the father.
In 1966, she pressured Paul B Fay, Jr. into cutting 2000 words from his memoir.
She forced Look magazine to drop serialization of William Manchester’s Death of a President.
The Kennedys also attempted to stop publication of White House Nannie by Maude Shaw, Evelyn Lincoln’s My Twelve Years with John F Kennedy, and Jim Bishop’s The Day Kennedy was Shot.
Shadows and Secrets It is generally assumed that the lines of communication between father and sons were open, but much would be explained if we could assume that communication was pockmarked by withholding.
Joe Kennedy had enough to be embarrassed about to “spare” his sons exposure to this kind of detail.
He began making his fortune in bootlegging Irish whiskey, in the late 1920s.
Gangster “Doc” Stacher, a lieutenant of arch criminal Meyer Lansky, reported that Joe was involved in a hijacked whiskey shipment being sent from Ireland to Boston in 1927.
Once Joe tried to ship bootlegged whiskey through Detroit without proper underworld permissions.
Kennedy appealed to his friends in Chicago, and had the contract cancelled.
Years later, Frank Costello tried to collect on that debt by asking Kennedy a favor.
Kennedy had become very rich and quite influential; he refused Costello.
During the October 1929 stock market crash, he made millions by short selling — and some writers suggest Kennedy may have actually manipulated the market into its crash.
That a relationship existed and continued, however, is corroborated by a few sources.
During the campaign in West Virginia, FBI wiretaps revealed that large Mafia donations went to the Kennedys.
FBI documents secured under the Freedom of Information Act support this contention.
The Sins of the Father Pass to the Son Joseph Kennedy was known as an incurable womanizer.
He had a longstanding affair with Gloria Swanson and financed one of her movies after taking control of a Hollywood studio.
Joe had frequent mistresses, and invited them into the home — one stayed for several months — and also would proposition his son’s girlfriends.
Joe always denied that his relationship with Swanson was sexual, but in 1980 she confirmed the rumor in her autobiography.
I turned my head and he clamped his mouth over mine, kissed me, and I ran upstairs and threw up.
He had a number of girlfriends. knew a girl who was his mistress for years.
When Joe Kennedy became Ambassador to England under Roosevelt in the late 1930s, he finally achieved a kind of respectability that had eluded him his whole life.
Next in line was Jack, who had little interest in politics but was required to fill his older brother’s shoes and try to live out his father’s narcissistic dreams.
Smathers said, “It was like a rooster getting on top of a chicken real fast and then the poor little hen ruffles her feathers and wonders what the hell happened to her.
He played a substantial role in all of Jack’s electoral victories and was on the phone to him constantly.
The peculiar relationship between father and son is an important clue in the entire family dynamic.
JFK had a relationship with Marilyn Monroe; he was followed by Bobby, and it is rumored that young Ted tried too, but was not as successful.
Winning was the essential element in sex; it was far more a conquest than any expression of intimacy or closeness.
His public image was so well developed and polished the American people would have been in a state of shock if they had even a glimpse of his other life.
To imagine this articulate President cursing, for example, was virtualiy beyond comprehension, but as one writer put it, ‘Kennedy uses profanity with the unconcern of a sailor, which he was and is,”’ 78 and, “Privately Jack admitted that he had no interest in agricultural issues.
After presenting his ‘farm policy’ speech to an unresponsive audience at a South Dakota fairground, he said to aides, ‘Well, that’s over.
As we delve into the labyrinth of Kennedy family secrets, more and more nuances come up that relate to the assassination itself.
Because of Giancana’s close relationship to Joe Kennedy, he felt that once Jack was elected, the “Outfit” would have smooth sailing.
But Bobby Kennedy had been a voracious anti-crime fighter on the McClellan Committee in the late 1950s.
Consideringjoe’s relationship to the Mob, Giancana thought this behavior was out of place.
The Mafia had helped John Kennedy cover up a prior marriage, through the efforts of Johnny Roselli.
It had helped in the West Virginia primary, and the electoral efforts in Chicago.
But 1 want your word that the day your son is elected. . . that’s the day that — ” Kennedy interrupted.
My son. . . the President of the United States. . . will owe you his father’s life.
Shadows and Secrets As Bobby Kennedy continued to badger the Mafia and especially J immy Hoffa through the McClellan Committee, and later through his efforts as Attorney General, Giancana reassured himself by saying “Old man Kennedy'U set him straight ” 81 Still, Bobby persisted in this crusade.
Joe just keeps tellin him and the guys that it’s just a political move, just a game.
Bobby may have been kept out of a special secrecy that existed in the Kennedy family.
Giancana asked Joe Kennedy to remove Bobby from the McClellan Committee, and he did.
Bobby was made the mastermind of John Kennedy’s presidential campaign; he may not have been told that the real reason for the move was to keep him from going any farther on his vendetta against organized crime on the McClellan Committee.
Besides, if anything goes wrong, I’ve got a lot of shit on them.j Giancana, however, finally was convinced he was double-crossed by the Kennedys, on April 4, 1961.
This was the date that Bobby Kennedy had Carlos Marcello deported to Guatemala.
If this was Camelot, Chuck mused, it looked like Mooney was being made the court jester.
In fact, Bobby Kennedy’s campaign against organized crime was highly effective; indictments against organized crime rose from zero to 683, and the number of defendants convicted went also from zero to 619.
Fie smiled, his eyes narrowing into small cobradike slits, and stood up.
What Giancana did not consider was the strong possibility that Joseph Kennedy did not want to embarrass himself in front of his well-groomed, Harvard-educated, idealistic sons, or have them learn about the deals he had made to catapult them into such prestigious positions in life.
Perhaps Giancana was correct and that the Kennedys were planning, through Bobby’s efforts, to neutralize the Mob and call in their markers.
But an equally tantalizing theory is that the Kennedys had a strong and notable history of denial within the family system.
Jack and their father, Joe, did not confide in Bobby as much as they might have; and Bobby refused to see what he didn’t want to see.
As Bobby went further on his crusade to clean up underworld “scum,” he was unwittingly precipitating deep anxieties elsewhere, threatening to expose his father’s influence-peddling and election fraud, Jack’s marital infidelities, and someone J Edgar Hoover wanted to keep in the closet at all costs.
Smuggled liquor through Detroit without informing the Jewish Mafia, who put out a contract on him.
Kennedy refused the requests of mobster Joe Costello, who similarly put a contract out on him.
Kennedy got Sam “Mooney” Giancana to have the contract removed, in return for promised future considerations.
Kennedy received donations from the Mafia, for rigging the West Virginia election for Jack, and used Mayor Daley and Sam Giancana in Chicago to turn the Illinois vote in favor of Kennedy in 1960.
Giancana’s aide, Johnny Roselli, handled the legalities and had any record of the marriage destroyed.
Joe had frequent sex parties in the discreet Cal-Neva chalet, sometimes with Giancana present.
Joe Kennedy and Jack met with Mayor Daley and Sam Giancana in the fall of 1959, at Chicago’s Ambassador East Elotel, on three separate occasions.
Jack Kennedy’s Connections Mayor Daley was Kennedy’s first visitor in the White blouse after Harry Truman.
Sam Giancana personally visited the President at the White House shortly after the Inauguration.
Frank Sinatra introduced Jack Kennedy to Judith Exner on February 7, 1960.
Giancana had Action Jackson murdered in one of the most gruesome Mafia torture killings ever.
It is unknown whether Kennedy knew that his revelations to Giancana resulted in this murder.
Further, it is unknown if Bobby was aware that his brother was passing such information to Giancana through Exner.
Marilyn Monroe’s contacts with Frank Sinatra, and Sinatra’s 30year relationship with Giancana, placed the Kennedys at risk.
After his brother’s assassination, Bobby Kennedy never again met with his own organized crime task force.
At the time of the Bay of Pigs fiasco, Robert Kennedy seemed surprised to learn that the CIA had executive action assassination plans against Castro through the efforts of mobsters Giancana, Roselli, and Trafficante.
Kennedy had an unusually bitter confrontation with CIA spymaster and organizer of such clandestine plots, William Harvey.
Jack Kennedy’s friend Senator Smathers notes that after the Bay of Pigs disaster, Robert Kennedy was assigned the task of chairing a task force to study CIA fumbling in the matter.
Allen Dulles, its director; General Cabell, head of CIA covert operations; and Richard Bissell.
The “cowboy” of the CIA, William Harvey, who had direct involvement with Castro assassination plans and covert operations, was transferred to Italy.
It was at this time, and no earlier, that Robert Kennedy and his brother John learned of the CIA relationship with Giancana, Roselli, and Trafficante.
Smathers found President Kennedy “horrified” at the idea of assassination; he refused to be pushed around.
Various CIA officials and others have tried to claim that Kennedy approved the assassination plots, and that his brother Bobby knew about them.
Bobby Kennedy did find out about some of it, and he did all he could to put a stop to it.
Shadows and Secrets When Robert Kennedy learned of the CIA’s use of organized crime, he was incensed.
In early 1962, Robert Kennedy found that the CIA was trying to protect one of its Mafia contacts, Sam Giancana, from prosecution on another matter.
When he insisted on pursuing the matter, Kennedy was finally told about the earlier stage of Giancana’s role in the murder plots by a CIA lawyer, Lawrence Houston.
In this chapter, we seek to understand the psychology of the main figures in the tragedy.
For John Kennedy to risk everything by engaging in relations with so many shady characters — and think he could get away with it — he had to be in denial.
And for Robert Kennedy, Attorney General, to be unaware of the extreme risks run by JFK — his liaisons that were promiscuous in every sense — he would have had to be deeply in denial.
He had to be willing himself not to see what was going on, seeking to not see rather than seeking to see it.
Most are from Mark North, who provides a detailed accounting of FBI surveillance tapes and chronology of Hoover’s activity.
Bobby Kennedy made his biggest moves against the Mob in early 1961 with the deportation of Marcello, the harassment of Giancana and Trafficante, and the arrest of Hoffa.
Hoover informed him that Giancana, through wiretap surveillance, had been heard mentioning that Joseph Kennedy accepted campaign contributions from Giancana.
It must have been at this time that J Edgar Eloover realized his days at the head of the FBI were numbered.
The Kennedy brothers would never forget what happened to their father and would blame Eloover for it.
Thus, on December 19,1961, we have at least some evidence about family denial patterns.
Both Jack and Bobby, or at least Bobby, seem unaware of their father’s dealings with the Mob.
A logical hypothesis, then, is that a deadly pattern of both deceit and denial existed within the male line of the Kennedy family system; Joe withheld important things from Jack, Jack from Bobby, and Bobby, the fool, aggressively prosecuted and harassed precisely the people who favored and serviced and his father and brother.
After John Kennedy was assassinated, Bobby Kennedy was disconsolate, rarely came to his office, and effectively ended his campaign against organized crime.
However, the very day that Jack Kennedy met Exner in Las Vegas, Teddy was also present, danced with her, and made amateurish attempts to enlist her for an interlude himself.
Shadows and Secrets June 1963 This is a pivotal historical issue, and one rarely discussed in conspiracy literature.
There is a tentative answer to the question, but we have conflicting source material, too.
If this is true, it appears that Bobby’s reaction was to attack rather than surrender.
Giancana filed suit, accusing the federal government of depriving him of his constitutional rights.
And Bobby’ll be scared to death I’ll open it... because if I do, all their dirty little secrets will come out.
Mooney did not have his day in court or his chance to expose the Kennedys.
Clearly, for Giancana in June of 1963, it would seem that the Kennedys were using every resource to call in their markers.
Giancana’s “double-cross” theory — at least up to this point — prevails over the notion that Bobby was a victim of family secrecy.
He knew all the secrets of his father and brother, and he had the court rule it had no jurisdiction — to prevent Giancana from spilling the beans in court testimony.
What if Jack said his relationship with Exner was minimal, or Dad said, “Giancana is making it all up; it’s all a lie.
And on top of all this, Dad suffers a stroke over the all of the undeserved stress.
Then the appropriate reaction for the Attorney General of the United States would be to go all out in a vendetta against underworld “greaseballs” and try to put them all away once and for all.
We don’t know what went through Robert Kennedy’s mind, but it deserves the closest scrutiny.
A1995 book 97 explores this issue and leaves us in exactly the same place that we started, wondering if JFK held secrets from Bobby in a manner that may have ultimately triggered the assassination.
The irony of it all was the Giancana had appeared earlier before the Senate Rackets Committee, faced Robert Kennedy, and pleaded the Fifth Amendment fifty-three times.
Bobby Kennedy listened, as I outlined the case in detail,” said Fawrence Houston, Information Officer of the Department of Justice.
But, he said, ‘Don’t you ever again get in touch with any gangster-Mafia 97.
In a letter to the editor of the Atlantic Monthly, years later, two of Robert Kennedy’s top aides, Frank Mankiewicz and Adam Walinsky, wrote, “Attorney General Kennedy was briefed about the CIA Mafia plot after the fact; he was told that the plot had ceased; he ordered that no such further attempts be made; but attempts continued despite his orders that they cease.
Mankiewicz and Walinsky both insisted that the Bob Kennedy they knew was an intensely moral man who wouldn’t have anything to do with an assassination.
They had discussed the matter with him and felt that he believed that his opposition was largely responsible for the project’s end.
However, Giancana eventually decided on a confrontation, and brought a civil suit against the Federal Government.
It seems hard to believe that President Kennedy would deal with the Mafia in killing Castro without first conferring with Bobby.
But then the President — as much as he used his brother on critical matters — still did not tell him everything.
He didn’t consult him on early key Cabinet selections; he didn’t involve him in the early planning for Bay of Pigs; he didn’t share details of most of his sexual adventures until he needed help and cover-up.
So it is not inconceivable that he kept these Mafia negotiations to himself — at the urging of the CIA — because Bobby had fought the Mafiosi intensely and would disapprove.
Campbell told an interviewer that she not only acted as a courier but she also arranged ten meetings between Kennedy and Giancana.
Giacana’s daughter Antoinette, interviewed by Larry King in February 1992,was asked whether JFK asked Giancana to kill Castro.
Robert Kennedy’s Personality Bobby’s motives for his vendetta against Giancana’s “Outfit” are not well understood.
The best hypothesis is that Bobby simply was naive and unaware of some crucial facts.
Bobby was eight years younger than Jack, a tenacious moralist, the fighter for ethics in government, the conscience of the family.
He was different from his older brother, was once nominated as Father of the Year, and even had contemplated the religious life.
Bobby Kennedy’s children show a very special kind of affection for their father, as well.
After his assassination, his sons presented their mother with a Christmas book.
Daddy was very funny in church because he would embarrass all of us by singing very loud.
There will be no more football with Daddy, no more swimming with him, no more riding and no more camping with him.
But he was the best father their ever was and I would rather have him for a father for the length of time I did than any other father for a milhon years.
Robert Kennedy was loved and respected not only by millions of Americans and his own children, but by his older brother as well.
Jack may not have been as open and candid with his staunchly moralistic, “square,” brother as historians may have supposed.
Furthermore, we do not know how open Jack was with himself with respect to sexual issues and the consequences issuing from them.
There is very good reason, therefore, to suspect Bobby was not apprized of all his older brother’s capers.
His brother, John spoke of Robert’s “high moral standards... a puritan, absolutely incorruptible” By 1960, when Robert turned thirty-five, he had been married ten years and had seven children.
Some say Bobby had as many as four extramarital affairs, but genuine evidence only supports one, Marilyn Monroe.
The clumsy affair with Monroe may have been his first sojourn in this direction, a direction he knew was not suited to his nature, and one he wanted to stop.
While Jack simply bedded them and was off to his next conquest, the Father of the Year with seven children even discussed marriage with Marilyn Monroe.
He took matters of the heart very seriously, and when it came to infidelity, he was a novice; he did not swim well in these waters.
Shadows and Secrets greatly from virtually all other members of the Kennedy family, and it began to look increasingly as if he felt he was responsible for his brother’s death.
At first, he was the rock upon whom grieving relatives could count; but gradually Bobby retreated into a disconsolate sullenness which became notable to all those who were close to him.
Bobby wouldn’t say the word “assassination” or “death” or even “Dallas”, but spoke only of “the events of November 22” ... he seemed haunted by his memories.
Once he appeared at an old friend’s house with a book of readings of world literature under his arm.
He made her listen while he opened the book and read from a selection about poet Gerard de Nerval, who often walked around town with a lobster on a leash.
Some of those close to Bobby saw it all as a classic case of survivor’s guilt.
If so, there was a deeper level of responsibility than with most survivors, one which came from the fact that Bobby, like Nerval’s lobster, knew the secrets of the deep.
While he claimed never to have read the Warren Commission Report, however, Bobby continued to agitate the question of the assassination furtively.
We may never get an answer on what Bobby knew and didn’t know or why he pursued the Mafia with such tenacity on the very threshold of the assassination.
A recently declassified set of memos from the CIA was made available on July 2, 1997.
The information corroborates that the CIA offered $150,000 to hire Mob hit-men to assassinate Castro, but it does not make clear whether Bobby Kennedy was aware of the contracts at the time of his persecution of Giancana.
When JFK died, the family priest came to Bobby’s residence to console him.
However, he had to wait for 3 hours as Bobby was in intense conversation with John McCone.
A book by Seymour Hersh, The Dark Side of Camelot, features a rare interview given by Judith Exner-Campbell.
She reiterated to Hersh that JFK was using her as a courier to Giancana regarding the Castro assassination.
If true, then our first question must be whether JFK told Bobby of these plans.
If Bobby knew of them, his persecution of Giancana becomes a deep mystery.
If Bobby did not know, then the secrecy between JFK and his brother on such monumental matters opens speculation even wider.
Shadows and Secrets With Judith Exner’s revelations that she acted as a courier between JFK and Giancana, it is plausible that the President was aware of these plans, and was one of the six insiders; but Bobby may have been left in the dark, creating quite a dilemma for Giancana.
Yet a later CIA internal investigation into the episode concluded that Robert Kennedy did not know about the Castro assassination plan using organized crime figures until he was informed about it by the CIA in May 1962.
This, despite an FBI document dated May 21,1961, stating that a CIA official told Attorney General Kennedy about “the use of Giancana and the underworld against Castro” during a “recent” briefing.
Exner told King that President Kennedy knew about the CIA’s use of Giancana in the Castro assassination plot.
Her cloak-and-dagger description of those alleged events was never reported in her earlier book or in her sworn testimony to the Church Committee.
Still others suggest Robert Kennedy himself was aware of Giancana’s use in plots against Castro, a fact which did not deter him from attempting to put Giancana away.
Goldfarb cites author Richard Reeves, who, in an interview, said, “There’s no 105.
JFK put his trusted brother RFK in charge of Mongoose, which had high Kennedy administration priority; it was a no-holds-barred operation, and Robert Kennedy was applying intense pressures.
According to Holland, Robert Kennedy’s intimate involvement with the CIA’s Cuba plans began two days after the inauguration.
Still, Kennedy’s close aide and Friend John Seigenthaler — one of those he was most likely to confide in — knew nothing of the allegations that Kennedy used rackets figures to pursue cold warrior gambits, and surely not to assassinate another country’s leader.
Seigenthaler recalls Kennedy expressing disgust with the CIA when he heard of their use of assassins, and telling John McCone and Richard Helms he thought it was disgraceful and that it should be stopped.
Had RFK been dealing with Giancana on operation Mongoose, Justice Department cases against him would have been fatally compromised.
Evidence seems to favor the hypothesis that Bobby Kennedy persecuted Giancana not because the Kennedy clan was “double crossing” the Mafia and calling in its markers, but because Jack was not forthright in confiding to Bobby all of his private dealings; and Bobby, the idealist, operated in ignorance of these compromising elements, and thus it did not strike him as anything out of the ordinary to go after organized crime.
He remained unaware of the government’s involvement with mobsters and was only dimly aware of his father and brother’s consorting with Giancana’s Outfit.
Samuel Elalpern, his second in command, called the memo document “as close as we’re likely to get” to conclusive proof.
In April of that same year, CIA murder plots against Castro were activated, and CIA operative William Elarvey delivered a U-Elaul filled with arms to John Roselli, who was supposed to transfer the weapons to Cuban exiles interested in murdering Castro.
If true, this event shows Bobby was involved in assassination plots against Castro.
More important, it leads to the conclusion that he had at least indirect awareness of the Mafia dimension of these intrigues, given that the CIA’s William Elarvey and Mob contact Johnny Roselli were involved.
This would sharply contradict what we have said earlier about Bobby’s naivete.
We know enough about Arthur Schlesinger, from earlier chapters, to suspect he has acted more as a Kennedy family publicist than a historian.
Despite his volumes written on the Kennedys, he failed to properly depict anything that might be embarrassing about the Kennedys, much less the alleged communications between 106.
We don’t know if Thomas, like Schlesinger, is putting the best spin on historical facts to keep the Kennedy mystique alive or whether these are credible assertions we should trust.
We began this discussion wondering why Bobby was so intent on prosecuting Giancana, Marcello, and Trafficante in view of the fact that his brother had enlisted the same thugs to assassinate Castro and irrespective of the fact that his long-time mistress was linked to exactly the person Bobby was trying to put behind bars.
In that case, retaliation was not only warranted but necessary, if the “Outfit” was to survive.
If Robert Kennedy were assassinated, JFK would have utilized all the resources of the government to arrest and punish his murderers.
Weighing against that theory is a psychological one, namely that Jack did not tell idealistic Bobby the details of his sexual encounters with Exner, nor about machinations with Mob figures to assassinate Castro — much less about his severe sexual addictions and the compromising situations they invoked.
If that hypothesis is true, then Bobby’s pursuit of Giancana makes more sense.
He is simply unaware of his brother’s dealings with Giancana and is acting out of ignorance, a victim of his brother’s pervasive pattern of deceit and denial.
The Landsdale memo suggests Bobby knew of the plots against Castro and participated in at least one rather actively, but it is still possible to think that, even if he helped hatch the Hemingway-farm plot against Castro, he may have been unaware of the Mob assets that were being readied for that hit.
Unfortunately, most of this material is closed to the public and numerous scholars (Richard Reeves, Robert Dallek, Nigel Hamilton, Laurence Learner, and Seymour Hersh) all have been denied a look — even this many years after the assassination.
The Mafia leaders were privy to what may have been the worst national secret in the history of the United States, and the most embarrassing personal secret about John Kennedy.
Nothing could damage the reputation of the United States government and of the Kennedy administration more than disclosure that it had conspired with organized crime to murder the head of a foreign government.
The risks Kennedy took defy the imagination, and if it were not for the discretion of the press, the Secret Service, White House staff, speech writers, aides, butlers, maids and chauffeurs, Kennedy’s legacy in office would have been exposed many times over, far earlier, indeed as early as Inauguration Day.
Ben Bradlee of the Washington Post, Joseph Alsop, Robert Pierpoint of CBS, and others in the media were already well aware of presidential infidelities.
While Bradlee was a leading figure exposing Nixon in Watergate, he acted in expressly the opposite fashion with Kennedy and remained inordinately “discreet” in protecting the Kennedy image.
Not all males in our society give their penises nicknames, but both Lyndon Johnson and Jack Kennedy did.
Jack Kennedy enjoyed almost constant sexual infidelities during the entirety of his presidency.
The affair with Judith Exner Campbell went on for over a year in the White House, but so did Kennedy’s entanglements with Pamela Turnure — see photo, right — (Mrs.
The relationship with Pamela Turnure appears to have lasted two years; with Mary Pinchot Meyer, over a year; with Judith Exner, slightly over a year; Priscilla Weir and Jill Cowan were ongoing playmates, but for an indeterminate length of time.
Identities of the Playboy centerfold, or “Pooh,” from the French Riviera have not been made, along with many of the call girls listed in the table, but corroboration of these affairs is legion.
Thirty-three extramarital relationships in three years, statistically, is well beyond the third standard deviation, not only for presidents but for the male population at large, and squarely in the territory of sexual addiction.
The average American male has had twelve sexual partners in his lifetime, and the number of “single” American males who have had over 30 partners in three years is miniscule.
As Reeves noted, “Had he lived, many of his indiscretions would have become public knowledge.
Marlene Dietrich’s contact with the President is described in a rather uncomplimentary biography published by her daughter.
While there are many sources of corroborating evidence for JFK’s liaisons, one interesting and more recent source is Ben Bradlee, publisher of the Washington Post , and a personal friend of the Kennedys.
Bradlee had access to personal telephone numbers where he could reach the president.
When Judith Campbell Exner published her account of her affair with the President, she listed these personal telephone numbers.
Note that the revelation of Gunilla von Post did not become known until 1997; source for this information was “20/20"" on August 14,1997.
Jack confided a bit in one woman who resisted his advances, and asked questions about women and marriage as though they were totally foreign topics: During one of these conversations I once asked him why he was doing it — when he was acting like his father, why he was avoiding real relationship, why he was taking a chance on getting caught in a scandal at the same time that he was trying to make his career take off.
Like his father, his relationship to sex was almost a defense against intimacy, and there was a notable absence of real intimacy relationship with anyone.
I visited him twice at the White House, the first time for only 15 minutes in a small room off the Oval Office.
He motioned to an enormous intricately carved rosewood bed, ‘That’s Abraham Lincoln’s bed,’ he said.
He laughed and told me about the White House legend that when you make a wish on the Lincoln bed it always comes true.
Kennedy's Mistresses during his Presidency, and the Information Sources 1.
Unnamed airline stewardesses — numerous; they had to undergo Secret Service investigations before being admitted to President’s quarters.
Priscilla Weiss, code named “Fiddle” by the Secret Service, a White House aide; apparently numerous soirees with the President.
Jill Cowan, code named “Faddle,” a White House aide; numerous contacts with the President.
Angie Dickinson, actress; rumored liaison; significant corroborating testimony that she spent a weekend with the President in Palm Springs.
Flo Pritchett Smith, wife of Earl T Smith; apparently numerous sexual contacts with the President in Palm Beach.
Jayne Mansfield, actress; two or three contacts, arranged through Peter Lawford.
Unnamed naked women in White House pool, discovered by Kenneth O’Donnel.
Susannah M., a 20-year-old; frequent contacts in Lincoln bedroom in White house; admissions made November 17,1993.
Marilyn Monroe; numerous occasions in Palm Springs, Los Angeles, Air Force One; once with an unnamed partner for menage a trois.
Tumure was on Air Force One carrying the President’s body back to Washington.
Unnamed young woman at home of columnist Joe Alsop on Inauguration Day.
Ellen Rometsch, East German prostitute; slept with JFK ten times in White House, around spring, 1963.
Unnamed nanny to the family of a journalist; JFK had sex with her at Camp David; she returned to Puerto Rico to get an abortion, allegedly paid for by Kennedy.
Major sources of information arc Judith Exncr’s My Story , Traphes Bryant, White House staff member, Secret Service personnel, and a Kennedy assistant ; also Michael Sullivan, Presidential Passions.
This relationship has not been included in the table since it occurred prior to his taking office.
Also not included, for the same reason, is an incident at the CaT Neva Lodge in Nevada where Kennedy spent an evening with 3 call girls.
Gene Tierney, Angela Greene, Lady Jean Campbell, Zsa Zsa Gabor, Susan Hayward, Joan Crawford, Peggy Cummins, Sonja Hene, Hedy Lamarr, Tina Louise, Austine McDonnel, Mrs.
A rumor that JFK had once been married to Durie Malcom is referenced in Heymann, 641.
I’ve known many of the great Hollywood stars and only a very few of them seemed to hold the attention for women that JFK did, even before he entered the political arena.
Bobby must have known about some of this, but whether he knew of the Exner' Giancana connection prior to his crusade against organized crime is debatable.
Arthur Schlesinger, the in-house historian, is not much help either, inasmuch as he quoted Judith Exner’s former husband rather than Exner and attempted to describe her allegations as desultory, spurious and rooted in fantasy.
White House telephone logs — Schlesinger had an office in the White House — make it quite clear that Schlesinger, not Exner, was living in a fantasy world.
Evelyn Lincoln coordinated the trysts; Traphes Bryant dutifully logged them in his diary.
Besides staying with Kennedy at his secret suite at the Carlyle and in the secluded Lawford beach house, Marilyn often traveled with the President on Air Force One.
This was successfully accomplished by a rather simple but effective physical disguise.
Marilyn would wear a brunette wig, large sunglasses that obscured most of her face, and unflattering “older” clothing.
Shadows and Secrets vate presidential airliner and others were casually told that she was Peter Lawford’s private secretary.
Protection of these Kennedy secrets was not merely the province of obsequious publicist-historians or co-opted journalists.
Kennedy played a significant role to stop the publication of any indiscretions as well.
The pattern of denial within the Kennedy family is not merely of clinical interest.
It had an effect on the whole paradigm of the assassination, which has not been carefully examined.
DeMohrenschildt was a friend to Joseph Kennedy, knew Jackie’s stepfather and her biological father “Blackjack Bouvier,” and spent numerous evenings in Dallas with Oswald.
After JFK’s assassination, deMohrenschildt contacted Janet Auchincloss, whom he also knew, and requested a meeting with Jackie.
Flere was a man who did not believe Oswald killed her husband, a man who had met with Lee and Marina Oswald over twenty separate times in Dallas, and a man who had seen Jackie frequently when she was a pre-teen. . . yet she declined the meeting.
Virtually every member of the Kennedy clan has gravitated to this posture.
He had real charisma and great potential, but he was young and thought he was above harm.
His personal recklessness is why the Kennedys never pushed the assassination investigation.
The family didn’t want to uncover the connection among the CIA, the Mafia, and the President.
In Jungian terms, the “shadow” represents the opposite of one’s stated or public persona.
This handsome, brilliant, idealistic young statesman, who enjoyed and empathized with people, who loved his charming wife, who was blessed with caring and sacrificing parents and siblings and surrounded himself with some of the most impressive thinking from elite institutions, had boldly persuaded the nations leading Democrats that he was the right man to lead the country toward greatness.
Behind the scenes, however, there was a less pleasant and unpublicized reality involving money, bribery, manipulation, adultery and a consistent lack of propriety.
The gap between the Kennedy image and reality had grown larger, and in the ensuing campaign it would widen even more.
According to these secret service agents, JFK was constantly being serviced by prostitutes.
Michael Selsmen, a publicist for Marilyn Monroe, also confirmed the affair between JFK and Marilyn.
A suggestion was made on this program that Rometsch might have even given information to East German intelligence on Kennedy’s trip to Dallas.
In 1960, JFK gave a package to Exner full of money to give to Giancana.
According to Jean Fiumphreys, wife of Murray Flumphreys, an associate of Sam Giancana, the mob was instructed to arrange for unions to deliver votes to JFK in Los Angeles, and St.
Hale, a former FBI agent, broke into Judith Campbell’s apartment to get information on the General Dynamics Contract.
Nothing in this program, however, suggests that Bobby Kennedy was aware of JFK’s close association with Giancana through Judith Exner.
Shadows and Secrets Apparently, the public persona that was cultivated by his writers, publicists, and sycophants hides a different man altogether.
Jack Kennedy spoke with the profanity of a sailor and that he was not merely reckless but out of control sexually.
Perhaps the gravest responsibility of all rests upon the office of President.
No President can excuse or pardon the slightest deviation from irreproachable standards of behavior on the part of any member of the executive branch.
Now, whenever 1 see those old films of Kennedy on television, I have to stop myself from heaving.
It’s hard to believe that here was this absolute fake, this womanizer and opportunist, coming off like Euripides.
It is less interesting to call Kennedy a hypocrite than to label this paradoxical behavior for what it is, a sexual dysfunction of major clinical dimensions.
John Fitzgerald Kennedy clearly would not be considered a person in the “normal” range of psychological functioning.
The hero of this strange, American myth is a person who, like so many others in this drama, is squarely in the grips of a mental disorder.
Though one might think that Marilyn Monroe is a minor character in this play, her death in August of 1962 was like a microcosm of the Kennedy assassination itself.
It contains all the issues of promiscuity, recklessness, Mob involvement, surveillance by J Edgar Hoover, mysterious circumstances surrounding the manner of death, botched autopsies, conspiracy theories, even cover-up.
In fact, the symbolic linkage of Kennedy and Lincoln is also repeated in this mini-drama.
Marilyn carried a picture of Abraham Lincoln with her wherever she moved.
When she married playwright Arthur Miller, she was attracted to him because of his similarity with Lincoln.
Marilyn, as the world could hardly fail to know, admired Lincoln already.
Her idolatry had started, she said, in junior high school, when her essay on Lincoln was judged the best in the class.
By happy coincidence, Arthur Miller had attended Abraham Lincoln High School.
Live years later, before her marriage to Miller, Marilyn would enthuse to Joshua Logan, director of Bus Stop.
Her love life was covered in the press far more than John Kennedy’s, but serious investigative works have since documented that she was puzzled, mentally unstable, pre-psychotic and gradually recapitulating the clinical dynamics of her mother, an institutionalized schizophrenic.
She had an even more pronounced sexual addiction than Kennedy, hollowing is a table of lovers, husbands, and rumored dalliances found in related literature.
Shadows and Secrets husbands in an eighteemyear period argues for a psychiatric diagnosis along the same lines as the President’s.
Marilyn gave inconsistent reports that she had been sexually abused as a child; the details appeared to change each time the story was rendered.
Her reply, Rosenfeld says, was that she would like “to put on her black wig, pick up her father in a bar, and have him make love to her.
In deference to Anthony Summers’ assiduous respect for corroborating his findings, we might simply list the witnesses he uses to establish the viability of the Kennedy-Monroe liaison.
These include statements by Jeanne Martin, wife of Dean Martin; Arthur James, Deborah Gould, Fred Karger, Ross Acuna, Jeanne Carmen, 127.
Weatherby, Jane Shalam, Paula Strasberg, James Bacon, William Kane, Stephen Smith, Anne Karger, Harry Hall, Fred Otash, and many others.
Monroe; the research and witnesses Summers presents with respect to Marilyn’s sexual relationship with both Kennedy brothers is impressive and persuasive.
Following is a table listing “cover-up” sources very similar to the table we presented in earlier chapters on Kennedy disinformation and cover-up.
Individuals Alleged in the Literature to have Covered Up or Withheld Information Concerning Marilyn Monroe’s Death Arledge, Roone Lawford, Pat Beatty, Warren Lawford, Peter Bolanos, Jose Leibowitz, Murray D’Amato, Paul McGuire, Phyllis Dickey, John McMillan, Douglas Dickinson, Angie Newcomb, Pat DiMaggio, Joe Rudin, Milton Evans, Courtney Smith, Jean Gates, Daryl Smith, Stephen Greenson, Ralph Dr.
Ralph Greenson, her psychiatrist, said professional ethics did not allow him to comment about what he knew.
Shortly before his own death, Greenson admitted that he did not feel she had killed herself.
Joe DiMaggio possessed considerable detail about Marilyn Monroe, her lovers, her association with the Kennedys, Mob figures, involvement with Frank Sinatra, associations with the Cal-Neva lodge in Nevada where Giancana was associated, etc.
DiMaggio did not speak publicly about Marilyn and revealed little of what he knew.
Shadows and Secrets Peter Lawford was allegedly present at Marilyn’s death, and well-substantiated rumors abound that he was implicated in cleaning up her apartment that night.
He is said to have destroyed her notes, notebooks, address books and any links to the Kennedys.
Following her death, Lawford flew to Hyannisport and stayed in seclusion in the Kennedy estate; he was never called to testify.
His third wife, Deborah Gould, said that one night when Lawford was inebriated, he related some details.
She told much of the substance of that conversation to writer Anthony Summers.
Beatty, Natalie Wood, and others were at a party at the Lawford home a few hours before Marilyn died.
I would have been delighted to have accepted your invitation honoring Pat and Peter Lawford.
Unfortunately I am involved in a freedom ride protesting the loss of the minority rights belonging to the few remaining earth-bound stars.
One of the purposes, perhaps, was to persuade Marilyn to remove herself from any further involvement in Bobby’s life.
Giancana bragged that he was the last man to have slept with her while she was alive. lj2 ) 130.
He was desperately trying to dissolve the relationship and stop her from calling him at the Justice Department.
On July 30,1962, Marilyn made her final call to him; it lasted eight minutes, and it was on the Monday of her last week alive.
B4 On the morning of the day she died, Marilyn received a strange package in her Hollywood home.
Marilyn opened it and walked out to the pool carrying its contents — a stuffed toy tiger.
Flanagan thought she was “terribly, terribly depressed,” but did not say why.
According to Dean Martin’s former wife, Jeanne, Marilyn’s close confident and friend Pat Newcomb knew more about that evening than has ever been revealed, especially about Robert Kennedy’s arrival , and Peter Lawford’s call to Marilyn and his arrival (or nonarrival) to clean up damaging information against the Kennedys.
According to Martin, “Pat got far too involved; she was deeply in love with Bobby Kennedy.
If you want to know who knew more about Marilyn than anyone, it’s Pat Newcomb.
On the night that Marilyn died, Bobby Kennedy was in Gilroy, California with family friends, a few hundred miles north.
But allegations abound that Bobby was with Marilyn that evening, that he took a helicopter out from the Lawford estate and returned to Gilroy.
Of even greater importance, however, is some impressive evidence that Marilyn Monroe was murdered rather than merely suicidal over her broken affair with Bobby.
First, Marilyn did not die of a deadly combination of alcohol and pills, as so many think.
Tests showed evidence of pentobarbital and chloral hydrate, one of the less dangerous sedatives found at her home.
Marilyn’s Nembutal level was some ten times the normal dose and her chloral hydrate level twenty times the norm.
Flowever, traces of pills in the stomach were not found; neither was a drinking glass from which she would have been able to swallow all those pills.
Typically, such suicides involve vomiting, but were no evidence of vomit in the pathologist’s reports.
This has led some to suggest that Marilyn was given that dose of chemicals by injection.
The autopsy report showed the colon had marked congestion and purplish discoloration.
No anal smear was taken, but the speculation that the drugs were administered anally is reinforced by a curious remark made by Peter Lawford.
A Curious Clue Some years after this research was reported by Summers, Sam and Chuck Giancana released their book on Sam “Mooney” Giancana, entitled Double-Cross.
In this work Giancana says that he had Marilyn murdered to expose Robert Kennedy, in fact, that her murder was timed exactly at a time when Bobby had been visiting.
The Giancana revelations came in 1992 while Anthony Summer’s speculations and hypotheses were developed in 1986.
Thus, it is not altogether absurd to conjecture that Marilyn Monroe was murdered in this manner, and that her murder was at the hands of the Mob as a means of compromising the Kennedys — and specifically, Bobby Kennedy’s war against the Mafia.
Mooney had received word from the CIA that Bobby Kennedy would be in California on the weekend of August 4.
Nicoletti said that three other planes also landed that week — in San Francisco — carrying four other men.
Mooney had selected a trusted assassin, Needles Gianola, to coordinate the job.
Needles, in turn, brought his sidekick, Mugsy Tortorella, on board and two other professional killers — one from Kansas City and one from Detroit.
Bobby Kennedy finally did appear at Marilyn’s home late on Saturday, accompanied by another man.
Listening in on the conversation, Mooney’s men ascertained that Marilyn was more than a little angry at Bobby.
Calmly, and with all the efficiency of a team of surgeons, they taped her mouth shut and proceeded to insert a specially “doctored” Nembutal suppository into her anus.
The suppository, which Nicoletti said had been prepared by the same Chicago chemist who concocted the numerous chemical potions for the Castro hit, had been a brilliant choice.
A lethal dosage of sedatives administered orally, and by force, would have been too risky, causing suspicious bruising during a likely struggle, as well as vomiting — a side effect that typically resulted from ingesting the huge quantities necessary to guarantee death.
Using a suppository would eliminate any hope of reviving Marilyn, should she be found, since the medication was quickly absorbed through the anal membrane directly into the bloodstream.
Indeed, within moments of insertion, the suppository’s massive combination of barbiturates and chloral hydrate quickly entered her bloodstream, rendering her totally unconscious.
The men carefully removed the tape, wiped her mouth clean, and placed her across the bed.
Connections between the Kennedys and Marilyn Monroe were never established.
Some say that she had intended to call a press conference on August 6 and tell all.
Telephone records, diaries, and notebooks, a questionable autopsy, and a mysterious line-up of friends and witnesses who did not want to be quoted followed.
Shadows and Secrets the death made to resemble a Hollywood starlet’s suicidal binge into depression, alcohol and pills.
If the Mob had failed in its efforts to bring the Kennedys into line, their next opportunity would come the following year in Dallas.
He did not violate professional confidentiality, but when Deputy District Attorney John Miner interviewed him after her death, his notes from that interview show Greenson was definite in asserting that Marilyn Monroe did not commit suicide.
Three times a week, for twenty years, Joe DiMaggio had a pair of red roses delivered to Marilyn’s crypt.
DiMaggio would not permit the Kennedys to be present at Marilyn’s funeral, nor Frank Sinatra — who attempted to attend the services.
One tier above Marilyn, in the same wall, lies the body of an obscure teenager called Darbi Winters.
She had only recently told her mother that, one day in the distant future, she wanted to be buried near Marilyn Monroe.
What is psychologically interesting is that the death of Marilyn Monroe symbolically prefigures another assassination, cover-up, disputed autopsy, and conspiracy which would occur fourteen months later to the President of the United States.
To underscore the “prophetic” aspect of this event, an important paraprax made by Peter Lawford is encrypted in this drama too.
As mentioned earlier, this book is either a truthful accounting of American history or a masterful work of disinformation.
The speculations about Marilyn Monroe’s “possible” cause of death, namely an anal suppository containing deadly levels of Nembutal, was a speculation made by Anthony Summers in 1986.
If the Giancana text is a work of disinformation, then the writers have researched this material carefully and crafted their tale accordingly.
If, on the other hand, the authors are not that familiar with the literature on the assassination or the death of Marilyn Monroe, then the level of internal consistency in their book is startling, and gives an uncanny match to the speculation and research that has gone before.
The Saga of Marilyn Monroe — The Final Word, asserts that Joseph Kennedy Sr., aware of Marilyn’s imminent plans to disclose her relationship with the Kennedys, contracted with mobster Sam Giancana to hit Monroe and make it look like a suicide.
This seems dubious only because it was precisely at this time that Bobby Kennedy was so actively pursuing Giancana.
If this theory were correct, it would also have difficulty explaining wdiy Bobby continued to pursue Giancana after Monroe’s death.
The authors, however, say that Jack Kennedy and his father knew of the impending hit on Monroe, but that Bobby did not.
She commissioned Jean-Louis to create a dress for the occasion, costing some $5,000.
She wore absolutely nothing underneath and had to be sewn into the garment.
Peter Lawford introduced her a few times, but, to his chagrin, she was still not yet ready to come out on stage.
Few, however, seemed to notice a joke by Lawford after his frustrating and repeated introductions.
In fact, fateful synchronicity seems to adorn the Kennedy myth at every opportunity.
Widow, Bone-Crusher, Enigma Another leading character this drama is First Lady, Jacqueline Bouvier.
An imposing 57”, Jackie Kennedy may have been the most publicized American woman of the 20th century.
Some psycho-biographical sketch and search through the shadows is warranted here as well.
Her father, “Blackjack” Bouvier, like Joseph Kennedy, was a womanizer with a reputation for shady deal making.
This solved many of the family financial problems that Blackjack had created.
Her parents fought bitterly, largely over Black Jack’s continuous philandering.
After their parents’ separation in 1936, Jackie and her younger sister, Lee, stayed with their mother, who grew increasingly aloof and was often absent.
Shadows and Secrets Jackie spent her junior year of college in France and became fluent in the language.
When she married Jack, she brought with her a fourteen-year age difference and a secret that she was almost penniless.
But she possessed qualities that made her an ideal candidate’s wife, and the family patriarch, Joe Kennedy, heartily approved.
As he once said, “A politician has to have a wife, and a Catholic politician has to have a Catholic wife.
Rose and Jackie did not get along well, and Rose blamed the miscarriages on Jackie’s smoking.
There were very significant stresses on her, however, for which smoking may have only been a symptom.
Jackie seems to have known about her husband’s cheating, for example, and one would suspect she was well prepared.
Her father’s own infidelities, plus her relationship to her father-in-law, Joseph, gave her ample evidence that males simply behaved this way and perhaps this was only to be expected from her husband.
I don’t think she realized what she’d walked into when she married him.
He was in constant competition with his old man to see who could nail the most women.
The closer John Kennedy seemed to come to the presidency, the more frenetic became his random search for women.
The Kennedys did not teli her of this event, but the ievei of tension and stress around her fife then and later were probably more than enough for any normal person to have to endure in a lifetime.
When Pam Turnure and Robert J Timmins, a wealthy Canadian tin magnate, were married, Jackie threw a reception for them.
She maintained contact with Pam for a number of years and even sent her children to visit them in Montreal.
Whether she knew Pam Turnure was her husband’s ex-lover, at the time of these events, is not known.
She wanted to evade what she described as America’s “oppressive obsession” with her and her children.
Editorials appeared describing the former First Lady as a traitor to her country.
Jackie was married to Onassis for six years, and became immeasurably wealthier as a result.
She settled for $42 million, or nearly $7 million for each year they were married.
As Charles Lindbergh longed for anonymity, so too did Jackie; but America’s obsessive fixation gave her little reprieve.
She died in 1994; one wonders if that obsession ever left her alone for a moment.
In the following section we will try to come to some conclusion about who Jackie was, to try to peer beneath those tabloid headlines that defined her.
One conscious and popular image was that she was an adept advisor to the President, consulting with him regularly on important decisions.
Beneath his glittering, outgoing exterior, there seemed to be an insularity and loneliness that Jackie not only recognized but shared.
You could see it in his eyes; he’d follow her around the room watching to see what she’d do next.
This second image comes from one of her old friends or former friends, Paul Mathias.
She was Miss Narcissist, perpetually searching mirrors for worry wrinkles and strands of prematurely gray hair.
Within 18 months of JFK’s assassination, she had two dozen of the world’s most brilliant and important men dangling like marionettes, dancing at her fingertips, most of them very married, very old, or very queer.
She was nothing; an ordinary American woman with average tastes, with some money.
She was a creation of the American imagination, Madison Avenue, Women’s Wear Daily, Vogue.
She was sharp enough to know that the more she exposed herself, the less impressive she would be.
She’s very manipulative, self-serving, a real bone-crusher, and very adept at it.
The whole Kennedy clan has constructed a litany of lies about itself and now, finally, they are beginning to emerge.
Most of the fabrications are built around JFK, and Jackie has created many of them herself.
Christina Onassis’ assessment of Jackie is similarly unkind, and as a projection, it adds a symbolic element: Some superstitious trait out of her Smyrna peasant past suggested to Christina that some sinister force had to be connected with all these deaths, first her aunt, then her brother, now her mother.
It must be Jackie who was bringing all the bad luck to the family, “undermining everything” as her brother had predicted.
Death was never very far from “the Black Widow,” as Christina now called her.
What she doesn’t realize is that 1 would have given her fifty times what I gave her for the pleasure of never having to see her again.
Kennedy kept Nancy Tuckerman and Pam Turnure with her as part of her own office staff.
She later told my mother that her own life was dominated by Jack’s death and that everything she did and everywhere she went reminded her of him.
It began to seem to her that the same “they” who had murdered her husband were now bent on commercializing and degrading her.
Every doorman, delivery boy, neighbor, waiter, taxi driver, anyone who had ever attended her in a store or smiled at her on the street, was a potential enemy.
Tier apparent paranoia wasn’t helped by a series of ghoulish incidents involving Caroline and John-John.
She remained in bed for long hours, taking sedatives and anti-depressants by day and sleeping pills by night, unable to be with anyone but also unable to be by herself.
Left alone with her bereavement, she became obsessed with the thought that she had somehow failed her husband, obsessed by the assassination itself, confessing to her Aunt Michelle that she had replayed the event a thousand times, analyzing it from every conceivable angle and perspective.
The “Kennedy Curse"" Not only did Christina Onassis have a superstitious feeling that Jackie Kennedy brought death wherever she went, others have talked about the larger 'Kennedy Curse 1 , a litany of misfortunes which would boggle the mind.
She is left severely brain damaged and remains institutionalized today.
Aug.,1963 Patrick Bouvier Kennedy, John and Jacqueline's third child, dies two days after he was born.
Nov.,1963 President Kennedy is assassinated while riding in an open car in Dallas, Texas.
June 19,1964 Edward Moore Kennedy is critically injured in plane crash that kills an aide.
June 5,1968 Robert F Kennedy, the United States senator and former United States attorney general, is gunned down after a speech in Los Angeles.
July 18,1969 The car Edward Kennedy is driving veers off a bridge to Chappaquiddick Island after a party.
Dec.,1997 Robert Kennedy's son, Michael, dies in a skiing accident in Aspen at the age of 39.
July 18,1999 John F Kennedy Jr., along with his wife and her sister, flying a small plane from New Jersey to a family wedding on Martha's Vineyard, are reported missing.
On who Jackie Kennedy was, author William Manchester said, I spoke with that woman for many hours, shared some of her deepest, darkest thoughts, wrote the authorized account of President’ Kennedy’s assassination, but I don’t have the faintest idea what Jackie Kennedy Onassis is really like.
She is still the target of more gossip and innuendo than any ten Hollywood movie legends combined, but she has gradually learned to deal with the clamor to circumvent it.
These six images of Jackie Kennedy are merely images gleaned from a literature that is so rife with gossip, obsessive fascination, rumor, hearsay, and slander that any objective observer would be hard pressed to make a selection.
Shadows and Secrets these perspectives is tainted by the aura around her and none is a true or reasonably objective portrait; and yet there is probably a hint of truth to each one.
She redecorated the White House, campaigned to save and preserve Grand Central Station, fought to preserve her husband’s legacy through the Kennedy library, and her literary achievements for Doubleday similarly worked in the direction of restoration and preservation.
From a clinical perspective, however, we can come to a few conclusions Considering that Jackie had to dodge paparazzi, like Ron Gallela, from wardrobe to bathroom for thirty years, she fares very favorably in our diagnostic lenses.
At the age of 34 she was catapulted into national prominence as the youngest First Lady of this century.
Her husband cheated on her more than any reasonable person could either imagine or suspect.
She was constantly in the limelight from the age of 34 until her death.
Hordes of obsessive fans, not all of them kind, followed her everywhere, even to the depths of the Adriatic to photograph her scuba diving on her honeymoon with Aristotle Onassis.
Despite all this, Jacqueline Kennedy remained active, mentally alert, productive and succeeded in raising two children to adulthood, neither one of whom manifested any significant psychopathology.
She coped amazingly well with environmental stressors which would be unimaginable for most of us.
Notwithstanding all that has been written and the tremendous collective cathexis Jacqueline Kennedy received, of all the characters in this play only Robert Kennedy and Jackie would be considered reasonable candidates for a psychological diagnosis within the normal range.
So, despite the hundreds of covers on the National Enquirer and the cruel, defamatory gossip about her, her ability to cope with these stressors goes almost unnoticed.
My wife is a shy, quiet girl, but when things get rough, she can handle herself pretty well.
He completed only the ninth grade, but at 118, his IQ was above average.
The only real father or father-surrogate was “Uncle Dutz” from New Orleans.
The Warren Commission thought Dutz Murret was a steamship clerk, but he was a bookie, a known associate of Sam Saia, in turn, a crime figure in New Orleans connected to Mafia kingpin Carlos Marcello.
Marina Oswald’s early testimony after the assassination described a gentle husband.
Later, it changed to portray a more unstable and violenceprone individual, consistent with Dr.
Much of the evidence about Oswald’s mental condition appears to come from Marina, whose testimony has been irregular or from author Priscilla MacMillan-Johnson whose credibility also has been questioned.
Johnson actually was the first journalist to ever meet Lee Harvey Oswald; she interviewed him in Moscow at the time of his defection.
After the assassination, she was given access to Marina Oswald and wrote the book, Marina and Lee, in 1977.
This represents virtually the only significant disclosures Marina Oswald has made about the assassination to anyone.
The work leads the reader toward the conclusion that Oswald killed Kennedy and that Marina believed he did so.
There is a tremendous amount of anecdotal and bibliographic detail which describes Oswald as an unstable character, an abusive husband, someone who in fact attempted to kill General Walker and someone who Marina believed was the assassin.
In 1993, however, Marina Oswald consented to an interview and said that she believed her husband was involved in some kind of conspiracy.
This notion was not expressed in JohnsonMcMillan’s book to any significant way.
Johnson-McMillan denies ever working for the CIA, but this alleged CIA connection and Marina Oswald’s change of heart should probably caution the reader to treat Johnson-McMillan’s work with skepticism.
Shadows and Secrets sources we learned Oswald struck Marina once with his fists and that such beatings occurred as often as once to twice weekly in Dallas and New Orleans.
A very recent book by Norman Mailer, based on five days of interviews with Marina (now in her fifties), corroborates the domestic violence was not a fiction, but it may have been exaggerated in Johnson MacMillan’s Marina and Lee.
In these early interviews Marina said Oswald planned to assassinate Richard Nixon, to hijack a plane to Cuba, and that he attempted to kill General Edwin Walker in the Spring of 1963.
These observations come from childhood friends and acquaintances to people who came to know the Oswalds in Dallas.
The American embassy consular official thought him to be “aggressive, overbearing, and insufferable’’ when he tried to renounce his citizenship.
That Lee Oswald was a KGB mole or CIA super-agent is part of the same American neurosis that puts out news releases about Jackie Kennedy falling into anorexia, having electroshock therapy, or searching for goat serum cures in Romania.
Sensationalism leaves none of our characters untouched, including Oswald — all the more reason not to relax our critical faculties when discussing his background.
That Oswald beat his wife is supported by Michael and Ruth Paine, George and Jeanne deMohrenschildt, and neighbors who lived near the Oswalds — all quite independent of Marina’s inconsistent testimony.
Marina, for example, said that she locked Lee in a bathroom when he was thinking about shooting Nixon.
There is virtually no evidence to indicate that Nixon was coming to town, however, and the entire scenario of locking him in the bathroom is confused by the fact that the lock on the door was on the inside.
One has to wonder about an exceptionally petite Marina mustering the strength to prevent a five-foot-nine-inch assassin from opening the bathroom door that couldn’t be locked, to prevent him going off to hit a target who wasn’t in town.
One psychological trait, widely corroborated, and also independent of Marina’s recollections, is that Oswald seemed to be a person who liked fame, attention, and controversy.
He boisterously renounced his citizenship in the American embassy in Moscow, passed out leaflets in New Orleans in front of the headquarters of antiCastro Cubans, seemed proud, even elated, that he was arrested for these activities, enjoyed his appearance debating Cuban issues, and savored the shock value of standing alone in front of an American aircraft carrier agitating on behalf of socialist Cuba.
Indeed, if Oswald did go to Mexico City, his allegedly rude outbursts at the Cuban consulate fit with this vainglorious side to his character.
Besides his apparent proneness to domestic violence, then, this haughty element is a second personality trait in which we can have some confidence.
Ocdipal Elements and Jealousy With respect to sexual identity, Oswald appears heterosexual.
There have been speculations about homosexual tendencies, but they are supported by almost no evidence, whatsoever.
In the early days of his marriage, he suffered from premature ejaculation, but as the relationship moved into its second and third year, performance improved.
He showed no homosexual tendencies in the USSR, and, contrary to Warren Commission comments, he was watched virtually all the time he 171.
Though no direct homosexual linkage can be proven with Oswald, there is an interesting homosexual subtext in this drama.
J Edgar Hoover, Clyde Tolson, Roy Cohn, Clay Shaw, David Ferrie, and various associates of Shaw and Ferrie, along with General Edwin Walker — whom Oswald allegedly tried to assassinate.
Walker was a right-wing member of the John Birch Society, later arrested for homosexual conduct in a bathroom.
Some authors believe Jack Ruby had homosexual tendencies, although specific homosexual relationships have not been proven.
First, he frequently slept in the same bed with his mother until age eleven.
Secondly, he seemed to like children and often infantilized himself in play.
Oswald often referred to Marina as “mama” and once when her breast milk was too abundant and causing her pain, Alik offered to suck the milk.
She was more surprised still when instead of spitting it out as she expected, he swallowed it.
A psychological theory of the assassination emerges from Priscilla MacmillanJohnson’s observations.
In prior chapters we noted that the Warren Commission was unable to determine a motive.
Oswald liked Kennedy, read Profiles in Courage , Portrait of a President, and spoke highly of Kennedy to deMohrenschildt all in the year of the assassination.
Ele and Marina kept a Life Magazine photo spread on Kennedy on their coffee table.
Oswald discovered a love letter Marina wrote from the United States that angered him greatly.
MacMillan-Johnson wondered if Lee might have sensed Marina’s attraction to Kennedy, and his similarity to Anatoly in Minsk, and shot the President to unconsciously destroy Marina’s symbolic suitor.
It is a wild speculation more than a theory, but probably the only psychological account ever offered to explain Oswald’s motives for the greatest crime of the century.
American obsessiveness over this event still has not bothered to answer “why” Oswald wanted to shoot Kennedy in the first place, if in fact he shot him at all.
The overall picture of his mental status cannot be rationalized away merely because he was a victim of unfavorable publicity.
He was a product of a broken home, a loner, confused about his own personal identity; he drifted from job to job, was content neither in the Soviet Union nor the United States, and his emotional balance fluctuated between an asocial indifference to the feelings of others to unpredictable outbursts of anger.
Although this chapter focuses on the mental health status of the major players, Johnson’s theory with respect to Oswald’s motives is not the only one.
On the basis of the available data, another theory supporting Oswald’s complicity and one refuting it could easily be forwarded.
For example, one characteristic of a “borderline"" personality is impulsivity.
It could be argued that Oswald’s decision to shoot the President was impulsive, consequent upon Marina having rejected him the night before.
Oswald picked up his rifle and went directly to the Depository to shoot the President.
His impulsive outbursts, particularly as a wife beater, support this hypothesis.
Oswald’s attempted assassination of General Walker differed markedly from his alleged presidential assassination plan.
If Marina’s testimony can be held to be credible, Oswald planned his hit on General Walker, researched it, spent many hours in his study going over maps, and frequently traveled to Walker’s home to find the best shooting location.
Oswald had planned his getaway, hid his rifle, and even had a plan for how to retrieve it after the shooting.
If this was Oswald’s modus operandi, it is entirely inconsistent with how he purportedly approached the presidential assassination.
He forgot to take his pistol with him, which he might need for an escape.
So the second psychological theory does not point to Oswald as the assassin at all, but shows an individual acting impulsively, on the run, scurrying home to pick up his pistol and having virtually no plan on what to do next.
Another inconsistency here is Oswald’s tendency toward braggadocio and exhibitionism.
It would have been consistent with Oswald’s character to boldly proclaim that he had carried out this execution for the socialist cause and for Cuba.
He did not attempt to get any political leverage or publicity for his cause after his arrest — as he would normally be expected to do; he denied that he shot the President to the press, to his wife Marina, and to his brother, Robert.
In short, the psychological analysis of Oswald’s character leads us in both directions, one favoring his involvement in the assassination, and one very much at odds with that analysis.
Another relatively new theory which offers to explain how Oswald, who admitted a liking for Kennedy, still might have been motivated to kill him, comes from Gerald Posner.
Castro gave a speech in Brazil on September 7,1963 , warning Kennedy that continued attacks upon Cuba could result in retaliatory actions against the Kennedy administration.
Posner argues that Oswald may have turned against Kennedy when he read of Castro’s speech two days later in the Dallas papers.
Shadows and Secrets aggressive with schizoidal features and was considered potentially violent.
Even giving him the benefit of the doubt in a dozen spurious anecdotes — generated by collective projections into a mythic devil instead of accurate descriptors of a real person — there is still enough hard data to indicate he was emotionally unstable.
Oswald the Mystery Oswald, of course, is more than a borderline personality.
He has been cast as the leading character from the dark side, the Darth Vader of this 20 th -century myth.
Furthermore, Oswald seems to occupy a place very close to the core of the paradox which is the Kennedy assassination.
When John Fain of the FBI interviewed him on his return from the USSR, Fain asked him if he was in American intelligence.
Oswald may have authored a letter to Hunt which was unearthed mysteriously in the mid1970s.
Oswald loved spy thrillers, watched I Led Three Lives as a boy, and read How to be a Spy in the year of the assassination.
The leading figure there was Guy Banister, former FBI agent, CIA contract agent, Minuteman, and right-winger.
Banister told his secretary that despite Oswald’s leafleting activities for Cuba, he was one of his agents.
Loran Hall’s fabrication to the Warren Commission and Sylvia Odio’s testimony — described earlier in this text — give substance to this point of view.
She said Oswald visited her and her sister and posed as anti-Castro freedom fighters.
Suddenly, J Edgar Hoover said that Sylvia Odio had to be wrong in her assessments and that an individual who looked like Oswald, Loran Hall, was actually the visitor to her apartment.
This seemed to clear the way for the Warren Commission conclusion that Oswald was a leftist, pro-Cuban sympathizer, not a right-wing anti-Castroite freedom fighter.
The Warren Commission went to print with that conclusion, only years later to learn that Loran Hall admitted he lied.
He never met Sylvia Odio; which leads investigators right back to the notion that Ms.
Shadows and Secrets someone’s tracks, tracks perhaps left by Oswald himself.
Hall admitted he lied and said that his life was in danger for coming forward with these admissions.
To add more mystery here, the Warren Commission accepted testimony from a car salesman who filled out a purchase order for a “Lee Oswald,” associated with the Democratic Friends of Cuba, long before the assassination.
Oswald could not drive, then or later; but the Warren Commission produced a document showing a Lee Oswald test-driving the car.
It doesn’t take a rocket scientist to understand that the Agency’s attempts to explain this do not wash.
I have found hard documentary evidence that other files were opened on Oswald immediately, files that were very, very sensitive.
This is a configuration consistent either with Oswald being the object of a sensitive intelligence investigation or with Oswald as an intelligence asset.
Newman notes that Andy Anderson’s report was reviewed by another officer, Donald Deneselya, who also recalled seeing it.
It apparently originated from a CIA section headed by “T.B.C.”, but no one at this writing seems to have a credible interpretation of who T.B.C. might be.
The Agency would not lie to cover for something that wouldn’t get them in trouble anyway.
The denial that they had any interest in Oswald is a big billboard saying there’s something else.
He was either part of an operation or an operation was built around him.
The level of suspicion of government or CIA complicity in these matters rises in direct proposition to the amount of black ink used to redact documents being released close to four decades after the killing of President Kennedy.
In sum, the picture of Oswald as an intelligence asset, somehow linked to antiCastro Cubans, or in someway set up or involved with David Ferrie, Guy Bannister, and/or Howard Hunt, or other CIA and former-CIA contract agents is not easily dismissed.
Anthony &r Robbyn Summers, “The Ghosts of November,” Vanity Fair , December 1994, 129.
Pawley and his cohorts were using Oswald to collect information on the left-wing JURE faction led by Sylvia’s father, who was in a Cuban jail.
A fictionalized CIA thriller written by Robert Morrow mentions the name Tracy Barnes, a CIA case officer; it might fit these initials.
Shadows and Secrets Oswald , the Psycho But Oswald does not get categorized as a contract agent working for CIA sponsored, anti-Castro organizations so easily.
He slips in here, there, everywhere — like Eugene Hale Brading — and is nowhere to be pinned into a fixed position.
Just in case we get too conspiratorial, too Garrisonized, we are reminded of one set of facts or another that frustrates all prospects of certainty.
A recently released, but redacted, document about Oswald from 1959 In September, 1993, the CIA released thousands of documents dealing with the assassination of President Kennedy.
At the same time, and in anticipation of the 30th anniversary of the assassination in November 1993, a spate of Kennedy books appeared, the most publicized being Gerald Posner’s Case Closed.
A short review of this important and controversial work follows in the Appendix to the chapter.
First, Oswald did not have enough money to afford the accommodations of a CIA operative.
This is the profile he cut, not the romantic, Ian Fleming image that fans of thrillers imagine would match the role he was supposedly playing in a conspiracy.
Oswald lived like a disturbed, lone, assassin; he was diagnosed as mentally unstable and violence prone.
He took a shot at General Walker and proudly called himself a “hunter of fascists” to George deMohrenschildt.
He hit his wife repeatedly, could not hold a steady job, and was rapidly losing Marina’s affection.
In fact, he was so out of control that he placed a loaded pistol on the table in front of his Russian interviewer and wept.
Both embassy officials recognized him as emotionally overwrought and unbalanced.
Throughout his story, Oswald was extremely agitated and clearly nervous, especially when he mentioned the FBI, but he suddenly became hysterical, began to sob, and through his tears cried, “I am afraid. . . they’ll kill me.
This is what I must now carry to protect my life,” and placed the revolver on the desk where we were sitting opposite one another.
He returned to Dallas, was no longer wanted by Marina, was jealous of her attraction to JFK, and continued to crumble psychologically.
Lee — not because he worked for David Ferrie, Howard Hunt, and the CIA, but because he was paranoid and thought the FBI was dogging him and getting him fired everywhere he went.
When Marina finally moved in with Ruth Paine and decided to stay with her instead of rejoining her husband, he was pushed to the edge.
The day before the assassination, he went to Ruth Paine’s house, where Marina had been staying; he slept that night “like a zombie,” says Marina.
He was in such a mysterious funk, just lying there, Marina even wondered if he was dead.
Oleg Nechiporenko, author of Passport to Assassination, is the primary source.
The assassination was an impulsive act of a borderline personality in a state of severe emotional crisis, the same borderline personality that had attempted suicide in Russia, shot himself in the elbow in the Marines, and was sentenced to hard labor in a brig.
The fact that after the assassination he had to go back home to pick up his pistol is further proof that he was out of control and acting on impulse, without plan or purpose.
If this was a pre-meditated and planned event, he would have carried his pistol with him, just as he had carried the rifle.
Instead, he abandoned the rifle in the Depository, went home to change clothes and pick up his pistol, and then left — probably, to high tail it out of town.
As he was fleeing, he shot officer Tippit, as part of this same, general, emotional collapse.
Oswald was cool, collected, rational, and cooperative at police headquarters less than an hour and a half after this so-called emotional collapse.
Furthermore, he was no raving maniac — at least in the eyes of those who interrogated him.
We cannot find ourselves particularly content with this “psychiatric” theory especially when we hear how rational and composed he was at police headquarters.
He was searching for an attorney and responding with deliberation to accusations.
Oswald, the Mafia Patsy When we consider Oswald as a “Mafia patsy,” another stream of evidence begins to collect.
The HSCA decision was that there was a conspiracy and that at least four shots were fired in Dealey Plaza.
Hoover had taped discussions of “contracts”; Trafficante, Marcello, Giancana were involved.
We have already gone over the alleged connections; especially through Uncle Dutz.
And Nofio Pecora, who bailed Oswald out of jail in New Orleans, was a friend of Marcello and had spoken to Jack Ruby only three weeks before the assassination.
And Marcello was the man who ordered the hit on Kennedy, and celebrated Kennedy’s death at a restaurant in such a churlish way that Mrs.
Even though Oswald did not drink or smoke or have any Mafia-like predilections, he fits as a patsy into a Mafia conspiracy easily, and is in fact dripping with Mafia connecting links and associations.
Anthony & Robbyn Summers, “The Ghosts of November,” Vanity Fair, December 1994.
At Marina’s urging, Ruth called Roy Truly, superintendent of the depository, and asked him to consider Lee.
On November 15, the Dallas TimeS'Herald reported that the President would be having lunch at the Dallas Trade Mart.
This is one of the weakest points in that whole theory, and only the wildest speculations can answer that dilemma.
There are some still-classified documents about the Paines, but if they point anywhere it is to the intelligence community, not the Mafia.
We cannot connect the Paines to a Mafia conspiracy without the greatest difficulty, and we arrive at another dead end.
We are left with a composite picture of Lee Flarvey Oswald which is muddled, multi-directional, and paradoxical.
He and Marina still talked, and there was still hope for their relationship.
They had just had a baby, their second, less than a month before the assassination.
Oswald added an exemption to his W-2 form to get less money withheld from a check he was anticipating at the time of his death.
This is not the profile of an assassin but a struggling new father with a future to look forward to.
Borderline or not, he may have been a totally innocent bystander who was used, abused, and eaten up by a conspiracy he had nothing to do with.
When he was taken to the police station, he was asked if he wanted to cover his face.
Like her husband, she has always left a very ambiguous trail of commentary.
Even now she waffles and is not quite sure he definitely did not do it, or if he was part of some conspiracy or government operation.
She is consistent on one fact, however, and that is that her husband has not been portrayed in the media properly.
Shadows and Secrets The innocent side and the human side get very little press.
Gerald Posner’s bias is so thick, he even publishes Oswald’s baby pictures with captions that leave little room to think of him as anything other than diabolical.
President Gerald Ford’s book is yet another example of the negative attire Oswald has had to wear.
There is evidence in abundance that Lee was not the unbalanced, violent, impotent, projected devil he was made out to be.
Many thought he was rather nice — these were people who knew him well, too.
I mean he was very refined, he really was, and extremely well-mannered. . . he was daring, and very outgoing and a very pretty child.
Those who knew Marina and Lee in Minsk relate an entirely different image as well.
You have brought me so much happiness in life I sing to you and share with you my life.
When asked if KGB had interrogated any of their prime sources after the assassination, Igor Ivanovich suddenly became emotional.
FBI agent James Hosty’s memoirs say that on September 23, Oswald, a leftist, was in the Cuban consul’s office in Mexico City, saying he was “going to kill that 193.
These two absolutely opposite images, opposites on the political spectrum, both dating to the same day, underscore Oswald’s chimerical quality and help explain why he and the rest of the drama have taken on such mythic qualities.
Even The Shark and the Sardines is in the “right-wing” scenario as well as the left.
Indirectly, it is about a highly successful CIA overthrow of the government of Guatemala; but it is also a deeply leftist treatment of American imperialism in Latin America and was a bestseller in communist Cuba.
When we look at the assassination as pure drama, as a myth, Oswald’s function is less mysterious.
If he were unambiguously guilty, this journey would never have taken place.
If we can never be sure what role he played in the assassination, Lee Harvey Oswald’s greatest significance may, in the end, be that he provides American national character an extraordinary opportunity to get a peek at itself.
This may not be his function in the real and literal murder, but it does appear to be his function in the mythic story to which he belongs and which has fascinated the American psyche for almost four decades.
Mental Status of the Main Characters Now we have used some of the tools and assumptions of traditional psychology to look at the most publicized, most “numinous” players in this psychodrama.
One conclusion we might offer is that most of prominent figures in the event and its wake exhibit one sort of psychiatric weakness or another.
Only Bobby Kennedy and Jacqueline Kennedy seem not to demonstrate psychopathology.
Ruby had been diagnosed as a “psychotic depressive” by his prison psychiatrist.
Lee Harvey Oswald’s mother, Marguerite, Baron deMohrenschildt,Jack Ruby’s mother, and perhaps Rose Kennedy.
The Kennedy tale is very heavily populated with mentally unstable persons.
By way of contrast, in 1963 only about 14% of Americans were thought to be mentally ill.
Conclusion In this chapter we explored the psycho-biographical portraits of the main actors.
But as detectives trying to solve a murder mystery, we are no closer to knowing what happened, or who did it, or why.
Whatever approach we take, we are denied a realistic, linear, solution, and as a historic event, it remains disturbing and unresolved.
But the story is so big that it functions in another realm, as well; the assassination has taken hold in America’s imagination with a grip that won’t let go.
Taken as a story, a drama, the assassination of John F Kennedy has all the characteristics of what Jung calls a “big dream,” an event loaded with paradox, radiating dialectical meaning, a mystery, and with deep roots in collective psychology.
In our last chapter we will ponder the symbolic subtext, as psychologists attempting to get to the essence of a symbolic myth.
We will look at Camelot, Lincoln, and other symbols that may be part of the compelling psychological force this story has taken on as the passage of time removes it from the reality of history into the realm of national legend.
On first reading, this text appears to present new evidence and also suggests to the reader that the author began this inquiry with no particular bias or vested interest.
Fie interviews numerous important witnesses like Delphine Roberts, and some of Guy Banisters’ closest friends; he tracks down witnesses who said that Oswald visited Clinton, Louisiana in the presence of Clay Shaw and David Ferrie, and does sometimes masterful detective work in showing how Oswald might have read Castro’s remarks against JFK made in Brazil on September 7,1963... and thus perhaps developed a motive to assassinate him.
After a few initial chapters Posner goes through a metamorphosis such that any evidence or testimony favoring the prosecution’s case is trumpeted, while virtually all evidence and testimony failing to support that point of view is disparaged or simply not addressed.
This leads the reader to an increasing tendency simply not to trust what Posner is offering either in the way of conjecture or evidence.
He cites the works of Mark Lane, Jim Garrison, Robert Groden, David Scheim, David Lifton and others as having ignored this information.
This may certainly be true, and certainly it can be argued that for a full and complete picture of this assassination story, such information as Oswald’s mental status when he was thirteen is of importance.
Posner, the prosecutor, however, is not making points in this way in order to ascertain the truth or develop a complete and comprehensive picture.
He appears merely to be attempting to point up flaws in the conspiracy schools and simultaneously beating his drum, hinting that he has adroitly uncovered further evidence and testimony to buttress his case against Oswald.
Posner is quite guilty of the same astonishing lack of comprehensiveness.
President Kennedy’s mistress, Judith Exner Campbell, who connected JFK to Sam Giancana and the Mob, is not even mentioned or indexed in this book.
One wonders how the case on Oswald can be so easily closed if such telling details are left out.
He seeks to make his case more convincing by taking absurd hypotheses, setting up straw men, and then ridiculing these fringe hypotheses relentlessly.
CIA officer Blahut’s theft of autopsy photos from the HSCA safe is neither mentioned, footnoted, nor indexed.
Garrison is discussed as a paranoid psychoneurotic and, at least by Posner’s accounts, not a single successful prosecution can be attributed to Jim Garrison in his whole career.
Posner spends a great deal of time asserting that Garrison started the rumor that Oswald held David Feme’s library card.
He says that Oswald never met David Ferrie, in the Civil Air Patrol or anywhere else, and that what Garrison had done to David Ferrie, Guy Banister, and Clay Shaw ruined them.
Especially in the case of Clay Shaw, Garrison’s actions drained Shaw’s personal fortune and destroyed an innocent man.
At no time in these virulent diatribes about Garrison does Posner mention that many years after the Garrison trial, Richard Helms, Director of the CIA, admitted that both David Ferrie and Clay Shaw had CIA connections.
Posner then proceeds to dispute that Ferrie ever had any contact with Oswald and claims that Ferrie was not in the Civil Air Patrol at the time Oswald was.
Ferrie is instructing a group of young cadets in the Civil Air Patrol and Oswald is clearly identifiable as one of the handful of cadets in the picture.
The actual library card controversy, however, evolved quite differently.
The question itself was never recited in the report, but the nature of the question is implicit in his answer.
The Secret Service agents reported that Ferrie said he had never loaned his library card to Lee Oswald.
As proof of this he produced his own library card, a card which had expired and which bore an address from which he had long since moved.
Apparently dazzled by his cooperation and his sincerity, the Secret Service let the matter drop.
Oswald had a library card on him when arrested, but the card is not available for public examination.
We must presume that the Secret Service agents were reasonable men and that there was something about the card on Oswald which made them think that it belonged to David Ferrie.
Rather than having started a rumor, Garrison picked up on a curious piece of questioning by the Secret Service, and his inferences are altogether justified.
That the David Ferrie library card may still be a classified document remains an open question.
Even the photographs come with captions in which the author’s bitterness is barely concealed.
Oswald’s baby pictures come with a caption stating that his mother was “unable to cope” with him.
Posner’s photomontage of Lee Flarvey Oswald, from age two to twenty, is accompanied by scornful and mordent descriptors for every image.
President Kennedy was hit by a bullet traveling from the rear, allegedly, and striking him at 2000 feet per second.
This resulted in Kennedy’s pitching backward not forward, not at all an achievement easily explained by physics.
Posner mixes “Thornburn’s position” in with his other data as if to weave a tale of “fact” when he is really concocting a very speculative explanation of the Zapruder film.
First, the bullet was never found, and thus tying it to Oswald’s rifle is a guess at best.
Second, that the bullet hit an oak tree has never been established and the Warren Commission failed to identify any branch of any tree that was nicked by this bullet, a fact which Posner at least admits.
Third, the metallurgical analysis of the concrete hit by this bullet did not conform to the metallic make up of the other bullets associated with Oswald’s rifle.
The reasoning of the Warren Commission and of its adherent, Gerald Posner, is at best questionable.
If one’s intent is to convict Oswald, then all other matters must fit into place.
If the metallurgical study did not confirm these preconceptions, then explanations must be given — even if no nicked tree can be found.
The explanations for the first shot are all predicated on the dogmatically held belief that the first shot had to have come from Oswald, from his rifle, and from the sixth floor Depository window.
If one abandons this fixed, irrevocable idea — if only for a moment — one realizes that the shot that hit the curb and injured James Tague was over 30 feet above the President’s head — if it came from the Depository.
If we assume the shot was not 30 feet over the President’s head but only a few inches over the President’s head, then by using the same reverse trajectory method used by Failure Analysis Associates, the origination point of the shot is the DaTTex building, not the Depository.
Shadows and Secrets that Brading had Mob associations, and that he used an alias with police investigators in Dallas, are also of great interest.
In short, the failure to make a metallurgical match with Oswald’s other bullets, the failure to provide evidence that the first shot hit an oak tree, and the failure to reconcile a “near miss” as over 30 feet above the President’s head suggests that the first shot may have originated from another weapon, may have been fired by another person, and may have been aimed from another location.
Such ideas were, of course, off limits for the Warren Commission of 1964, since it would have opened rather than closed the case.
Unfortunately, such alternate hypotheses are heresy to Mr Posner, as well, resulting in ever more convoluted theories built up to explain things away on the basis of a very meager factual base.
A prosecutorial orientation requires that evidence and witnesses favoring the prosecution must be underscored, italicized. . . even heralded. . . and simultaneously, evidence and witnesses not favoring this position must be impugned.
It is quite instructive to see how this bias places Posner in the position of handling two unrelated witnesses, Silvia Odio and Barney Baker.
Sylvia Odio was the Cuban refugee living in Dallas who testified that “Leon” Oswald visited her apartment with two antLCastro Cubans in late September 1963.
When she saw Oswald on television after the assassination, she knew it was the man who came to her apartment.
Sylvia Odio’s testimony is not favored among Warren Commission protagonists primarily because it casts doubt on Oswald’s trip to Mexico City.
It also casts doubt upon his singular image as a leftist, pro-Castro, Marxist.
His appearance at the residence of Annie and Sylvia Odio clearly puts him in an antiCastro role and places him in the company of rightist-militant, anti-Castro freedom fighters.
This is not the image which the mythic Lee Harvey Oswald has been cast to play these last thirty years.
Thus Posner parades a litany of negative facts about Sylvia Odio in order to impugn the accuracy of her testimony and undermine the credibility of her account.
He reviews her psychiatric history, reports interviews with some of her friends that portray her as “histrionic,” and fails to find the letter Sylvia allegedly sent her father in a Cuban prison where she wrote of her experiences.
There is no doubt that Posner, in keeping with his prosecutorial orientation, seeks to take away any shred of Odio’s credibility.
None of this is in any way “featured"" information in Posner’s treatise.
That she lived alone in Dallas with her sister while both her parents were incarcerated under Castro — and that this partly accounted for her reluctance in coming forward — is similarly concealed in Posner’s enthusiastic, prosecutorial foray.
Garrison is a gun toting, paranoid, megalomaniac drooling for publicity and fame.
Sylvia Odio is a neurotic psychotherapy patient, prone to histrionic exaggeration, a divorcee who came from a “fractious marriage,” and a person under psychiatric care whose hysterical fainting spells simply cannot support any of her outrageous stories.
These are the pictures Posner paints under the guise of objectivity and clarity of mind.
His bias becomes all the more evident when one considers how protective and uncritical he is toward witnesses who support his position.
The anti-Castro Cuban Loran Hall came forward and said that Sylvia Odio was wrong, that Hall and two associates, Lawrence Howard and William Seymour, actually were the individuals who had gone to see her.
This rendition was placed in the final Warren Commission report, and Odio’s testimony simultaneously vitiated by Hall’s account.
Odio vehemently denied that these were the men who visited her apartment.
It is curious that Posner homes in on every possible weakness of Odio’s account and yet seems to have no interest in tracking down Loran Hall or attempting to learn why he lied to the Warren Commission.
Posner did not interview Hall’s friends, relatives, parish priests... as he did with Odio.
Baker, a Hoffa goon, had only recently been released from Sandstone prison when he was called by Jack Ruby in 1963.
Shadows and Secrets Posner does not investigate Barney Baker’s criminal record, his psychiatric history.
He does not ask Baker why he called Dave Yaras, and makes no attempt to impugn Baker’s credibility the way he did with Sylvia Odio.
He simply leaves his reader with the unaltered facts, namely that Hoffa goon Baker strongly denies that Jack Ruby called him for any other purpose than to help him in his AGVA disputes in his Dallas night club.
Odio’s full psychiatric history is examined and her history of fainting spells unearthed.
Barney Baker’s background, education, and rap sheet are ignored — in order to assure the reader of Ruby’s innocent and uncomplicated contact with yet another mobster.
One paragraph is devoted to Baker’s corroboration of Ruby’s innocent contact with the Mob and the Teamsters.
Posner does not report that Giancana visited Kennedy in the White House, that his girl friend befriended Kennedy, that Giancana was murdered after testifying to HSCA personnel or that Giancana’s relatives have written books revealing that Giancana confessed to them that he had a hand in the assassination.
Norman Mailer’s subsequent text shows rather clearly that deMohrenschildt admitted he had a relationship with the CIA and identified the contact person, a fact that was corroborated independently of DeMohrenschildt’s comments.
One notable account is that of Joseph Campisi, a mobster who was the owner of the Egyptian Lounge, a restaurant frequented by Ruby.
Posner makes a point to mention that Ruby did not meet with Campisi on the evening before the assassination, even though he did go to the Egyptian Lounge.
Posner obviously wishes to imply that while Joseph Campisi was a mobster and owned the Egyptian Lounge, he had little contact with Ruby and certainly none on the eve of the assassination.
Posner may even be hoping to give the reader the impression that Jack Ruby may not have even known Joseph Campisi.
In sum, Gerald Posner failed to mention mobster Campisi’s visit to Ruby’s prison cell; he failed to mention CIA Counterintelligence Chief, James Angleton’s destruction of the diaries of a Presidential mistress, Mary Pinchot Meyer; he did not report Richard Helm’s admissions that Clay Shaw and David Ferrie were associated with the CIA, and he never mentioned or made any reference to long-time Presidential mistress, Judith Exner Campbell.
In addition, his assessment of the relationship between David Ferrie and Oswald was fully and unequivocally mistaken.
One important observation contained in this text but not contained in the review above is that Posner’s use of the Failure Analysis study of Dealey Plaza was not commissioned for Posner’s text but taken from another source, with ambiguous attributions given.
Three years and two million pages later, there is much that remains closed.
First, let’s look at general psychological mechanisms that obtain to this story.
Neither Ted Sorenson, Arthur Schlesinger, Pierre Salinger, William Manchester, Dave Powers, Kenneth O’Donnell nor any of the other Kennedy idolaters can be found on record even hinting obliquely at Kennedy’s severe sexual pathology.
To persist in propagating the notion of a glorious second term, hadJFK not been shot, seems geared only to make us regret his untimely death all the more.
One such JFK supporter finally came out of his gilded closet recently and dealt with the issue.
Ben Bradlee, publisher of the Washington Post, wrote in his 1995 memoirs about Mary Meyer, his sister-in-law, and her affair with JFK (quoted in prior chapters), and remarked that he felt that JFK deserved to be impeached for his behavior.
Bradlee’s indignation does not match up with his much earlier Conversations with Kennedy, was contained in that book or others which he wrote afterward.
When writers omit major facts, that is a conspiracy to propagate the public’s denial of reality.
When documents are destroyed and witnesses are killed, that is a conspiracy, presumably to protect someone from prosecution.
In January, 1996 — and not a moment earlier, the government released a document showing FBI interest in Oswald’s trip to Switzerland, well before he defected to Russia.
John Newman published a partial analysis of two million documents released by the government in 1992 — they are heavily redacted with black ink.
In one, the FBI learned that Oswald’s mother sent him a $25 money order.
Newman says only the first and last page of the memo have ever been released — the other thirty pages are still classified.
Even the released documents are often largely obliterated; the level of censorship and obfuscation is chronic and continuing.
Gerald Posner, the cheerleader for the Warren Commission, glibly says Mary Meyer’s death had nothing to do with the assassination, but conspicuously fails to mention that her murder remains unsolved, that CIA Chief of Counter Intelligence James Angleton was caught red-handed breaking into her studio in search of her diary two days after her murder, or that Meyer told her best friend that she feared for her life — just before she 199.
Camelot and Carousels Mary Pinchot Meyer, sister-in-law of Ben Bradlee of the Washington Post and last presidential mistress of John F Kennedy.
Meyer was murdered ten months after JFK, shot in the head, execution style.
Within two days, Bradlee attempted to enter her art studio only to find James Angleton of the CIA picking the lock.
Meyer had told her friend that she was afraid for her life and that if anything happened to her, her diary should be saved.
Angleton was looking for the diary which was later found and destroyed.
One JFK conspiracist (and sensationalist!), Robert Morrow holds that Mary Meyer was ready to turn over to an inquiring Bobby Kennedy important documents about the assassination taken from her former husband.
Cord Meyer, a high ranking CIA officer, and that was the reason for the murder. was murdered.
Mary Meyer died in 1964, but Posner grinds out hackneyed, “it’s-overand-done-with” slogans thirty years later as part of an orchestrated chorus of denial, disinformation, and concealment.
Many of the actors have or had very solid reasons for their denying, hiding or distorting; perhaps some of them, and much of the public (happy to embrace the Kennedys as the closest thing we have to an American aristocracy) are just as glad to leave hidden things hidden — only through denial can we still hold JFK as the prince we wish he was.
Various portions of this tale have inspired vehement and dogged denial, from every quarter, for a broad spectrum of reasons, a broad spectrum of interests.
Taboos were broken, trust was betrayed, unspeakable things were done — over and over again, at many levels.
The ability to accept and confront such things is a measure of maturity; the easiest, simplest, and most primitive alternative is to deny them, to ignore them, and to make sure no one talks about them.
Similarly, it could serve as a primary text for testing methods of Freudian andjungian dream interpretation.
The Carousel A Carousel is a merry-go-round made up of painted horses and animal figures; it moves in a circle, always leading somewhere but returning to its point of origin.
The Kennedy assassination is an infinite maze of possibilities that leads round and round in circles, too.
Like the snake that eats its own tail, the carousel symbolizes a course or a pursuit that reaches as its destination its place of origin.
It was in the Carousel Club, the striptease joint that he owned in Dallas, that Jack Ruby met his underworld contacts, conducted his business, consorted with his dancers, worked the sensitivities of the Dallas police officer corps, and was infected with gonorrhea, a condition he was being treated for at the time he killed Oswald.
It was his Carousel Club that got him deeply in debt with the IRS, a debt that was due and payable at the time of the assassination.
The carousel makes a second appearance with Bobby Baker, Lyndon Johnson’s right-hand man and legislative assistant.
Baker’s government salary was insufficient to support the lifestyle he was living, and for this discrepancy he was in the news at the time of the assassination.
When Baker opened up the Carousel Motor Inn in North Carolina, this drew suspicions and serious senate investigations.
Both Johnson and Bobby Baker may have been engaged in inappropriate influence peddling and shady financial dealings.
The third appearance of the symbol of the carousel comes in an oblique reference by Chuck Giancana in his book, Double-Cross.
Chuck had never been made privy to his brother Sam’s underworld dealings.
Chuck always felt that not knowing was better than knowing, and his brother felt the same.
It was the first time that his brother had “brought him in” to the secret world of Mafia machinations.
Camelot and Carousels If the “carousel"" had been interjected into the drama intentionally, we could complement the artist for pulling together diverse strands of plot in a subtle way; and we could say that its real symbolic import is that this tale takes us on a sometimes intriguing, sometimes nauseating journey to nowhere and everywhere, round and round, in an infinite complexity which negates all hope for resolution.
The symbol would serve to alert us that we have embarked on an endless journey into paradox and contradiction and will end up where we began. . . wondering if Lee Harvey Oswald really did do it all by himself.
The facts are many, corroborating evidence is plentiful, and every interpretation that has been published, so far, fails to withstand the test of all the other “reliable” evidence.
Even if we take into account as much as we can of the psychology and the motivations of all the actors, the witnesses and the writers who have co-authored this drama, we can neither fully accept nor fully reject any of the offered scenarios.
Even if we surrender our conspiratorial thinking and accept Posner’s view that Oswald acted alone, we can’t explain why Posner withheld and deleted as much information as he did in order to achieve even marginal persuasiveness; neither can we account for the contradictions and logical problems in all the other versions.
If comfort is what we seek, we must convert the Kennedy story from a political intrigue and murder mystery, a prosaic historical event, to an enigma, a symbolic tale.
Dream Interpretation Joseph Campbell, author of A Hero with a Thousand Faces, remarked that interpreting dreams and interpreting myths and fairy tales were not altogether different processes.
We look for similarities, common meanings, deeper themes, and consistencies between symbols, and then bring them into focus and closure.
This is a chapter in which we play, speculate, and test the limits; and it departs radically from the more rigorously embraced realism of the preceding chapters.
We begin with the most obscure symbols and work our way to the better known.
Symbols In The Myth Camelot Don’t let it be forgot, that once there was a spot, for one brief shining moment that was known as Camelot.
Camelot is the first of two major symbols associated with John F Kennedy and his administration.
The King Arthur legend was rooted in England, but the Kennedy “Camelot” myth was an Americanization, and its symbolism was picked up by Jacqueline Kennedy.
Camelot and Carousels The Camelot story resonates because it touches on some profound human drives, desires, needs and conflicts.
Somehow, it taps deeply into our psychology and, obliquely or directly, we find it fascinating.
As the story goes, Arthur became King of England when he showed that he (and only he) could retrieve the great sword Excalibur from the stone that held it.
Ele established a “round table” where all the most valiant knights of the empire might discuss and sort out their problems, and a court with a prosecutor counterbalanced by a defense counsel, and an impartial jury.
Arthur loved both Jenny and “Lance,” and does not appear to have interfered in their love; but when his knights accused his Queen of infidelity, he had to administer justice.
On the day of her execution, Arthur procrastinated long enough to allow Lancelot to appear and rescue her.
Some 90 percent of the American rendition is concerned with adultery — not noble ideas.
Some parallels with the Kennedy story; • John Kennedy, like King Arthur, was considered a negotiator, not a saberrattler.
A blood kinsman may have set in motion a process which destroyed the house of Kennedy.
Mordred merely brought out the truth of the hypocrisy in Camelot; Bobby may have precipitated his brother’s murder by prosecuting the Mafia, not realizing that the Mafia was tightly interwoven in his own family affairs.
Passion versus the Dream Another important theme is the interplay between passion and idealism.
He was the first president to sign a nuclear test ban treaty with the Soviets.
During his three-year Presidency, Kennedy met with Khrushchev in Vienna — an historic and unprecedented moment of dialogue and reconciliation.
In 1962, Kennedy announced a Geneva Conference agreement on a neutral Laos, another peaceful initiative.
He attempted to mediate and negotiate an end to the conflict with Cuba through a secret emissary.
He sought to negotiate a retreat from Vietnam before the United States became too heavily involved.
Kennedy resolved conflict through compromise, accommodation, and negotiation; and this was essential to his ideological legacy.
As Arthur brought a new image to kings and kingship, so did Kennedy bring a new image to the White House and American culture.
The world’s greatest artists, singers, and dancers came to perform at the White House, from Nureyev to Pablo Cassals.
Abraham Lincoln As Arthurian symbolism has stuck to the Kennedy myth, so has the symbolism of Abraham Lincoln.
Lincoln and Kennedy trigger an archetypal image, the archetype of the hero; both were vigorous incarnations of this unconscious imprint.
Both stand as personal and historic hero figures in American collective psychology, and some Jungian analysts have already made this observation.
Still, the metapsychology goes beyond mere collective infatuation with a hero figure.
Abraham Lincoln was President during some of America’s most difficult days, when an internal battle was waged, a bitter, brutal war; Kennedy, too, fought America’s internal enemy — this time, however, the struggle was more elusive and waved no discernible flag.
Kennedy presided over an internal struggle over America’s future direction — whether to reach an accommodation with its arch enemies, the Soviet Union and the European left, or to go its own way, pursuing America’s manifest destiny, alone.
Camelot and Carousels The Collective Scapegoat In the Kennedy myth, Oswald has been cast as the American traitor, and certainly the enemy within.
We can see in Kennedy’s personal life, vastly hypocritical and contradictory to his public persona, the seeds of destruction through unbridled, compromising sexual passions.
Oswald has been made to occupy the role of the mythic, designated assassin all this time.
At least symbolically, therefore, he is dressed up in this myth as the antiAmerican, Marxist-Leninist, and is forced by history to wear the wardrobe of the traitor, the shadow, who stands in opposition to all that American democracy, society, and Kennedy himself represented.
He is dialectical, protean, symbolizing always his opposite as well as himself.
He is both communist and anti-communist, proCuban and anti-Castro, pro-Kennedy yet his assassin.
He was affiliated with the Mob through his uncle, but did not smoke, drink, womanize, nor gamble; any Mob affihation was considered laughable by his wife.
He was a Marine with a security clearance, yet a defector, a Marxist-Leninist with an active subscription to the Worker.
He was a sweet loving father, cooing baby talk to his daughter in the bathtub, yet a borderline, vicious, unpredictable wife-beater.
Looking at the event as if it were a work of drama, and adding in not only the hard facts of the assassination but all that has been written and said about them, all the reactions of the media and the public at large, Lee Harvey Oswald (like John Wilkes Booth, before him) represents a Jungian shadow figure, the traitor, and the symbolic figurehead of the enemy within.
As Wilkes Booth became, in people’s mind, a symbol of the South and the Confederacy, Oswald symbolically represents the “evil empire” of communism.
He was seen first as a Marxist-Leninist — at the most conscious level, he represents that which was alien and seditious to the United States.
Indeed, as psychological figure, it is possible he might even represent a displaced symbol of deeply running American fears of communism and the cold war, which were very much in evidence at the time.
References to King Arthur and Camelot are based upon Green, Roger Lancelyn.
The major figures in this American drama are King Arthur, his queen, Jenny, Sir Lancelot, the magical guide Merlin, and Arthur’s illegitimate son, Mordred.
In 1936, Hitler was a troubling presence, but world war would not break out for another three years.
When the Lindbergh baby was kidnapped in the early 1930s, it was such a big story that it eclipsed wars, the Depression, and everything else in the news.
Kennedy’s assassination has been called “the crime of the century,” but the term was first used to refer to the kidnapping of Charles Lindbergh’s son and the subsequent lynch-mob like trial of Bruno Richard Hauptmann in Trenton, Newjersey.
Hauptmann was caught, prosecuted, and put to death for this crime; but the unprecedented publicity of the incident led to an almost complete abandonment of objectivity.
Scholars have since alleged that the actual killer of the Lindbergh baby was never caught.
Hauptmann was framed; very likely he was entirely innocent of the crime, and was a victim of the mass hysteria which surrounded this case.
Hauptmann was a family man, a hard working carpenter in the Bronx, a man who loved his wife, and had just had his first baby... not a likely baby-killer.
He came to the United States in search of a better life , and when he was a teenager he had been arrested for theft; but after coming to the United States he had no criminal record here at all.
A German was selected as the likely culprit, and was readily seized upon by the American psyche as the designated baby murderer, the dastardly swine who could coolly and with pre-meditation commit this vicious crime.
That’s a controversial interpretation, perhaps, but the evidence against Hauptmann was so circumstantial and weak that it causes one to wonder.
In that case, the irrational wrath directed at Hauptmann and his execution represents more of a ritual-sacrificial killing rather than the expression of the dispassionate hand of justice.
American fears of communism and confrontation with the Soviet Union were very high at that time of the Kennedy assassination.
The cold war was not just a political-historical situation; it represented a nascent collective fear of annihilation.
Marxist-Teninist Lee Harvey Oswald could have served as a psychological scapegoat for these running fears of communism in the same way that Hauptmann may have served as the “designated” scapegoat for America’s growing fears of Nazi Germany.
The Lindbergh case and the Kennedy assassination are considered the greatest crimes of the 20th century; both shared widespread mass popularity and obsessiveness.
Both were followed by botched crime investigations in which evidence was so tainted and distorted one could have very little confidence in the prosecution’s case.
Both involved crimes in which the real perpetrators and/or conspirators were likely never apprehended.
In this model, Oswald functions as a symbolic poison-container for these American fears, and his selection as the “designated assassin” distills, condenses and crystallizes them onto one figure.
The Kennedy Tragedy as the Foreshadow of American Tragedy The Kennedy storied “foreshadowed” changes in the American psyche itself; it encapsulated in a microcosm many of the shifts that were just taking place, beneath the surface, in the society.
In 1963, Americans overall were positive and optimistic, but in the three decades that followed deep resentments, disillusionment, cynicism, alienation, mental illness, crime, divorce, and disaffection burgeoned.
The alienation was occasioned, on the one hand, by a lack if faith in the Kennedy assassination inquiries, plus an ever-increasing mistrust of the government in general.
This was the government that led us into war in Vietnam; and it was increasingly perceived as lying on a regular basis.
But even after the Vietnam debacle was over, feelings of alienation prevailed and continued unabated.
In a sense, the whole Kennedy story summarized the emerging trends, the internal poison that ate away the lofty visions of the American dream and left in its wake alienation, disaffection, anomie, and pessimism.
From Camelot, in the words of King Arthur, By the sword of Excalibur, we will get through this.
Whether we like it or not, Kennedy was not the democratic, intelligent, open-minded, articulate statesman his 205.
He was a manipulative, dysfunctional, secretive Sybarite, perhaps the most sociopathic and mentally unstable president in this century.
Both Kennedy and the public eschewed the discipline, the restrictions, the selfcontrol needed to maintain a healthy lifestyle.
JFK went on a binge of sexual license and promiscuity, and the American public went on a binge of its own.
They saved less than they ever had, and spent far more than they ever dreamed; and they did what they felt like doing — more than any previous generation had done.
In the thirty years after JFK, Americans legalized gambling and abortion, made single parenting socially acceptable , developed the highest divorce rate and the highest rate of sexually transmitted diseases in the industrialized world.
They presided over the distribution of handguns and narcotics throughout their inner cities, addicting their most vulnerable class to lethal substances like crack cocaine, and they tried to raise a generation of children in homes without a father, with a television set as the primary caretaker.
These are rather well substantiated megatrends of the thirty years that followed the Kennedy assassination.
Only recently has the downward acceleration decreased — in some of these areas.
Violent Crimes, 1960-1990 Soum Worid Almanac, Na/v Yoifc Sapps Hcrad, 19&4 Just as JFK was killed by some elusive, internal, traitorous predator, so was American society attacked in these years.
Selfishness, narcissism, greed, self-interest, the inverse of this slogan, is a far more accurate description of Kennedy’s approach and at the same time it describes megatrends that were emerging in the American character for the next thirty years as weh.
When Kennedy was killed, The Brady Bunch and Little House on the Prairie were popular TV shows.
Thirty years later, Maury Povich parades scantily clad 9-year-old girls out on afternoon TV, talking in sexuahy explicit language.
Jerry Springer is the master of ceremonies over marital brawls and beatings, and Sally Jesse Raphael hosts discussions of ritual incest and baby killing during family viewing hours.
The entire culture has shifted; indeed, the American culture was overwhelmed by an enemy within, no less than its President feh victim to an internal set of demons.
The young, idealistic, handsome, statesman-like star on stage was killed by something that was quite the opposite of himself; so too, the brilliant, star-like American dream which has been rhapsodized for two centuries by romantics and ideologues seems itself threatened by internal forces.
Both JFK and Clinton were Presidents, and both became embroiled in extra-marital affairs which threatened their presidencies — and may have contributed to Kennedy’s assasination.
Camelot and Carousels The Significance Of The Number Three While the interpretation of Kennedy’s regime and his assasination as a foreboding of the times to come in the United States is a powerful one, another suggested interpretation blends the rational and the irrational, the conscious and unconsciousthe elements in the American mind.
Regardless of what we do, it seems that Oswald will forever be the “designated assassin,” and that no matter how many other confessions are unearthed and how much evidence gathered.
Children a century hence will memorize that Oswald fired three shots that killed the President of the United States.
This may not be the most rational conclusion, but if we follow Jacqueline Kennedy’s admonition that John F Kennedy’s life and death was a story of myth, fable, and legend, not of political science or history, then it takes us to a new realm, to the symbolic realm.
This is not a murder mystery awaiting a solution, but a myth awaiting our understanding.
It remains a mystery, the literal truth of which shall always elude us, forever there when we are here, forever here when we happen to be looking over there.
Certain stories maintain a hold on the psyche and never seem to let go, always retaining in their core an element of mystery and uncertainty.
Seen from that standpoint, the most powerful symbol in this story as a myth is the number three, “finality,” the symbol of completion.
This story is anything but complete, but the symbol would tell us that indeed the story is the same today as it was in 1963, despite all that has been said and written to the contrary.
Oswald, a Marxist-Leninist, lone assassin, shot the President of the United States.
So was it then, and so shall it ever be, not because it is literally true, not because Oswald could be convicted in a court of law, and certainly not because Oswald actually did it.
No, it will memorialize itself because it belongs to a numinous American myth which will endure and be remembered this way for centuries, resisting all rational attempts to set the story straight and revise it accordingly or properly.
Three shots, three bullets, three years in the White house, 33 months in office, 33 extramarital affairs during his Presidency, 33 members of Oswald’s fictional Fair Play for Cuba Committee JFK’s three brothers, his three children, Oswald asking his wife to return to him three times, all counterpointed with his favorite Chekhov story, “The Queen of Spades,” italicizing the number three.
Three little pigs with three little houses, one of straw, one of twigs, and one of bricks.
It is probably literally or historically untrue that Peter lied and the cock crowed three times or that in the year AD 33 a man named Barrabas was released by Pontius Pilate and that Christ was crucified exactly as the bible related, but this has not stopped the story from being propagated this way for the next forty generations.
The actual intrigues which led to Brutus killing Caesar may not have occurred exactly as written, but it doesn’t stop the legend from permeating our history books and being learned as an event that we are taught literally occurred.
Conclusion So, too, with Oswald and Kennedy, the story has remained unchanged for all these years, despite an avalanche of facts to the contrary.
This is not a literal, historical event; it is myth, a fable, an American fairy tale which demands its own script, its own ending, its own immutable cast of characters.
N14006, in the Stateville Correctional Center in Joliet, Illinois is serving a life sentence for murdering a policeman.
Fie is an inarticulate fellow, and a former loyal associate of mafioso Chuckie Nicoletti.
He says he was the grassy knoll gunman and was paid $36,000 for the hit.
Given his ignorance of most of the JFK assassination, his account is quite credible.
From my correspondence with him, this is where I would lay the greatest odds of determining who the real killer was, if indeed Oswald was not our man.
But the point of this book is precisely that it matters little who is right or wrong, who is the grassy knoll gunman, or even if there was a grassy knoll gunman.
The myth is intact, unchanged, and like all folk tales, it will be told and retold the same way for generations to come.
There is simply no physical or empirical proof which could be brought which would, once and for all, answer the dilemma and solve the murder mystery.
Indeed, by now this is not a murder mystery any more than The Brothers Karamazov is.
Lee Harvey Oswald, a mentally disturbed lone gunman, a defector, and a communist sympathizer, fired three shots and assassinated the President of the United States on November 22,1963.
