The concession did not have to be made because Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev agreed to an American ultimatum and removed the missiles without an explicit link to the Jupiter missiles in Turkey, which were obsolete anyway, Rusk said.
The Cuban missile crisis is considered one of the most tense moments in U.S.-Soviet relations.
After the Soviets began to build missile launchers in Cuba, Kennedy publicly criticized the buildup on Oct., 1962, ordered a naval quarantine and threatened to attack Soviet territory if any missiles were fired from the island.
On Oct., 1962, the United States delivered an ultimatum to the Soviets, demanding withdrawal of the missiles, pledging no United States invasion of Cuba and stating that Washington would withdraw the obsolete Jupiters as previously planned and not as part of any deal with Moscow.
According to Rusk, Kennedy developed the fallback position amid concern Moscow might reject the U.S. ultimatum, pushing the two nations toward nuclear war.
The next day, however, the Soviets began dismantling their Cuban missiles, easing the crisis.
According to the Rusk letter, Washington considered the Jupiter missiles to have limited military value.
Nevertheless, any public trade-off would have involved Turkey, a North Atlantic Treaty Organization ally, and was seen by senior Kennedy advisers as a threat to the alliance.
The incident which might have pushed the two superpowers closer to nuclear war is disclosed in a book released last week.
They managed to pass unnoticed through United States and NATO cordons in the northern Atlantic, but they were spotted by the Navy as they approached Cuba.
Valentin Savitsky's B-59 submarine was quickly spotted by Navy patrol aircraft when it appeared on the surface.
The submarines' commanders could use conventional torpedoes only on order from the navy chief, and the use of nuclear torpedoes could be authorized only by direct order from the Soviet defense minister, the book says.
However, the close surveillance by the United States Navy made it difficult for submarines to resurface for scheduled communications sessions.
Savitsky eventually controlled his anger and ordered the submarine to the surface.
It was dark, but the area was brightly lighted by searchlights from United States ships and a United States helicopter buzzing overhead.
Savitsky is not quoted in the book; he had died by the time Mozgovoi began work on it.
The previously unknown incident, which might have pushed the superpowers closer to nuclear war, is disclosed in a book released this week.
They managed to pass unnoticed through United States and NATO cordons in the northern Atlantic, but were sighted by the Navy as they approached Cuba.
Valentin Savitsky's B-59 submarine was quickly sighted by Navy patrol aircraft when it appeared on the surface.
The submarines' commanders could use conventional torpedoes only on order from the navy chief, and the use of nuclear torpedoes could only be authorized by direct order from the Soviet defense minister, the book said.
Its Russian title, Kubinskaya Samba Kvarteta Fokstrotov, translates to Cuban Samba of the Foxtrot Quartet.
Mozgovoi said that, according to his conversations with submariners, Savitsky was the only one of four submarine commanders to consider unauthorized use of a weapon, but that it was hard to blame him.
The crisis ended with Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev's agreement to withdraw the missiles in exchange for President John F Kennedy's no-invasion pledge.
The previously unknown incident — which might have pushed the two superpowers closer to nuclear war — is disclosed in a book released this week.
The bombardment went on for several hours and some sailors lost consciousness.
After an especially strong explosion shook the submarine, ""Savitsky got furious and ordered an officer in charge of a nuclear-tipped torpedo to arm the weapon,"" Orlov wrote. said in the book.
After an especially strong explosion shook the submarine, ""Savitsky got furious and ordered an officer in charge of a nuclear-tipped torpedo to arm the weapon,"" Orlov said in the book.
In today's list of quotes from the late '60s to '90s, you'll hear about the Apollo 11 launch, the Challenger explosion, Hurricane Andrew and more.
Readers: This is part three of a 1999 piece on Florida through its voices.
And most importantly, there was a majestic Saturn V launch vehicle sitting on Pad A with three calm and cool astronauts on board.'' -Apollo 11 launch commentator Jack King recalling July 16, 1969.
They were the scum then like we are the scum now… but in a decade, you'll see.
Many bright minds crossed the Florida Straits seeking exile.'' -Manuel Collado, part of the 1980 Mariel boatlift.
While many of the 1960s refugees were among Cuba's elite, many Marielitos were blue-collar and some were criminals released from jails.
The dramatic influx of 125,000 people in just four months overwhelmed South Florida and helped make Miami the capital of Latin America.
The fire of Liberty City and the water of Mariel have left Miami faltering, uncertain and divided, at the most crucial point in its history.'' -Nov., 1980, Miami Herald editorial.
In May 1980, after four white former Metro-Dade officers were acquitted in the beating death of black motorcyclist Arthur McDuffie, Miami's Liberty City erupted into riots.
Oranges!'' -Big Pine Key firefighter Joe Crehan at a Homestead community center, on the chaos that followed Hurricane Andrew, in August 1992.
It was, at least at the time, the most devastating hurricane in United States history.
Her family once owned each side of a road in Boca Raton and grew beans in the 1950s before South Florida exploded in an orgy of growth.
Submit your questions, comments or memories to FloridaTime@Gatehousemedia.com.
After exchanging notes, they realized the brush was even closer than they had thought.
In addition to the Soviet missiles that triggered The Crisis, the Russian general in charge of operations in Cuba revealed that tactical nukes were on the island and ready to be used.
The leaked memoirs of Nikita Khrushchev already have shown that Fidel Castro was eager to have the Soviets employ nuclear weapons.
There seems to be some confusion about whether he wanted them used in response to an American invasion of the island or even before.
The Russians were under the impression that their Cuban caudillo was calling for a First Strike, and prudently declined the honor and risk.
If those Soviet nukes had been used against American troops, there's little doubt that the American commander-in-chief, John F Kennedy, would have retaliated in kind perhaps directly against the Soviet Union.
There is much to learn from such retrospective discussions, mainly about human folly.
He had a way of being present at the creation of one disaster after another, including the Vietnam War.
By OK'ing an operation that could not succeed on its own, then abandoning the freedom fighters on the beaches, the Kennedy administration succeeded only in tightening Fidel Castro's grip on Cuba and his tail-that-wags-the-dog relationship with the Soviets.
If the Churl of the Antilles had been overthrown in 1961, he would not have been in any position to provoke a nuclear crisis or inspire three wasted decades of insurrectionary violence throughout Latin America.
If communism had not been allowed to sink its hooks into Cuba earlier, the world would have been spared a missile crisis later.
But somehow I can't imagine Robert S McNamara, the secretary of defense associated with so many American reverses, leaning across the table and telling Cuba's bloody dictator as much.
It was a bit like having Stalin at an exchange of historical reminiscences about the Katyn Forest massacre.
It is ironic enough to have Robert Strange McNamara, whose string of failures in foreign policy led him to ever loftier heights in the American establishment, still giving advice.
On his return from Havana, he told the National Press Club that this is the time just when Fidel Castro's regime is shakier than ever to relax the pressure and resume normal relations with Communist Cuba.
While expressing some pro-forma concern about the complete absence of freedom under Cuba's Maximum Leader, McNamara offered the same kind of defensive praise for the brutal regime in Cuba that one used to hear about the Soviet Union and Communist China before the truth became undeniable.
Even if Cuba had been left to the Batistas, health and education would probably have advanced in step with its economic progress over the past 30 years.
Yet the same old voices keep arguing for an accommodation with the last remaining Communist tyrants even as they are toppled.
And there is something about having helped engineer a great series of failures in the long-ago that gives their present pronouncements an oracular aura.
In reality, that terra incognita to the McNamaras of the world, the true Communist faith is now represented only by a by a couple of isolated outposts Cuba and North Korea and by its last great redoubt on the Chinese mainland.
One just hopes Cuba's Maximum Leader will live long enough to see it all come crashing down around him.
The story can't miss, although Donaldson is hard-pressed to maintain the intensity during the film's entire running time.
The film covers everything that happens between the discovery of Soviet missile bases in Cuba and the final accord reached between the Soviet Union and the United States.
Donaldson and screenwriter David Self are required to maintain tension -in a story whose ending is a foregone conclusion.
Costner, also one of the film's producers, plays the film's central character, White House advisor Kenny O'Donnell.
Like the proverbial fly on the wall, O'Donnell is privy to the most intense and intimate conversations between his old college chums, John and Robert Kennedy (Steven Culp), who are now the president and the attorney general of the United States, respectively.
Myriad military and political advisers are also on hand to weigh in on the crisis, and the hawks far outnumber the doves.
The president's contemplative reluctance to launch a full-scale offensive -a position supported by the likes of Dean Acheson and Gen.
Curtis LeMay -is seen by some as indecisiveness and by others as outright cowardice, if not treason.
History has judged Kennedy's actions favorably, and Thirteen Days is in no way a revision or rethinking of that history.
The sweep of the story occasionally obscures the individual personalities of some of the pivotal characters involved, although Greenwood's triumphant personification of JFK is one of the best portrayals of Kennedy to date.
Not quite as successful but still praiseworthy is Culp's interpretation of Robert Kennedy.
Frank Wood , Dylan Baker , Madison Mason, Christopher Lawford, Conway and Cariou make strong impressions in the film's smaller roles, while Ed Lauter and James Karen don't seem to have any dialogue at all -although both hover on the sidelines throughout.
Michael Fairman's performance as Adlai Stevenson is a surprise standout.
Costner, sporting an overripe New England accent that makes it sound as if he's doing a Kennedy impression, is nevertheless coolly appealing as O'Donnell, particularly when he's operating within the ensemble nature of the film.
When it comes time, late in the film, for Costner to extol the Meaning of It All, Thirteen Days comes dangerously close to pretentiousness.
Also attending the conference, which will focus on Cuba's role in the crisis, will be Arthur Schlesinger Jr., former special aide to President John F Kennedy, Cuban organizers said Tuesday.
The conference's aim is to shed light on events leading up to the crisis, which peaked when the United States learned there were Soviet nuclear missiles on Cuba, an island just 90 miles away.
After several tense days of negotiations with Washington, Nikita Khruschev withdrew the weapons without consulting with Havana; that move enraged Fidel Castro's government.
Former presidential speech writers Richard Goodwin and Ted Sorensen and then-CIA analyst Dino Brugioni will also take part, said Fernandez.
Visits to sites Also taking part in the Oct.-13 event will be a number of Soviet military officials, Fernandez said.
There will be two days of seminars and a day of visits to sites related to the crisis, including a former missile silo in the western state of Pinar del Rio.
The international affairs research institute maintains an extensive archive on declassified United States government documents.
Fernandez said the Cuban government will release a number of formerly classified documents on the crisis in conjunction with the conference.
It ended when Khrushchev agreed to remove the missiles in exchange for American guarantees that Cuba would not be invaded.
Ten were declassified in 1973 by the State Department, and the 11th was released in '79, she said.
The remaining letters, written by both men from Oct. through Dec., have remained sealed at the Boston library.
Blight said the reason may be that world leaders may be reluctant to have frank correspondence if they fear the documents might be released later.
Cit at ion CHRISTOPHER CALLAHAN, ' United States won't release 11 letters on missile crisis', St.
It did so despite a breakdown in communication between Prime Minister John Diefenbaker, his defence minister and senior military commanders, says the author, retired Cmdr.
He also suggests that nuclear weapons were deployed in Canada at the time, and the Canadian Forces was prepared for nuclear war.
Canadian Involvement Reconsidered, will be published next month by the Toronto-based Canadian Institute of Strategic Studies.
He credits defence minister Douglas Harkness and Rear Admiral Kenneth Dyer, then Maritime Commander Atlantic, with making decisions which allowed the forces to defend the continent.
On Oct., 1962, the United States obtained irrefutable evidence that the Soviet Union had installed medium-range missiles in Cuba which were nearly operational.
President John F Kennedy ordered a naval blockade of the island and the United States military stepped up patrols against Soviet submarines which had entered the Atlantic.
As an anxious world teetered on the brink of nuclear war, Kennedy and Soviet leader Nikita Krushchev conducted 10 days of tense negotiations.
The United States and Canadian military continued their patrols to flush Soviet subs, many armed with nuclear weapons, out of North American waters.
The United States forces needed Canadian help to protect the continent and the North American Aerospace Defence agreement, provided for such co-operation, Haydon writes.
The prime minister was also upset with Kennedy for what he saw as a lack of consultation with Canada over the crisis.
As a result of those and other factors, Diefenbaker delayed ordering the forces to a higher state of alert.
Harkness, realizing the seriousness of the crisis, eventually took it upon himself to tell senior commanders to do what was necessary to ready the forces.
With the United States navy calling for assistance, Dyer ordered much of the fleet to sea.
The navy and air force played key roles in finding and tracking Soviet submarines deployed in the North Atlantic and close to the coastline.
Haydon marshals an array of evidence to suggest that BOMARC surface-to-air missiles, designed to destroy Soviet nuclear bombers north of populated centres, were armed and ready at North Bay.
CF-101 Voodoo fighters may also have been armed with nuclear weapons, Haydon says.
The Diefenbaker government, fearing a nuclear weapons debate, sidestepped the question during the crisis.
One of the principal issues in the election of 1960, a supposed ""missile gap"" or fear that the Soviets had more and bigger missiles than did we, helped John F Kennedy defeat Richard M Nixon for the presidency.
Turned out that the ""gap"" faced the other way we had the decisive edge in missilery after all but the anxiety remained.
Then, two months into his administration, Kennedy permitted Cuban exiles secretly training in Central America to attempt to recapture their country from Fidel Castro and communism.
Castro crushed the invasion at the Bay of Pigs and further consolidated his power by constantly warning countrymen of a perpetually imminent second invasion.
And the Soviets, led by Nikita Khrushchev, began constructing missile launch sites in Cuba to reassure Castro.
When aerial photography confirmed the construction, Kennedy summoned senior advisers for an intense week of secret meetings while public officials attempted to maintain normal schedules.
The hardliners among them advocated ""pre-emptive"" strikes to take out the launch sites before they were operational.
And so, on Oct., 1962, President Kennedy told the nation of the construction of the sites and of a ""quarantine"" of Cuba to prevent the delivery of missiles for the sites to launch.
In the end, Khrushchev and Kennedy ""kept their cool,"" as slangsters of the day would have said.
We permitted the first Soviet vessel that approached the quarantine line to pass, judging it had no missiles aboard anyway, and the others turned around.
Then, 25 years later, at a conference in Moscow, we learned that some of those missile sites had been completed, were operational and that area commanders had the authority to launch, if we had taken a shot at them.
Reuters Section: NEWS 76 Words Page: 11 OpenURL Link HAVANA Cuba on Monday erected a deactivated Soviet medium-range missile on the Havana coast as a monument to the Cuban missile crisis.
The 80-foot missile, similar to the more than 40 Soviet R-12 missiles deployed in 1962, was positioned pointing straight up, not north toward the United States.
In October, 1962, the United States pressured the Soviet Union to remove the missiles.
The missile is a monument to ""the Cubans' refusal to be bowed,"" Cuban military officials said.
Matthew Brown Of The Morning Call Section: NATIONAL 1735 Words NATIONAL Page: A1 OpenURL Link Surprised by the rumble of the flatbed trucks, Radem Cruz Soto joined neighbors streaming out of their oneand two-story concrete homes in this farming community to throng the main road for a closer look.
The transports carried no insignias; the pink-faced young men wore ordinary clothes.
The 19-year-old economics student swelled with pride -and a feeling of relief.
Eighteen months earlier, a force of exiles organized, armed and trained by the United States had landed at Playa Giron, a stretch of beach at the mouth of the Bay of Pigs, in an attempt to wrest the Caribbean nation from the socialist revolution of Fidel Castro.
The attack was a disaster, but U.S.-backed insurgents continued to hold the Sierra del Escambray mountains around the southern port city of Trinidad in Sancti Spiritus province.
Officials in Havana saw the work of the CIA in warehouse fires, factory explosions and plots on Castro's life.
Cubans braced for a larger invasion, this time by United States troops.
But with the unannounced delivery of the Soviet R-12 and R-14 medium-range ballistic missiles, it seemed to Cruz Soto that long-awaited help finally had arrived.
In nuclear weapons capable of striking most cities in the continental United States, he believed, Cuba now had the deterrent it needed to pursue its new brand of socialism free of interference by the colossus to the north.
Forty years ago this coming Monday, spy plane photographs of Soviet base construction here at the foot of the Cordillera de Guaniguanico mountains would trigger the most dangerous confrontation of the Cold War.
But while Americans remember the Cuban missile crisis as a moment when the world seemed to teeter on the edge of nuclear armageddon, to Cubans it was a time of courage and defiance, a brief instance when the little country had the strength to stand up to its overwhelming adversary.
Indeed, Cubans say it wasn't until Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev agreed to take the missiles back -a deal Castro learned about through news reports -that they felt vulnerable.
Rudolf Anderson during the crisis, and the Soviet missile launcher used to shoot it down.
Inside the former presidential palace, the state-run museum displays a map of the naval blockade ordered by President John F Kennedy and a photo of anti-aircraft artillery brigades defending the storied stretch of Havana seafront called the Malec.
These artifacts of what Cubans call ""la Crisis de Octubre"" are presented as part of a larger narrative, one also represented by newspaper headlines describing United States sanctions against Cuba and the tank commanded by Castro to defend the Bay of Pigs.
Cubans say it was the failed April 1961 landing at Playa Giron that led Castro to seek Soviet protection.
Running his fingers over a map, he outlines what his commanders believed would be the United States battle plan.
Operation Mongoose, authorized by Kennedy in November 1961, combined diplomatic pressure, economic sanctions and military threats with industrial sabotage and support for insurgents.
When Castro asked for conventional missiles to defend Cuba, Khrushchev saw an opportunity.
In the years since World War II, the United States had surrounded the Soviet Union with hundreds of nuclear warheads.
The Soviets, meanwhile, had no more than 50 weapons capable of striking the United States.
The Soviet soldiers, their sunburned faces glistening in the tropical heat, smiled and waved to their Cuban companions.
After years of tension with the stronger United States, the missiles brought Cubans a sense of relief.
From the beginning, Cuba and the Soviet Union differed over whether to publicize the acquisition.
Castro favored announcing a mutual defense pact; Khrushchev told him they should wait until the arms were assembled and present their presence to Kennedy as a fait accompli.
Soviet troops setting up bases all over the island, even in civilian clothes, proved difficult to hide.
It wasn't until a week later, on Oct., that CIA analysts examining photographs taken the day before by U-2 pilot Maj.
Eleven years old at the time, Rafael Saumell Muoz remembers images of Castro and Kennedy flickering across the family television screen.
He recalls shortages of milk, butter, rice and beans during the crisis, and seeing United States planes flying low over the island.
Looking out over the Malec from his father's high-rise apartment in Havana, he says, he could see the line of United States ships stretching across the horizon.
But with Soviet ships approaching the blockade, Kennedy preparing for action, and Castro deploying all of Cuba's military to defend the island, not everyone was calm.
Kennedy's pledge not to invade the island would provide little comfort.
Khrushchev's agreement to remove the missiles would strain relations between Havana and Moscow for years.
While the rest of the world gasped its relief, Cuba felt ignored, betrayed and abandoned.
Forty years after the crisis, Pena Martinez still sees injustice in the United States focus on Cuba.
In South Florida, people were wondering how much longer the tension could last before the crisis erupted into war.
Meanwhile, in Washington, FBI agents observed that the staff at the Soviet embassy was burning large quantities of documents -generally the last act of an embassy before its country goes to war.
Air attacks would be fairly quick and low-risk -at least compared to an invasion which, the military estimated, would result in 18,484 casualties.
In Havana, Fidel Castro thought the low-level flights were a prelude to a United States attack.
The Cuban leader also sent an astonishingly bellicose message to Khrushchev in which he estimated that the United States was planning to invade Cuba within the next three days.
He suggested that if the United States invaded Cuba, the Soviets should try to pre-empt United States plans by unleashing a nuclear attack on American targets.
A United States official, asking not to be identified, said the Kennedy letters may contain some clarifications of the agreements Moscow and Washington reached in late October 1962 when the crisis was resolved.
No other conflict during the post-World War II era brought the two superpowers closer to nuclear war than the crisis that grew out of the Soviet decision to station offensive nuclear weapons in Cuba.
A week of unprecedented international tension ended when Khrushchev agreed to dismantle the missiles in return for a promise by Kennedy not to invade Cuba.
The official, who asked not to be identified, said the Kennedy letters may contain some clarifications of the agreements Moscow and Washington reached in late October 1962 when the crisis was resolved.
Officials said the government's decision to release the Kennedy letters is linked to a long-planned conference on the missile crisis the Cuban government is holding in Havana.
U.S., Cuban and former Soviet officials who participated in the crisis are scheduled to attend.
During the crisis, Castro was outraged by Khrushchev's decision to withdraw the missiles without consulting him first.
A United States official said at least one of the letters has not been released because no copies were placed in State Department files.
The president's daughter showed Khrushchev a signed copy of the 1963 Nuclear Test Ban Treaty that her mother, Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis, kept as a memento.
The treaty had its beginnings in the 13-day standoff over Soviet nuclear missiles being placed in Cuba, just 90 miles from the United States.
Taking part in the panel discussion were Khrushchev, former Kennedy advisers Theodore Sorensen and Schlesinger, and Washington-based Cuban diplomat Josefina Vidal.
All were opposed to a pre-emptive strike against Iraq to remove weapons of mass destruction, and said the Bush administration had not learned the lessons of the missile crisis.
Schlesinger said there were advisers then urging Kennedy to carry out a military strike against Cuba to remove the missiles.
His telegram, sent at the height of the crisis, fifty years ago this month, was disclosed yesterday among 2,700 pages of previously unreleased files from the personal papers of Robert F Kennedy, the president's brother and attorney general.
The documents shed light on how the Kennedys and their closest advisers averted catastrophe in October 1962 after United States spy planes discovered the USSR had secretly deployed nuclear missiles to Cuba, its ally.
One memo by Dean Rusk, Mr Kennedy's defence secretary, details plans for a strike by the United States air force on the Cuban missile sites if negotiations should fail.
The archives contain exhaustive minutes, transcripts and handwritten notes from meetings at the White House during the notorious ""13 Days"" described in Robert Kennedy's memoir of the same name.
But they also contain dozens of memos sent to Washington from America's ambassadors around the world, on how the crisis was playing out on their patches.
Mr Bruce, who served as the ambassador to the Court of St James's between 1961 and 1969, took the temperature in Westminster.
While they could depend on the Atlanticism of Harold Macmillan's Conservative government, the Kennedys were anxious about the Labour opposition, led by Hugh Gaitskell, which had many proud Socialist MPs.
While most Britons were sympathetic, ""Communists, CND supporters, pacifists and disturbed centrists have violently dissented,"" he said.
Mr Bruce was secretly briefed on internal party wranglings by George Brown, Labour's deputy leader and head of its Right wing.
On the other hand, Lord Lambton, a Tory MP and ""advocate of fighting everywhere"", told Mr Schlesinger to report back to Kennedy that he should have sent in the marines.
The archives publish in full the letters between President Kennedy and Nikita Krushchev, the Soviet premier, which in the end led to the aversion of hostilities.
Kennedy received a rambling letter from Krushchev on Oct 26 promising the missile sites would be removed if the United States pledged not to invade Cuba.
Before he could reply, he received another on Oct 27 stating that the terms were for the United States to dismantle its own missiles in Turkey.
The president famously chose to ignore the second letter and respond to the first, accepting the deal.
Even the president's brother, Robert F Kennedy, then attorney general, argued in favor of air strikes or an invasion of the island nation to remove Soviet nuclear ballistic missiles, a report in the Boston Sunday Globe said.
Citing documents that will be made public this week by the John F Kennedy Library, the Globe said only the president favored the Khrushchev's offer to remove the missiles if the United States would scrap its Jupiter missiles in Turkey.
The library's officials could not be reached for comment on the Globe report, which was based on transcripts of meetings held by the Executive Committee of the National Security Council Saturday, Oct.
On the same day Kennedy revealed the missile crisis, a Soviet officer spying for the West falsely reported that the Soviet Union was about to launch a nuclear attack on the United States, Newsweek magazine reported.
A State Department adviser during the Kennedy administration, Raymond Garthoff, told the magazine that CIA officers correctly disregarded the Soviet officer's warning and did not tell Kennedy or his top aides.
But Kennedy added to the proposal that the United States would dismantle its weapons in Turkey five months later, so he would not appear to have backed down, according to the Globe.
The administration had decided prior to the crisis to eliminate the missiles in Turkey, but they had not carried out the plan.
Nevertheless, Robert Kennedy disagreed with the compromise and later urged ""that we buy time now in order to launch an air attack Monday or Tuesday,"" Oct. or 30.
Khrushchev announced the withdrawal of the missiles from Cuba Sunday morning, after a night meeting between Robert Kennedy and Soviet Ambassador Anatoly Dobrynin during which the attorney general relayed the president's agreement to the Soviet premier's proposal.
Garthoff said his report was based on information from a CIA official, who told him of the false alarm shortly after it happened.
Oleg Penkovsky, a senior Soviet military intelligence officer, wanted to provoke the superpowers because he had been spying for the West for a year and a half and was about to be arrested, Garthoff said.
