In October 1962 President John F Kennedy was informed of a U-2 spy-plane’s discovery of Soviet nuclear-tipped missiles in Cuba.
Over an intense 13 days, he and his Soviet counterpart Nikita Khrushchev confronted each other “eyeball to eyeball,” each with the power of mutual destruction.
A spy photo of a medium-range ballistic missile base in San Cristobal, Cuba, with labels detailing various parts of the base, displayed in October of 1962.
Pausing at the nuclear precipice, President Kennedy and the group of advisors he had assembled evaluated a number of options.
After a week of secret deliberations, he announced the discovery to the world and imposed a naval blockade on further shipments of armaments to Cuba.
Presented with the choice of attacking or accepting Soviet nuclear missiles in Cuba, Kennedy rejected both options.
The crisis was resolved at the last minute when Khrushchev accepted the United States offer.
Evidence presented by the United States Department of Defense, of Soviet missiles in Cuba.
This low-level photo, made October 23, 1962, of the medium-range ballistic missile site under construction at Cuba’s San Cristobal area.
Added since October 14, the site was earlier photographed, are fuel trailers, a missile shelter tent, and equipment.
Evident also are extensive vehicle tracks and the construction of cable lines to control areas.
Curtis LeMay, center, at the White House in Washington to discuss U-2 spy plane flights over Cuba.
A map of Cuba annotated by former United States President John F Kennedy, displayed for the first time at the John F Kennedy Library in Boston, Massachusetts, on July 13, 2005.
A photograph of a ballistic missile base in Cuba, used as evidence with which United States President John F Kennedy ordered a naval blockade of Cuba during the Cuban missile crisis, on October 24, 1962.
President John F Kennedy tells the American people that the United States is setting up a naval blockade against Cuba, during a television and radio address, on October 22, 1962, from the White House.
From left, Soviet foreign deputy minister Valerian A Zorin; Cuba’s Permanent Representative to the United Nations, Mario Garcia-Inchaustegui; and United States Ambassador Adlai Stevenson.
Cuban President Fidel Castro replies to President Kennedy’s naval blockade via Cuban radio and television, on October 23, 1962.
President John F Kennedy signs a proclamation enacting the United States arms quarantine against Cuba, on October 23, 1962.
Two soldiers sit in a sandy dugout beside a machine gun hold position on a beach on Key West, Florida, on October 27, 1962.
United States Navy surveillance of the first Soviet F-class submarine to surface near the Cuban quarantine line on October 25, 1962.
Members of the Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament march during a protest against the United States action over the Cuban missile crisis, on October 28, 1962 in London, England.
United States Army anti-aircraft rockets, mounted on launchers and pointed out over the Florida Straits in Key West, Florida, on October 27, 1962.
A low-level photograph taken November 1, 1962, of a Medium Range Ballistic Missile Site at Sagua La Grande, Cuba.
President John Kennedy reports personally to the nation on the status of the Cuban crisis, telling the American people that Soviet missile bases in Cuba are “being destroyed”, on November 2, 1962.
He said United States air surveillance will continue until the effective international inspection is arranged.
Soviet personnel and six missile transporters loaded onto a Soviet ship in Cuba’s Casilda port, on November 6, 1962.
Note shadow at the lower right of the RF-101 reconnaissance jet taking the photograph.
A P2V Neptune United States patrol plane flies over a Soviet freighter during the Cuban missile crisis in 1962.
The Soviet ship Kasimov removes 15 Soviet I1-28 aircraft from Cuba after the United States asked for their withdrawal.
A Soviet submarine near the Cuban coast controlling the operations of withdrawal of the Russian Missiles from Cuba in accordance with the US-Soviet agreement, on November 10, 1962.
American planes and helicopters flew at a low level to keep close check on the dismantling and loading operations, while United States warships watched over Soviet freighters carrying missiles back to the Soviet Union.
A group of United States Army hospital tents and ambulances, set up at the Opa Locka airport, formerly a marine air station in Miami, Florida in November of 1962.
Buildup of troops and military equipment, rushed to south Florida to launch an invasion of Cuba if it had been ordered, remained on the keys, between Miami and Key West.
This unit, showing no sign of dismantling, was manned and ready with its anti-aircraft missiles in Key West on November 21, 1962.
These photographs capture the moments in time when the USSR had placed nuclear missiles withing launch range of the United States.
I was 6-7 years old at the time and I can still remember these events unfolding.
The cold war was a long drawn out event which had started just after the close of WWII, when Russia had been a ally to the United States against Germany.
General George Patton never trusted the Russian Communists and he made that point publicly known.
With every United States military impulse set to destroy the USSR military weapons, Kennedy opted for a Naval blockade of Cuba, and the presentation of the aggression before the UN security counsel.
Khrushchev agreed to remove the missiles if the United States would promise not to invade Cuba and the United States removed its missiles from Turkey.
Khrushchev would have a large complement of his navy spread across the Atlantic, and the United States would have soviet attack submarines within a few miles of its naval bases.
Juan Farrias December 30, 2020 i remember those years well. i was 19 years old and lots of people were building undergrond shelters and many relocated away from the cities. there was no question kennedy ment what he said. from the replys i heard coming from the news and how khrushchev was responding he knew kennedy ment business. god bless our military and the people who protect from nurses to the top generals Jacqueline March 15, 2022 Thank you for posting these photos and this information.
He has just recently passed, but after 37 years in the Navy, this is so great to see to learn about what he and his other shipmen went through.
Wes left Newport, RI 10/15, bound for Scotland, in the middle of the night we made a hard turn to Port, went to flank speed.
We stayed at General Quarters, on her aft starboard for the next fourteen days until relieved by a sister ship.
