A lawyer by training, Castro led the Cuban Revolution and transformed the island into the first communist state in the Western Hemisphere.
Young Castro and campus activist Fidel Castro Ruz was born on August 13, 1926, on his family's successful sugar plantation near Birán, Oriente Province, Cuba.
Castro's parents had not planned to send their young son to school, but he was so set on getting an education that he talked them into letting him go when he was only six or seven years old.
He was a motivated student who did well in agriculture, history, and Spanish, and he was also an exceptional athlete.
Castro soon joined the activists and associated with one of the gangs, the Unión Insurreccional Revolucionaria.
Although police suspected him of the murder of a rival student leader and other violent actions, nothing was proven.
Castro developed a reputation for his personal ambition and public speaking ability, yet he never became a well-known student leader.
Castro jumped into the shark-infested waters and swam to shore carrying a gun over his head.
Reproduced by permission of the Corbis Corporation . streets, distributing anti-United States material and stirring a revolt.
Pursued by Colombian authorities, the Cuban students sought asylum, or protection, in the Cuban embassy.
The ideas of fascism (a strong central government headed by one absolute ruler) and communism (where goods and services are owned by the government and distributed among the people) were widely discussed.
Castro soon found a calling with Cuba's Ortodoxo party, which stressed economic independence, political liberty, social justice, and an end to corruption.
Castro also became a devoted follower of the party's charismatic leader, Eduardo Chibás.
Because Castro had no income with which to support his family, the marriage eventually ended.
Leading the revolution Early in 1952 Castro began campaigning for a seat in congress as a replacement for Chibás.
On March 10 General Batista and his army overthrew the regime of Cuban president Carlos Prío Socarrás.
For Castro, violence seemed the only way to oppose the military takeover.
He organized a group of followers and on July 26, 1953, attacked the Moncada military barracks in Oriente Province.
After being released by an amnesty in 1955, Castro was sent to Mexico City, Mexico.
There he began organizing an expedition against Batista called the 26th of July Movement.
On December 2, 1956, Castro and eighty other men landed in Oriente Province.
After encounters with the army, in which all but twelve of his men were killed or captured, Castro fled to the Sierra Maestra.
In these mountains, Castro designed a guerrilla operation, where a small band of revolutionaries would attempt to remove Batista.
Castro emerged as the undisputed leader of the anti-Batista movement, and his guerrillas increased their control over rural areas.
It was called off after Batista ordered strikers to be shot on sight, causing massive shootings.
Revolution changed course On January 1, 1959, Castro and his July 26th Movement assumed power and began public trials and executions of ""criminals"" of the Batista government.
On February 15 Castro replaced José Miró Cardona as prime minister and appointed his own brother, Raul, as commander of the armed forces.
A powerful speaker and a charismatic leader, Castro began exercising an almost mystical hold over the Cuban masses.
As previous revolutionaries had done, he lectured the Cubans on morality and public virtue.
He also emphasized his commitment to democracy and social reform, and he promised to hold free elections—all while denying that he was a communist.
He greatly reduced rents, and passed a law that confiscated inherited property—all moves hinting at Castro's communist leanings.
By the end of 1959 many military leaders left and were replaced by communist radicals.
This internal trend toward a communist agenda appeared in foreign policy too.
Castro accused the United States of taking actions against his revolution.
Afterwards, Cuba established relations with other communist countries, mainly the very powerful Soviet Union.
On January 3, 1961, United States President Dwight Eisenhower broke relations with Cuba.
Declaration of a socialist state In April 1961 anti-Castro exiles, supported by the United States under the leadership of its newly elected president, John F Kennedy , attempted an invasion of Cuba at the Bay of Pigs.
In December 1961 Castro merged all groups that had fought against Batista into the Integrated Revolutionary Organizations.
When President Kennedy avoided confrontation and directly negotiated the missiles' removal with Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev , Castro felt humiliated.
Spread of the revolution Another source of conflict in Cuban-Soviet relations was Castro's determination to take his revolution into other countries.
After the 1964 Havana Conference, the Soviet Union was temporarily able to slow down Castro's support for armed struggle in Latin America.
But by 1966 Castro founded the Asia-Africa-Latin America People's Solidarity Organization to promote revolution on three continents.
In July 1967 Castro formed the Latin American Solidarity Organization, which was designed to spark violence in Latin America.
Castro's efforts, however, were mostly unsuccessful, as evidenced by the failure of former Cuban revolutionist Che Guevara's guerrilla campaign in Bolivia in 1967.
Nevertheless, Castro's efforts in this regard continued through the 1970s.
Repression culminated in boat lift Despite the improvements that Castro brought to Cuba, he was constantly criticized for human rights abuses.
Political prisoners crowded Cuban jails, while homosexuals, intellectuals, and others were constant victims of government-sponsored violence.
One of Castro's goals was to remove opposition to his rule, which he accomplished not only with executions and imprisonments, but also through forcing people to leave the country.
The largest of these, the Mariel Boat Lift, occurred in response to a riot in Havana.
In mid-April of 1980 Castro opened the port of Mariel to outsiders, particularly exiled Cubans living in Miami, Florida, who sailed into port to claim their relatives.
He loaded boats with prison inmates, long-term psychiatric patients, and other people whose presence in Cuba was not welcomed.
Communism loses steam With the collapse of the Soviet Union in the early 1990s, Castro's revolution began to lose momentum.
Without support from its Soviet allies, unemployment and inflation both grew in Cuba.
Castro began pressing the United States to lift the trade embargo it had imposed upon Cuba since the revolution.
The United States government remained firm, however, refusing to negotiate with Cuba on trade matters until Castro ended his form of government.
U.S.-Cuban relations had begun to show signs of warming by the latter part of the 1990s.
Castro visited the United States in 1996, and invited Cuban exiles then living in the United States to return to their homeland and start businesses.
In the summer of 2000 a CubanUnited States media frenzy erupted when a Cuban mother and her son escaped Cuba on a makeshift boat.
The mother died during the trip, but the son, Elian Gonzalez, was rescued and brought to America.
Castro was heavily involved in the dispute over custody between Elian's relatives in the United States and his father in Cuba.
On July 26, 2000, Castro led what may have been the largest government-organized march in Cuban history to protest the United States embargo of Cuba.
The march also celebrated the forty-seventh anniversary of the Cuban Revolution.
The leader of Cuba is said to be showing his age, but he still manages to speak for hours on end and sleeps only a few hours every night.
War is not fighting, though fighting's what we see, nor is it death, for death is but it's end.
It is the rancor of disunited hearts, the death of love, the end of hope.
