The Cold War pitted east against west, pushing the world to the brink of nuclear war.
Now, as we approach the 25th anniversary of the fall of the Berlin Wall, which brought the era to a close, CNN International is again airing its 24-part series, The Cold War, which first aired in 1998.
Giving unparalleled insight from those who lived and fought through the events that defined an era, The Cold War lets viewers see how the events of yesterday have shaped the world of today.
Award-winning television director Jeremy Isaacs was the executive producer.
The series was narrated by Academy Award nominated actor Sir Kenneth Branagh.
The programs will air on CNN International every two weeks starting on January 4.
Photos: Remembering the Cuban missile crisis Photos: Photos: Remembering the Cuban missile crisisRemembering the Cuban missile crisis – People gather in an electronics store to watch American President John F Kennedy deliver a nationally televised address on the Cuban missile crisis on October 22, 1962.
Photos: Remembering the Cuban missile crisisRemembering the Cuban missile crisis – President John F Kennedy meets with aides.Hide Caption 2 of 8 Photos: Photos: Remembering the Cuban missile crisisRemembering the Cuban missile crisis – Onlookers gather on George Smathers Beach in Key West, Florida, to see the United States Army's Hawk anti-aircraft missiles positioned there during the Cuban missile crisis.Hide Caption 3 of 8 Photos: Photos: Remembering the Cuban missile crisisRemembering the Cuban missile crisis – A P2V Neptune United States patrol plane flies over a Soviet freighter in 1962.
Photos: Remembering the Cuban missile crisisRemembering the Cuban missile crisis – President John F Kennedy signs the order of naval blockade of Cuba on October 24, 1962.
Photos: Remembering the Cuban missile crisisRemembering the Cuban missile crisis – American tanks are on alert in the Berlin Grunewald, West Germany, on October 25, 1962, as the crisis over the Cuban blockade looms.Hide Caption 6 of 8 Photos: Photos: Remembering the Cuban missile crisisRemembering the Cuban missile crisis – President John F Kennedy leaves St.
Photos: Remembering the Cuban missile crisisRemembering the Cuban missile crisis – American destroyer USS Vesole escorts the Russian freighter Polzunov into international waters, bringing an end to the Cuban missile crisis in October 1962.
The secret techniques of Stasi agents Photos: The secret techniques of Stasi agentsThe lives of Stasi agents – Disguises as tourists were often used to help agents appear ""inconspicuous"" in places frequented by Westerners.
The secret techniques of Stasi agentsThe lives of Stasi agents – These pictures from a staged surveillance scene helped to train prospective agents in how to keep suspects under watch.
The secret techniques of Stasi agentsThe lives of Stasi agents – All parcels mailed to the GDR from West Germany were opened by the Stasi.
The secret techniques of Stasi agentsThe secret techniques of Stasi agents – The United States Embassy in East Berlin was constantly photographed and filmed.
The secret techniques of Stasi agentsThe lives of Stasi agents – An arrest is staged and documented for training purposes.
The secret techniques of Stasi agentsThe lives of Stasi agents – This picture was taken in the room of a teenager that allegedly showed pro-Western sympathies.Hide Caption 6 of 15 Photos: The secret techniques of Stasi agentsThe lives of Stasi agents – High-level Stasi functionaries pose for the camera.Hide Caption 7 of 15 Photos: The secret techniques of Stasi agentsThe lives of Stasi agents – Many of the disguises used by Stasi agents are detailed in Simon Menner's book.
The secret techniques of Stasi agentsThe lives of Stasi agents – So versatile: A Stasi agent blends in with the crowd.
When the Berlin Wall first openedWhen the Berlin Wall first opened – Thousands of people line up December 19, 1963, to apply for passage into East Berlin.
When the Berlin Wall first openedWhen the Berlin Wall first opened – Cars pass into East Berlin on Christmas Day in 1963.
When the Berlin Wall first openedWhen the Berlin Wall first opened – The opening brought joyous reunions for separated families.
More than 500,000 people were said to have entered East Berlin by midnight December 31.
When the Berlin Wall first openedWhen the Berlin Wall first opened – A West Berlin policeman stops traffic at an crossing point on January 5, 1964.
But when President Franklin Roosevelt took office in 1933, diplomatic and trade relations between the two countries resumed.
The relationship was strained yet again after the USSR annexed the Baltic States and signed a non-aggression pact with Nazi Germany.
Despite their differences the Soviet Union and the United States found themselves allied after the German invasion of Russia in June 1941.
As the war in Europe began to wind down and victory was in sight, the two countries had very different views as to what the post-war world would look like.
At the Potsdam Conference, just before the atom bomb was dropped on Japan, it became clear that Stalin wanted to put Eastern Europe under the Soviet sphere of influence, setting the conditions for the Cold War to commence.
Episode 1 includes interviews from George F Kennan, Zoya Zarubina, Hugh Lunghi and George Elsey.
In the Soviet Union, Stalin has resumed his feared purges and the country is gripped by famine.
Germany is forced to cede some of its eastern territory to Poland, and the Germans living in that area are expelled from their homes.
Stalin begins to increase his hold on Eastern Europe, installing communist regimes, but decides to stay out of the Greek Civil War.
The United Kingdom, exhausted from the war, sees its once-powerful empire go into decline.
As food shortages begin to threaten the stability of Europe, a more assertive United States begins to challenge the USSR's influence in both Turkey and Iran.
Episode 2 includes interviews from Lord Annan, Sir Frank Roberts and Paul Nitze.
Suspicious of American intentions, Stalin prevents countries in the Soviet sphere from taking part in the plan.
As a counter to the United States plan, Stalin established the Council for Mutual Economic Assistance.
While Yugoslav leader Marshal Tito was originally allied with the Soviet Union, he decides to forge his own foreign policy path and accepts aid from the Marshall Plan.
After the 1948 Italian elections, the CIA and Catholic Church conspire to push the communist party there from power.
The Marshall Plan successfully modernizes Western Europe and strengthens its ties to the United States.
With the introduction of the Deutsche Mark, the Soviets react by tightening checkpoints leading into the French, British, and American sectors of Berlin, ultimately leading to a ground blockade of the city.
To keep the city from starvation, the western allies begin the Berlin Airlift, ferrying in supplies by plane.
German Communists in Berlin successfully take over the city's municipal government, which causes both the city and country to be divided between east and west.
The Soviets install Kim Il-sung as the leader of the north, while the Americans place Syngman Rhee at the head of the south.
In 1950, with the help of the Soviets, North Korea invades South Korea, pushing United States and South Korean forces to a city at the southern tip of the Korean peninsula, called Pusan.
In response to the invasion, a United Nations force, led by the United States, regains the advantage, driving the communist forces towards the Chinese border.
Feeling threatened, and at Stalin's behest, Chinese leader Mao Zedong attacks.
The House Committee on Un-American Activities in the United States begins investigating alleged communist infiltration in the entertainment industry and diplomatic corps.
In the USSR, an increasing cult of personality is being built up around Stalin and a more repressive police state is taking hold.
In response to Yugoslavia's independent foreign policy, the Soviet Union pushes a series of purges in Prague as a warning to other satellite countries that may stray from Soviet policy.
Fear and repression in the USSR hits its zenith right before Stalin's sudden death in 1953.
Khrushchev also reestablishes relations with Yugoslavia and in a secret speech given to the Soviet leadership he denounces Stalin's harsh policies.
Meanwhile, West Germany begins to rearm, leading the USSR to establish the Warsaw Pact in response.
Trying to maintain Soviet influence in Eastern Europe, Khrushchev sends troops into East Germany, Poland, and Hungary to put down revolts.
With the successful Soviet launch of Sputnik, America responds by increasing its development of nuclear armed missiles.
A fear takes hold in the United States that the nation is falling behind the Soviets in terms of technology.
John F Kennedy is elected President of the United States in 1960, as the Soviets seem to have a commanding head start in the space race.
Khrushchev demands that the British, French, and Americans leave West Berlin, but they decline and the opportunity for a peaceful resolution is dashed when the Soviets walk out on the Paris Summit of 1960 because of the U-2 incident.
On the night of August 12, 1962, East German security forces begin to build the Berlin Wall.
In response, a tense standoff between United States and Soviet forces ensues.
In 1963, President Kennedy delivers his famous ""I am a Berliner"" speech.
He begins to nationalize American assets in Cuba, which leads to the United States introducing an economic boycott of the island nation.
The United States sponsors a failed counter revolution on the island with the Bay of Pigs Invasion.
The crisis leads to a United States blockade of Cuba, and a near war with the Soviet Union.
The crisis ends after secret negotiations between the United States and USSR lead to a deal to remove American missiles from Turkey and Soviet missiles from Cuba.
Refugees began to flood into South Vietnam from the north, after communists there began a strict land reform program.
The Viet Cong, with Soviet help, tries to reunify the country through force.
America, supporting South Vietnam, becomes more involved after the Gulf of Tonkin incident.
As American casualties continue to grow, so does the unpopularity of a war that seems unlikely to be won.
After the Tet Offensive, President Lyndon Johnson's clout is severely damaged.
A policy of bombing North Vietnam, while also seeking to negotiate a peace, does not work.
A new deterrent policy is thought up by United States Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara, called MAD, or Mutually Assured Destruction.
Both Americans and Soviets begin testing and building more nuclear weapons, including submarines that are able to strike should one side destroy the other.
Adopting a defensive strategy, the Soviets create an anti-ballistic missile.
The United States develops multiple independent warheads to counter this.
Yet there is some hope of de-escalation after both sides sign the SALT Treaty.
