I am also grateful to Jonathan Brown, Thomas C Field Jr., Jonathan Hunt, Aragorn Storm Miller, David Scott Palmer, Claudia Rueda, Cameron Strang, Jeffrey F Taffet, and the two anonymous reviewers from Diplomatic History for their comments on earlier versions of this article.
There were, in fact, many reactions across the hemisphere, multilateralism in order to justify a blockade or “quarantine” that was, arguably, against the tenets of international law.
The few histories that examine the crisis in the wider Latin American context focus on the OAS resolution and depict the hemispheric response as unanimous.
Faced with the threat of nuclear war, Latin American politicians, military officers, and citizens did not sit idly by and watch the drama play out on their doorstep.
The global scope of the missile crisis offers a unique opportunity to construct an international and transnational history of one moment across two continents, allowing us to compare the ways that internal and external dynamics combined to create processes of accommodation, negotiation, and contestation.
A closer examination of the hemispheric responses to the missile crisis reveals that Latin American governments and citizens tried to take advantage of this rare moment of United States vulnerability to change United States relations with Latin America.
Two noteworthy exceptions to this trend are the Wilson Center’s Cold War International History Project 50th anniversary Bulletin and the two-part article by James G Hershberg on Brazil’s covert role in the missile crisis.
In the “first wave,” historians told the story of the crisis predominantly through the lens of United States perspectives and sources.
A “second wave” began in 1987, when Soviet and Cuban sources started to reshape the conversation.
At the same time, sentiments of both nationalism and pan-Latin Americanism inspired thousands of Latin American citizens across the hemisphere to seize upon the missile crisis to protest United States economic and political imperialism.
They argued that Castro had every right to defend his country and directed their anger against political and economic symbols of the United States presence in their own countries, including embassies, businesses, and Alliance for Progress exhibits.
While concerns about the United States were paramount, Latin American responses to the missile crisis also depended on domestic and “intermestic” politics.
As they did with so many of the other battles of the Cold War, Latin American governments and citizens viewed the international confrontation through the lenses of their own local conflicts.
Nicaraguan and Venezuelan leaders who faced armed opposition and guerrilla insurgencies adopted a more belligerent stance, treating the crisis as an opportunity to eliminate Cuban support for domestic opposition.
In Mexico, Bolivia, and Brazil, countries with strong leftist movements and revolutionary traditions, national leaders had to take a more ambiguous approach to avoid alienating significant sectors of the population.
The missile crisis also widened the political divisions within many countries as deadly riots and street fighting broke out between supporters and opponents of Castro.
I use the term “Pan-Latin Americanism” to distinguish the popular, antiUnited States sentiment of regional solidarity from the program of Pan Americanism that the United States has promoted since the nineteenth century.
This combustible combination of threat and possibility manifested in various ways and with a wide range of consequences throughout the hemisphere.
ON THE WARPATH Many Latin American leaders enthusiastically supported the United States quarantine of Cuba, and some even tried to push Kennedy to take a more aggressive approach.
Other Latin American leaders joined the effort to remove the missile bases because they saw it as an opportunity to gain United States support to shift local balances of power.
National leaders in Central America, the Caribbean, and northern South America demonstrated their support for the United States position by pledging military and strategic assistance.
The governments of the Dominican Republic, Guatemala, Colombia, Venezuela, Panama, Honduras, Haiti, Costa Rica, and El Salvador all expressed their readiness to provide marine, naval, and air force units to maintain the quarantine.
Their enthusiasm stemmed from animosity toward Castro, who had been supporting revolutionary efforts to overthrow many of these governments.
Nicaraguan dictator Luis Somoza Debayle, who considered Castro a personal enemy, adopted an especially belligerent stance.
A member of one of Latin America’s longest-lasting familial dynasties, the Nicaraguan president had maneuvered himself into power after the assassination of his father, Anastasio Somoza Garcı́a.
The family’s hold over Nicaraguan politics dated as far back as 1934, when the elder Somoza used his position as director of the National Guard to assassinate the guerrilla leader Augusto César Sandino; two years later, Somoza staged a coup and seized power.
Somoza quickly consolidated his control, placing loyal somocistas in key positions in the government and National Guard, and acquiring immense wealth through investments, concessions to United States companies, theft, and graft.
The Somozas were the largest landowners in Nicaragua, and were infamous for their corrupt rule and repression of dissent.
These qualities attracted the ire of Fidel Castro, who, soon after overthrowing Cuban dictator Fulgencio Batista, turned his gaze upon Nicaragua.
In the years leading up to the missile crisis, Castro’s diplomatic officials in Mexico spent much of their time supporting revolutionary efforts by Nicaraguan political exiles.
When Somoza learned of the missiles in Cuba, he saw the crisis as a chance to eliminate a dangerous enemy and called for an invasion of the island.
Manuel Rangel Escamilla, “Actividades de asilados polı́ticos nicaraguenses residentes en nuestro paı́s que en forma constante tratan de efectuar una conjura en contra del gobierno actual de la República de Nicaragua que preside el Gral.
He argued that Latin Americans should no longer allow the United States to determine their defense against the threats of Castro and communism.
Not all Nicaraguans supported Somoza’s belligerent response to the missile crisis, and many of those who opposed their country’s dictator also challenged his foreign policy.
The university was a long-standing center of political opposition; as early as 1939, students there had begun organizing protests and burning portraits of Somoza.
Tomás Borge Martı́nez, one of the founders of the Sandinista Front of National Liberation in 1961, participated in an anti-Somocista student movement in León in the late forties.
Other Latin American leaders also tried to convince the United States to take a stronger stance against Castro.
Betancourt had also been a friend to Castro until 1959, when disagreement over the issues of communism and cooperation with the United 18.
Betancourt seized upon the missile crisis as an opportunity to crack down on both Castro and the domestic Venezuelan opposition that was receiving Cuban support.
In an address to the nation, Betancourt explained that he was calling up the armed forces for the first time since World War II because “the Government of Venezuela will comply with each and every one of its international compromises.
Small groups armed with machine guns also attacked a Goodyear Tires warehouse and burned stacks of tires.
Miller, “Precarious Paths to Freedom,” 191; Richard Gott, Guerrilla Movements in Latin America , 112.
No tengo por que negar que es dificil y riesgosa la situación de hoy,” El Nacional, October 28, 1962.
During his address to the nation, Betancourt had spoken at length about the importance of petroleum and the threat that the missiles in Cuba posed to Venezuela’s oil industry; mere hours later, “communist terrorists” set off explosives in four electric power stations around Lake Maracaibo, about three hundred miles west of Caracas.
According to CIA estimates, the explosions temporarily reduced the country’s total oil output by one-sixth, a significant blow considering that those exports provided approximately ninety percent of Venezuela’s foreign exchange earnings at the time.
Venezuela’s representative in the OAS blamed Cuba, claiming that during the missile crisis authorities had intercepted a cable from Havana urging Venezuelan communist groups to attack United States government and industrial installations.
Raúl Lugo Rojas, a representative of the MIR who had been arrested the previous June in connection with a failed military revolt against the Betancourt government, questioned the right of the United States to establish quarantines in 32.
The missile crisis thus contributed to domestic unrest within Venezuela and cost its government significant oil revenues, but it also gave Betancourt an excuse to strike a blow against the local opposition and their Cuban supporters.
The attacks against the power stations and the oil and gas pipelines provided muchneeded evidence for his efforts to convince domestic and international audiences that Venezuela was Castro’s “number one target” in the hemisphere.
The United States continued pouring money and military equipment into Venezuela, and Betancourt managed to keep both the leftist opposition and the military in check long enough for the presidential elections of December 1963 to usher in Venezuela’s first peaceful transfer of power from one democratically elected leader to another.
Argentina’s government and military forces were the earliest and most enthusiastic partners in United States efforts to remove the missiles.
The country’s interim president, José Marı́a Guido, was the first Latin American leader to promise military support and followed through by deploying two destroyers, Espora and Rosales, to join the United States fleet in the Caribbean.
An editorial titled “Liberty Is Non-Negotiable” in the newspaper La Prensa summarily rejected the possibility of a negotiated removal of the missiles.
Lugo was released after the revolt as he still retained his parliamentary immunity from prosecution.
According to Stephen Rabe, the government of Venezuela also deployed two destroyers to support the United States Navy’s blockade.
The Dominican Council of State sent two frigates to join the quarantine as well, but they soon had to detour to Puerto Rico for costly repairs.
During his time in office, Frondizi had roused the ire of the armed forces by increasing trade with the Soviet Union, defending Castro and meeting with Che Guevara in the OAS, and, most importantly, allowing Peronist candidates to participate in gubernatorial and congressional elections in March 1962.44 Mere days after the Peronists won a convincing victory at the polls, the military annulled the results and arrested Frondizi.
The Argentine response to the missile crisis, unlike that of Nicaragua or Venezuela, had less to do with Castro’s revolutionary meddling and more to do with internecine power struggles.
In 1962, Argentina’s armed forces were practically at war with each other over the role that the military should play in promoting modernization and democracy and fighting communism and Peronism.
The virulently anti-Peronist “colorados” were campaigning for military rule, while the legalist “azules” sought to preserve civilian rule under constitutional norms.
On multiple occasions, the two groups demonstrated their willingness to come to blows, such as in April 1962 when an azul-led tank column descended upon colorado troops assembled in downtown Buenos Aires.
Later that year, in September, a week-long armed confrontation broke out between the coalitions.
José Marı́a Guido, interim president at the time of the missile crisis, had been elevated from his post in the Senate by the azules following the March 1962 military coup against Frondizi.
After Guido deployed the navy destroyers, leaders of the other branches clamored to become involved as well.
Without consulting his superiors in the Defense and Foreign Ministries, Brigadier General Cayo Alsina of the colorados offered Air Force support to his United States counterpart.
M Robben, Political Violence and Trauma in Argentina (Philadelphia, PA, 2011), 34.
Like the Venezuelans, the Argentines paid a price for their enthusiastic support of the United States quarantine.
In mid-November, nine Argentine Air Force pilots died in Panama in a flight connected with the hemispheric operation to force the removal of the missiles.
While the Argentine government clearly supported the United States throughout the missile crisis and military officials tried to use it as a chance to strengthen the relationship between the two countries, some very vocal members of the nation’s public sympathized with Castro.
Saboteurs threw Molotov cocktails at a U.S.-sponsored “Allied for Progress” exhibit in Buenos Aires on October 24.55 The violence escalated the next day into an attack on the home of the cultural attaché of the United States embassy.
The violence lasted for days, as three people were wounded on October 31 in a shootout between police and a group of protesters carrying Argentine and Cuban flags, and saboteurs launched tar bombs at a branch of a United States bank in Buenos Aires.
Protestors used the international confrontation as an opportunity to demonstrate their dissatisfaction with the Alliance for Progress and with United States economic penetration of their country.
In 1962, Argentina’s economy was in a depression and its citizens were suffering from inflation, stagnation, and shortages.
Controversial austerity measures imposed by the International Monetary Fund’s stabilization plan fueled anticorporate populism and nationalist sentiment.
The destruction of United States property during the missile crisis starkly illustrated the rising tide of economic nationalism, forcing Argentina’s leaders to take note.
Almost exactly a year after the missile crisis, newly elected president Arturo Illia caved to public pressures and delivered on his campaign promise to cancel private contracts held by transnational oil companies.
Infuriated, McClintock and other U.S. officials responded to Illia’s economic nationalism by decreasing assistance and foreign aid to Argentina’s civilian government and increasing their support for military leaders.
Beginning in 1963, United States military aid and sales of material to Argentina rose dramatically.
In 1966, the armed forces ousted Illia in a coup and installed Onganı́a in his place, ushering in a four-year military dictatorship.
Violenta acción popular, tiroteos y manifestaciones en Argentina,” Revolución, November 1, 1962.
In the section-by-section vote on the final resolution, the representatives from Mexico, Bolivia, and Brazil abstained on the clause that authorized the use of armed force to prevent the missiles from threatening the peace of the hemisphere.
Motivated largely by domestic concerns, the leaders of these three countries sought to find a middle ground where they could support the United States without directly opposing the Soviets or Castro.
Prior to the missile crisis, Mexico’s semi-authoritarian government had been one of Fidel Castro’s greatest public advocates in the region.
Mexico was the first country in the Americas to officially recognize Castro’s new regime in January 1959, and President Adolfo López Mateos repeatedly defended the Cuban government during a tour of South America the following year.
When Kennedy revealed the presence of Soviet missiles in the Caribbean, Mexico’s president tried to use his country’s special relationship with Cuba to find a peaceful resolution.
López Mateos was out of the country at the time of Kennedy’s announcement, finishing a tour of Asia.
He cut his trip short, and on board his trans-Pacific flight home sent urgent messages to Kennedy and Dorticós.
In both, he made a plea in favor of peace, and in the note to the latter he “expressed his fervent desire that the missiles not be used in any form and that they be removed 62.
Intelligence agents and army officials closely monitored the actions of any group suspected of harboring sympathies for Cuba.
Unlike in Argentina, different branches of the security forces cooperated and shared information; for example, on October 25, the ministry of national defense sent a report to the minister of the interior warning of leftist plans for informal, “lightning,” protest meetings.
On November 4, riot police arrived two hours before a coalition of leftist groups planned to hold a meeting criticizing the United States quarantine of Cuba.
The police tore down signs and banners and ordered the organizers to vacate the premises.
The Mexican government also adopted military measures to minimize repercussions within and surrounding the country.
The Argentine newspaper La Prensa quoted unofficial sources in the state of Veracruz that claimed that the Mexican navy had deployed at least ten ships to patrol the channel between the Yucatán peninsula and Cuba.
Additionally, the government sent army troops to guard petroleum installations from sabotage, effectively preventing the sort of damages that the Venezuelans suffered.
This firm governmental response combined with a relative lack of popular activism to keep violence from breaking out within Mexico.
Once the crisis had passed, one of Mexico’s leading leftist journalists, Manuel Marcué Pardiñas, bemoaned the lack of activism in his country.
Secretarı́a de Relaciones Exteriores, “Declaración mexicana sobre Cuba y las armas atómicas,” Polı́tica, November 1, 1962.
The government’s ambiguous policy toward Cuba had successfully co-opted a cause—defense of the Cuban Revolution—around which various leftist groups could otherwise have united and mobilized.
At the same time, the swift and coordinated response on the part of the intelligence services and the armed forces further discouraged pro-Castro activism.
López Mateos’s “carrot and stick” approach to governing served him well during the missile crisis.
Furthermore, there was at least as much popular approval of the blockade among the Mexican public as there was opposition.
The United States consulates in Mérida, Tampico, Tijuana, Matamoros, and Monterrey reported widespread support for the United States during the missile crisis.
Mexican support for the United States during the missile crisis led to a subtle but important shift in the relationship between the two countries.
Before October 1962, United States officials worried that their southern neighbors were not taking the communist threat seriously and tried to use diplomatic and economic pressure to compel Mexican leaders to break relations with Castro’s government.
When Kennedy presented the world with indisputable proof of nuclear warheads in the Caribbean, the Mexican government had to choose a side.
By supporting the United States in that crucial moment, López Mateos demonstrated where his true loyalties lay and gained United States acceptance of his foreign policy toward 73.
Manuel Marcué Pardiñas, “La polı́tica internacional del gobierno del presidente Adolfo López Mateos,” Polı́tica, December 1, 1962.
The missile crisis caused significantly greater problems in Bolivia, where another increasingly conservative, semi-authoritarian government with revolutionary roots was trying to hold on to power.
At the same time, the Bolivian government took great care to avoid provoking an antirevolutionary backlash from the United States by compensating the owners of the tin mines, leaving other mines owned by United States companies intact, and maintaining legal protections for foreign investment.
Instead of engendering United States opposition, Paz sought and gained financial assistance from the United States; by 1958, United States funds provided one-third of Bolivia’s national budget and the country had become the largest recipient of foreign aid in the Americas.
In the year leading up to the missile crisis, the Alliance for Progress had continued these trends, as Kennedy tried to use economic assistance to temper revolutionary tendencies and encourage political stability.
Paz had been able to secure such largesse by arguing that his regime needed the support to keep its moderate revolution from falling into radical communist hands.
Additionally, he upped the ante by “playing the Soviet card,” entertaining offers of aid from the Soviet Union to gain greater attention—and aid—from the United States.
In June 1961, a series of strikes and demonstrations in mines, factories, and universities over a controversial plan of foreign aid convulsed the country and resulted in the deaths of five protestors; four months later, as many as twenty students were killed when security forces repressed riots sparked by an increase in fuel prices.
The United States Treasury Department’s decision to sell off thousands of tons of tin from the strategic stockpile in mid-1962 had also sent Bolivia’s domestic and international politics into a tailspin, prompting Bolivian legislators to demand renewed negotiations with the Soviets.
Paz Estenssoro responded in September 1962 by postponing a visit to Washington and pulling Bolivia out of the OAS.87 On numerous occasions, Paz declared the country in a state of siege, and he increasingly came to rely on the armed forces to quell internal unrest.
Bolivia’s leader was desperately trying to tame the revolution that he had unleashed to avoid the dual threats of civil war and United States intervention.
As soon as Kennedy announced the presence of missiles in Cuba, United States and Bolivian officials jumped into action in an effort to minimize the local effects of the crisis.
The United States ambassador, Ben S Stephansky, cabled Washington on October 23 to report that the Bolivian minister of government had warned him that leftists in the national congress were planning to make pro-Cuban speeches calling for demonstrations.
The Bolivian government minister had asked for the names and addresses of United States citizens in La Paz to provide adequate 84.
The undersecretary of the foreign minister had already called the Cuban chargé d’affaires and asked him to publicly express his opposition to any possible demonstrations, threatening that the Bolivian government would perceive even tacit Cuban support for demonstrations as an unfriendly act.
Bolivian leaders’ efforts to contain the damage from the missile crisis proved insufficient.
A storm of protests broke out on October 26, a few days later than Stephansky had predicted.
The disorder reportedly began when police used tear gas to disperse anti-Castro students who were stoning a pro-Cuban radio station.
The students regrouped and began attacking a communist-friendly bookstore, shattering its windows and burning its wares.
Three thousand labor union members responded with a pro-Castro demonstration near the United States embassy, where opposing demonstrators intercepted them.
The crowd erupted into street fighting and rioting, mobs burned both Soviet and United States flags, and by the time army troops and police had restored order five people lay dead and dozens more were injured.
United States officials, eager to turn the tragedy to their advantage, blamed the deaths on communist and communist-front organizations.
The embassy in La Paz sent the State Department a list of names of twenty-eight people believed to be responsible for the violence, explaining that they had been seen distributing weapons to students and union members.
Two of the people on the list had traveled to Moscow, and eight others had traveled to Cuba.
Some of the suspected instigators were members of the Revolutionary Nationalist Movement, others were union leaders, and another was a former non-commissioned officer in the Bolivian army.
The last person on the list had been recently employed as assistant to the minister of education, and led a group of armed men from that ministry on October 26.93 After the conclusion of the missile crisis, Paz Estenssoro tried to turn the tense situation into an opportunity to repair his partnership with the United States.
The Bolivian president closed the letter expressing “sincere happiness” that his country’s stance had been appreciated by the 91.
The missile crisis thrust Brazil’s leaders into a similarly difficult position.
There, leftist president João Goulart had been in power for little over a year and was struggling to establish legitimacy in the position that his predecessor, Jânio Quadros, had suddenly and unexpectedly abandoned in August 1961.
To gain the military’s acceptance of his elevation from the vice presidency in the wake of Quadros’s resignation, Goulart had been forced to agree to rule under a parliamentary system with reduced presidential powers.
Dissatisfied with this arrangement, Goulart immediately began maneuvering to abandon the parliamentary system, at the same time that he was trying to strengthen Brazil’s shaky economy and keep the restive military in check.
The fact that Goulart had established relations with the Soviet Union and refused to cut diplomatic ties with Castro added further tension to his relationship with the military and the United States.
In a meeting on October 22, he appeared “visibly shocked” when United States ambassador Lincoln Gordon summarized the evidence of the nuclear buildup in Cuba.
Goulart expressed particular interest in seeing evidence of the missiles, which he claimed would be critical to publicly justify strong support for the United States.
The Brazilian president described the Soviet action as a “grave diplomatic error,” arguing that the United States 94.
After he had time to reflect and consult his advisors, President Goulart’s disagreement with the United States response to the missile crisis continued, but his arguments and goals changed.
He also voiced fears about the future of the OAS and contended that the organization had been losing authority as a result of hasty decision-making that departed from the proper application of its own statutory norms.
From the steps of the building, Brazilian Premier and Foreign Minister Hermes Lima declared that, as a pacifist nation, his country opposed intervention and defended Cuba’s right to self-determination.
As in Bolivia, tensions escalated during the course of the missile crisis.
On October 25, some seven thousand pro-Castro demonstrators, the majority students, marched on the United States Embassy in Rio.
They came within blocks before truckloads of riot police in steel helmets intercepted them with tear gas, clubs, and jets of water.
The demonstrators responded by throwing rocks, prompting several police officers to fire submachine guns over the heads of the marchers, who fled.
In Recife, military police used batons and tear gas to disperse a pro-Cuba demonstration, beating protestors who had sought sanctuary in a nearby church.
Meanwhile, the stevedores’ union threatened to stage a boycott of United States ships in Brazilian ports if the quarantine continued.
Violências da polı́cia contra manisfestantes pró-Cuba,” Última Hora, October 25, 1962.
In a quieter manner, the Brazilians thus helped maintain the air quarantine, just as the Argentines were publicly helping to maintain the naval quarantine.
Some Brazilians on the conservative side of the national political divide wanted their government to cooperate even more enthusiastically with the United States.
On October 25, a group of two hundred women bearing signs that read “Cuba yes, Russia no” held a demonstration at the Foreign Ministry, where they accused Hermes Lima of cowering in fear of the Soviet Union.
Other conservative newspapers accused the president of succumbing to radical leftist advisers.
On October 24, he told legislators from forty-seven countries gathered for an interparliamentary meeting in Brasilia that coexistence was the key.
One of President Goulart’s closest political advisors, former foreign minister Francisco San Tiago Dantas, leader of Brazil’s moderate left wing, presciently proposed one way in which the crisis could be resolved in a peaceful manner.
In an interview with reporters, Dantas argued that Cuba should yield its nuclear weapons in exchange for a pledge from the United States not to invade.
In September 1962, Brazil’s representative in the United Nations had submitted a draft resolution calling for the creation of a denuclearized zone throughout Latin America.
Once the crisis developed in October, the Brazilians began pushing again for the proposal that they had tabled the month before.
The Joint Chiefs of Staff emphatically opposed the idea of using the Brazilian initiative to resolve the crisis, arguing that it would not guarantee the prompt removal of the missiles and would degrade the United States’ military flexibility in its own 117.
United States officials eventually reached a compromise and instructed UN representative Adlai Stevenson to give a cautiously positive response to the denuclearization proposal.4 Evidence has recently come to light that Kennedy and other United States leaders initiated yet another Brazilian effort to find a negotiated solution to the crisis.
As historian James Hershberg has discovered, Brazil played a key role in a covert United States effort to convince Castro, not Khrushchev, to relinquish the missiles.
On October 25, Kennedy’s Executive Committee discussed a proposal to make an approach to Castro “through a Latin American representative in Cuba, probably the Brazilian Ambassador, pointing out that Cuba was merely being exploited in the interests of the Soviet Union and that any of the possible paths by which the Cuban crisis can be expected to develop will result in the overthrow of his regime, 123.
If the missiles were not removed, “further steps will have to be taken against Cuba and very soon,” it warned.
Instead of entrusting the message to Washington’s preferred intermediary, the Brazilian ambassador to Cuba, Goulart chose as his messenger the new chief of the cabinet’s military department, whom United States observers regarded as pro-Communist and anti-American.
Ultimately, the Brazilians’ not-so-secret attempt to convince Castro to relinquish the missiles failed when the Cuban leader rejected the suggestion of international inspections and insisted upon the return of the Guantánamo Bay naval base.1 Goulart’s response to the missile crisis, even his cooperation with Kennedy’s covert effort to negotiate with Castro, backfired by engendering resentment rather than gratitude among United States officials.
The rifts in Brazil’s political scene had become so wide that increasing numbers of people on both sides of the spectrum refused to compromise and began urging antidemocratic solutions to the deadlock.
The missile crisis was one of many controversial events and issues that exacerbated the polarization, illustrating how Goulart’s attempts to play multiple angles left him exposed to attacks from the left, right, and swiftly shrinking center.
Political factions within Brazil used the missile crisis as an opportunity to criticize and undermine Goulart’s leadership.
In the spring of 1964, the military staged a coup with United States approval and Goulart, left with no political base, fled to Uruguay.
Local political conditions combined with international alignments to produce reactions ranging from war mongering to attempted mediation.
In the nations of Central America and the Caribbean, dictators tried to amplify the crisis to clamp down on domestic opposition and rid the region of Castro’s revolutionary intrigues.
The Mexican government kept a tight lid on its domestic situation and managed to turn the crisis to its advantage by gaining the gratitude of United States leaders.
Some South American governments enthusiastically joined the quarantine while struggling to quell local protests, and others endeavored to play a mediating role between Washington and Havana.
Yet one thing that united the variety of responses was a common desire to use the missile crisis as an opportunity to alter the United States’ relationship with its neighbors.
Lincoln Gordon, “Brazilian Financial Situation and Political Orientation,” November 20, 1962, ibid.
Somoza and Betancourt were unable to goad the United States into pursuing a more belligerent policy toward Castro; on the contrary, as part of the resolution of the missile crisis Kennedy pledged not to invade Cuba.
There was, however, one unanimous Latin American response to the missile crisis that eventually had a successful outcome.
The events of October 1962 drove home the danger of nuclear war for people across the Americas and prompted a truly hemispheric reaction.
In April 1963, at the initiative of President López Mateos of Mexico, the presidents of five Latin American countries—Bolivia, Brazil, Chile, Ecuador, and Mexico—announced that they were prepared to sign a multilateral agreement that would make Latin America a nuclear weapon-free zone.
Nearly four years later, on February 14, 1967, leaders of fourteen countries gathered in Mexico City to sign the Treaty of Tlatelolco, voluntarily agreeing to prohibit the testing, use, production, acquisition, storage, installation, and deployment of nuclear weapons within their territories.
The nuclear weapons-free zone came into effect in 1969 when the requisite number of countries ratified the treaty.
