Kennedy, that Nikita Khrushchev had secretly placed nuclear missiles in Castro's Cuba and that an unprecedented United States showdown with Moscow was at hand.
Here and there, housewives stampeded the supermarkets to stock up on canned goods.
A handful of protesters, including socialist Norman Thomas, urged the White House to yield.
But most Americans, including Congress and the media, backed JFK's imposition of a naval blockade and the 13-day crisis ended with a Soviet retreat.
Historian Robert Pollard examines the October 1962 drama and today's scholarly debate over its causes and consequences. by Robert A Pollard At 7:00 P.M. on Monday, October 22, south as the Panama Canal.
Kennedy 1962, President John F Kennedy adnoted that construction was also dressed the nation on television.
His subject was Cuba. sile sites for intermediate-range bal""Within the past week,"" Kennedy listic missiles , which could said, ""unmistakable evidence has strike targets more than 2,000 miles established the fact that a series of away. offensive missile sites is now in prepWhile home-based Soviet nuclear aration on that imprisoned island. weapons had long posed a grave The purpose of these bases can be threat to United States national security, the none other than to provide a nuclear President explained, the missiles in strike capability against the Western Cuba were different.
MISSILE CRISIS cannot be accepted by this country, if regime's expropriation of Ameriour courage and our commitments can-owned properties and increasare ever to be trusted again by either ingly close ties with the Soviet Union friend or foe."" prompted the Eisenhower AdminisKennedy said that he had ordered tration to impose a partial trade ema ""strict quarantine"" by the United States bargo and, later, to sever diplomatic Navy to intercept shipments of offenties. sive military materiel to Cuba.
He Meanwhile, during the 1960 presiinvited Soviet Premier Nikita Khrudential campaign, the Democratic shchev ""to move the world back from nominee, John F Kennedy, charged the abyss of destruction"" by withthat the Republican administration drawing the missiles from Cuba and had allowed the Communists to gain entering into negotiations for the a foothold just 90 miles from the control of nuclear weapons.
Florida coast while offering ""virtually no support"" to anti-Castro The Bay of Pigs groups.
The President acknowledged the In fact, CIA training of Cuban risks inherent in his decision.
Kennedy, as President, approved ""But the greatest danger of all would plans to deploy a 1,200-man exile be to do nothing."" force for an attempted overthrow of One of the epochal confrontations Castro.
Milin late April 1961 resulted in a lions of Americans wondered if a humiliating United States defeat and a furnuclear holocaust was at hand.
Alther shift by Cuba into the Soviet though the crisis was ultimately orbit.
But American U-2 photo-reconnaissance even after 20 years, certain elements planes had already established that remain a mystery. the Soviets were installing defensive The prelude to the crisis lay in the surface-to-air missiles in hostility between the United States Cuba, but United States intelligence found no and Cuba following Fidel Castro's solid evidence of any missiles which seizure of power from Fulgencio might threaten the United States The PresiBatista in January 1959.
MISSILE CRISIS parently deceived by repeated and fear of the new SAMs had inhibpledges from Khrushchev and his ited reconnaissance by the U-2s in emissaries that the Soviets would early October.
Kennedy's top intelliavoid any aggressive action in Cuba. gence advisers, moreover, doubted On September 4, the White House that the Soviets would install offenreleased a statement that the only sive missiles before their protective missiles in Cuba were defensive in SAM network was ready.
The United States would This revelation surprised and anonly react if Cuba ""became an offengered Kennedy, but he took the news sive military base of significant cacalmly.
Kennedy appointed meantime, he said, United States surveillance an Executive Committee of would continue. the White House National Security This did not soothe his Republican Council on October 16 to advise him critics, who now included Senator during what was now looming as a Barry Goldwater of Arizona and full-fledged world crisis.
And on October superpowers were to come closer to 10, Keating claimed on the Senate war than at any time since the Berlin floor that construction had begun on ""airlift"" crisis in 1948. six IRBM sites and that the AdminisWhile the ExCom deliberated, the tration was deceiving the American President maintained the appearpeople.
One mornhad earlier relied on leaks from the ing, for example, Kennedy took United States intelligence community, but he never disclosed the source for his al* Included were Bundy, Secretary of State Dean Rusk, Defense Secretary Robert McNamara, Atlegations on October 10. torney General Robert Kennedy, former SecreAt the time, American intelligence tary of State Dean Acheson, UN Ambassador apparently had still not discovered Adlai Stevenson, General Maxwell Taylor, the missile sites.
Robert A Pollard, 31, is a research associate at the Wilson Center's International Security Studies Program.
MISSILE CRISIS An Oval Office portrait by Bernard Fuchs of John Fitzgerald Kennedy, who led the United States through Cold War crises over Laos, Berlin, and, finally, the nuclear missiles sent by Nikita Khrushchev to Cuba in late 1962. astronaut Walter Schirra and his what was happening, the White family out to see daughter Caroline's House managed to persuade them to ponies, and then met with a White remain silent.
The ExCom members, too, presence of the missiles as a serious took precautions, arriving at differthreat; the Soviets were likely to reent White House gates at different buff diplomatic overtures until the times to avoid attention.
MISSILE CRISIS The two main options were an air in Cuba, Gromyko complained of strike or a blockade, with most American designs against Castro.
ExCom members initially leaning Kennedy repeated his September toward the former.
A ""surgical"" air warning against offensive missiles strike against the Soviet missiles without revealing what he knew. would be quick and decisive, its The key session of the ExCom ocproponents argued.
But further incurred on Saturday, October 20. quiry indicated that Soviet casualRusk and McNamara secured Presities on the ground might be high and dent Kennedy's assent to a blockade the results uncertain.
Kennedy inmander at one of the missile sites, it formed congressional leaders of his was thought, might even be tempted decision just two hours before his to launch a missile on his own in the broadcast to the nation on Monday, event of an American attack.
The climax came on the morning Gromyko Complains of Wednesday, October 24, as the To eliminate all the missiles, a United States ""quarantine"" took effect.
An air strike, moreover, approximately 25 incoming Russian would be ""a Pearl Harbor in reships.
Independence took position near ""My brother,"" he told the group, ""is Cuba.
In addition, By Thursday, October 18, discus25,000 Marines aboard Navy ships sion shifted to a partial naval blockand more than 100,000 Army troops ade designed to halt the flow of in Florida were ready for an invasion Soviet offensive weapons to Cuba.
Yet this time, the Navy reported to the Presiapproach, as Dean Acheson noted, dent and his advisers that two Ruswould not remove the missiles alsian ships, the Gagarin and the ready in Cuba, and, during the blockKomiles, were approaching the ade, the Soviets could prepare more American ships with a submarine esand more of them for launching. cort.
McNamara told the group that While his aides conferred, Presithe prearranged plan was for dent Kennedy held a long-scheduled helicopters from the carrier Essex to White House meeting with Soviet signal the submarine by sonar to Foreign Minister Andrei Gromyko. identify itself; if this failed, they The Soviets, by most United States estimates, would use depth charges to make the were hoping to spring their surSoviet vessel surface. prise immediately after the United States *The Soviets had put 22,000 personnel in Cuba, November elections.
Maintaining the 10,000 of whom were guarding the missiles, as deception that there were no missiles much against the Cubans as the Americans.
MISSILE CRISIS ""I felt we were on the edge of a less compromising language, Khruprecipice with no way off/' Robert shchev demanded the withdrawal of Kennedy later wrote.
He Then at 10:25 word came that the knew the obsolete Jupiters were no two Soviet ships had ""stopped dead longer useful to NATO defense.
The pable sense of relief swept through Joint Chiefs, joining the ExCom at the room.
Later, the other Soviet midday, argued that the blockade ships reversed course. had failed to force a Soviet pullout, The success of the blockade, of and that the time had come for an air course, did not ensure the withstrike followed by a full-scale invadrawal of the missiles already in sion of Cuba.
Intelligence revealed that SAM had shot down a U-2, killing work on the missile sites was conMajor Rudolf Anderson, Jr., one of tinuing, as was the assembly of the two Air Force pilots who had first Soviet Ilyushin-28 bombers. discovered the missiles in Cuba.
Several senior officials spoke in favor of Jupiters in Turkey an air attack to destroy all the SAM Kennedy and Khrushchev had exsites as well, but Kennedy rejected changed messages up to this point this option. almost daily, but to no avail.
In a letter received October 23, for instance, Khrushchev's Retreat the Soviet Premier had flatly refused At this point, Robert Kennedy sugto recognize the blockade, which he gested that the President should igcharacterized as ""outright banditry, nore the second letter and reply to or, if you like, the folly of degenerate the first.
While President Kennedy imperialism."" was sending a message to KhruYet, Khrushchev provided a way shchev accepting the conditions of out on October 26.
If they siles in Turkey would be removed in could not resolve the crisis, Khrudue course, but not in exchange for shchev wrote Kennedy, ""what that the missiles in Cuba.
Kennedy our countries dispose."" publicly welcomed Khrushchev's A second message arrived at 10:17 * Kennedy had earlier directed that the missiles A.M. on October 27, just as the Exbe removed, but the State Department had not Com met to consider the first one.
MISSILE CRISIS ""statesmanlike decision"" on the others chided Kennedy for not acting same day.
Over the next few weeks, more boldly to eradicate the ComCastro, angered by his exclusion munist presence in the Caribbean. from the Soviet-American deal, deRepublicans charged that Kennedy layed implementation of the agreehad long ignored their warnings and ment by blocking UN inspection.
But then timed his response to affect the U-2 surveillance and observations at impending congressional elections. sea revealed that the Soviets had deSenator Goldwater contended that stroyed all missile sites and removed Kennedy's implicit pledge never to 42 MRBMs.
On November communism into Latin America and 20, the Soviets agreed to remove thrown away the key to their retheir bombers as well.
The public response in America was a combination of profound relief In March 1963, Fidel Castro told a and patriotic celebration. visiting newsman that certain asMost contemporary observers pects of the missile crisis remained a applauded the President's courage ""mystery"" which could take histoand skill in forcing Khrushchev to rerians ""20 or 30 years"" to unravel. treat from a dangerous and aggresEven after 20 years, scholars debate sive venture.
In contrast with his misin December 1962, Kennedy argued handling of the Bay of Pigs, Kennedy that while the Russians probably ""never lost his nerve"" in this crisis. never intended to fire the missiles, Similarly, Walter Lippmann wrote their presence in Cuba ""would have that ""the United States, which had politically changed the balance of overall nuclear superiority and conpower.
It would have appeared to, ventional superiority around Cuba, and appearances contribute to realwas careful to avoid the ultimate ity."" catastrophic mistake of nuclear diThe Soviet press at the time plomacy, which would be to surclaimed that the missiles were deround the adversary and leave him signed primarily to protect Cuba no way to retreat."" against a United States invasion.
MISSILE CRISIS arsenal of tactical nuclear weapons, The missiles in Cuba, however, or even conventional arms and Sowere highly vulnerable, and they viet troops, would have sufficed.
Casprobably represented only a ""quick tro himself said after the crisis that fix"" to Soviet nuclear inferiority.
The United ployment in Cuba was again disproStates had surrounded the Soviet portionately large at least 42 Union with military bases, ""and now MRBMs and 24 to 32 IRBMs.
As most United States scholars see it, the Soviets were not using the Cuban No Bargaining Chips missile deployment as a ""bargaining Scholars disagree on the military chip"" to force the Allies out of West significance of the missiles, but a Berlin.
The Soviets probably never majority believe that the Soviet would have traded their huge inMRBMs and IRBMs in Cuba would vestment in Cuba for Berlin, and have roughly doubled the number of they must have known that any seriSoviet missiles capable of striking ous confrontation over West Berlin American cities.
Roger Hilsman, the State DeUlam places Khrushchev's gamble in partment's director of the Bureau of the context of both the Berlin probIntelligence and Research during the lem and the growing Sino-Soviet rift. crisis, adds that missiles based in The Kremlin hoped that ""a dazzling Cuba could have seriously eroded the Soviet success in the international United States ability to strike back after a arena, a demonstration of continuing Soviet nuclear attack.
Soviet dynamism in foreign policy, might persuade the Chinese com*If the Cubans had controlled the missiles, the rades to trust their nuclear defense to outcome might have been quite different, for the Russians"" and to forgo developCastro was prepared to go to nuclear war rather ment of nuclear weapons.
I realize in retrospect that he reached the proper settlement with Kennedy.
Anxiety over Beihad prevailed, there might have been a terrible jing's bid for leadership of Third war.
During the crisis, President ric of lies"" it is not surprising that Kennedy estimated the chances of the United States President did not pursue a war breaking out at ""somewhere bediplomatic solution through timetween one out of three and even."" consuming traditional channels.
FiSince the United States eventually nally, Kennedy and his advisers removed its missiles from Turkey never seriously considered the first and pledged not to invade Cuba, use of nuclear weapons; they did not some writers have asked, why did try to go to the brink.
Kennedy confront Khrushchev with All in all, Kennedy's decisions dura choice between humiliation or posing the crisis were judicious.
Stone have Khrushchev an outcome short of concluded that Kennedy shunned total defeat.
Later, Kennedy discourquiet diplomatic approaches and aged celebration over the Soviet risked nuclear war largely in order to Premier's retreat, and cautioned bolster his own image at home and newsmen against exaggerating its abroad.
After the Bay of Pigs, Cuba importance. was Kennedy's political ""Achilles heel,"" and his prestige could not surNever Again vive another show of weakness.
Probably the most intriguing quesKennedy's defenders, including tion about the 1962 crisis is whether Hilsman, Theodore Sorensen, and or not it gave impetus to the massive Arthur Schlesinger, note that several Soviet arms build-up in subsequent members of the ExCom and other years.
Recalling Khrushchev's advisers urged much stronger action humiliation, First Deputy Foreign than that which the President Minister Vasily Kuznetsov later adopted.
MISSILE CRISIS approaching parity in strategic nuother's intentions at the beginning. clear weaponry with the United The Americans underestimated States, and the Soviet fleet, if not yet Khrushchev's willingness to gamble a match for the United States Navy, achieved while the Soviets underestimated ""bluewater"" status for the first time Kennedy's willingness to fight.
The Kremlin, howcrisis further demonstrated that inever, may already have been comtelligence services can fail, that mitted to large-scale rearmament by statesmen can lie, and, once again, 1960, in which case the Cuban misthat seemingly rational men can ensile crisis and the subsequent ouster gage in reckless adventurism. of Khrushchev in 1964 had little funA still common misperception is damental impact. that the crisis resulted in a tacit Soviet-American accord on the Misperceptions status of Cuba, bringing a certain Few scholars today would echo stability to the Caribbean region.
In Hilsman's description of Kennedy's fact, the United States never formally October 1962 success as ""a foreign pledged not to invade Cuba because policy victory of historical proCastro did not allow UN inspection portions"" for the United States.
And the cording to Steel, ever the critic, the Khrushchev-Kennedy messages did crisis involved a near-fatal failure of not clearly define the ""offensive"" diplomacy and intelligence.
Acheson weapons which the Soviets were similarly attributes the favorable prohibited from stationing in Cuba. outcome more to ""plain dumb luck"" Not until August 1970, as Sovietolothan to skillful management, and Algist Raymond Garthoff notes, did lison demonstrates that Kennedy Washington and Moscow reaffirm and Khrushchev did not always their understanding on this issue, exercise full control over their resuch as it was.
Some KenSoviet-American accords underlay nedy partisans, Robert Kennedy the controversies surrounding the among them, were appalled by the Soviet shipment of MIG-23s to Cuba unwillingness of certain advisers, in 1978 and Washington's belated notably Acheson and the Joint discovery in 1979 of a Soviet ""comChiefs, to contemplate the likely conbat brigade"" on the island. sequences of direct military action against Cuba.
Sobering Up The significance of the missile The abrupt withdrawal of the nucrisis was not nearly as unambiguclear missiles, however galling to ous as some contemporaries beCastro, did not undermine Cuban lieved, largely because the condisecurity; the Cubans continued to tions geography, timing, relative receive substantial military and ecostrength surrounding it were nomic aid from the Soviet Union. unique.
The ""lessons"" in the uses of Most importantly, Castro gained an United States strategic superiority, for ininformal but credible guarantee stance, became largely irrelevant against a Yankee invasion.
Still, the once the Soviets achieved a rough cost to Cuba of the continuing U.S. equivalence with the United States refusal to restore normal economic in nuclear weapons. and diplomatic ties has been very Clearly, each side misread the high.
MISSILE CRISIS ""won"" very much from the 1962 on June 10, 1963, drew what is permissile crisis. haps the most enduring moral for The crisis was salutary in one reSoviets and Americans alike: spect.
Contemporary observers perhaps exaggerated how close the ""Total war makes no sense in an age superpowers came to a holocaust. when great powers can maintain But the experience was sufficiently large and relatively invulnerable nusobering so that Soviet and Americlear forces and refuse to surrender can leaders have never since engaged without resort to those forces.
It in anything akin to nuclear brinkmakes no sense in an age when a manship.
Improved communications single nuclear weapon contains and other safeguards have also lesalmost ten times the explosive force sened the possibility that a United States Presdelivered by all of the allied air ident will ever again face a nuclear forces in the Second World War.
