In October 1962 the United States and the Soviet Union came closer to war than the two superpowers ever had—or ever would.
John F Kennedy and Premier Nikita Khrushchev backed off, with both making substantial concessions.
Historical Background At the beginning of 1959, Cuban guerillas led by Fidel Castro overthrew the pro-American dictator Fulgencio Batista.
Bymid-1960 Castro had firmly oriented the new regime against the United States, and his government grew increasingly dependent on the Soviet Union for military and economic aid.
Soon after his inauguration, the newly installed President Kennedy approved an Eisenhower administration plan for a military invasion by Cuban exiles.
The exiles landed at the Bay of Pigs in April 1961, were swiftly crushed by the Cuban military, and the expected popular uprising failed to materialize.
Kennedy authorized the largest covert operation in CIA history, Operation Mongoose, to undermine the Castro regime and Cuban economy and perhaps to assassinate Castro.
He also ordered the Joint Chiefs of Staff to prepare plans for a future invasion of the island.
In 1962 the administration succeeded in barring Cuba from the Organization of American States, in putting in place a comprehensive economic embargo, and in pressuring 15 Latin American nations to break off relations with Cuba.
Khrushchev, too, saw the fate of his country and his leadership wrapped up in the fate of Cuba.
The People's Republic of China was increasingly challenging the U.S.S.R.'s leadership of the Communist world, and a failure to defend Cuba with sufficient vigor threatened to undercut the Soviet Union's standing.
In addition to these political and strategic incentives, Khrushchev also thought he saw an opportunity for Communist gains, believing that Kennedy was cautious, if not timid, and would not risk nuclear armageddon.
When, in the late spring of 1962, Khrushchev offered to bring Cuba firmly within the Soviet Union's orbit and to deploy nuclear missiles under Soviet control, Castro, who with good reason feared for his life and for his regime, enthusiastically accepted the proposition.
The Crisis During the summer of 1962, American suspicion about Soviet activities in Cuba grew, and the domestic political pressure on Kennedy became intense.
In mid-September, the first Soviet medium-range ballistic missiles arrived in Cuba; in early October, nuclear warheads arrived.
By late September, United States intelligence reported that missile sites appeared to be under construction, but not until October 14 did a U-2 spy plane turned up incontrovertible evidence.
On October 22, Kennedy addressed the world, demanding that the missiles be withdrawn and announcing the imposition of a naval “quarantine” on shipments of “offensive” weapons to Cuba.
At the same time, Kennedy ordered the military to prepare for air strikes or an invasion.
United States naval forces took up positions two days later, and Soviet-bloc ships steaming toward Cuba decided at the last moment not to challenge the cordon.
The next week was a harrowing one as the world teetered at the edge of nuclear war.
Soviet and United States decision makers weighed their options, and both Kennedy and Khrushchev deserve much credit for their caution.
Kennedy in particular resisted recommendations and pressure—from among his closest civilian and military advisers and from outside the administration—to pursue more aggressive military action that would have raised the risk of unintended escalation.
The style and substance of Khrushchev's missive of October 26 reflected the extreme stress under which the Soviet leader was operating; the letter offered to withdraw the missiles in exchange merely for an American promise not to invade the island.
The situation grew more tense when an American U-2 was downed during a Cuba overflight and another United States spy plane drifted into Soviet airspace.
Fearful that the accelerating cycle of violence would eventually push the two powers over the precipice, Kennedy agreed to the terms of Khrushchev's second letter, but in a way that would permit the United States to save face.
In exchange for the withdrawal of the missiles, he offered a public commitment not to invade Cuba and a private assurance that the United States would quietly withdraw the Jupiters a few months after United Nations inspectors confirmed that Soviet missiles had been removed from Cuban territory.
Khrushchev agreed to Kennedy's proposal, and on October 28 the crisis all but came to an end.
American officials congratulated themselves for having stared down the Russian bear, but the better informed among them knew that both sides had gone far to allay the other's concerns.
On November 21 Kennedy announced that the United States was satisfied that the missiles had been withdrawn—Castro had denied United Nations inspectors access to the sites, so the United States relied on aerial photography instead—and that the quarantine was no longer in effect.
Millions evacuated their homes, and all over the country shoppers raided supermarkets for emergency supplies.
Tourists and other foreign visitors desperately sought to flee to safer parts of the globe.
Americans faced the brutal fact that talk of civil defense in the preceding decade had been just that.
When the crisis abated, the public was understandably relieved, but raised no clamor for an ambitious civil defense program to reduce the vulnerability to nuclear attack.
Some undoubtedly understood that the nuclear revolution meant that defense had become impossible—they embraced the logic of nuclear deterrence.
Most, however, simply avoided unpleasant realities, and others refused to abandon the elusive dream of foolproof defense—reflected later in Ronald Reagan's focus on the Strategic Defense Initiative and George W Bush's commitment to missile defense.
The emerging consensus appears to be that his primary goals were deterring an American invasion of the island, countering the overwhelming United States advantage in strategic nuclear weapons, and building the foundation for a triumph in the long-festering Berlin issue.
Kennedy chose to proceed initially with the quarantine rather than a number of other possible options because he believed that only a strong display would persuade the Soviets of American resolve, while too strong a display could spark a full-fledged war.
The most interesting question with regard to the United States is why the installation of the missiles was viewed as inherently threatening.
The domestic politics of Cold War America played a role, but so too did concerns about the international repercussions of passivity, specifically, concerns were voiced about maintaining the United States reputation for resolve among its allies and adversaries alike.
That both superpowers ran such great risks for such apparently small rewards has led many scholars to interpret the crisis as a classic illustration of the impact of individual and organizational irrationality on foreign policy.
Soviet and American decision making was rife with misperceptions and miscalculations—in part because policy makers suffered from cognitive and motivated biases and in part because they were misled by bureaucracies committed to parochial interests.
Moreover, organizations following standard operating procedures nearly led the United States and the Soviet Union over the nuclear cliff.
Soviet leaders wrongly saw a United States nuclear test in the Pacific, scheduled long before, as a clumsy effort at intimidation.
United States decision makers perceived the downing of their spy plane over Cuba by Soviet surface-to-air missiles as escalatory saber rattling by the Kremlin, for they incorrectly assumed that the order to shoot down the plane had come from Moscow.
Many have traditionally attributed the resolution of the crisis to American strategic and tactical superiority, but this was well-known to the Soviets before they embarked on this venture.
The side that cares most deeply is willing to climb higher up the escalatory ladder, and it can consequently issue more credible threats; thus, its preferences will come to dominate.
The proximity of Cuba to the United States mainland gave the United States an inherent advantage in the competition for credibility, but the Soviets, too, had strong reasons not to back down.
When faced with mutual assured destruction, both countries grew cautious and carefully picked a path away from the brink.
But dumb luck and resolute leadership played an equally large, if not greater, role.
Had Kennedy listened to many of his advisers and approved air strikes or an invasion, the Soviet Union and the United States might have laid waste to each other.
The two countries again came close to war in 1973, during the war between Israel and the surrounding Arab states; on several other occasions, nuclear command and control faltered and accidents nearly grew into tragedies.
Contemporary debates about the dangers of nuclear proliferation turn in part on such differing interpretations of the Soviet and American experience with nuclear weapons.
The stability of deterrence during the Cold War may inspire confidence that future nuclear-armed states would show equal caution.
If, however, the fact that the Cold War did not turn hot was less the product of reason than of luck and leadership, then any confidence that other nuclear rivals, India and Pakistan, for example, would be as fortunate might be misplaced.
Between the mid-1940s and the early 1960s, the United States and the Soviet Union engaged in a competition for global influence that knew no bounds.
The crisis of October 1962 marked a critical turning point, as both superpowers identified a line that could not be crossed and negotiated ground rules that fundamentally altered the nature of their relationship.
These explicit mechanisms of assuring stability in crisis were, however, less important than the tacit agreements forged over Cuba and more generally over their respective spheres of influence.
Covert activities to roll back Soviet control over Eastern Europe and American influence in Latin America, which were so common in the 1950s, were all but unheard-of after the crisis.
Moreover, after 1962, both superpowers accepted the status quo with regard to Germany and relinquished any hope of reuniting the country on their side of the Cold War divide.
By the mid-1960s, analysts spoke often of superpower relations after the Cold War—not because they optimistically projected from an incipient détente to a future in which superpower conflict would be absent.
Rather, they appreciated that the very nature of superpower action had changed, that what had transpired was a difference of kind, not just a difference of degree.
The greatest challenge to them came not from Ronald Reagan's aggressive rhetoric regarding the “evil empire,” but from his zealous pursuit of American invulnerability that threatened to undermine the Soviet nuclear deterrent.
