Batista's forces launch a last, unsuccessful push against a small guerrilla army led by Fidel castro and based in the mountains of the Sierra Maestra.
When the United States press calls the executions a ""blood bath,"" Fidel Castro rallies Cubans to legitimize his policies, which many support.
Members of Castro's 26th of July Movement underground and leaders of the anti-Batista political opposition form an interim government.
Manuel Urrutia, a judge, becomes president; José Miró Cardona becomes prime minister.
Rebel army commander Fidel Castro becomes prime minister of the revolutionary government, replacing Miró Cardona.
Castro's government expropriates properties belonging to the International Telephone and Telegraph Company, and takes over its affiliate, the Cuban Telephone Company, lowering telephone rates.
Castro visits the United States He is greeted everywhere by cheering crowds.
The trip is overshadowed by suspicions that he might be a Communist, but he publicly denies the Communist leanings of some in his inner circle, including his brother Raúl.
The government expropriates farm lands over 1,000 acres and bans land ownership by foreigners.
Castro calls for a rally in Havana on the anniversary of the storming of the Moncada Barracks.
In celebration of the Agrarian Reform Law, tens of thousands of peasants are brought to the city, welcomed and housed by middle and upper class families.
At a mass rally of one million people, Castro reveals the class content of his revolution.
Along with 14 officers, Comandante Huber Matos, an important figure in the revolution, resigns his post as military commander of Camagüey province.
He cites his concern with the growing influence of Communists in Cuba's revolutionary government.
Pedro Luis Díaz Lanz, former chief of Castro's air force, who had defected in July, flies a B-25 plane from Miami to Havana, dropping leaflets calling on Fidel Castro to eliminate Communists from his government.
One of the most popular comandantes of the revolution, his death is to this day shrouded in mystery.
Matos' conviction marks the end of the ""revolutionary coalition"" between moderates and radicals.
By the end of the first year, only nine of the original 21 ministers of the revolutionary government remain.
With his brother Raúl as minister of defense, Ché Guevara in charge of Cuba's Central Bank and himself as prime minister, Fidel Castro holds the reins of power firmly in hand.
The Soviet Union agrees to buy five million tons of sugar over five years.
The United States will place embargos on sugar, oil and guns, and issue propaganda.
In addition, the plan calls for Cuban exiles to attack Cuba and attempt to overthrow Castro.
Within the next month Texaco, Esso, and Shell oil refineries will be nationalized.
In response to these seizures, the United States Congress eliminates Cuba's remaining sugar quota.
Fidel Castro addresses the United Nations General Assembly, lashing out at the United States and flaunting his new friendship with Soviet premier Nikita Krushchev.
Under the direction of the Ministry of the Interior, the C.D.R. serve as surveillance agents, ferreting out dissidents, counterrevolutionaries, homosexuals.
They will also carry out health and education campaigns and fuel revolutionary enthusiasm.
Many are businessmen and professionals, including more than 50 percent of Cuba's doctors and teachers in the first two years of the revolution.
President John Kennedy authorizes the CIA to proceed with Eisenhower's Cuban invasion plan.
It calls for an army of 1,200 Cuban exiles to land in Cuba's southeast coast, take over the city of Trinidad, and call on Cubans to rise up against Castro.
Three other key opposition leaders are arrested at a meeting in Havana, including Humberto Sorí Marín, the architect of the revolution's Agrarian Reform Law.
Rolando Masferrer, a former Batista official, is indicted in Miami for an attack on Cuba violating the Neutrality Act -an aborted invasion of Cuba the previous October 4th.
The United States distances itself from pro-Batista exiles while supporting other anti-Castro groups.
A second bomb in several days destroys Cuba's finest department store, El Encanto.
Eight B-26 bombers attack airfields at Ciudad Libertad in Havana, San Antonio de los Baños in Pinar del Río and Santiago de Cuba in an attempt to destroy Cuba's air force.
A second wave, designed to wipe out any surviving aircraft, is inexplicably cancelled.
The Castro regime places dynamite under the cells in prisons, as a warning to any prisoner who might try to help Bay of Pigs combatants.
Word spreads, so that no Cuban citizen with a family member in prison will aid the American invasion.
The invasion will end three days later in the exiles' defeat by the Cuban army.
In Havana, former colleagues who have spoken out against him, including Humberto Sorí Marín, Manuel Puig, and Regelio Gonzalez Corso, are executed for treason.
President Kennedy approves Oeration Mongoose, a covert CIA plan to get rid of Castro.
Castro calls for all Latin American people to rise up against imperialists in his Second Declaration of Havana.
President Kennedy bans all trade with Cuba, excepting foods and medicines.
President Kennedy bans the import of all goods made from or containing Cuban materials.
Biryuzov secretly arrives in Havana to discuss placing nuclear weapons in Cuba.
Fidel's brother, Raúl Castro, Cuba's Minister of the Armed Forces, goes to Moscow.
The two nations agree to deploy nuclear missiles under Soviet jurisdiction in Cuba.
A Soviet freighter arrives in Cuba with the first nuclear weapons shipment, a cargo of middle-range ballistic missiles.
A second Soviet freighter delivers another shipment of middle-range ballistic missiles to Cuba.
After two weeks of being deterred by clouds, a United States U-2 reconnaissance flight over Cuba photographs the Soviet construction of intermediate-range missile sites.
Kennedy announces a naval blockade of Cuba and declares that a Soviet nuclear attack launched from Cuba would require a response in kind.
Castro writes a letter to Khrushchev urging him to use nuclear weapons and sacrifice Cuba if necessary.
Radio Moscow announces a deal has been reached: Khrushchev is ready to remove the missiles from Cuba.
In exchange, Kennedy promises to remove United States missiles from Turkey and pledges not to invade Cuba.
The United States sends Cuba medicines and food in exchange for exiles captured in the Bay of Pigs invasion.
The Kennedy administration bars Americans from any transactions with Cuba.
Given a hero's welcome, the young revolutionary revives Soviet spirits and faith in the future.
After a disastrous experiment with rapid industrialization, Cuba agrees to focus on producing sugar.
The Soviets agree to purchase sugar at inflated prices while selling Cuba oil at deflated prices.
Also Cuba will receive free of charge all military equipment it requests.
President Kennedy sends a message to Castro that he is now ready to negotiate normal relations and drop the embargo.
According to former Press Secretary Pierre Salinger, Kennedy would have negotiated the agreement if he had lived.
Vice president Lyndon Johnson is sworn in as the new United States president.
When the Organization of American States requires its members to discontinue diplomatic and trade relations with Cuba, Mexico is the only country to refuse.
That same day, Fidel Castro reads a letter Guevara had written him the previous May.
In it Guevara resigned all his official posts and his Cuban citizenship before leaving to fight in other lands.
Months later, defeated and humiliated, Ché Guevara will return secretly to Cuba.
At a conference of solidarity with the peoples of Africa, Asia and Latin America, Fidel Castro proclaims that ""revolutionaries in any corner of the world"" can count on the assistance of Cuban fighters.
After spending months recovering and training in the mountains of Cuba, Ché Guevara leaves for Bolivia to try to spark a continental revolution.
United States President Lyndon B Johnson grants the right to apply for permanent residency to any Cuban who arrived in the United States after January 1, 1959.
Addressing the Federation of Cuban Women, Fidel Castro makes wild promises about his cattle breeding program.
He predicts Cuba will produce enough milk to satisfy the demands of the entire population.
Soviet premier Aleksei Kosygin pays a surprise visit to Havana after meeting with President Johnson.
He advises the Cubans that the Soviets will not support wars of national liberation in Latin America.
His visit is followed by a letter from Soviet leader Leonid Brezhnev warning Castro that the Soviets will not prevent a United States invasion if Castro continues fomenting revolution in Latin America.
After capturing Guevara in Bolivia the day before, U.S.-trained rangers execute the Cuban revolutionary.
The Cuban government begins rationing petroleum in response to a reduction in supply from the Soviet Union.
Their ""microfactionalist"" activities are seen to compromise Cuba's sovereignty.
Castro takes most of the remaining private Cuban businesses into state control.
While campaigning for president, United States Senator Robert F Kennedy is fatally shot in Los Angeles, California.
Soviet tanks enter Czechoslovakia to suppress the reform efforts of president Anton Dubcek and the resistance movement known as the Prague Spring.
People defined as anti-social -homosexuals, hippies, artists -are rounded up.
The armed forces magazine Verde Olivo launches a campaign to ""cleanse"" Cuba's arts and literature of all pernicious foreign influence.
In the latest of Castro's economic schemes, all of Cuba is mobilized and resources diverted to a single goal of producing ten million tons of sugar in the next harvest.
A group of volunteer workers from the United States arrives to work on the sugar harvest.
Other volunteers come from Korea, Vietnam, and the Eastern block countries.
With the economy in a shambles as all resources -human and economic -consumed by the harvest, Castro announces that the largest harvest of sugar in Cuban history has missed its goal by 15 percent.
The arrest and detention of poet Herberto Padilla for political differences with the Cuban government signals a dangerous crisis between the government and intellectuals.
Cuba is accepted as a member of the Non Aligned Movement, a ten-year-old conference of nations created in opposition to the U.S.-Soviet arms race and to Western colonialism.
On his first visit to a Latin American country since 1959, Castro is welcomed in Chile by President Salvador Allende, a Socialist who had been elected to office in September 1970.
Castro begins a 63-day tour of Africa, Eastern Europe, and the Soviet Union.
Cuba becomes a member of the Soviet Union's trade association, the Council of Mutual Economic Assistance.
Cuban economic and political institutions are increasingly modeled on those of the Soviet Union.
Health indexes, which had dropped in the 1960s, begin to rise as a consequence of Cuba's large investments in a health care system.
Cuba and the United States begin negotiations over the problem of airline hijackings.
Fidel attends the Fourth Conference of the Non-aligned Nations in Algiers.
He argues that a ""natural alliance exists between the Soviet Union and the Third World.
In Chile, Salvador Allende's government is overthrown by a military coup d'etat.
In Miami, Florida, a group of seven anti-Castro militants forms Omega 7, a terrorist group that will target Cuban governmental representatives or Castro sympathizers in the United States.
Two United States senators visit Cuba, the first United States officials to visit since the break in relations.
With the goal of re-establishing diplomatic relations, the United States State Department conducts high-level secret talks with Cuban officials.
Secretary of State Henry Kissinger announces the United States is ""ready to move in a new direction,"" normalizing relations with Cuba, and prepared to lift the 15-year-old trade embargo.
Following months of secret negotiations, the announcement indicates both nations are on the verge of a breakthrough.
The Organization of American States ends sanctions against Cuba, allowing member nations to determine their own relations with Cuba.
The United States allows foreign subsidiaries of United States companies to do business in Cuba, and drops penalties to other nations for trade with Cuba.
Top members of the Cuban general staff begin appearing in Angola, a mineral-rich Portuguese colony in South West Africa.
Planeloads of Cuban special troops are sent to Angola, followed by two passenger ships.
With the military backing of Cubans, the Angolan independence group M.P.L.A. takes over the capital city of Luanda and proclaims Angola's independence from Portugal.
United States intelligence discloses more than eight failed attempts by the CIA to assassinate Fidel Castro between the years 1960 and 1965.
United States president Gerald Ford announces that Cuban involvement in Angola will prevent the restoration of full U.S.-Cuban diplomatic relations for the near future.
United States Secretary of State Henry Kissinger announces that there is no possibility of normalized U.S.-Cuban relations while Cuba has troops in Africa.
By now there are more than 15,000 Soviet-armed Cubans fighting in Angola.
In Miami, radio commentator Emilio Milán loses both his legs when a bomb explodes in his car.
He will later assert that he was attacked because of his public opposition to terrorism.
A Cuban airliner crashes after an explosion near Barbados, killing 73 people.
Luis Posada Carrilles, an anti-Castro activist trained by the CIA, is charged with the bombing.
United States president Jimmy Carter, ignoring Cuba's continuing presence in Angola, initiates rapprochement.
He allows United States citizens to travel to Cuba and spend $100 there.
The United States and Cuba open interest sections in each other's capitals.
Somalia expels all Soviet advisers and breaks diplomatic relations with Cuba, citing the presence of Cuban and Soviet advisers in Ethiopia.
They will fight Somali forces with Soviet weapons and under Soviet command.
Cuban troops help block the Somali invasion of Ethiopia with the aid of East German and Soviet officers.
Because of Cuban military activity in Africa, United States Secretary of State Cyrus Vance declares that he does not immediately anticipate better relations with Cuba, much like the failed Kissinger initiative over Angola in 1975.
Castro demands the eviction of United States military bases from Guantanamo Bay.
Anti-Castro exiles begin a bombing campaign against the Soviet mission, Cuban United Nations mission, and the Cuban interests section in the United States.
In an announcement by the United States government, officials declare that those responsible for the July bombings will be prosecuted to the fullest extent of the law.
United States officials believe that it could be used for military purposes.
In an attempt to abolish the trade embargo, United States Congressman Ted Weiss introduces an ambitious, yet unsuccessful bill to re-establish diplomatic relations with Cuba.
Since 1977, Cuba has supported the Sandinista insurgency against Anastasio Somoza's rule in Nicaragua.
In July, the Sandinista Liberation Front takes power, resulting in a new western ally for Castro.
Huber Matos is freed after 20 years in a Cuban prison, and transported to Nicaragua.
He creates Cuba Independiente y Democrática, an organization that will work to raise awareness of human rights violations in Cuba.
Cuba supports the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan, a non-aligned nation.
For the first time, Cuban farmers are allowed to sell the remaining produce above their state quotas in an unregulated market to private individuals.
After a shooting incident leaves the Peruvian embassy unguarded, ten thousand Cubans descend upon it seeking sanctuary.
This begins the Mariel boatlift during which 125,000 refugees make their way to the United States Twice as many are left behind to wait at the port of El Mariel.
Cuban human rights activist Ricardo Bofill is arrested for disseminating ""enemy propaganda"" and sentenced to another fourteen years in prison.
While he had succeeded in sending his reports on human rights abuses out of Cuba, most friends and university colleagues avoided contact with him.
During this prison term, many political prisoners will ask to become members of the group Bofill co-founded, the Cuban Committee for Human Rights , and compile accounts of prison atrocities.
Anti-Castro terrorists assassinate a representative of the Cuban mission to the United States.
The new United States president, Ronald Reagan, enters office committed to fighting Communism.
He establishes the most aggressive policy against Cuba since the Bay of Pigs invasion.
Jorge Mas Canosa institutes an anti-Castro lobbying group in the U.S., the Cuban-American National Foundation , which quickly gains power.
For four weeks, the United States Navy carries out maneuvers in the Caribbean.
A week later Pentagon officials state that the maneuvers were expected to send a message to Cuba.
Cuba anticipates a United States invasion and goes on full alert, preparing the country's entire military.
In a secret meeting in Mexico, Cuban vice president Carlos Rafael Rodriguez and United States Secretary of State Alexander Haig discuss the escalating situation, but reach no compromise.
The Reagan administration reissues the ban on United States citizens traveling to Cuba.
Cuban vice president Rodriguez announces to the United Nations that Cuba's military power has nearly doubled since 1981, in reaction to the U.S.'s aggressive stance.
Regis Debray, a socialist French writer who once fought in Havana with Castro's forces, travels to Cuba to escort him.
Valladares is received with great fanfare, and he founds Resistance International.
Suspicious of Cuban involvement in Grenada following a coup, the United States invades the small Caribbean island with 8,000 troops and establishes a provisional government.
Cuba and Angola outline provisions for the removal of Cuban troops from Namibia and support United Nations Security Council Resolution 435, which calls for Namibian independence.
The United States Department of Defense announces that it will spend $43 million restoring Guantanamo Naval Base.
The United States and Cuba reach an immigration agreement, beginning with the return of 2,746 Mariel refugees to Cuba.
A new housing law allows Cubans to purchase, and eventually sell, property they rent from the government.
Castro and other high Cuban officials meet with five United States Catholic Church leaders.
In early January, the Office of Religious Affairs opens its doors, signaling a deeper relationship between church and state.
Backed by Reagan Republicans and Cuban hard-liners, the station broadcasts news and information from the United States to Cuba.
Its constant mention of the C.C.P.D.H. offers Bofill and his colleagues some protection -they become better known than ever, and much harder to silence.
President Reagan's daughter gives a copy to her father and introduces them.
Reagan names Valladares as a delegate to the United Nations's Human Rights Committee.
Reagan prohibits Cuban government or Communist party officials to travel to the U.S., thus banning most artists, students, and scholars.
An international conference on the church in Cuba is sponsored and hosted by the Cuban Catholic Church.
Farmers markets, which have been legal for six years, are banned in Cuba.
A United States resolution criticizing Cuba for supposed human rights violations is voted down by the United Nations Human Rights Commission.
Armando Valladares brings up the issue of Cuban human rights abuses at a United Nations meeting, and the United States demands Cuba be inspected.
Ultimately, the resolution will fail in a 19 to 18 vote because many Latin American countries doubt United States reports of the problems.
Armando Valladares once again asks the United Nations to look into Cuba's possible rights violations.
Facing mounting pressure, the Cuban government gives in and invites U.N.H.C.R. members from countries including Ireland, Columbia, Nigeria, the Philippines, and Bulgaria to visit Cuba and assess the situation.
He firmly denies the existence of human rights organizations and calls any who might be involved liars and cheats.
The United Nations delegation visits Cuba to investigate human rights issues.
Because of an endorsement on Radio Martí, almost 4,500 people gather to testify on human rights violations.
Some of the abuses include torture, executions, disappearances, and inhumane medical experiments in the prisons of Cuba.
Castro tries to distract the committee by showing them flourishing hospitals and well treated prisoners in rehabilitation programs.
However, back at the Hotel Commodoro, the group hears over 1,500 testimonies about rights violations.
It states that Cuban citizens are deprived of freedoms such as speech, movement and the right to assemble, and details specifics including the names of people abused for political and social reasons.
An anti-Castro station funded by United States tax dollars, TV Martí, is launched.
Congress passes the Mack Amendment, prohibiting all trade with Cuba by subsidiaries of United States companies located outside the U.S., and proposing sanctions or cessation of aid to any country that buys sugar or other products from Cuba.
United States Congressman Robert Torricelli introduces the Cuban Democracy Act, which prevents foreign-based subsidiaries of United States businesses from trading with Cuba, travel to Cuba by United States citizens, and families to transfer funds to Cuba.
Over two-thirds of the trade between Cuba and the United States is in food and drugs.
However, the law does permit private businesses to deliver food and medicine to Cuba.
Because of this, the act is believed to violate an international law stating that food and drugs can not be used as weapons in international disputes.
Castro ends the ban on United States currency in Cuba as the nation's economy declines without Soviet subsidies.
Angling to update Cuba's telephone network, Grupo Domos, a Mexican telecommunications company, signs a work agreement with the Cuban Ministry of Defense.
Out of 66 passengers, 31 survivors get picked up by the Coast Guard and claim that two other boats tried to sink theirs, and did nothing to help save them.
More than 32,000 Cubans are picked up by the United States Coast Guard and taken to the United States naval base in Guantanamo Bay.
The United States and Cuban governments decide on a cap of 20,000 Cuban immigrants annually.
The United States and Cuba endorse their agreement that all rafters leaving Cuba will be returned.
Their five-point plan includes pardons for political captives, nonviolence, a peaceful evolution toward democracy, a system that enforces human rights, and the right of Cubans all over the world to take part in that transition.
Fliers urging citizens to revolt against the government are dropped over Havana by planes owned by a Miami-based group, Brothers to the Rescue.
The Cuban government asks the United States government to stop actions by exile groups like Consilio Cubano and Brothers to the Rescue.
The Cuban government warns that it will shoot down exile planes in Cuban airspace.
A Radio Martí reporter challenges the Cuban military to follow up on their threat of shooting down rebel aircraft.
Four exiles are killed when the Cuban military shoots down two Brothers to the Rescue airplanes over international waters.
President Bill Clinton signs the Cuban Liberty and Democratic Solidarity Act.
This law, also known as the Helms-Burton Act, enforces penalties on foreign companies conducting business in Cuba.
Terrorists bomb a dance club in the Melia Cohiba, Havana's premiere hotel.
A series of attacks on local nighttime attractions in Havana and Varadero follows.
According to the Miami Herald, a majority of young Cuban Americans wish to begin a dialogue with Cuba, even though Cuban-Americans over the age of 45 oppose such talks.
Cubans Vladimiro Roca, Félix Bonne, René Gómez and Marta Beatriz Roque, the authors of La Patria Es de Todos , are arrested.
Not until 2002 will the last to be released, Vladimiro Roca, leave the high security prison where he has been kept in isolation.
Salvadoran Raúl Ernesto Cruz León is arrested for committing six of the attacks in Havana and Varadero.
The FBI begins an investigation of seven Cuban exiles after the United States Coast Guard examines a boat in international waters requesting assistance.
As a result of the investigation, the seven will be indicted in August 1998.
November; The founder of C.A.N.F., Jorge Mas Canosa, dies in Miami, Florida.
The Pentagon decides that Cuba is no longer a significant threat to the U.S., and urges dialogue with Cuban officials.
European countries claim parts of the Helms-Burton Act violate international law and call for an end to the Cuban embargo.
In Puerto Rico, seven Cuban exiles are convicted of plotting to assassinate Fidel Castro.
Senator John W Warner and over 20 other United States Senators recommend the formation of a bipartisan commission to review United States policies on Cuba.
President Bill Clinton refuses to establish a commission to review Cuban policy.
Cuba calls for a Salvadoran bomber, Raúl Ernesto Cruz León, who has been convicted of attacking Cuban businesses, to receive the death penalty.
The Coalition of Americans for Humanitarian Trade with Cuba unite with former members of the United States Congress and ask the Clinton administration to end restrictions on food and medicine supplies to Cuba.
They argue that it is unfair to supply it to other countries, such as Iraq, when Cuba's people are in desperate need.
Eleven Cuban refugees are killed when their boat capsizes in the Caribbean Sea.
A five-year-old boy, Elián Gonzalez, survives, but his mother is among those who die.
After seven months of a bitter legal and political battle, Elián Gonzalez is sent home to his father in Cuba.
The Cuban government announces that two American newspapers, the Dallas Morning News and Chicago Tribune, will join CNN and The Associated Press by opening branches in Cuba.
At the 10th Ibero-American Summit, Posada Carriles and three other Cubans are arrested for plotting to assassinate Castro.
A bipartisan task force in the United States calls for end to the trade embargo.
Norwegian legislator Hallgeir Langeland nominates Fidel Castro to receive the Nobel Peace Prize for his help to other developing nations.
On October 12, former United States president Jimmy Carter receives the prize.
On the 40th anniversary of the Bay of Pigs invasion, a 3-day conference is held in Havana.
Attendees include the CIA chief for the Miami base, five members of the Brigade 2506, two former Kennedy administration officials, and scholars.
A C.P.F. poll determines that the majority of Americans think the United States should do business with Cuba and allow travel there.
They also agree that reuniting Elián González with his father in Cuba was the appropriate decision.
Former United States Surgeon General Jocelyn Elders tours Cuba's hospitals.
She states that Cuba is better than the United States at keeping people healthy and out of the hospital, but that America has a better health care system for those who are already sick.
The United States Food and Drug Administration announces that Cuba has purchased 130,000 tons of grain from two American suppliers, Cargill, Inc. and Archer-Daniels-Midland.
Cuban officials offer to compensate Cuban Americans for properties seized during the revolution 40 years ago.
Cuban test scores and literacy levels top those of the rest of Latin America, reports the United Nations Education, Scientific and Cultural Organization.
The United States Treasury Department grants licenses for Cuban travel, and 2,000 Americans make the trip.
In Havana, six members of the United States Congress meet with Fidel Castro and members of two insurgent groups.
In the coming months, more United States elected officials will tour Cuba.
Undersecretary of State John R Bolton accuses Cuba of developing biological terrorism capabilities.
In a three-minute address on Cuban television, he says he believes it is time to end the embargo.
He also makes direct reference to the Varela Project, urging Cuban authorities to institute democratic reform.
Firebombs are thrown at the buildings of the rebel groups C.A.N.F. and Alpha 66.
On the day before the United States invasion of Iraq, Cuba arrests 80 people for their political beliefs.
The government also searches homes, seizing personal papers and electronic equipment.
Of those detained in March, 75 are tried and convicted on treason charges.
Denied lawyers before the start of the trial, the defendents are tried in coutrooms closed to all but immediate family members.
The sentences range from six to 28 years in prison, and average over 19 years.
Human rights watchdogs denounce Cuba's re-election into the U.N.H.R.C., claiming the country's presence in the organization is shameful.
President George W Bush restricts travel to Cuba from one visit per year to one visit in three years, and reduces the amount of money that can be spent.
Cuba's central bank announces a ban on the use of United States dollars.
Castro tells Cubans to ask their United States relatives to send other foreign currencies.
Fidel Castro | Article Interview Excerpts Filmmaker Adriana Bosch sought out thoughtful voices to tell the story of Fidel Castro.
