Introduction The USA had been very hostile towards Cuba ever since a Communist revolution overthrew the US-backed dictator Batista to bring in the charismatic and fiery Fidel Castro as Cuban President.
The United States President John F Kennedy even backed an attempt to overthrow Castro by supporting Castro’s enemies in an attempted invasion at the Bay of Pigs in 1961.
On the following pages, there is a timeline of the events which followed.
DEFCON 1 would be allout war with the USSR o President Kennedy went on national TV to tell the American public what was happening o In Moscow, Khrushchev became more and more convinced that the USA would invade Cuba.
October 23rd o Khrushchev condemned the United States blockade, calling it piracy.
Secretly, he was relieved that the United States had not invaded Cuba o Castro ordered Cuban forces to get ready for an American invasion o A fleet of Soviet ships approached Cuba carrying more missiles o Panic buying in United States supermarkets, as people prepared for war October 24th o Secretary General of the United Nation, U Thant, called on both sides to compromise o Khrushchev ordered Soviet ships to stop heading for Cuba o United States Armed Forces went to DEFCON2.
This was the only time in the entire Cold War they went this close to war © 2015 London Grid for Learning 2 www.coldwar.lgfl.net Key Events – Activity 3 October 25th US warships stopped the first Soviet ship.
It was only carrying oil so they let it through October 26th o Over 120,000 United States troops assembled near Florida coast.
United States invasion of Cuba looked likely o Kennedy told ExComm that he favoured some sort of deal to end the crisis.
The ExComm Hawks still wanted an invasion o Kennedy received a letter from Khrushchev.
The letter offered to remove the missiles if the USA promised not to invade Cuba.
Most of ExComm wanted to accept the offer October 27th o Probably the most tense day of the crisis.
Cuban forces shot down a United States spy plane o Khrushchev sent another letter to Kennedy.
However, it also insisted that United States missiles be removed from Turkey.
However, he admitted that ‘Khrushchev has us in a pretty good spot here, because most people will regard this as a reasonable proposal.’ o Kennedy accepted Khrushchev’s offer.
In other cases, writers may focus on the technology or on particular politicians.
The job of the Doomsday Clock is to estimate how close the world is to destruction by nuclear weapons.
The key figures on the BAS committee were not able to meet in October 1962 and therefore never set a time for the Cuban Crisis because it was over so quickly.
Your task is to use all the resources provided to write a paragraph about the Cuban Crisis and explain how many minutes to midnight the clock would have been set.
