RFE/RL correspondent Sophie Lambroschini reports on what ""lessons"" these men say they have for today's nuclear world.
Moscow, 12 April 2001 -Last night in Moscow, a Hollywood disaster movie provided the occasion for a serious and thought-provoking round-table discussion on the nuclear risk today.
The standoff between the United States and the Soviet Union is widely considered the closest point the world has ever come to nuclear war.
The roundtable, hosted by the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, reunited key players in the nearly 40-year-old event -Kremlin and White House officials who spent many sleepless nights determining whether it would be war or negotiation to bring the crisis to an end.
The officials gathered for last night's discussion used their collective experience in the 13-day standoff to reflect on its lessons for the world today.
In introductory remarks, Carnegie Endowment President Jessica Matthews noted that despite the passing of time and changing ideologies, United States and Russian nuclear strategies seem ""essentially indistinguishable"" from their Cold War predecessors.
Because of this, she said, they are equally ill-equipped to deal with today's nuclear risk.
Robert McNamara, the United States defense secretary at the time of the crisis, was among the round-table participants.
McNamara went on to point out that mistakes are a natural -and in the case of nuclear weapons, irreversible -part of war.
The next missile crisis, he added, might not end so well. "" the best managed foreign policy crisis, the best managed defense crisis of the past 50 years -in a sense I think it was.
To make his point, McNamara recalled some of the errors of judgment made during the crisis by United States President John Kennedy, his brother Robert Kennedy -then United States attorney general -and the Russian leadership.
McNamara said the Soviet Union made a mistake when it thought that just a year after the fiasco of the failed United States invasion at Cuba's Bay of Pigs, Washington would not react to the Soviets' secret transfer of missiles to Cuba, just 90 miles southeast of the Florida coast.
To the contrary, McNamara said, when United States spy planes discovered the missiles in the middle of October in 1962, most of Kennedy's advisers pressed him to launch an immediate bombing and invasion campaign to claim control of the island.
He said up until the last moment, this option was being seriously considered.
While the invasion option was still pending, diplomatic efforts continued.
On October 28, Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev defused the crisis by agreeing to dismantle the missiles in exchange for assurances that Cuba would not be invaded -and that United States missiles would be pulled out of Turkey.
Khrushchev adviser Fyodor Burlatsky, also attending yesterday's discussion, said he is still surprised that common sense prevailed in resolving the crisis.
According to a letter from Khrushchev to Castro that Burlatsky had edited, the Soviet leader was ambling along the Black Sea shore in Bulgaria when an aide pointed out that just on the other shore, in Turkey, the United States held a missile base.
Khrushchev then decided that the Soviets should have a base of their own -in Cuba.
Burlatsky recalls the idea was set into motion without any thought as to what would happen if the United States found out.
United States President George W Bush has argued that such a system is intended to protect the United States and its allies from rogue nations like Iran or North Korea that are suspected of developing their nuclear arsenal.
But the plan has spurred outrage in Russia, where many politicians say they believe NMD may be directed against their own country, and that it could violate the 1972 Anti-Ballistic Missile treaty.
All of the speakers at yesterday's roundtable said the defense shield would only increase the danger of nuclear confrontation.
Georgi Kornienko, a Soviet embassy official who was involved in the settlement efforts in 1962, says that Washington is currently repeating the Soviet's original mistake of failing to see the other side's point of view.
The United States has plans to deploy a National Missile Defense shield.
Sorensen also pointed out the increased risk of nuclear proliferation if NMD is deployed.
He argued that deterrence -the Cold War mantra that no one would risk mutual destruction -worked for ""rational"" people like Khrushchev and Kennedy, but would have no effect on ""irrational"" leaders.
McNamara suggested cutting United States and Russian offensive nuclear forces from 7,500 to 1,000 -levels even lower than preliminary START III targets.
He said the risk of inadvertent or accidental launch could also be reduced by separating the warheads and the launch vehicles.
An outside observer, Aleksei Arbatov, deputy head of the Duma Security Committee and one of Russia's most prominent security specialists, pointed out that East and West have sidelined disarmament issues on the basis of the unproven theory that ""democracies don't wage wars with one another."" "" now that we're not enemies any more we can just forget all about it.
Arbatov added that by forgetting about nuclear risks during the 1990s, Moscow and Washington are now being confronted by the issue again -and in an atmosphere of growing bilateral tension.
Back to top Follow Us Quick Hits About RFE/RL Contact Us Pressroom Terms Of Use Jobs and Internships United States Agency For Global Media Legal All RFE/RL Sites Browse News Features Blogs Multimedia Qishloq Ovozi RFE/RL Newsline Analytical Reports Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty © 2022 RFE/RL, Inc.
