Led by anti-Castro supporters, the Bay of Pigs invasion was unsuccessful.
Castro understood the invasion as an attempt to overthrow his government.
After this unsuccessful event, the two superpowers of the United States and the Soviet Union came close to a nuclear confrontation.
This book takes a closer look at this dramatic conflict and the tensions that emerged from the threat of nuclear power.
Our books are written to give essential information in a straight-to-the-point, easy to read format.
We have cut out technical jargon, waffle, and unnecessary filler to ensure you get the essential information you need to achieve your goals with confidence.
This book looks at a momentous event from the Cold War, showing how one of the world's most charismatic leaders chose to follow a brave course of action.
Personal narratives are also shared, allowing readers first-hand details that other books on this topic do not supply.
Readers hear from a Soviet Naval Officer as he goes to battle, and a British Journalist who recalls the tense weeks of the crisis.
Resolved through back-channel negotiations, the moment is popularly remembered as the closest the world has ever come to full-scale nuclear war.
Charles River Charles River Editors Publisher : Createspace Independent Publishing Platform Release : 19 January 2018 GET THIS BOOK President Kennedy Fights the Cold War *Includes pictures.
Within just a month of becoming President, the issue of communist Cuba became central to John F Kennedy and his administration.
This notable book, packed with interesting sidebars and fascinating facts, transports readers back to a time of political intrigue.
Over two tense weeks, United States president John F Kennedy and Soviet premier Nikita Khrushchev managed to negotiate a peaceful resolution to what was nearly a global catastrophe.
The United States and the Soviet Union, uneasy allies in World War II but Cold War rivals after the defeat of Germany, squared off over the discovery of Soviet nuclear missiles in Cuba.
This launched 13 days of tense negotiations between the two nations, as both President John F Kennedy and Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev prepared for the possibility of nuclear war.
By focusing on the roles of a number of key individuals, such as JFK, Robert Kennedy and Nikita Khrushchev, and by using recently declassified materials, this book frames answers to these questions.
