The major players in the conflict were the United States, led by President John F Kennedy, Cuba, led by President Fidel Castro, and Russia, led by Premier Nikita Khrushchev.
On 15 October, 1962, an American spy plane revealed missile installations in Cuba, raising concerns about Cuba's intentions.
President Kennedy and his cabinet discussed a number of approaches to the issue, ultimately authorizing a naval blockade of Cuba to prevent military material from reaching the area.
Ultimately, on 28 October, the United States agreed to refrain from invading Cuba and to the secret removal of American missiles from Turkey, and the Soviet Union destroyed the missiles in Cuba, under the supervision of the United Nations.
The Cubans, who referred to the event as the October Crisis, were angry by what they perceived as a betrayal on the part of the Soviet Union, since Castro was not involved in the negotiations between the United States and the Soviet Union. .push; Mary McMahon Ever since she began contributing to the site several years ago, Mary has embraced the exciting challenge of being a HistoricalIndex researcher and writer.
Mary has a liberal arts degree from Goddard College and spends her free time reading, cooking, and exploring the great outdoors.
Mary McMahon Ever since she began contributing to the site several years ago, Mary has embraced the exciting challenge of being a HistoricalIndex researcher and writer.
Discussion Comments .push; BostonIrish January 28, 2011 @hangugeo112 I don't believe that the global nuclear threat will have been fully dealt with until we the world disarms as a whole.
There will always be power struggles in future generations, and we must do our children and grandchildren a favor by uniting as one world and choosing to leave self-destruction behind us. hangugeo112 January 26, 2011 The stalemate of the Cold War was effectively broken once Kissinger made us friendly with China.
The tactics of the Kennedy's were ingenious in this instance, but they did not affect change in terms of the Cold War, they simply stalled a potential nuclear fallout.
It was the brilliant tactics of diplomats under the Nixon presidency which brought the world past those times.
Personally, I don't find it unlikely that the superior United States intelligence would be able to recognize a nuclear threat that close to United States shores, regardless of the Soviets' agenda. anon75243 April 6, 2010 I believe that the United States removal of their missiles from Turkey was the main goal of the Russians in this crisis.
The Russian missiles were stationed in such a way, that whey were easily discovered, this started all the circus.
The Official CTBTO Photostream The Cuban Missle Crisis is generally considered the historical point at which the United States and U.S.S.R. came closest to nuclear war.
When he approached Cuba to discuss the possibility of installing missiles and other military material, President Castro consented, deeming it a wise security move.\r\n \r\nOn 15 October, 1962, an American spy plane revealed missile installations in Cuba, raising concerns about Cuba's intentions.
