Memories of a Young Reporter World Oct 22, 2012 12:30 PM EDT President Kennedy announces the Cuba blockade on Oct., 1962, during the Cuban missile crisis.
Fifty years ago, on Oct., 1962, the Washington Post landed on my doorstep with big headlines about a crisis atmosphere in Washington, D.C., and pictures and stories describing late-burning lights in the White House, Executive Office Building, Pentagon and State Department.
It would be hours more before we learned where the crisis was, what it was about and that it would push the planet as close as it has ever been to nuclear war.
The bureau’s chief and owner was Les Carpenter, a Texan with close ties to Vice President Lyndon Johnson.
Carpenter’s wife Liz, who started the bureau with him after World War II, had joined the vice president’s staff at the beginning of the Kennedy-Johnson administration.
The Post immediately answered one question for me, even if the stories themselves were barely pieces in a puzzle.
The Saturday morning before, I had been working at the bureau when I received a call from Liz.
She asked me to read her the stories that had moved on our AP and UPI wire machines about President Kennedy cutting short a campaign trip he was making on behalf of Senate candidates in the mid-term elections in Illinois and Wisconsin.
The brief dispatches said the president had come down with a cold and was returning to Washington.
Liz usually did not call our office for details of the president’s schedule.
Then I put it out of my mind and went back to writing my story about movie theater gross receipts for Variety.
The officials had been meeting in utter secrecy since the previous Tuesday, when the president had been informed that U2 spy planes had come back with photographic evidence that the Soviet Union was installing medium range missile sites in Cuba.
The president and the others in the group had gone to great length amid ruses and decoys to keep their deliberations secret, both from the Soviets and the American press and public.
But even as the hours wore on that Monday, there was no official word, beyond the announcement from White House Press Secretary Pierre Salinger that the president would address the nation at 7m.
Only 18 months before, the United States had tried and disastrously failed to invade Cuba and overthrow Fidel Castro.
Kenneth Keating, that the Soviets were conducting a military buildup on the island.
Berlin, divided for a year by a grotesque wall, had been a Cold War flashpoint for years.
But for once, the often blustering leader of the Soviet Union, Nikita Khrushchev, was keeping silent.
Decades before cable news television, speculation was carried by radio, the wire services and word of mouth.
It was such that a flurry could erupt when the head of the Federal Communications Commission, Newton Minow, entered the White House.
We learned later the United States was bolstering its efforts to make sure the president’s speech could be heard in Cuba.
The president described the missiles, asserting they were capable of carrying nuclear warheads 1,000 miles, a range that included Washington, much of the southeastern United States and potential targets in Latin America.
He went on to build a case of the dangers of this first deployment of Soviet offensive weapons outside the USSR and how the Russians had consistently lied about it.
In a room of about 20 normally talkative and garrulous fraternity men, the only sound was the occasional gasp.
No one can foresee precisely what course it will take or what costs and casualties will be incurred.
Of course, it was six days, not months, until the crisis began unwinding.
But no one knew so that night and in the increasingly tense days that followed, wondering if Soviet ships would try to crack the quarantine, if indeed the Soviets would adhere to the United States demand to dismantle and remove the missiles, if the United States would launch a bombing strike or invasion to accomplish that end.
Alas, I am not a pack rat and nearly 20 moves in an adult lifetime are not conducive to keeping bits of paper.
About of dozen of us, and I was certainly the most junior by at least a decade, entered a conference room in the vice president’s office suite in the Executive Office Building, a Victorian-era gray pile across from the White House.
The setting could have been from a movie, the elaborately trimmed, high-ceiling room that spoke of power and all the history that had taken place there when it served as headquarters of both the War and State Departments in the first and second World Wars.
And Johnson, who used to fill a room with his size, gestures and voice, seemed especially subdued, talking in a low voice, his tone somber.
The best news report I remember coming out of it was from Seth Kantor of Scripps-Howard.
He pieced together from LBJ and other non-attributable sources just how dangerous a turn in the road the United States had reached.
As that week spun on, seemingly in increasing danger, there was some talk of a few people here moving their families out of Washington.
I knew no one who did, and the thought never crossed my mind, if only for the prosaic reasons that I had to go to work and school.
Ever since the Soviets exploded their first atomic bomb in 1949, being a nuclear target was part of the subconscious price that we and our families paid to work and live in the nation’s capital.
Countless histories and memoirs and transcripts of the Ex Comm meetings that President Kennedy secretly recorded have laid out the details of all the discussions and arguments as the crisis developed and how it wound down without a nuclear catastrophe.
The key was a public deal for the Soviets to remove the missiles in exchange for a United States pledge not to invade Cuba.
Years later, we learned details of a secret side deal for the United States to withdraw some missiles from Turkey.
Word of Khrushchev’s acceptance of the public deal was broadcast on a glorious autumn Sunday morning, the kind Washington often produces as an antidote to its hot and humid summers.
At a book signing event in 1994, I asked Liz Carpenter what exactly she knew when she called me that Saturday morning.
She died six years later, taking that and probably many other secrets to her grave.
And the missile crisis saga continues to be fodder for more books, and Washington being Washington, think tank conferences on crisis management.
In response to RFK’s question, the president estimated the odds of nuclear war between one-third and one half, and that 20 million to 90 million Americans could be killed.
Hmm, I thought for the first time in decades, those were not the greatest of odds for me to reach my 21st birthday.
But for me those memories were subsumed a mere 13 months later in the greatest trauma of my adult journalistic life, covering the assassination of President Kennedy.
From time to time, he writes dispatches on what those scholars and wannabe secretaries of state have in mind for Europe, Asia and Latin America.
Learn more Educate your inbox Subscribe to Here’s the Deal, our politics newsletter for analysis you won’t find anywhere else.
