The discovery of these installations by U-2 photoreconnaissance missions , led the United States government under the Kennedy Administration to impose a naval blockade on Cuba euphemistically called a “quarantine” to give it an appearance of international legality.
This was accompanied by an official request for the removal of the missiles already in Cuba, and an explicit threat of a “full retaliatory response upon the Soviet Union”, should any of those missiles be launched.
Such policy was announced by President Kennedy in a TV address on 22 October 1962.
On 28 October, after days of extreme international tension and a real danger of escalation3, Khrushchev suddenly agreed to remove the missiles, under two conditions.
The crisis was later defined by historian (and Kennedy’s aide) Arthur Schlesinger, Jr as “the most dangerous moment in human history” 4.
KING’S REACTION 3 Martin Luther King’s reaction to the Cuban crisis was initially dealt with in the context of an article by this author that first investigated the African Americans’ responses to said nuclear crisis5.
More specifically, said reactions tended to combine a widespread support for the President in a time of national crisis with a strong desire for the preservation of peace.
Special for its relevance, given the fact that at the time, while he had not yet been awarded a Nobel prize, he was already the best known activist and the most influential leader of the civil rights movement.
Fitting because the views he expressed, if more elaborated and nuanced, appear consistent with the reactions of approval recorded among the majority of the African American public.
Apparently it was a picture that lay already in the heart of the pastor from Georgia.
Content-wise, his statement was cautious but supportive, while unwilling to define his position on the specific measures taken by Kennedy.
He also declined an approach by an emissary of the local student movement for nuclear disarmament – the “Tocsin” – to combine his rally with their own and address them jointly 9.
It is entirely plausible that the rationale for this refusal was to avoid to be dragged into a protest debate against White House foreign policy.
This however was not due to any tendency to court the administration, as confirmed by both his previous public condemnation of the Bay of Pigs invasion (which had taken the form of a strongly critical statement and a signed petition)11 and his later protest of the United States war in Vietnam (expressed on several occasions, including his famous speech of April 4, 1967) 12.
Apparently, he was simply convinced that the government did not deserve to be criticized in this specific case.
Everyone of us knows full well that we came dreadfully close to the precipice of nuclear war in 1962.
We must not allow the delicate balance that has been established in matters of foreign policy to be destroyed by our arrogance.
We would hope that since near disaster has been avoided, America would in humility readily grasp the opportunity to make a determined bid for peaceful co-existence. now is the time for us to concretely seek common agreement on nuclear testing and disarmament.
According to those opinions, the Soviets had ended up backing down unconditionally as soon as the United States had raised their tone, making clear they meant business15.
Moreover, he appeared to have been a good prophet, not only because the Soviets had actually gained more from the agreement than was publicly known at the time, thus confuting the claims of a total United States triumph, but even more so since an international treaty on nuclear tests was effectively achieved a few months later, and détente was the course that Washington and Moscow chose in 1963 16.
THE LETTER TO PRESIDENT KENNEDY 12 These views that King expressed publicly on the missile crisis may now be integrated with a previously unknown document that was recently unearthed.
To this end, Clarence prepared for King a draft letter, here quoted in its essential parts.
Because so often as a spokesman for civil rights I have written you to press for programs we felt to be urgent, my personal observations on other subjects, as a private American citizen, have necessarily been limited.
The resolution of the Cuba crisis with its immense implications is, however, so important, I am eager to express my personal reactions.
At a time when so many are saying that the most impressive achievement is the result, I find myself as much impressed by the method.
By method I do not mean “firmness” or any of the other oversimplified descriptions which mislead rather than clarify.
Putting aside the issue of blockade, it was the larger scheme of your basic design which was singular in diplomatic art.
The original quality was in the opportunity it provided for choices to this adversary which could evoke constructive responses.
In precisely measuring consequences, the architecture of your initiative, by planning for a not dishonorable doorway, served to bring out a positive quality in Mr Khrushchev.
Finally, in resisting any impulses to overestimate or overstate results, you gave your adversary an opportunity to count some gain, thereby obviating a psychology of desperation.
Equally, your fair and generous characterization of Mr Khrushchev’s responses as “statesmanlike” created an example for him.
In the combination of these approaches, I feel you have utilized some of the elements of non-violent creativity in international conflict, despite the presence of latent force.
Non-violent resistance has so much spiritual power because it unremittingly pursues its goal and yet it recognizes that every opponent somewhere has a receptive syndrome which may lead to reconciliation, even if presently limited in dimension.
Something vastly more important seems to have occurred than a bases-invasion quid pro quo.
You may well have reached into the deep recesses of a divided world and found a bridge of accommodation A world armed and over-armed on both sides with ultimate weapons cannot find security or survival in multiplied power.
Hope is only in the realization that there is a final point of restraint both sides must observe.
In this direction may be the greatest achievement of the twentieth century – the emergence of statesmen who are equal to the colossal risks a racing technology has imposed upon the world.
Dora, Martin’s secretary, was to send me the reply at the time but it was sidetracked and I never saw it nor do I know the nature of his response”25.
Nor has Clarence B Jones himself ever expressed any contrary opinion, in our repeated email exchanges on the subject, though unwilling to provide further details26.
In this sense, the fact that Schlesinger, while receiving the letter, did not pursue its publication29 and the fact that, more recently, a footnote of Volume VII of Dr.
Also, Jones writes to King that his “suggested text incorporates thoughts you have expressed on this subject”32.
This remark grants relevance to the document even should one suppose that it was not eventually sent or that it was sent in modified form, because it would still contribute to shedding more light on King’s views of the Cuban crisis.
King’s description of Kennedy’s policy as an example of “non-violent creativity in international conflict” is surely striking, considering that such actions no matter how politically comprehensible in light of the Soviet provocation and how less drastic than other alternatives considered in the Ex-Comm33 such as air-strikes or invasion of Cuba included military measures which contributed significantly to the most dangerous nuclear crisis that ever occurred34.
King’s use of “despite” and “putting aside” to characterize the blockade and the threatened use of force, instead of “in force of them” or “thanks to their combination with negotiation” marks an implicit yet significant difference with the prevailing interpretation of Kennedy’s handling of the Cuban crisis, widely seen in those days as a perfect mix of diplomacy and military power.
The general aim of the letter seemed to convey to the President a word of personal, even spiritual backing, encouraging him to pursue détente “despite contrary pressures” 37.
Eventually this would prove to be the path Kennedy took in the final months of his presidency.
DR.KING’S NONVIOLENCE 23 Moreover, should it be confirmed that it was sent in this form, the letter would also provide evidence of the fact that King promoted non-violent methods (or what he saw as such) not only in civil rights issues but also in the field of international relations.
Not in the sense that partisan internal politics influenced the handling of foreign affairs by leaders, but on the contrary in the sense that groups pressing for desegregation at home were also campaigning for a stop to the arms race and for détente in foreign affairs, seeing the two issues as linked 46.
In this regard the position assumed by King in this letter would appear emblematic.
As King himself revealed in an article published in the midst of the nuclear crisis, 47 the two leaders discussed ‘issues ranging from the efficacy of non violence to the Cuban crisis’.48 While not implying any causal connection, the fact that in those same weeks King had discussed the usefulness of non-violence with a prominent foreign leader can be seen as a further confirmation that the topic was indeed particularly present and relevant in King’s mind also in that very period.
The variety of their reactions confirms the value of a study of the so far neglected sociocultural dimension of said crisis, based on ways it was perceived and the reactions it produced.
THE RELATIONSHIP WITH KENNEDY 30 The letter may also prove significant for what it tells us on the relations between King and Kennedy on two major points.
Even without knowing all of these details, King notices and praises this attitude by Kennedy perhaps even more because he knew how the political milieu at the White House and in foreign policy circles was then centered on an ideology exalting toughness and masculinity, rather than virtues of restraint, moderation or wise prudence, as historian Robert Dean has demonstrated.
King was convinced that JFK’s quality as a leader was evolving, becoming bolder.
As he will explain after the President’s assassination, he believed he had known two different John Kennedys.
And as one reads this letter of praise where King says to be “most impressed” by the President’s methods, one cannot help but think that Kennedy’s efforts to avoid an escalation in the Cuban crisis played an important, early role in shaping this idea of an evolving Presidential leader in King’s mind.
So it can be argued that Kennedy’s handling of the Cuban crisis is likely to have been one of the major steps that contributed to the late assessment of President Kennedy by Martin Luther King, of course together with his later TV address of 11 June 1963 on civil rights as a moral issue the country needed to confront.
Levison’s words to Schlesinger also points in the same direction of an evolving relationship between the two leaders.
It seems already useful, however, to present this new document with all the elements currently available, considering its obvious relevance, for its content, the leaders involved, and because it integrates the picture of Dr.
King’s reactions to the crisis and his relationship with President Kennedy.
They stand out in particular for their initial laconic prudence and their absence of criticism of Kennedy during the crisis (at that critical juncture, King appears to see the President as someone to pray for, rather than someone to judge or debate upon), and later for their political lucidity in warning against any indulgence in national arrogance or self-complacency while pointing toward the post-crisis new opportunities of fruitful negotiations for nuclear disarmament and détente.
I would like to thank Raffaella Baritono for kindly discussing with me a first draft of this article.
The Cuban missile crisis represented a turning point in the Cold war and in the nuclear age.
Kennedy, Khrushchev and Castro on the brink of nuclear war ; Alice George, Awaiting Armageddon.
Also, among the several thousands messages that citizens sent to the White House, the ratio was 22 in favour to 1 against.
This detail comes from the organizer of the Tocsin rally, the activist Todd Gitlin, future President of the Students for a Democratic Society.
Incidentally, this comment was quoted later by the militant activist in exile Robert Williams in his newsletter from Cuba, with the word ‘military’ put in capital letters, in criticism of King’s supposed non-violent attitude.
M4389, Reel 11, Group 1, Series 7, John F Kennedy Institute for North American Studies, Berlin.
King also added his name to a petition condemning the attempted invasion.
The quotation marks here suggested some doubts on the suitability of a term that was recurrent in the international public debate of those weeks.
Reeves mentions “The United States’ sense of triumph in Cuba” and reports the poll documenting Kennedy’s rise in approval rates, jumping from 66 to 77% after the Cuban crisis.
Before the Cuban crisis, it had been unfruitfully negotiated for years in Geneva.
Consensus among scholars on the impact of the Cuban crisis on 1963 détente and negotiations of the LTBT is wide.
David Holloway, Nuclear Weapons and the escalation of the Cold War, 1945-1962, in Cambridge, Vol., 397; Campbell Craig, Fredrik Logevall, America’s Cold War, The politics of insecurity ,212-213.
Clayborne Carson, Tenisha H Armstrong, eds., The papers of Martin Luther King, Jr., Vol.
Ultimately, however, he was unable to provide details, despite repeated invitations and questions on our part to help clarify the matter for historical accuracy.
However this is not of direct relevance here, as King’s frequent use of speechwriters and ghostwriters (such as Jones and Levison) as a civil rights activist simply followed a common practice among public orators and prominent leaders in general.
This however is just a speculative hypothesis, and while the choice by Schlesinger of not pursuing the letter’s publication may in theory be linked also to doubts over its ‘delivered’ status, there are no elements to support this case and it seems more plausible that his choice was based simply on different research priorities.
In particular, having already written two big books on the Kennedy brothers and their times, each containing chapters on civil rights and on their relations with King, Schlesinger may well have decided not to return on such topics.
The volumes of this broad project are published in chronological order, along several years, and the one covering the period of the Cuban crisis has not been released yet.
The Executive Committee of the National Security Council was the group of government officials and experts that President Kennedy gathered upon the discovery of Soviet missiles in Cuba to advise him on the handling of the situation.
Quoted in Clayborne Carson, Tenisha H Armstrong, Adrienne Clay, Susan Carson, Kieran Taylor, eds., The papers of Martin Luther King, Jr., Vol.
During the Cuban crisis, Rustin organized the largest peace rally of the week in the US, gathering between 8.000 and 10.000 people in front of the UN building, on October 28, 1962.
L Campus , Giorni, 179, 182, 183; Lawrence Wittner, Resisting the Bomb, The struggle against the bomb – A history of the world nuclear disarmament movement, Vol.
In other words, their two-fold struggle was for desegregation, not disintegration, as in the title of one the most relevant chapters of V Intondi’s book.
An example of this is in Rustin’s 1959 mission to Ghana to try to stop French nuclear testing being conducted in the Sahara desert, or in the message of support sent by the NAACP (National Association for the Advancement of Colored People) to the delegates at the 1955 Asian-African Conference in Bandung.
On the interconnection between civil rights and foreign affairs, segregation, and colonialism in that phase of the Cold war, see for example Brenda Gayle Plummer, In Search of Power.
Of course this last remark must be understood as referring to the situation of mounting tension related to the general Soviet military build-up in Cuba which was going on since the summer, not yet to the missile crisis itself, considering that Bella left the United States en route to Cuba on the morning of October 16, precisely when the photo-evidence of the presence of Soviet ballistic missiles in Cuba was being secretly communicated to Kennedy himself.
So Bella and King could not have been already aware of this new development when they met.
In this regard, the attack on Adlai Stevenson for advising the President to advance specific negotiation proposals to Khrushchev seems to us symptomatic.
On the final legacy of the Kennedy administration on civil rights, historians disagree.
What is important is that we preserve confidence in the good faith of each other.
In theory this may have made civil rights activists slightly friendlier to Kennedy’s Cold War initiatives of the following weeks.
However, there is currently no specific evidence of said episode having had any impact on Dr.
Jones’ forthcoming autobiography or the next volume of The papers of Martin Luther King, Jr., that, proceeding chronologically, should also cover the period of the Cuban crisis.
Our search in the archives of the Kennedy Library and in the online document databases of the Howard Gotlieb Archival Research Center in Boston, of the King Center in Atlanta and of the King’s Institute at Stanford found no such reply.
ABSTRACTS This research article deals for the first time with the reaction of Martin Luther King Jr. to the Cuban missile crisis of October 1962.
King to President Kennedy, in which the civil rights leader praised Kennedy’s management of that crucial nuclear confrontation between United States and USSR and saw in it the potential for détente.
King’s reassessment of Kennedy’s evolving qualities of leadership a view that King will further develop over the course of 1963 (in the most fruitful months of their cooperation) and will express after Dallas.
On this particular topic, he previously authored ‘Missiles have no colour.
In 2012 he received a research grant from the JFK Institute for North American Studies of the Freie Universat, Berlin.
L'Italia della Ricostruzione e del Miracolo attraverso il Festival di Sanremo' , investigating Italy’s ‘boom’ years through the lens of popular songs of the time.
Research aside, he works as a public historian authoring programs for ‘Rai Storia’, History thematic channel of Italian State television.
