Ernest May investigates how Kennedy demonstrated his leadership skills during the crisis.
On this page The 'gravest issues' The ExComm and the secret tapes Quarantine A Berlin crisis, not a Cuba crisis Dreadful days Finessing the Turkish missiles issue Resolution Find out more Page options Print this page The 'gravest issues' Early on Tuesday 16 October 1962, John F Kennedy's national security assistant, McGeorge Bundy, brought to the President's bedroom some high-altitude photographs taken from U-2 planes flying over Cuba.
Since Soviet premier Nikita Khrushchev had promised repeatedly not to send offensive weapons to Cuba, and America's top intelligence analysts had predicted that he would keep his word, Kennedy felt safe in voicing this warning.
Kennedy's predecessor, Dwight Eisenhower, had calculated in 1960 that, if a crisis led either side to fire nuclear weapons, all humans in the northern hemisphere could perish.
Top The ExComm and the secret tapes A P2V Neptune United States patrol plane flying over a Soviet freighter during the Cuban missile crisis, 1962 © To help him decide what to do about the Cuban situation, and how much risk to run of a nuclear exchange, Kennedy assembled a small group that came to be called the Executive Committee of the National Security Council or ExComm for short.
We know today exactly what was said in the meetings of the ExComm, because Kennedy had a tape recorder installed in an unused part of the White House basement, with wires running to concealed microphones in the Oval Office and Cabinet Room.
Top Quarantine In the first day's debates, everyone favoured bombing Cuba.
Others joined the chiefs of staff in insisting that an attack should also take out air defence sites and bombers, so as to limit losses of United States aircraft and prevent an immediate air reprisal against United States bases in Florida.
To meet this concern and to obtain time for gaining support from other nations, there developed the idea of the President's publicly announcing the presence of Soviet missiles in Cuba, ordering a blockade to prevent the introduction of further missiles, and demanding that the Soviets withdraw the missiles already there.
To those of Kennedy's advisers who still favoured quick use of military force , this quarantine constituted an ultimatum.
Top A Berlin crisis, not a Cuba crisis American tanks on alert in the Berlin Grunewald, West Germany, as the crisis over the Cuban blockade looms during the Cuban missile crisis © In the early phase of ExComm debate, Kennedy blamed himself for the crisis 'Last month I should have said that we don't care' implying that if he had not given such a strong public warning, he could possibly have let Khrushchev get away with placing missiles in Cuba; 'It doesn't make any difference if you get blown up by an ICBM flying from the Soviet Union, or one from 90 miles away.
Kennedy interpreted the installation of missiles in Cuba as a move preparatory to a showdown on Berlin.
Top Dreadful days Robert McNamara in 1965 © On Monday 22 October, Kennedy went on radio and television, describing the secret Soviet build-up in Cuba, proclaiming the quarantine, and demanding that the Soviets remove the missiles.
McNamara acknowledged that the submarine commander might think he was being attacked rather than being sent a signal and might fire at the destroyer.
I'd much rather have a merchant ship.' ... one harrowing moment followed another.
Fortunately, before there was an encounter at sea, Khrushchev ordered all Soviet merchantmen bound for Cuba to turn back.
Meanwhile, Kennedy and his advisers faced the question of how to keep track of continuing missile construction in Cuba.
He sent Robert Kennedy to see the Soviet ambassador, Anatoly Dobrynin, to tell him that the missiles in Turkey were obsolete, and that the United States planned to pull them out within about six months.
United States reconnaissance aircraft kept watch while the Soviets dismantled their missiles and loaded the parts on ships for return to the Soviet Union.
Top Resolution The world escaped nuclear war in October 1962 largely because of the prudence of Kennedy and the belated prudence of Khrushchev.
Kennedy and Khrushchev both recognised that, once blood had been spilled, it would be very hard to keep any crisis under control.
The Soviet bloc lived for the next 27 years with a wall around West Berlin that marked East Germany as a huge penitentiary, and it eventually became possible for west and east to turn towards the stabilising compromises of the later period of détente.
Earlier books have dealt with the making of the Monroe Doctrine, American expansion in the late 19th and early 20th centuries, America's intervention in World War I, American Cold War strategy, and uses of historical reasoning in decision-making.
This page is best viewed in an up-to-date web browser with style sheets enabled.
While you will be able to view the content of this page in your current browser, you will not be able to get the full visual experience.
