He was the youngest president ever to be elected, the first Roman Catholic president, and the first president to be born in the 20th century.
Although, he didn’t get the chance to live out his term and possible another one, he impacted the entire world.
John F Kennedy was born May 29th, 1917, child of Joseph P and Rose Kennedy.
John grew up in the nineteen twenties and thirties at his birth place of Brookline, Massachusetts.
John had once stated, ""life is unfair,""1 yet for him the statement was definitely not true.
Coming from a wealthy family let him have the freedom to do what most kids couldn’t.
He and his brothers and sisters all participated in things such as sailboat races, tennis matches, or even just a simple game of touch football.
All family members were always encouraged to get involved with government issues.
Joseph and Rose were trying to prepare their sons for public life and prepare their daughters for marriages to distinguished young men.
In 1937, the Kennedy family moved to Great Britain so that John’s father could become the American ambassador there for three years.
John was a very good student at Harvard, yet he didn’t make the high grades that his brother had.
So, John joined two clubs and spent most of his time working on a newspaper published at Harvard, ""Crimson""3.
When he had finished his school term his father decided to let him tour Europe.
When he was there he started to become interested in wars and politics, after noticing Hitler’s actions.
John went back there the following summer and saw how Hitler never gave up and continued to strengthen his army.
The United States had sided with Great Britain, so he knew he would have to go into the war.
So, he went to enter the Air Corps, but was turned away because of his back problems.
Instead he went for the position on naval officer and passes the health analysis.
He was assigned to the intelligence division, he thought it was very boring.
Shortly after Pearl Harbor was attacked, John was sent for motor torpedo training4.
In Tulagi, John was assigned to a dirty old looking boat that had already been through nine months of combat.
John experienced his first real combat when his boat was attacked by a Japanese fighter plane.
They continued to stay there until one night when a full size Japanese ship came full speed at Kennedy’s boat.
The boat was demolished and the Japanese thought that all of the men had been killed.
All of the men were forced to swim to Plum Pudding Island , three and one half miles away, with Kennedy leading them.
After his triumph he was promoted to Full Lieutenant and was awarded the Navy and Marine Corps Medal for saving his crew.
He also received a Purple Heart for the severe back injury he suffered from the collision.
After that, he took command of another PT boat and took part in many more missions.
For John one particularly bad thing happened in this war, his brother died.
Now that he was gone, John was now the eldest son and it was now his responsibility.
Though he was still weak from his war injuries, he campaigned aggressively.
He served three terms as a Democratic Congressman, from 1947 until1953.
He won that election and less than a year later he enhanced his appeal to the people.
He had almost become Stevenson’s vice presidential running mate in 1956.
His speech on concession brought him into over 40 million homes in America.
He quickly became one of the most famous political figures in the country.
People were saying that no Roman Catholic man could ever become president.
The press loved him, he and his wife appeared on magazine covers, photographers followed them everywhere.
So, to transport him and his staff around the country, his father bought him a forty passenger Convair aircraft6.
In January 1960, Kennedy formally announced his presidential candidacy.
His rivals were Senators Hubert H Humphrey of Minnesota and Lyndon B Johnson of Texas.
Kennedy knocked Humphrey out of the way and was still battling the rumors of a catholic president.
He dealt with that by winning the primary in West Virginia, which is primarily Protestant.
He was nominated on the first ballot, and chose Johnson as his running mate.
Congress passed a bill increasing minimum wage, and Congress passed his bill to create the Peace Corps.
Which was an agency to perform social and humanitarian services overseas.
Within two years the Peace Corps were working in Asia, Africa, and Latin America.
Kennedy ran into some problems after the conservative Republicans joined with the Southern Democrats to stop legislation they didn’t like.
A Medicare bill, a civil rights bill, and a bill to create a Cabinet-level Department of Urban Affairs were all defeated8.
Kennedy didn’t lose all of his approval because he get some of his bills passed.
Congress passed a bill to lower tariffs, authorized a purchase of over $100 million in United Nations bonds, and Congress appropriated more than $1 billion dollars to send a man to the moon.
Kennedy began to lose popularity after he started forcing universities in the south to accept black students.
He continued to speak out against segregation and lost even more populairty.
During the next two years Castro became very hostile towards the United States.
After some problems with $1 billion dollars in properties and companies owned by the U.S., Castro began to proclaim his belief in Communism.
In April 1961, more then 1000 exiles landed in Cuba at a place called Bay of Pigs.
Their plan was to move inland and join with anti-Castro forces to stage a revolt.
Castro’s forces were there to meet the invaders, and the revolt didn’t happen.
The prisoners were released in exchange for food and medical supplies valued at $53 million.
In March 1961, Kennedy introduced the Alliance for Progress, which would strengthen democratic institution in the Latin American nation to prevent them from doing what Cuba did.
There was a lot of hostility, considering that there was a shooting down of a U.S spy plane in Soviet air space.
The Soviet premier actually made it clear that the policies toward the Untied States would be even more strict.
In August 1961, the Communists ordered that there be a wall put up between East and West Berlin.
Those countries protested the wall, but since East Germany was Communist, it was done anyway.
Khrushchev decided to supply Cuba with nuclear missiles that would be in range of the Eastern United States.
He denied it when asked if he was supplying Cuba with missiles, but in the summer or 1962 there a United States spy plane photographed a construction site managed by the Soviets and then spotted a missile on October 14th.
For seven days Kennedy met with advisors on how to handle and respond to this, while the administration carried on as if nothing was wrong.
On October 22nd, Kennedy told the nation about the missiles, demanded that the USSR remove the missiles and declared the water around Cuba a quarantine zone.
Kennedy warned the USSR that if Cuba attacked the United States it would be considered an attack on the United States by USSR itself.
Troops were sent to Florida to prepare for invading Cuba and air units were alerted.
American vessels blockaded any Soviet ships that looked suspicious and searched them.
For several days Soviet ships avoided the quarantine zone while Kennedy and Khrushchev discussed this.
Before the United States could respond to that note, Krushchev sent another trying to negotiate other terms.
The USSR removed and dismantled all of the mistled and offered the United States an on-site inspection.
Kennedy promised not to invade Cuba and to remove missiles from Turkey.
United States spy planes revealed that the missile bases were being dismantled.
They were trying to win support from the state that Kennedy had barely carried in 1960.
AS the motorcade approached an underpass, two shots were fired in rapid succession.
One bullet passed through Kennedy’s neck and struck Governor Connally in the back.
Less then 2 hours after the shooting, on the residential plane, Lyndon B Johnson was sworn in as the 36th president of the United States.
That afternoon, Lee Harvey Oswald, who was employed in the warehouse, was arrested in a movie theatre and charged with murder.
Hundreds of thousands of people filed passed the coffin of the president.
