The invasion plan called for the largest drop of paratroopers since the battle for Normandy in 1944; the Pentagon estimated that 18,500 Americans would be killed or wounded in the first 10 days of battle.
One-eighth of the bombers were in the air at all times for 30 days, prepared to drop nuclear weapons on the targets in Cuba and the Soviet Union.
More than 100,000 combat-ready army infantrymen were deployed to ports along the East Coast.
A huge navy fleet, backed by 40,000 marines, was steaming, moments away from battle stations, through international waters in the Caribbean and the South Atlantic.
The new movie Thirteen Days has an ambitious goal—to recreate what was one of the most dramatic episodes of the Cold War.
To his credit, Australian director Roger Donaldson's approach to his film is serious.
Unfortunately, the film fails to cast a critical eye on the role of the Kennedys, United States policy on Cuba, or Washington's foreign policy in general.
The viewer ends up relieved that the world squeaked by, but not too disturbed about our future course.
While it is a film that should be widely viewed, one hopes that some movie-goers will take it as a starting point to delve into the history and transcend in their understanding the one-sided picture of the crisis presented on-screen.
The film begins with the nuclear mushroom clouds that might have been and nearly were—evoking the fear that none of us who were alive at the time could ever forget.
This atmosphere of chilling realism intensifies throughout the film as it reenacts the 13-day crisis, mid-October 1962, when American policymakers debated how to handle the discovery of Soviet missiles being installed only 90 miles from Florida.
Technically, Thirteen Days contains all the defects that seem to be required by Hollywood—playing to formula and including the requisite supply of gratuitous and overly sentimental moments.
Kevin Costner, the big-name attraction, unfortunately provides the least inspiring performance.
The characterizations are based on the screenwriter David Self's study of historical records and documents, White House tapes, memoirs and interviews with some of the participants.
It is fascinating to view the dramatization of the policy struggle between the White House and the military.
Much of the dialogue is lifted directly from the transcripts of meetings of ExComm , where Kennedy and his advisers assembled.
And, surprisingly for a contemporary Hollywood film, the movie refrains from demonizing either Castro or Khrushchev One cannot leave the screening without shuddering at the thought of an unchecked military brass, or a civilian regime that provided greater latitude to the social and political types who inhabit such positions as the Joint Chiefs of Staff.
Air Force General Curtis LeMay is shown as the fascistic advocate of nuclear war that he was.
In the actual transcript of the ExComm discussions, LeMay's contempt for Kennedy's reluctance to risk nuclear war is more graphic.
He declares at one point, “This blockade and political action I see leading into war.
Thirteen Days does depict LeMay in common company with Maxwell Taylor and the other military officials who are continually bordering on insubordination in their demands for a free rein against Cuba.
It's lucky for us that we have McNamara over there,” referring to McNamara's role in reining in the brass.
The film's positive elements—its general adherence to the factual development of the crisis as played out in the White House, and its strong evocation of the period—are, however, overshadowed by the fact that this is a political film with severe limitations.
In the end, one feels that Costner & Co. aim to contrast America's “great presidents” of yesterday with their lesser counterparts of today.
We are shown a Camelot-like portrait of decisive and intelligent men, who despite massive pressure—from the Joint Chiefs, Congress and senior statesmen—stand firm and prevent a nuclear holocaust.
To understand the Cuban missile crisis, one requires a correct perspective.
The film's vantage point, portraying a dispute within the confines of the White House, cannot elucidate the interests of the working class.
The men we watch in this film represent not the American people, but the American bourgeoisie.
Nuclear brinkmanship was a key component of United States foreign policy in 1962.
Unfortunately, the film rather predictably portrays the Kennedys as the selfless advocates of reason, without a look back at the overall role they and the American government played.
While the actions with regard to Cuba of both the United States and USSR were criminally reckless and reactionary, the basic geopolitical facts and preponderance of power must be understood to assess responsibility for the events of October 1962.
In the aftermath of World War II, the United States exercised unchallenged economic, political and military supremacy over two-thirds of the planet.
The European states were bankrupted and compelled to liquidate their colonial empires.
The United States took on the role of world policeman against the working class in the advanced countries as well as the semi-colonial masses.
The Cold War expressed the unrelenting military and economic pressure that the United States exerted against the Soviet Union in its drive to reconquer those territories that had been lost to capitalism.
In that context, the Kennedy administration sought to provide a measure of reform, not so much for its own sake, but in order to make the hegemonic control of the United States more palatable, especially in light of the challenge from popular, radical regimes like that of Castro in Cuba.
The new administration's initiative, the Alliance for Progress, for example, aimed to create conditions for economic aid and political reform in Latin American countries.
This can rightfully be described as a political cover-up, and it makes it impossible for the filmgoer to properly understand the events of October 1962.
The American government's obsession with Castro began with the 1959 Cuban Revolution.
Fidel Castro led the movement that overthrew the corrupt and autocratic Batista regime.
In June 1960 Castro expropriated the American sugar firms, and subsequently nationalized all banks and industrial enterprises, including oil refineries, most of which were American-owned.
Tensions were exacerbated when Khrushchev, sensing an opportunity to challenge the hegemony of the United States in its own hemisphere, agreed to purchase half of Cuba's sugar and provide $200 million in low-cost loans.
The Eisenhower administration developed a plan for the overthrow of the Castro government, which was bequeathed to Kennedy when he assumed office in 1961.
The CIA assembled and trained a crew of Cuban refugees which it transported on April 17 to Cuba's Bay of Pigs, the site of the military fiasco.
In January 1962, Robert Kennedy established “Operation Mongoose,” a secret anti-Castro terrorist operation.
Edward Lansdale, the infamous anti-hero of The Ugly American, who had overseen the crushing of the Filipino rebellion in the early '50s, was named to head the operation.
The CIA quickly spent $100 million to create a base for clandestine operations out of Miami.
Code-named JM/WAVE, the Miami station had hundreds of agents, exotic weaponry, and its own fleet of airplanes and speedboats.
During the same period, the American government was devising various assassination plots against Castro, documented in 1975 by the congressional investigation led by Senator Frank Church.
In one series of efforts, CIA official Richard Bissell subcontracted with the Mafia for Castro's murder.
These were the conditions that convinced Castro, correctly, that he was facing a protracted and murderous assault from the US, and led him to ask Moscow for military protection.
Officially, the United States tried to isolate Cuba by persuading other Western Hemisphere countries in the Organization of American States to cut off trade and diplomatic ties with the island nation.
In April 1962, a huge military exercise was staged , with 40,000 men conducting amphibious landings at beaches in North Carolina and off Vieques Island, Puerto Rico.
Khrushchev, like Castro, came to believe that the United States was readying a second invasion.
The Cold War in 1962 Kennedy was under pressure to have a showdown with the Russians over Cuba, not just from the military, but, above all, from political quarters.
Moreover, the Kennedys were keenly aware that the face-off with the Russians came only weeks before congressional elections.
Any perceived “softness” on Cuba in this deeply reactionary climate would mean political suicide for the Democrats.
United States policy under the Kennedy administration was militaristic, and, confident of its superiority, provocative.
At this time nuclear capability was considered the main measure of national strength, and by any standard the United States predominated.
Kennedy had announced that the United States would, by 1964, triple its ICBMs.
Meanwhile, the intense series of negotiations between the Americans and Soviets over nuclear testing collapsed in April.
The United States then proceeded with a new round of nuclear explosions in the Pacific, demonstrating its military advantage.
Moreover, in a further United States military provocation against the Soviets, the deployment of Jupiter intermediate-range ballistic missiles in Turkey began in November 1961, with completion set for March 1962.
However, the major flashpoint in the Cold War throughout the early 60s was the divided city of Berlin, and this was a constant reference point in United States policy toward Cuba.
Khrushchev had issued several ultimatums to the United States to remove Western troops from Berlin, the final one at the Vienna summit of June 1961.
He gave the Allies six months to withdraw, and in mid-August the Berlin Wall was erected.
Kennedy responded with a major military buildup, but the Allies were well aware that they could not win a battle in Germany with conventional weapons.
The outlook of “containment,” begun under Truman, was taking on a new aggressiveness.
This world political crisis was not simply a remote backdrop to the missile crisis.
The film Thirteen Days fails to in any way convey the global context of the debate raging within ExComm, and its ability to explain events suffers as a result.
The fact is that at every point, ExComm, and particularly JFK himself, weighed the impact of any action in Cuba against its implications for world politics.
Our war plan at that point has been to fire our nuclear weapons at them.
Secretary of State Dean Rusk further points out, “If we strike these missiles, we would expect, I think, maximum Communist reaction in Latin America.
In the case of about six of those governments, unless the heads of government had some intimation requiring some preparatory steps from the security points of view, one or another of those governments could easily be overthrown.
Along these same lines, the United States bourgeoisie was increasingly aware that it was becoming vulnerable internationally.
This became another factor driving the United States along the route of escalating militarism.
While American economic and political power was at its height in the early 1960s, United States policymakers sensed a growing weakness in the face of a wave of decolonization sweeping Africa and Asia.
For example, by 1960 the membership of the UN had doubled from its postwar size, including dozens of new African nations.
Washington had already resorted to the military overthrow of the reform government of Arbenz Guzman in Guatemala in 1954, and it faced similar threats of independence from almost every corner of the so-called “developing” world.
The Cuban Revolution was, therefore, considered a direct challenge to the world position of the United States and became a symbolic issue for United States policymakers.
The Stalinist mindset Notwithstanding the aggressive United States posture, the decision of Khrushchev to place missiles in Cuba was both reckless and provocative.
It reflected a foreign policy that combined gross opportunism with adventurism.
Given the policies of the United States throughout its history, from the Monroe Doctrine on, it was a serious political miscalculation to underestimate the United States response to Soviet missiles on Cuban territory.
But he had no thought-out fallback position should the missiles be discovered en route.
Russian Premier Khrushchev was also under pressure from the emerging Sino-Soviet split, and was looking for safe avenues to appear militant and shore up the Warsaw Pact as well as its reputation in the Third World and nonaligned bloc.
Khrushchev was being severely challenged by the Chinese and by senior figures in his own government for reducing Soviet military preparedness and not taking a sufficiently “revolutionary” stance in foreign policy.
Cuba's fate was becoming a test of Soviet power and global credibility.
Interestingly, the Soviet ambassador to the US, Anatoly Dobrynin , as well as the Soviet representative to the UN, Valerian Zorin , were not informed of the missiles nor consulted in the decision.
Dobrynin writes in his memoirs, “But he grossly misunderstood the psychology of his opponents.
After JFK announced the blockade of Cuba and warned the USSR that the United States would make a “full retaliatory response upon the Soviet Union” to any attack, Khrushchev was apparently dumbstruck.
Dobrynin writes, “Even then Moscow continued to tell our embassy nothing.
This rash gamble expressed the bankrupt and reactionary mentality of the Soviet bureaucracy, one that conceived of the defense of the USSR in bourgeois and nationalist terms, as a matter of Great Power diplomacy.
To engage in the politics of brinkmanship and nuclear threats with the United States—the world's most ruthless imperialist power and a state that had proven its readiness to unleash thermonuclear destruction—was an act of stupidity and political indifference.
Far from seeking to expose the predatory aggression of the United States and rally workers and the oppressed masses against imperialism, Khrushchev attempted to reply in kind.
The role of the bourgeois nationalist leader Fidel Castro was similarly reckless and hostile to the interests of the working class.
Clearly, neither Khrushchev nor Castro sought to politically warn and mobilize the working class against United States provocations or the danger of a nuclear attack.
Romaticizing the Kennedys Thirteen Days romanticizes the Kennedys once again.
It serves a contemporary political purpose to periodically update and revitalize the Kennedy legend, because it forms a vital part of the myth of liberalism and the more general myths of the American bourgeoisie.
As the leaders of the world's preeminent military power, the Kennedy brothers were defending their class interests in a period of America's hegemony.
They were more astute and measured in their approach than many of their contemporaries.
It combined the Cold War with “human rights,” counterinsurgency and CIA murders with the “Alliance for Progress” and the Peace Corps, anticommunism with a measure of support for civil rights.
In the early 1960s, America was only beginning to face the economic drain of Vietnam, mounting deficits and the dollar crisis.
The Kennedys were able to shrewdly combine anticommunism, diplomatic flexibility, adventurism and restraint, thereby providing the bourgeoisie with political leadership.
Subsequently, the contradictions within Stalinism led to the self-dissolution of the USSR and the reestablishment of capitalist property relations within the former workers state.
While the political forms have changed, American militarism remains as starkly dangerous to mankind and its future as was revealed during those fateful 13 days in 1962.
