HomeAbout Comments Policy RSS Feeds Educate Yourself about Radiation Protection Regulations with Historical Research from the United States Nuclear Regulatory Commission October 18, 2018 This week is Nuclear Science Week, which supports national and international interests relating to all aspects of nuclear science.
These types of regulations may assist in developing clean energy, avoiding future radioactive accidents, and helping insure proper radioactive waste material disposal.
The United States Nuclear Regulatory Commission recently released these print historical volumes that cover major milestones within the United States nuclear power resources and regulatory environment.
A Nuclear Crisis in Historical Perspective Inside this book, you will find a bit of history about nuclear power that began in 1954 when the Atomic Energy Act of 1954 became a law.
This scholarly text explores the political, business, construction, and environmental elements surrounding nuclear power plant safety and regulation within the United States.
It also covers many insights into the reactor faults that led to Three Mile Island’s accident, evacuation of employees and political aftermath.
Nuclear reactor engineers, operators, technicians, students as well as professionals and policy analysts pursuing research about Three Mile Island, clean energy, nuclear engineering and ionizing radiation may be interested in this work.
A History of Radiation Protection in the Twentieth Century While reading this academic text, you will learn about the role of United States federal agencies in radiation safety, and about the evolution of radiation protection regulations.
It traces how the principles and practices of radiation protection have changed over time in response to political and scientific developments.
This book underscores historical efforts to provide adequate protection against the hazards of radiation to workers exposed in their jobs and to the general public.
Environmental science, pre-med, medical students and professionals may be interested in the 20th century history of radiation protection to compare it with modern-day regulations.
Walker, historian at the United States Regulatory Commission, traces the efforts of policy makers to find solutions to complex issues relating to waste management from commercial applications of nuclear energy that have become a source of scientific and public inquiry.
Within this book, Walker examines the early history of radioactive waste disposal at government installations that produced materials for nuclear weapons.
Find more resources relating to this topic in our Nuclear Power & Radiation collection.
Find more than a million official Federal Government publications from all three branches at www.govinfo.gov.
The goal behind the Counterterrorism Calendar is to educate and inform both professionals– first responders, military, intelligence, law enforcement and other counterterrorism personnel– as well as civilians about the threats of international terrorism and how to prevent, respond or mitigate these threats against the United States both at home and abroad.
This Revolutionary War recruiting poster urged brave and able-bodied young men to “take notice” and join forces with General Washington and the Continental Army in the fight against “foreign enemies,” in this case, the British.
Bettmann/CORBIS In World War 2, the Federal Government issued numerous similar domestic campaigns reminding citizens that it was their civic duty to “defend America” and inviting citizens to help support the war industry and to be vigilant against spies, saboteurs and other actions by the enemy both at home and abroad.
The 2014 Counterterrorism Calendar Under the Office of the Director of National Intelligence, the National Counterterrorism Center or NCTC serves as the primary organization in the United States government for integrating and analyzing all intelligence possessed or acquired by the United States government about international terrorism, including data from United States Federal agencies like the CIA, NSA, Defense Intelligence Agency, and the FBI as well as other domestic and international sources.
First published in a spiral-bound daily planner format in 2003, just two years after the World Trade Center attacks, the Counterterrorism or CT Calendar from the NCTC is published annually.
The right-hand page of the planner has the event planner dates along with key historical events of significance to terrorists that might be used to plan future terrorist activities.
On the left-hand pages are photos, maps and/or data on terrorists and terrorist organizations around the world, from Africa and the Middle East to Europe and the Americas.
Map denoting locations of major terrorist incidents likely committed by the Harakat Shabaab al-Mujahidin—commonly known as al-Shabaab, a “clan-based insurgent and terrorist group” operating in and around Somalia.
NCTC 2014 Counterterrorism Calendar “Terrorism tutorial” information ranges from cultural—details about the Islamic Calendar; the spelling of Arabic names and terms; lists of Foreign Terrorist Organizations , and logos used— to technical – information about Chemical-Biological-Radiological-Nuclear-Explosive weapons commonly used by terrorists, from suicide bombs to sarin gas, and how to detect and mitigate them.
NCTC 2014 Counterterrorism Calendar “Wanted” Terrorists Providing the real drama of the calendar are the full-page “Wanted” poster-style pages of an individual terrorist, complete with photo , aliases, his terrorist activities, the reward offered, and how to report information about him.
One of the largest rewards, $25 Million, is offered for information leading to the capture of Ayman al-Zawahiri, also known as “The Teacher” or “The Doctor” who is a physician and the founder of the Egyptian Islamic Jihad.
Al-Zawahiri is believed to have served as an advisor and doctor to Usama Bin Ladin.
He has been indicted for his alleged role in the August 7, 1998, bombings of the United States embassies in Dar es Salaam, Tanzania, and Nairobi, Kenya.
Extract from the “wanted” page of Ayman al-Zawahiri, Al-Qaida leader and founder of Egyptian Islamic Jihad.
NCTC 2014 Counterterrorism Calendar Civilian Involvement Finally, the NCTC carries on the civilian involvement tradition by including instructions for citizens of the United States and other countries on how they can help fight terrorism.
Additionally, the Rewards for Justice Program is described in detail, wherein the United States Secretary of State may offer rewards for information that prevents or favorably resolves acts of international terrorism against United States persons or property worldwide.
On the last page is a Bomb Threat Call Procedures form with valuable details of questions to ask and information to note about the caller, such as his or her voice and background sounds.
Forewarned is Forearmed Like the tradition of the best Government civilian campaigns since the founding of the Nation, the National Counterterrorism Center’s annual Counterterrorism Calendar is simultaneously meant to alert and inform us, making both civilians and professionals alike aware of the very real dangers around us and educating us on what—and whom—to look for.
With the cover photo depicting the 2013 bombings at the Boston Marathon– where ordinary citizens were instrumental in identifying and locating the terrorists responsible– the importance of having an informed and involved citizenry has never been clearer.
Search for it in a nearby Federal depository library or download a PDF version.
Even the first floor of my house where I used to live in New Jersey on the Hudson River across from Manhattan was flooded.
As in so many emergencies, the heroes of Superstorm #Sandy are definitely the first responders from firemen, police, National Guard, and emergency medical personnel who rushed to deal with emergency situations even while the storm was at its height.
These first responders have to rush into extremely hazardous conditions, often with live power lines, broken gas lines, or work around sewage, spilled chemicals, or other pollutants, such as is happening in Hoboken, all while trying to save lives.
Published by the experts at Department of Transportation’s Pipeline and Hazardous Materials Safety Administration in conjunction with Transport Canada, the Emergency Response Guidebook 2012 is the newly updated guide for use by transporters, firefighters, police, and other emergency services personnel who may be the first to arrive at the scene of a transportation incident involving a hazardous material or “Hazmat” as it is usually referred to in the United States.
The Emergency Response Guidebook 2012, or ERG as it is known popularly to those who use it, provides first responders with a go-to manual to help deal with hazmat accidents during the critical first 30 minutes.
PHMSA’s goal is to place one of these ERGs into every emergency service vehicle nationwide.
The Guidebook is organized to provide first responders individual pages or guides on how to deal with each kind of hazardous material.
STEP ONE: Identify the HAZARDOUS MATERIAL by finding either the Name of the Material or the Identification Number of the material from a placard or orange panel on the container or from the shipping paper or package.
Identify the 3-digit GUIDE NUMBER in this guidebook that corresponds to the material name or number.
Follow the GUIDE INSTRUCTIONS carefully on the corresponding orange-bordered numbered guide page.
Fully-suited hazardous materials first responders at a chemical spill drill.
The 4-digit Hazardous Material Identification Number 2880 is clearly shown on a placard on the tanker.
Cross-reference for hazardous material ID number to the ERG Guide number.
Looking up Guide number 140, we find that water is to be used to deal with this particular material, not dry chemicals or foams such as from fire extinguishers.
Each Guide page also discusses how to handle small or large fires of this material, fires involving whole tanks for trailer loads, spills or leaks of this material, and first aid for anyone injured by this substance.
It also includes numbers for all provinces in Canada, including bilingual French-English phone numbers, and hotline numbers for Mexico, Argentina, Brazil and Colombia.
And finally, a terrific glossary of terms helps decipher some of the jargon.
Firemen, bomb squads, CBRN teams, police, emergency medical personnel, military police and other first responders have a hard enough job to do without risking their lives dealing with broken pipelines, overturned tankers, bombs, spills, and other hazardous materials.
Fortunately the Department of Transportation provides this excellent tool to help keep them—and us—safer.
Find this and other books for Emergency Management and First Responders under the Security, Defense & Law Enforcement category on our new online bookstore.
Take Our Poll Note 1:As of January 27, 2012, this poll is NOW CLOSED with the final results showing above, but feel free to click on the SHARE THIS link to pass on the results to others.
Assassination of Osama bin Laden A Navy SEALS team located and killed Osama bin Laden this year, the mastermind behind the 9/11 attacks and many other Al Qaeda and insurgent terrorist attacks.
A Collection of Research Ideas, Thoughts, and Perspectives, V 1analyzes causes and possible responses to terrorism as presented at the FBI Terrorism Research and Analysis Project Symposium of international academics and law enforcement personnel.
Death of North Korea’s Kim Jong Il The recent death of North Korea’s leader, Kim Jong Il, marks an uncertain time for the Korean Peninsula and the entire region.
A Country Studyreviews the history and the dominant social, political, economic, and military aspects of contemporary North Korea before this.
The Gulf Oil Disaster and the Future of Offshore Drilling, Report to the President, January 2011.
This best-selling publication offers the fullest account available of what happened in the Gulf of Mexico on April 20, 2010 and why, and proposes actions, changes in company behavior, reform of government oversight, and investments in research and technology that will be required to avert future disasters.
End of the war in Iraq There is an interesting White House timeline about the Iraq war at the end of which is a link to the Joining Forces initiative with which one can express one’s support for the troops.
GPO’s bookstore has a number of books about Iraq, but two stand out as best-sellers.
Journal of a Company Commander gives a realistic account by Major Todd Brown of his experiences as a United States Army company commander in Iraq from April 2003 to March 2004.
The Iraq Reconstruction Experienceexamines the Iraq reconstruction experience, and provides 13 take-away lessons for future contingency relief and reconstruction operations.
Japan earthquake and tsunami Natural disasters were big in the news this year, and the Federal Government was involved in responding to them, from the National Guard in the United States to foreign response teams overseas.
For example, in response to the tragic earthquake and resulting tsunami and nuclear reactor problems in Japan, the United States Agency for International Development , deployed a Disaster Assistance Response Team that included disaster response experts, urban search and rescue teams, and nuclear experts from the United States Department of Energy, Department of Health and Human Services, and the Nuclear Regulatory Commission.
The Field Operations Guide for Disaster Assessment and Responseis used by USAID’s Office of United States Foreign Disaster Assistance for DART teams and other disaster assistance personnel when responding to foreign disasters like the Japan situation.
Last Space Shuttle flight 2011 marked the end of NASA’s three-decade long space shuttle program when, on July 21, the final space shuttle mission ended with the shuttle Atlantis rolling to a stop at its home port, NASA’s Kennedy Space Center in Florida.
NASA has published a number of terrific books about the program which you can find in our NASA and Space Shuttle Publications, along with a new set of beautiful color bookmarks, one for each shuttle and the best-selling Wings in Orbitbook.
United States economy and the Federal budget It seems every newscast this year has covered the United States economy, Federal Government budgets and deficits and differing opinions about options to address them.
We have assembled many collections of Federal publications on our year-round Gift Guide and in our Special Collections page on GPO’s online bookstore.
CBRN Chemical-Biological-Radiological-Nuclear, chemical weapons, first responder, nuclear, nuclear proliferation, nuclear weapons, weapons of mass destruction, WMD | Permalink Posted by gpoturner2010 You are currently browsing the archives for the Nuclear category.
