For the Soviet government, having an ally 90 miles off the coast of the Union States and in a position to influence the western Caribbean was a great advantage.
In 1962, the Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev and Castro negotiated the placement of Soviet nuclear missiles that could reach targets in the United States almost as soon as their launch could be detected.
These missiles not only could have altered the Cold War balance of power, but they also could have become a great propaganda coup.
Historians still debate the exact motives for stationing the missiles on Cuba.
What sort of United States reaction the Soviet government expected is unclear, although Khrushchev had not been impressed with Kennedy's statesmanship at their meeting in Vienna the previous year.
When the United States government discovered the missiles, the events of October 1962 brought the world as close to the brink of nuclear war as it has ever been.
As these documents show, it was difficult for the Kennedy administration to determine a course of action that would neither show weakness nor lead to war.
First, the government had to assess the threat, and then the President had to inform the American people of that threat and of the United States government's response.
The first document is a transcript of what was said at a meeting of the Executive Committee of the National Security Council , a group of the president's closest advisors, held in the early stages of the conflict.
The second is President Kennedy's address to the American people, broadcast live on television on October 22, 1962.
And what I tried to do was develop a little package that meets the action requirement of the paragraph I read. : Yeah.
President Kennedy's Address to the American people, October 22, 1962 Good evening, my fellow citizens.
The purposes of these bases can be none other than to provide a nuclear strike capability against the Western Hemisphere.
And now having confirmed and completed our evaluation of the evidence and our decision on a course of action, this Government feels obliged to report this new crisis to you in fullest detail.
Each of these missiles, in short, is capable of striking Washington, D.C., the Panama Canal, Cape Canaveral, Mexico City, or any other city in the southeastern part of the United States, in Central America, or in the Caribbean area.
This urgent transformation of Cuba into an important strategic base-by the presence of these large, long-range, and clearly offensive weapons of sudden mass destructionconstitutes an explicit threat to the peace and security of all the Americas, in flagrant and deliberate defiance of the Rio Pact of 1947, the traditions of this nation and Hemisphere, the Joint Resolution of the Eighty-seventh Congress, the Charter of the United Nations, and my own public warnings to the Soviets on September 4 and 13.
But this secret, swift, and extraordinary build-up of Communist missiles-in an area well known to have a special and historical relationship to the United States and the nations of the Western Hemisphere, in violation of Soviet assurances, and in defiance of American and hemispheric policy-this sudden, clandestine decision to station strategic weapons for the first time outside of Soviet soil-is a deliberately provocative and unjustifiable change in the status quo which cannot be accepted by this country if our courage and our commitments are ever to be trusted again by either friend or foe.
