After breaking with the regime in November, 1959 and returning narrative of arguably the most dangerous moment in to Washington, I acted as representative in Washingthe history of mankind.
This organization was formed by people who critical weeks when a small miscalculation by either had fought against Batista, including former followKennedy or Khrushchev could have unleashed nuclear ers of Castro, who were opposed to the alliance with conflict.
It included the most prominent leaders nity of providing the definitive comprehensive history of the democratic left.
Before and after the Bay of of that crisis because their inadequate research on conPigs, I acted as liaison with the Kennedy administratemporary Cuban history, events and personalities tion through a friend of mine who was close to Presileads them into mistaken assumptions and interpretadent Kennedy. tions.
This can be attributed in part to the fact that My comments are made from the perspective of access to Cuban files and documents on the crisis has that direct experience on the events that took place on not been granted yet.
However the authors failed to both sides of the Florida Straits during those years. make full use of already available information on the Granted that such a narrow perspective, based on perCuban side of events. sonal experience from the Cuban side, cannot match Despite these shortcomings, this book offers unique the well documented analysis made by the authors in access to the deliberations of Kennedy and Khrushchev relation to the two nuclear powers involved in the criwith their respective advisors, as well as to official sis.
All this reviewer can contribute are some clarificlassified communications related to the crisis not cations on facts and assumptions, as well as a couple available up to now.
It is up to future historians to compleof the superpowers, the authors offer valuable insights ment the research undertaken by Naftali and Fursenko on the relationship between Castro and the Soviets from the Cuban perspective.
And, that will have to before, during and after the crisis. wait until equivalent documentation is available.
I was a modest participant in the events of that period, as well as in the ones that preceded it.
During the Mistakes and Assumptions on the Cuban Side insurrection against Batista, I was Castro's represenEssential to understanding the behavior of Castro tative in Washington.
After Castro came to power, I during the crisis is knowledge of who he is and what 78 / S O C I E T Y 9 JULY/AUGUST 1998 were his motivations and intentions.
Fursenko deal with this issue in the first two chapters arms embargo against Batista was announced by the of the book.
It is precisely in those two chapters that State Department in March, 1958 over the opposition most of the mistakes of fact and assumption are made. of the Pentagon.
The authors quote, without balancing it with other What actually happened was that, after the embargo sources, a CIA report prepared in early 1957 on Castro. was enacted, the Cuban Air Force had exchanged the In that report, Lyman B Kirkpatric, Jr., states that Fiheads of some training rockets which were delivered del ""grew up in a stately house, attended parochial to them earlier by mistake instead of armed ones.
The auand was photographed by members of our movement thors obviously accept this early image of Fidel who worked at the base.
Rafil Castro thought this inbecause later on in that same chapter they refer to dicated the announced embargo was a ruse.
Although Mr Kirkpatric can be excused for within his newly established front, which surrounded his naive portrayal of Castro, the truth is well known the base, to force compliance with the embargo.
And there is no excuse for ignoring those facts ever, the conclusion reached by the authors that Fidel's in a scholarly historic work such as One Hell of a behavior during this period reflected ""a more moderGamble.
All the authors had to do was to refer to ate stance"" towards the United States is unwarranted.
Una versi6n rebelde, that Rafil acted without consultCastro was the son of a former Spanish colonial ing his brother.
But he also adds that a young rebel soldier who had fought against Cuban and American officer sent by Rafil to explain the action to Fidel came forces during the Spanish-American War.
This took place disagreement between the brothers was only a matter in the United Fruit's enclave around Nipe Bay in eastof timing not of substance, as is assumed in One Hell ern Cuba. of a Gamble.
Rather than being privileged, as the authors assume, It is equally inaccurate to say that in July, as one of Castro was one of the illegitimate children of the house the concessions to obtain the release of the kidnapped servant sired by his father, who also had two children soldiers and Marines, the United States ""suspended with his legitimate wife.
All the children, legitimate the planned deliveries of military aircraft to Batista."" and illegitimate, lived in the same plantation.
Instead By that time, Batista had realized he could not get any of providing a ""privileged background"" and a ""stately aircraft from the United States despite Pentagon efhouse,"" Castro's early family setting was highly conforts to continue United States support for his regime.
In his childhood, fore, Batista had negotiated the purchase of British Castro was taunted both for being the son of a SpanSeafury fighters from England.
Furthermission in Washington was converted into the purmore, as a teenager, he was not allowed to use the chasing office of weapons from arms smugglers all facilities established for American staffers at the over the world.
Those are the roots of the profound During the summer of 1958, Fidel wrote a letter to sense of inferiority that feeds Castro's resentment his secretary and confidant, Celia Sfinchez, stating that, against the Cuban upper classes, the United States in after the war against Batista ended, he was going to general and Americans individually. start a much bigger war, the war against the United There are some additional factual mistakes and asStates.
He closed the letter by saying, ""I feel that is sumptions in those initial chapters.
That letter, dated June 5, 1958, is exhibwith the description of the incident of the Guantanamo ited at the Museum of the Revolution in Havana.
Naval Base soldiers and Marines kidnapped by Ratil These facts lead to a very different interpretation Castro in July, 1958.
It is not true, that the selling of of later events covered by Naftali and Fursenko in their KENNEDY, KHRUSHCHEV, AND CASTRO / 79 book.
They reveal that, when Fidel came to power, he that the only high ranking official he was to meet in had already decided to wage war on the United States. private was Vice President Richard Nixon.
The amWhat separated him from Ratil and Che was not a bassador told Castro that this was due to his rejection matter of goals, but of timing. of an official United States invitation in favor of coming in a Another factual and interpretative mistake made by private visit.
Naftali and Fursenko, in their otherwise excellent Castro felt that even this minor protocol visit was book, is their treatment of Castro's visit to the United likely to taint the image he wanted of a non-official States in April, 1959.
Only the ambassador's threat to resign perWashington, Princeton, N e w York City, Boston, suaded Castro to meet the vice president.
We did not stop in bassador explained that, if a meeting with a high level New Haven, Connecticut.
Castro came to Washington to placate United States public In the book, the authors make reference to an inciopinion which had been alienated by the executions dent that reveals how the unwarranted initial assumpof Batista collaborators in early 1959.
Such alienation tions about Castro and his brother have resulted in threatened to nullify the cautious strategy he was folmistaken interpretations of events.
Having defeated Batista, he was significant revelations resulting from the access Naftali determined to pursue his ""destiny"" of waging war and Fursenko had to Soviet documents is that, at the against the United States.
However, consistent with same time Castro was in the United States, Khrushchev the thinking described above in the quote of Capt. was approving the provision of weapons from Soviet Moran, Castro did not want a premature confrontasatellites to equip the Cuban armed forces.
Rufo L6pez And, only the Soviet Union had the capability to equip Fresquet, who was a member of Castro's entourage, an army of 200,000 or to provide the strategic umthat Fidel had a strong phone argument the same day brella to counteract American military power.
Therewith his brother leads the authors to link it to the Sofore, it is almost certain that Rafil's weapons requests viet decision.
It also reinforces their assumption that to the Soviets were made with Fidel's full knowledge Ratil was acting in secret in his dealings with the Soand approval.
They raise the possibility that the argument deassumptions that the events of Castro's April, 1959 veloped because Fidel was angry at Ratil for requesting visit to the United States must be seen. the weapons without his knowledge.
The visit was made at the invitation of the AmeriActually, what happened was that, during the trip, can Society of Newspapers Editors as the result of a Rafil was calling Fidel daily to tell him that people in deliberate decision.
Castro did not want to tarnish his Cuba were very disappointed with reports reaching anti-American i m a g e p o s s i b l y in the eyes of the Havana about the visit.
According to Rafil, the perSoviets but also of the Latin American left--by acception in Havana was that Fidel was selling out to cepting an official invitation.
He decided to make a the United States, just like any other Latin leader.
That direct appeal to United States media leaders who could influday in particular, the reporting referred to Bohemia, ence American public opinion, while shunning offiCuba's most popular weekly magazine at the time. cial contacts.
Fidel called Bohemia's reporter, Carlos Castafieda, to Moderates like me and, even more so, members of his room and lashed at him for his coverage.
Fortuthe economic team in the visiting entourage were mere nately for Mr Castafieda, his boss had arrived that day decoys.
He wanted to calm those wishing to develop with a copy of the latest issue of the magazine.
When good economic relations with the United States and a Castro read the report, he realized there was no ground democratic Cuba.
That is, until he felt ready to make for complaining and apologized to the reporter.
Rafil his bold move of radicalizing the revolution. was trying to manipulate him.
That is what the phone At no time during the visit did Castro express any conversation was about. unhappiness over not meeting President Eisenhower.
One incident that is not covered in One Hell of a The only complaint he expressed was when the CuGamble and is perhaps the most important that ocban Ambassador, Dr.
Rafil and Che were evidently concerned with First, the Cuban Communist old guard, as the rest of Castro's hesitation in jumping into the Soviet fold.
Communist leaders in Latin America, was extremely They wanted to radicalize the revolution at a faster cautious.
They were pressing Fidel to use the tude of Soviet leaders reveals, such a challenge to the May 1st ceremonies that year to make that radicaliUnited States was not in their minds either.
Unwilling to do that at that time, Fidel fore, it is internally inconsistent to attribute the acdecided not to go back to Cuba from the United States tions of Ra61 and Che to their secret membership in in time for the May 1st celebration.
Fidel inIn fact, a short time after, Che was publicly expressstructed Dr.
Regino Boil, the Economics Minister, to ing his criticism of the lack of revolutionary zeal of start making arrangements for Fidel to attend the the Soviet leadership.
As a further radicalization step, Ra61 and Che had supported the first expedition to come out of Cuba to Castro and the Communists overthrow a Latin American government.
In this case, As the authors reveal, a key factor influencing the Panama.
The expedition had been delayed and arrived behavior of the Soviet leadership during these years in Panama after we had left the United States.
Castro had to do with the position of Castro towards Comwas approached by reporters with the news dispatches munism and in particular his relations with the local as we were coming out of the hotel.
The authors give great imous with Ra61. portance to Ra61's alleged secret membership in the That evening he summoned Ra61 to Houston, where PSP in this respect.
First, at the time Rafil joined the party neither one hear the insults all over the Penthouse at the Shamof the brothers had any reason to hide such a memberrock Hotel, where we were staying.
Therefore, it is ship because both were minor and irrelevant political true that, as the authors argue, Ra61 and Che had a figures.
The authors are wrong in two America, there were many prominent politicians who points in their interpretation, however. had joined the party in their youth, to resign later on One is that Naftali and Fursenko overestimate the in their lives. political clout of either Ratil or Che to challenge One legitimate question to ask is why did the PSP Castro.
A hypothesis can be argued that they were trya meeting between the three could have told them that ing to convey the impression of a secret relationship both Rafil and Che were extremely submissive in the in order to distract attention from the fact that the PSP presence of Fidel.
Ratil was very unpopular in general hierarchy had been collaborating with Batista ever and even within the Rebel Army.
Che was perceived since he was their candidate for the presidency in 1940. as a foreigner by the majority of the population, parIn exchange, Batista turned over to them control of ticularly in Havana.
Such a challenge to Fidel was the powerful Confederaci6n de Trabajadores de Cuba nothing but wild speculation.
A very significant one may disagree with what he has done, Fidel Castro concession since, by law, the CTC enjoyed a monopoly is the outstanding political leader that has emerged of labor representation.
And, that was already the PSP leaders not only called Fidel Castro a putschist, case at that time. as the authors recognize, but through their party cadSecondly, neither Che nor Rafil would have been res within the labor m o v e m e n t cooperated with advocating such aggressive and daring behavior as a Batista's union leaders to cause the failure of the two result of their ""secret"" membership in the Communist calls made by Castro for general strikes.
It also raised a potenan excuse to act before Castro and the Soviets were tial threat.
Failure to respond could push Castro into ready and, two, to show their masters in Moscow that the arms of Mao, who was already starting the Sinothey had some high-level access to the new regime in Soviet conflict.
Therefore, a positive response was in which Khrushchev was so interested.
All he needed was a United States leadership invited Ra61 to Prague, was also a close friend of Fipliant to such a move, which he expected from a newlydel.
It is quite likely that the two brothers agreed to elected President Kennedy.
It was agreed The second question is what made Fidel, being that if there was to be a fifth television debate between aware of the Communists' behavior towards his Nixon and Kennedy, the issue was going to be Cuba. struggle against Batista, decide to rely on their supCharlie Bartlett had made arrangements for my briefport.
And, as the authors amply demonstrate, the Soing candidate Kennedy on Cuba if such a debate were viets had serious doubts about the reliability of their to take place.
Since distrust was mutual, this seems to Goodwin, Kennedy's speech writer.
No serious stusuggested using the slogan ""Alliance for Progress"" for dent of the Cuban Revolution gives too much credence the program of cooperation with Latin America to the notion that Castro was a Communist all along.
And, Naftali and Fursenko provide the best docuThese contacts gave me some access to the new mented explanation that this was not the case. administration.
Only the Soviet revolutionary movement, the MRE People were being Union had the military capability to provide support recruited in Miami to mount an invasion from a base in for his goal of challenging American hegemony, not Retalhuleu, Guatemala.
Mr Grobart was sent to Cuba by Stalin in the sloppiness of the operation from the military side.
The twenties as the representative of the Comintern, the inclusion of elements from the former Batista armed international organization created by Lenin to promote forces revealed a great lack of political sensitivity on Communism and support the Soviet Union.
He was the part of whoever was planning this operation. the liaison between Moscow and the PSP for decades, At that time, such an approach was doomed to fail. including the revolutionary period.
No history of the The only people who had any chance of challenging relations between the two can be complete without Castro successfully were those who had fought Batista access to those communications.
Furthermore, it is and, being anti-Communist, were rebelling against highly unlikely that the Presidium would have ignored Castro's betrayal of the revolution.
Even for them, the this old hand, who had a superb knowledge of Cuban odds were remote.
The authors rely too much tion of the Cuban people with his charisma and the on the reports of the KGB man in Havana, Aleksandr economic distribution measures he had instituted, not Alekseev, who they themselves reveal could easily be to mention his appeal to Cuban nationalism. misled into sending inaccurate reports.
The CIA operation was predicated on their earlier success against Colonel Arbenz in Guatemala, where The Soviet and United States Approaches to the Bay of Pigs the conditions were totally different.
Frank Bender had As the authors reveal, Castro's approach to the Sobeen the CIA operative in charge of the Guatemala viets offered Nikita Khrushchev a tempting opportuoperation and was made responsible for the Cuba one.
In ised that he was going to talk not only to the presieither case, it became evident that people of revoludent-elect but to Allen Dulles, who was also a friend tionary origin, regardless of how anti-Communist they of his.
Shortly after, Bartlett called to inform me about were, could not seriously expect any assistance from CIA Director Dulles' reaction.
Under those circumstances, it was that our group was pro-Communist and attributed to not fair to encourage false hopes among those who were that ideological inclination the reason for our opposirisking their lives in the underground in Cuba that there tion to the operation. was any possibility of United States assistance to them.
No As the authors of One Hell of a Gamble reveal in matter what the new administration decided, the CIA great detail, while this was going on in Washington, was committed to its plan, which was out of tune with substantial Soviet military support for Castro was the historical moment Cuba was living.
When the doomed Brigade 2506 landed CIA was relying on leaving President Kennedy no reand United States air support was denied to them, the Soviets, course other than to order a full-fledged American according to the information obtained by Naftali and intervention.
Frank Bender, who can air support in the naive notion that the United was in the next room at the Hotel Lexington in New States could deny involvement in the landing of 1,400 York, walked into Miro's room afterwards.
The Bays of Pigs operaCuban Air Force planes. tion started a few days later.
In the light of those statistics, hard as it is to say it, Shortly after the disaster, we received a request from the Soviet side deserved to win.
They had made a sem e m b e r s of our underground who had survived rious and tangible commitment to attain their goal in Castro's sweeps of opponents.
The side weapons, explosives and about 8,000-10,000 American side wanted to reverse history with a shrinkCuban pesos in cash to undertake a sabotage of ing commitment of military resources, under a hesiHavana's electric power plant.
Castro's massive detant policy and in support of an artificial leadership tentions had left them without their usual safe houses created by the CIA. and sources of local support.
In the face of the defeatHowever, contrary to frequent criticism of Presiist mood of the times, we thought that such a strategic dent Kennedy's unwillingness to commit American sabotage could galvanize the will to resist. forces, Cubans ought to be grateful to him for not comThis request was passed to Richard Goodwin and pounding his initial mistake.
The ignorance, arrogance Paul Nitze over lunch at the Metropolitan Club.
Shortly and conceit of the Bay of Pigs planners had led them afterwards, a meeting was arranged at the Executive to underestimate the forces they were to contend with Office with Tracy Barnes, one of the CIA officers inin numbers, firepower and morale, as well as in navolved in the Bay of Pigs operation.
This incredible misunderstanding of meeting, a CIA officer was assigned to liaise with us. the situation could have led the United States to comManuel Ray, the national coordinator of the MRP, mit inadequate American forces into a trap like Vietcame to Washington for the meeting with the CIA linan] but much closer to home.
Fidel Castro would and, two, that we present a budget to cmTy out the have been made a legendary hero, not only for Cuoperation. bans but for Latin America and the Third World.
KENNEDY, KHRUSHCHEV, AND CASTRO / 83 On the Road to Nuclear Conflict It was precisely at that time, and in view of the inAs the authors reveal with abundant documentaformation Moscow was receiving about Operation tion, both the Soviets and the United States misinterMongoose and more serious United States military invasion preted each other in the wake of the Bay of Pigs plans, that Khrushchev conceived the bold move of disaster.
Castro, for his part, was interested in nailing placing missiles in Cuba.
For Khrushchev, this plan down the Soviet strategic guarantee he needed to exhad multiple purposes besides ensuring the security pand his challenge to American hegemony.
It was also intended revolutionary opposition demoralized and in total disto allow him to gain respect among his followers and array as a result of the Bay of Pigs disaster, Castro potential opponents within the Kremlin.
Krushchev was ready to move forward to the socialization of believed missiles in Cuba would place the Soviets on Cuba.
With Soviet support and a totalitarian dictatorequal footing with the United States in the nuclear ship he could have a solid domestic base for his overcompetition, and raise the international stature of the seas adventures.
The Kennedy administration had Soviets in their conflict with China. consolidated his regime internally.
One crucial point that this book documents clearly The Kennedy administration undertook a new prois that the initiative to place the missiles in Cuba was gram as equally wrong in its conception, as I was to taken by the Soviets and not by Castro.
Presidium decision to deploy the missiles in Cuba was Only, this time it was fully under the command of made contingent on Castro's acceptance.
A high-level the attorney general, Robert Kennedy, as a proxy for military mission was sent to Cuba to negotiate that his brother, the president.
Castro's response was to insist that the tion Mongoose was led at the operational level by a placing of the missiles be presented as a contribution person even more ignorant of Cuba than Frank he was willing to make to the socialist cause and not Bender, Brigadier General Edward Lansdale, who had to place Cuba in the dependent position of a move been successful against the Huk Rebellion in the made exclusively for its security.
Lansdale had promised that, if the Cubans rebelled against Castro, there was going by October, 1962, Operation Mongoose could trigger to be a second coming of Christ.
As the authors reveal, few people Cubans were deeply religious--a completely unwarwithin the administration, except perhaps the attorranted assumption--they were expected to start reney general, took him seriously. belling in response to that call.
At that time, a United States The United States based its actions on the use of submarine was to fill the night sky with star shells, conventional weapons in an area it considered within thus convincing the natives that Christ was arriving, its sphere of influence.
The Soviets hoped to leapfrog leading to the final overthrow of Castro.
Their logic bebelieve that the United States Attorney General fell for such ing that this was justified as reciprocity for the presignorant nonsense.
Millions of taxpayers dollars were ence of American nuclear weapons on the Soviet wasted in pursuit of such ill-conceived projects. periphery.
As a result of these two sets of mistaken But the other side had a less biblical and more pracassumptions, the stage was being set for a potentially tical approach to earthly matters, such as using milicataclysmic nuclear conflict. tary power to expand one's sphere of influence.
As the cable traffic and the minutes of meetings on According to the documentation obtained by Naftali both sides quoted in One Hell of a Gamble reveal, the and Fursenko, Castro wanted more Soviet military escalation proceeded as a result of poor intelligence, assistance, in particular an air defense system.
In misinterpretations, political concerns and demands for March, 1962 Castro also sent Minister of Interior respect from the other side.
The Kennedys' preference Ramiro Valdes to Moscow to request that the Soviets for resorting to informal channels reveals incredible establish in Cuba a base to train Latin American revonaivet& In the end, both sides used these informal lutionaries.
This proposal scared the Soviets, since they channels to defuse the crisis. realized that such offensive actions would ensure Shortly before the crisis erupted, I made another American retaliation against Cuba, leading to a conapproach to the Kennedy administration.
This time on flict between the two powers. behalf of Rebel Army officers who had broken with 84 / S O C I E T Y 9 JULY/AUGUST 1998 Castro.
They were followers of Major Huber Matos, a an hour I had the high-ranking officer on the phone revolutionary hero who was still in prison for chalwith the news that now they wanted to hold the meetlenging Castro's alliance with the Communists.
The negative response had already Soviet presence increased in Cuba--50,000 troops gone back and we did not have the means to make a were to be deployed--nationalism started to work new contact within a short time. against Castro.
Although I have the attorney general, which took place in his office at no evidence of this, to this day, I am convinced that the Justice Department sometime in late August, 1962. they were the ones to whom the United States reDuring that conversation, the attorney general exfused to talk. pressed the willingness of the United States government to supAs Naftali and Fursenko report, while this was goport any internal action, while opposing any overt ing on, there were dozens of Soviet cargo vessels intervention. speeding to Cuba with missiles and nuclear warheads.
At the time, our group was infiltrating former Rebel CIA interrogation of arriving exiles at Opa Locka, Army officers into Cuba.
They perceived a climate of Florida had generated sixty reports of Soviet troops growing discontent, not only over economic difficuland missiles seen in Cuba.
Furthermore, U-2 spy plane ties but, in particular, over the increasing Soviet presphotos showed the emplacement of SA-2 antiaircraft ence.
On August 10, General Lansdale had called came back with news of a planned military revolt to for a meeting at which he presented phase two of his take place by September 30.
Yet, a month later, the Kennedy adernment representative to take place no later than by ministration had no interest whatsoever in finding out September 28.
The meeting could take place at the about plans for an internal revolt coming from within Guantanamo Naval Base.
No commitment of United States assistance Naftali and Fursenko do not make any reference to was implicit in accepting the meeting.
It is in those chapordinator for the revolt was in a position to come into ters of One Hell of Gamble that the unraveling of the the base. crisis is discussed.
The mention on page 228, made I immediately contacted Bartlett, whom Attorney before the authors discuss the most critical events, General Kennedy had designated as our liaison, with deals with the approval by President Kennedy of some the news that our group had a response to the attorney of the actions prepared by General Lansdale, ""a gregeneral's request made a month earlier.
Due to the nade attack against the Chinese embassy in Havana. people involved, I had reason to believe this was a A Cuban recruited by the CIA claimed to have access potentially serious action.
Shortly after, I had a gentleto the r o o f overlooking the e m b a s s y garden.
He man on the phone and the meeting took place on the also authorized underwater demolition at25 th of September.
I acted as interpreter during the two to threefull fledged revolt planned by Operation Mongoose hour session.
There was no explanation given of what for that same period, the United States had more the plan was.
That was to be done at the meeting in significant assets inside Cuba than such meager acGuantanamo. tions reflect.
On the 26 th, the high-ranking officer called to say The first mention after the crisis was over, on page they were not interested.
When Bartlett called on the 288, deals with the orders to stop any infiltration or 29 t~ to inquire as to how it was going, my response black actions.
He called back in half an hour the decision to disband the operation by December, with the explanation that the plan we had presented 1962.
When I told him that no presentaafter the return of the Bay of Pigs prisoners to Miami. tion was made of any plan, he went back and in half The Kennedy administration had arranged payment 86 / S O C I E T Y 9 JULWAUGUST 1998 of a $53 million ransom to Castro for the members of As the discussions on both sides develop in the Brigade 2506 captured by the Cubans. book, perhaps in its most useful chapters, the leaders It is reasonable to conclude from the facts available of the two nuclear powers decided to back out for the that the United States really was not interested in an sake of mankind.
President Kennedy seems to have selected the option of the quarantine to give time for a bowed to the only solution acceptable to the CIA and response from Khrushchev before any exchange of fire. the Pentagon, a direct United States intervention.
Their objective He also went out of his way to help Khrushchev save was to roll back the Cuban Revolution.
For his part, Khrushchev abandoned his hopes Communist revolutionary version was not acceptable. for expansion of his missile capabilities against the It was nationalism to which the CIA and the Pentagon United States, also used calming language, and reobjected.
Under this scenario, Operation Mongoose was versed the delegation of authority to use tactical nothing more than a ruse to keep Miami Cubans quiet. nuclear weapons that had been granted to the Soviet For that, the CIA needed so-called ""assets"" they could field commander.
The importance of this action to control, not a nationalist internal leadership that could avoid a nuclear accident was dramatized by the downdevelop their own ideas.
That may explain why Moning of the U-2 plane which the book reveals was the goose could not be used during the most critical period result of faulty communications within the Soviet of the missile crisis.
When the Soviets unexpectedly forces inside Cuba. raised the ante with the deployment of nuclear weapCastro, however, showed no such restraint.
As is ons, there was no option left for the United States but to reported in O n e H e l l o f a G a m b l e , he angered accept the consolidation of Castro's regime.
Khrushchev by proposing unleashing a nuclear war if One of the most revealing aspects of this book is there was any conventional American action against that it shows that the three leaders involved were actCuba.
Castro's suggestion of a first nuclear strike was ing in response to insecure feelings about their selfshocking to the Soviet leadership.
Kennedy considered that Khrushchev's actions dering about the wisdom of their whole Caribbean ploy. in Vienna and Berlin, as well as in refusing a test ban, Later on, Castro tried to spoil the emerging settlement reflected the Soviet leader's lack of respect for him. of the crisis by threatening to down American planes So, in responding to Soviet initiatives, Kennedy was sent to verify the withdrawal of Soviet weapons.
Fivery conscious of doing it in a way that reflected that nally, he tried to gain control of Soviet tactical nuclear he had to be respected. weapons after the settlement was in progress.
FortuKhrushchev, for his part, considered that Kennedy nately, by this time, the Soviet side was aware of the was showing his contempt for him and the Soviet reckless nature of their Cuban ally.
Union when he refused to accept that Berlin was within As a sobering conclusion, I must point to the fact the Soviet sphere of influence.
In Khrushchev's case, the challenge devastation and casualties would have been immense. being mounted by Mao against Soviet leadership of Not to mention what would have happened if tactical the Communist bloc seems to have also influenced nuclear weapons had been used against Guantanamo his behavior. or a United States landing operation.
Cuba and the world can As the third political leader involved in this crisis, be grateful for the restraint shown by the two nuclear Fidel was only interested in his place in history.
Actpower leaders, Kennedy and Khrushchev. ing with total disregard for the fate that could befall the Cuban people, he was actually daring and irresponsible.
It took decades for him to recognize that Ernesto F Betancourt represented Fidel Castro in Washhis demands on the Soviets had been unreasonable. ington during the insurrection against Cuban dictator The Soviets took great risks and had to endure the Fulgencio Batista and broke with Castro over the alliance humiliation of withdrawing their missiles.
He participated in the Alliance f o r tained a non-intervention pledge that has been honProgress and was the first director of Radio Marti, the Voice of America station broadcasting to Cuba.
Castro's of Revolutionary Strategy; A Handbook for Practitioners, grandiose condition that, in accepting the missiles, he published by Transaction Publishers, and a consultant on was supporting the socialist cause was not met.
The public sector reform in Latin America and the Caribbean. crisis resulted only in improving Cuba's security.
