It stemmed from Soviet leader Nikita S Khrushchev’s secret dispatch of nuclear missiles to Fidel Castro’s revolutionary Cuba and US president John F Kennedy’s determination to reverse that deployment – and climaxed during the famous “13 Days” “eyeball-to-eyeball” “on the brink” (the crisis birthed so many clichés that one can string them together to evoke it) extending from Washington’s detection of the missiles in midOctober to Khrushchev’s coerced consent to remove them on October 28.
Yet, any serious analysis requires assessing how multiple narratives converged to bring the Cold War to its tensest apex.
Most broadly, the crisis starkly dramatized the chasm between ends and means that Hiroshima portended for international aﬀairs.
Cuba itself represented a vital interest for neither the United States nor the Soviet Union; both proclaimed their ideological contest should be decided through gradual historical processes, not war; and both Khrushchev and Kennedy sought their political goals short of a hazardous military collision.
Nevertheless, in the supercharged atmosphere of the missile crisis, with forces on high alert, any direct clash, whether intentional or accidental, was fraught with the danger of uncontrollable escalation.
As Khrushchev wrote Kennedy, “if indeed war should break out, then it would not be in our power to stop it, for such is the logic of war.
How I Learned to Stop Worrying and Love the Bomb fused subversive humor and technical verisimilitude to depict accidental nuclear war and hilariously mock Cold War paranoia.
While we’re attacking frontally Watch Brinkally and Huntally4 Describing contrapuntally The cities we have lost.
To block Communist expansion, John Foster Dulles had espoused “brinkmanship” – the doctrine to display unﬂinchingly, when challenged, the nerve to risk nuclear war – and Khrushchev embraced this recipe for his own ratcheting up of tensions to discover whether the West would cave.
In no place was his strategy more apparent than Berlin, where, in late 1958, he launched a drive to expel United States and allied military forces from the western sector of the divided capital and, eventually, ease its absorption into East Germany.
Though Dwight D Eisenhower and Kennedy vowed they would stay put, Khrushchev repeatedly turned up the heat.
Sooner or later, the superpowers would have to break their habit of meeting at the brink – because a crisis exploded into all-out war, or grew so terrifying as to sober them up.
The question has gnawed at oﬃcials and analysts since they were ﬁrst discovered.
On May 21, 1962, he formally proposed secretly deploying mediumand intermediate-range nuclear missiles to Cuba; the Presidium provisionally approved his concept three days later and, once a delegation to Havana secured Castro’s wary approval, ratiﬁed it on June 10.
After JFK publicly warned in early September against introducing “oﬀensive weapons” to Cuba, the Soviet leader upped the ante by augmenting (and sending nuclear-armed submarines to escort) this battleﬁeld atomic arsenal, which ranged from eighty short-range FKR-1 nuclear cruise missiles to nine warheads for Frog/Luna battleﬁeld missiles to six warheads for short-range IL-28 bombers.
The total buildup, apparent to United States reconnaissance by late summer, also included tanks, surface-to-air missiles , MiG-21 jet ﬁghters, and roughly 50,000 soldiers and technicians.
Khrushchev’s venture deﬁes mono-causal explanation; like Harry S Truman’s dropping of the atom bomb on Japan (which combined short-term military and postwar political aims), it had overlapping objectives.
By establishing Cuba as an unsinkable strategic missile base, Americans guessed, Khrushchev sought to double Soviet capacity to hit targets in the continental United States more cheaply and easily than with intercontinental ballistic missiles stationed at home.
The nuclear balance did, indeed, vex Khrushchev – especially in view of his lagging ICBM program – and enhance the deployment’s attractions.
Yet, attributing it to this motive alone shortchanges other considerations.
For instance, Americans generally derided as a patent propaganda ploy Khrushchev’s claim that he acted to defend Havana from aggression.
Besides its open campaign to isolate Havana diplomatically, politically, and economically following the failed April 1961 Bay of Pigs invasion, the Kennedy administration sponsored secret actions – covert harassment , assassination plots, military muscle-ﬂexing – that might have fanned fears of attack both in Havana and in Moscow, even as Washington grossly underestimated Khrushchev’s personal commitment to Castro’s revolution.
Safeguarding Cuba – strategic missiles to “restrain the United States from precipitous military action,”10 tactical weapons to ﬁght if deterrence failed – was a key Khrushchev aim.
He hatched the idea of sending missiles to Cuba while visiting Bulgaria in May 1962, as he paced a Black Sea beach and brooded over nuclear-tipped Jupiter MRBMs pointing at his homeland from over the horizon in Turkey.
Kennedy suspected that leverage there was the Cuban deployment’s real aim, and during the missile crisis set up a special high-level group to deal with a possible counter-blockade around West Berlin.
Though it didn’t happen, a successful Cuban gambit might have emboldened the Soviet leader to resume squeezing.
Though it remains uncertain whether Khrushchev devised any speciﬁc plan, timetable, or “grand strategy” to exploit a fait accompli in Cuba (as Fursenko and Naftali contend), he counted on it to enhance his overall position on the Cold War chessboard for subsequent moves in Berlin or elsewhere.
More important than the missiles’ military impact, the Kremlin 10 Nikita S Khrushchev, Khrushchev Remembers, trans. and ed.
Khrushchev’s ploy also promised to boost his leadership of international Communism.
Acting decisively to protect revolutionary Cuba would counter Chinese claims that the Soviet “revisionists” had gone soft.
Khrushchev also wanted to avoid losing ground to Beijing in Havana itself.
While dependent on Soviet economic aid since the rupture with Washington, Cuban leaders such as Che Guevara ideologically skewed closer to Beijing’s avid support for armed uprisings throughout Latin America.
With Soviet–Cuban ties strained in early 1962 as Castro purged pro-Moscow Communists, Khrushchev believed that sending missiles might reinforce the alliance and fence out China.
Like Mikhail Gorbachev, he genuinely wished to reduce Soviet military spending drastically in order to improve his people’s lot.
Yet, unlike his reformist successor, Khrushchev also indulged in threatening behavior that undercut East–West progress.
As Khrushchev puzzled over how to save Cuba, the prohibitive cost of fending oﬀ its giant neighbor magniﬁed the allure of a nuclear deterrent – much as his enemy had laid a tripwire in West Germany rather than match Soviet conventional forces.
Khrushchev thereby emulated not only Dulles’s “brinkmanship,” but also Eisenhower’s “New Look” of seeking “more bang for the buck” through increased reliance on nuclear weapons.
Khrushchev steamrollered the Presidium, but odds are remote that his associates, if in power, would have chanced nuclear war for Cuba’s sake.
Though hardly irrational, the deployment did not simply ﬂow from a detached reckoning of Soviet interests.
On Khrushchev’s foreign policy aims, see also Taubman and Savranskaya’s chapter in this volume.
Kennedy’s response The news Kennedy received on the morning of Tuesday, October 16, 1962, came as a shock.
Throughout the late summer and early autumn, his administration had watched with mounting unease the Soviet military buildup in Cuba and, as the mid-term congressional elections in November neared, sustained barbed Republican criticism for allowing it to proceed.
Secretly, JFK stepped up military contingency planning and covert operations against Havana.
Though CIA director John McCone, dissenting from his own analysts, argued from his French honeymoon that the SA-2s were probably meant to hide the installation of surfaceto-surface missiles, JFK preferred to believe Khrushchev.
As late as Sunday, October 14, national security adviser McGeorge Bundy reiterated on national television that there was neither “present evidence” nor a “present likelihood” of an oﬀensive threat.
Even as he spoke, a U-2 spy plane snapped damning photographs of MRBM sites under construction southwest of Havana.
On Monday evening, word seeped through top administration ranks, and the next morning, Bundy broke the bad news to JFK in his bedroom as he breakfasted and read the papers.
The ad hoc group varied – Dean Acheson, Robert Lovett, Adlai Stevenson, and others came and went – but regulars included Bundy; Secretary of State Dean Rusk, his deputy, George Ball, Deputy Under Secretary U Alexis Johnson, and Soviet expert Llewellyn E Thompson, Jr.
Johnson; CIA director McCone; Secretary of the Treasury C Douglas Dillon; speechwriter Theodore C Sorensen; and most importantly, the president’s brother.
As later caricatured, Excomm “hawks” favored military action, while “doves” preferred political and diplomatic pressure.
In fact, debate frequently shifted, as participants oscillated between camps or advanced arguments that combined approaches.
From the outset, all agreed the United States could not passively accept the missiles.
Fearing escalation after a ﬁrst strike and less concerned than the uniformed military over the missiles’ strategic impact (primarily a “domestic political problem”), he shunned either preemptive military action or a purely political-diplomatic path and instead proposed, as a moderate alternative, a blockade on oﬀensive weapons shipments to Cuba.
U-2 ﬂights spotted more MRBMs plus IRBM bases; the clock ticked toward the missiles going operational; and worries of a leak grew.
On October 18, Kennedy and Andrei Gromyko conversed politely for more than two hours in the Oval Oﬃce.
JFK hid the fact that he had caught the Kremlin red-handed and, resisting temptation to display the incriminating U-2 photos in his desk drawer, reaﬃrmed warnings against introducing oﬀensive weaponry to Cuba.
The unsuspecting foreign minister repeated Moscow’s false assurances and, despite noticing Rusk’s “crab red” face, blithely cabled home that the situation seemed “completely 16 Excomm meeting transcript, 6:30m., October 16, 1962, in May and Zelikow , Kennedy Tapes, 92.
Most important, JFK had edged away from his initial impulse toward an airstrike (although hearing General Curtis LeMay, the cigar-chomping air force chief, growl that a blockade would be “almost as bad as the appeasement at Munich” bluntly reminded him of the domestic political hazards of appearing weak).21 Maintaining the charade of normality, the president left for a scheduled campaign swing.
To convince hardliners they were getting a fair hearing, he secretly instructed Bundy to keep the airstrike option alive.
But after cutting short his trip on Saturday to return to Washington, and hearing closing arguments from the bitterly split Excomm, he reaﬃrmed his preference for a limited blockade.
By Monday afternoon, when the White House announced that the president would address the nation at 7m. on a “matter of highest national urgency,” a crisis atmosphere gripped Washington.
After sending special envoys to brief key allies (Harold Macmillan, Charles de Gaulle, Konrad Adenauer) and telephoning predecessors , Kennedy informed congressional leaders and heard some of them rip the blockade as a futile half-measure.
Irked, he then walked to the Oval Oﬃce to tell the world of its predicament.
First – McNamara disclosed decades later – JFK felt deterred by the prospect of a single Soviet nuclear warhead detonating on an American city,22 and his military advisers could not guarantee a surprise airstrike would wipe out all the missiles.
Second, Kennedy derived thin comfort from the hawks’ forecasts that the Soviets would swallow a ﬁrst strike on Cuba without retaliating elsewhere.
Finally, Kennedy recoiled at a surprise attack liable to kill thousands of Cubans and Soviets.
Though hawks bitterly rejected the analogy, RFK passionately argued that a sudden strike would be “very, very diﬃcult indeed for the President … with all the memory of Pearl Harbor and with all the implications this would have for us in whatever world there would be afterward.
John F Kennedy in the White House (Boston, MA: Houghton Miﬄin, 1965), 803.
To persuade the Kremlin to reverse course, he announced a “strict quarantine on all oﬀensive military equipment” bound for Cuba, eﬀective from Wednesday morning.
Rusk quipped mordantly to an aide that they had won a “considerable victory” since they were still alive – Khrushchev had not retorted with a preemptive strike.
As the United Nations Security Council opened emergency debate, Kennedy secured unanimous endorsement of the blockade by the Organization of American States , and NATO allies also quickly closed ranks.
Ready to settle for a “halfway successful” outcome, he ordered two IRBM-transporting ships to stop shy of the quarantine line while instructing one vessel to run for Cuba before it went into eﬀect.
He leaned toward Mikoyan’s cautious advice to order nucleararmed Foxtrot submarines to avoid the area around Cuba over his defense minister’s brash conﬁdence that the noisy vessels could evade United States detection – but that instruction seems never to have reached the commanders of the submarines.
RFK vented the president’s ire at being “deceived intentionally,” and the two argued hotly.
Leaving, the attorney general asked what orders Soviet captains approaching the blockade held.
Standing instructions “not to obey unlawful demands to stop or be searched on the open seas,” Dobrynin presumed.
Once the quarantine started at 10m., no one knew whether Soviet ships would respect or ﬂout it.
The danger and concern that we all felt hung like a cloud over us all … These few minutes were the time of greatest worry by the President.
His hand went up to his face & covered his mouth and he closed his ﬁst.
His eyes were tense, almost gray, and we just stared at each other across the table.
Kennedy remained bent on evicting the missile bases already in Cuba, work on which was accelerating.
Dramatically, Stevenson insisted his Soviet counterpart answer the “simple question” of whether Moscow was placing MRBMs and IRBMs in Cuba.
Indicating he could wait “until hell freezes over,” the American then achieved a public relations coup by unveiling enlarged U-2 images of the missile bases.
Masking his retreat with gibes at JFK’s cowardice, the Soviet leader scaled back visions of a Cold War masterstroke.
If Washington “pledges not to touch Cuba,” he would dismantle the missile sites under UN inspection.
Reaching out in personal, emotional terms, Khrushchev viscerally evoked the horrors of war and also implied a deal.
You would declare that the United States will not invade Cuba with its forces and will not support any sort of forces which might intend to carry out an invasion 38 Excomm minutes, October 25, 1962, ibid., 209.
Then, Radio Moscow broadcast a tougher, more impersonal Khrushchev message demanding that in exchange for removing Soviet missiles from Cuba, Kennedy withdraw “analogous means” from Turkey.
Confused by the discordant messages, some on the Excomm blanched at rewarding nuclear blackmail.
A weather-sampling mission strayed over Siberia, rousing Soviet interceptors to scramble.
The news stoked fear on the Excomm – uncertain whether Moscow had authorized the act (it hadn’t) – that the Soviets had deliberately “ﬁred the ﬁrst shot” in the crisis.
Most Excomm members adamantly opposed a public swap and several advisers, including RFK, Bundy, and Thompson, urged JFK to eschew the Turkish oﬀer and instead “accept” the deal implicit in Khrushchev’s private letter – an idea that would go down in crisis lore as 44 Fursenko and Naftali, Khrushchev’s Cold War, 488.
Kennedy grew dismayed as conversation turned toward the likelihood of imminent combat, especially if ﬁring at surveillance ﬂights persisted.
If that’s part of the record, then I don’t see how we’ll have a very good war.
First, he had his brother assure Dobrynin that if Khrushchev removed his missiles, the Jupiters would be gone from Turkey within four to ﬁve months.
Finally, Kennedy’s ambassador in Rio was instructed to give the Brazilian government a message it could present to Castro, prodding him to evict the missiles in exchange for a rapprochement with the United States.
None of these eﬀorts struck Kennedy as promising, so it was with surprise bordering on disbelief that he learned the next morning that Khrushchev had agreed, in exchange for the no-invasion vow, “to dismantle the arms which you describe as oﬀensive, and to crate and return them to the Soviet Union,” and even to permit the UN to verify the process.
After all, JFK had only requested a commitment to withdraw the missiles sometime on Sunday, so he had more hours to haggle.
Yet, the Kremlin leader rushed to accept Kennedy’s proposal in the belief that he needed to “act very quickly” since Washington might soon attack, and before the belligerent Castro dragged the USSR into mortal conﬂict.
Khrushchev’s surrender ended the crisis’s most acute phase, but it took several weeks for United States and Soviet negotiators to sort out the debris.
To surmount Castro’s balking at inspections, the Americans monitored the missiles’ departure by ﬂying low over the ships carrying them away as sailors pulled back the covering tarpaulins, a procedure that humiliated Soviet naval commanders.
After Khrushchev grudgingly accepted Washington’s demand to remove the IL-28 bombers, JFK lifted the quarantine on November 20.
Khrushchev assured Kennedy that all Soviet nuclear weapons were gone from Cuba – but the tactical nuclear weapons weren’t shipped out until early December.
Though Kennedy never formalized the no-invasion vow due to Cuba’s blocking of on-site inspection, on January 7, 1963 Washington and Moscow jointly requested the issue’s removal from the Security Council agenda.
Probably the peril of intentional escalation was less acute than once formerly believed.
As the crisis climaxed, Khrushchev and Kennedy veered toward compromise rather than belligerence.
The Soviet leader, as noted above, secretly resolved by October 25 to settle for terms Washington could accept, and JFK’s frantic search for an escape hatch two days later suggests that, rather than approve an airstrike or invasion early the next week, he would have tightened the blockade, or even publicly bartered missiles.
Both leaders increasingly recognized their shared, transcendent interest in avoiding the ultimate catastrophe.
Yet, the risk of inadvertent escalation appears to have been even greater.
Contingent events might have been disastrously misinterpreted or caused an 57 Malinovskii to Pliev, October 27, 1962, in Gribkov and Smith, Operation ANADYR, 63.
United States spy planes photographed Soviet missile equipment as it arrived in Cuba and as it was sent back.
Here missile launchers are waiting to be sent back to the USSR from the port of Mariel, west of Havana. accidental clash, and revelations about Soviet nuclear weapons in and around Cuba other than the strategic missiles – including the tactical nuclear weapons (which local commanders under attack might have used regardless of Moscow’s edicts), and nuclear-armed submarines maneuvering around the blockade – suggest even a limited or accidental collision risked ballooning to general war, since any nuclear use against United States forces would have provoked instant nuclear retaliation.
At least one frazzled Soviet submarine commander on the blockade line, stalked and harassed by American ships and planes and out of touch with Moscow, is reported to have concluded that war had begun and considered ﬁring his nuclear torpedo.
In sum, the crisis still earns its status as the most dangerous moment in history.
Kennedy’s success in compelling Khrushchev to pull out the missiles struck most Americans as a glorious victory.
He won kudos for toughness in domestic politics and gained conﬁdence and stature for the duration of his shortened presidency, at home and abroad.
Castro was enraged at the Soviet leader both for his concessions to JFK and for his failure to consult before making them.
To mollify him, Khrushchev sent Mikoyan to Havana for weeks of tense secret negotiations, a hidden November Crisis that buﬀeted Soviet–Cuban ties.
The Kremlin’s decisions to extract additional hardware only intensiﬁed Castro’s fury, while Khrushchev grew increasingly exasperated at the Cuban leader’s intransigence.
Though the alliance survived, the crisis’s humiliating outcome gravely impaired Khrushchev’s standing within the Kremlin.
Together with other missteps, it solidiﬁed a sense that his erratic foreign policy had to end and ultimately hastened his ouster in October 1964.
Despite chagrin at the way the crisis had ended, he owed his regime’s long-term survival partly to JFK’s noinvasion vow.
Khrushchev’s claims to have “saved” Cuba, hollow at the time, in retrospect have some validity.
In the Cold War and nuclear arms race, the crisis heralded an era of relative stability in superpower relations.
In June 1963, JFK made a singularly conciliatory speech toward the USSR, hailing its World War II role and emphasizing the two nations’ common humanity and interest in avoiding nuclear ruin.
Shortly thereafter, Washington and Moscow established an emergency hot line – a step directly attributable to exasperation over the cumbersome methods used during the crisis – and agreed to a limited nuclear test ban, a major arms control advance that pointed the way towards a 1968 nuclear nonproliferation pact and also exacerbated the Sino-Soviet split as Beijing (nearing its own ﬁrst atomic blast) decried superpower collusion.
Convinced now that “Imperialism, as can be seen, is no paper tiger can give you a nice bite in the backside,”61 Khrushchev lost his appetite for a new Berlin showdown.
Within a decade, Moscow and Washington ratiﬁed the 61 NSK to Novotný, October 30, 1962.
The waning of superpower tensions fostered speculation that Kennedy and Khrushchev, had they lasted in power longer, might have ended the Cold War altogether.
Neither yielded fundamentally incompatible views of ideology or the legitimacy of the postwar international order.
Though military friction in Europe subsided, the superpowers repeatedly clashed indirectly in the Third World – and success in Cuba may have facilitated disaster in Vietnam.
In 1965, when Johnson decided to bomb the north and send hundreds of thousands of United States troops to the south, his entire national security team consisted of missile crisis veterans; McNamara later acknowledged that his experience with the quarantine directly inﬂuenced his thinking on the bombing.
Furious at being forced to back down – and submit to mortifying close-range inspection – Moscow resolved to catch up in the nuclear competition as rapidly as possible and never again be vulnerable to American pressure.
United States leaders rationalized the rapid expansion of the Soviet ICBM force as a stabilizing component of what McNamara dubbed mutual assured destruction , and Nixon and Brezhnev enshrined it in 1972 as a state of nuclear parity.
Some scholars argue the crisis reinforced a process of superpower “nuclear learning” – increasing judiciousness and responsibility, cementing a stable “long peace” – but this runs up against evidence that in late 1983 nuclear tensions led to another comparably perilous trip to the brink.
More than any other single Cold War event, the Cuban missile crisis stimulated a voluminous historiography and contentious public debate, not only over what actually happened but its implications for national security policy controversies, international relations theories, bureaucratic politics models, and a host of other ﬁelds and sub-ﬁelds.
First, both Khrushchev and Kennedy come oﬀ looking worse in terms of their actions before the crisis – more irresponsible and reckless, less heedful of the risks and potential unintended and disproportionate consequences of their actions (for example, Khruschev’s deployments of tactical nuclear weapons and nuclear-armed submarines; Kennedy’s obsessive anti-Castro campaign) – yet, once in the crisis, their shared achievement in escaping it appears even more impressive.
It required not only bridging the gulf between them, but mastering their own bellicose initial impulses, and those of some in their own camps.
And second, even with the Cold War a receding memory, the persistence of acute fears over nuclear proliferation and confrontation into the twenty-ﬁrst century suggests that the missile crisis will retain its relevance, as well as its fascination, for the foreseeable future.
