In this crisis, Cold War tensions heightened to almost world war status as the United States confronted its nemesis the Soviet Union to negotiate the fate of Cuba which was now armed with missiles capable of delivering nuclear warheads to targets thousands of miles away.
In this international struggle, the actions and intentions of Fidel Castro have been dramatically overshadowed by those of United States’ President John F Kennedy and Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev.
Kennedy mentions Castro’s pilot in the first chapter of the book saying that the pilot’s “boastful and intoxicated way [of talking] about the nuclear missiles”2 led American intelligence operatives in Cuba to the discovery of the missiles in the first place.
Kennedy also mentions Castro directly twice in strategies discussed at President Kennedy’s specially formed Executive Committee meetings.
The Kennedy administration chose the former in that Soviet supplies to Cuba were stopped by a naval blockade, but never dealt with Cuba directly.
Therefore Cuba and the Castro regime were never even considered to be a major part of the crisis from the American perspective.
Laffey and Weldes point to the ExComm transcripts for answers to this lack of a Cuban perspective.
In their analysis they state that the United States government did not believe Cuba to be important to the crisis because they believed Cuba to be a “Soviet-puppet state,”5 implying that the Castro regime was perfectly in line with the ideologies and aspirations of the Soviet Union.
Castro, the Missile Crisis, and the Soviet Collapse , 34 3 such as Sergei Khrushchev state that the Soviet government had little influence in the outcome of the Cuban Revolution and the placement of missiles into Cuba was intended to be more like aid to a fellow communist nation than acts of a superior nation on its subordinate.
In their analyses of the event, Cuban historians such as Tomas Acosta and Carlos Lechuga pose the statement that Cuba turned to the Soviet Union for “mutual defense” and that Cuba was betrayed by the Soviet Union in negotiations.
I will cite Soviet material when it is necessary for understanding the ideological and tactical differences between Cuba and the Soviet Union.
On January 1, 1959, Castro had sent Fulgencio Batista into exile and was able to bring the entire island of Cuba under his control.
A New History confirmed this theory by citing a passage from Khrushchev’s memoir.
In his article entitled “Cuban Communism,” Irving Louis Horowitz outlined five points as to why Castro did not openly embrace Marxist-Leninist ideology at the time of the triumph of his revolution.
The first point Horowitz made was that Soviet style communism would “elevate Havana to a supreme place in the bureaucratic hierarchy,”16 and would thus take away some of Castro’s rural charisma.
This point is well taken considering the emphasis of Marxist doctrine on industry and the influence of Castro on the success of the Cuban Revolution.
Being forced to depend on a country literally on the other side of the world for political and material sustenance would place the success of the Revolution in jeopardy.
The fourth point Horowitz made is that the adoption of orthodox communism would cause Cuba to be politically and economically isolated from the rest of Latin America.
The final point Horowitz posed was that the adoption of orthodox communist doctrine would crush the “revolutionary will” of the Cuban people.
This point is the strongest element of Horowitz’s argument of the historical context of the Cuban Revolution.
In order to fully understand the impact of this element in Horowitz’s theory, it is necessary to analyze the relationship between Cuba and the United States in the first half of the twentieth century.
In 1895, the Cuban people revolted against Spain, their imperial homeland.
The United States intervened in Cuba’s defense and went to war against Spain in 1898.
With Spain defeated, the United States occupied Cuba and assisted in its reconstruction as an independent nation.
The Politics of CubanUnited States Trade, 1902-1933” Mary Speck analyzes the efficacy of two political stipulations placed on Cuba from the United States: the Platt Amendment and the Reciprocity Treaty.
Speck explains the rationale for these two stipulations by quoting President William McKinley and his desire for creating “singular ties of intimacy”21 between the United States and Cuba.
The Reciprocity Act, promised Cuba that the United States would maintain low tariff rates.
Speck does indicate however that in some instances the United States influence in Cuba did have positive effects on the Cuban infrastructure.
Speck identifies the U.S.-Cuban joint company the Cuban Portland Cement Corporation as a positive example of U.S.-Cuban cooperation by indicating that this company was capable of producing one thousand barrels of cement a day26.
The effects of these two acts of legislation served to frustrate Cuba’s attempts at resisting U.S. incursion in their domestic affairs while they triggered economic and political failures in the country and made the nation ripe for the Cuban Revolution of 1959.
United States economic domination in Cuba intensified during the 1950s right before the Cuban Revolution.
In his article entitled “Castro, Cuba, and the United States” Philip W Bonsal analyzed the American influence on the industries in Cuba from the 1940s to the late 1950s.
This included the telephone, electric light and power companies as well as two of the three crude oil refineries (the other company owned by an Anglo-Dutch conglomerate) and a major railroad company on the eastern side of the island.
Bonsal adds that the retail merchandising and tourist markets were also dominated by American capitalists.
These two analyses demonstrate that although Cuba was formally declared independent in the final years of the nineteenth century, Cuba was still dominated, this time by the United States.
A half century later, the Cuban Revolution was meant to liberate the people from the economic dependence that the United States had imposed upon them.
The notion that the Cuban people would eagerly accept a system in which they were wholly dependent, both ideologically and materially, on the USSR is contradictory to the Cuban spirit of liberty.
In the same collection of articles, Horowitz explained that Cuban-style communism formed naturally in a way that was contrary to traditional Marxist-Leninist doctrine.
Horowitz pointed out that at the time of the Cuban Revolution; there was no proletariat, no urban working class to unite together against the capitalist oppressors.
In Marxist-Leninist doctrine, the proletariat is vitally important to a successful communist revolution.
As a result of this, Cuba could not survive on its own industrial strength and would require imported industrial goods for sustenance and therefore could not become self-sufficient.
Therefore in the doctrine of Cuban communism, the guerrilla is the driving force of social revolution in lieu of the proletariat.
We must come to the inevitable conclusion that the guerrilla fighter is a social reformer, that he takes up arms responding to the angry protest of the people against their oppressors, and that he fights to change the social system that keeps all his unarmed brothers in ignominy and misery.
He launches himself against the conditions of the reigning institutions at a particular moment with all the vigor that circumstances permit to breaking the mold of these institutions.
Although Castro had vaguely defined himself as a “humanist” early in his political career, after April 1959 he began to exhibit signs of moving rapidly to the left culminating a speech given in December, 1961 in which he formally declared himself a communist.
Sergei Khrushchev indicated that this was due to the fact that on Castro’s visit to the United States he visited with Vice President Richard Nixon instead of President Dwight Eisenhower.
While it is true that if Eisenhower had received Castro instead of Nixon; Castro may not have immediately become a communist, the structure of Cuban issues to be resolved with the United States had the potential to produce antagonism between the two nations.
The “human will” of the Cuban Revolution was to rid itself of domination by the United States, therefore, antiUnited States sentiments already existed in Cuba without Castro’s communist transformation.
Gott strengthened his point by referencing a memo written to Eisenhower by CIA chief Allen Dulles during the final days of the Cuban Revolution indicating that, “Communists and other extreme radicals appear to have penetrated the Castro movement.
Contrary to Sergei Khrushchev’s speculation this mutual animosity and mistrust would prevent Cuba from becoming a “moderately friendly” nation to the United States.
We began in the university to make the first contacts with the Communist Manifesto, with the works of Marx and Engels and Lenin.
I can say an honest confession, that many of the things that we have done in the revolution are not things that we invented, not in the least.
When we left the university, in my particular case, I was really greatly influenced--not that I will say I was in the least a Marxist-Leninist.
In declaring himself a Communist, Castro stated that he advocated the redistribution of wealth in his nation.
These acts of legislation expropriated land and industries in Cuba placing them in the hands of the Castro regime.
As a result of these actions, American companies with economic interest in Cuba issued 8,816 certified claims against Cuba totaling to $1,799,548,568.69.44 Fidel Castro’s formal declaration as a Communist and a Marxist-Leninist resulted in the United States attempting to isolate the island economically and politically.
As these acts of aggression were taking place, Castro lived in fear of the United States believing that the United States would invade his island and crush his regime.
The presence of a Communist dictatorship in the western hemisphere dramatically alarmed the United States because the containment of Communist countries was a primary element of United States Cold War strategy.
Castro’s fears became a reality when 1,500 CIA-trained Cuban mercenaries attempted to invade the island in April of 1962 in an event known as the Bay of Pigs Invasion, known to the Cuban people as Playa Giron invasion.
He feared that the U.S. would mount another invasion and succeed in removing him from power.
In order to fully dismantle Cuba’s communist regime, the United States would have to invade and occupy Cuba.
Shortly after the publication of “Cuba and Communism in the Hemisphere” the CIA authorized Operation Patty.
This was a multifaceted plot designed to kill both Castro and his brother Raul while creating a justification for United States military intervention in Cuba.
This plan was scheduled to be executed July 26, 1961 during a nationwide celebration of the July 26th Movement.
At this celebration, Castro and his brother Raul would be targeted for assassination as they gave their speeches at functions in Havana and Santiago de Cuba respectively.
The assassination of Raul Castro would take place from one of the houses close to the stadium where Raul was scheduled to give a speech.
A .30 caliber machine gun would be assembled in this house and would scope out Raul while he was giving his speech.
Shortly after the gunshot, four men armed with grenades would enter the crowd and confirm the death of Raul.
After the assassination of Raul Castro took place, mortar attacks were scheduled to go off at the Hermanos Diaz oil refinery and near the United States Naval Base at Guantanamo Bay.
The plan for assassinating Fidel Castro involved placing an 82 millimeter mortar shell in the Plaza of the Revolution in Havana near the stage where Castro was scheduled to give a speech.
The size of the shell was intentionally designed to kill as many people as possible targeting specifically Castro and other subordinate members of the Cuban Revolutionary Government.
After the assassination of Fidel Castro, assassins and saboteurs already positioned in the Cuban provinces of Camaguey and Las Villas would mortar buildings of communist party members and destroy bridges to impede Cuba’s ability to defend itself.
Operation Patty was authorized in the final days of June in 1961 but was not executed due to the fact that Cuban security forces who had apparently infiltrated the CIA intercepted information about the plan.
The Cuban government allowed the plan to mature to the point where it knew that all parties were identified and then canceled all events scheduled for July 26 and subsequently arrested all the operatives.
The Cuban government formally condemned the action on August 12, 1961.51 The United States government continued to develop plots to assassinate Castro using various methods such as exploding and poisoned cigars, having Castro write with a pen known as the AM/LASH device, a 49 Acosta, 40 50 Acosta, 40 51 Acosta, 41 15 pen outfitted with a finely crafted hypodermic needle capable of injecting poison into the user’s bloodstream.
The United States government planned to employ the Mafia as a delivery system for these devices due to their connections with the island.
Richard Bissell, a high ranking operative in the CIA Cuba Project later stated, “I hoped the Mafia would achieve success.
The first stage of the operation was entitled “Action” and was scheduled to go into effect in March 1962.
The purpose of action was to “start moving in” that is to say, infiltrate Cuba and prepare for the uprising.
The second stage of the operation was entitled “Build-Up” and was scheduled to take place in April-July 1962.
The third stage of the operation was entitled “Readiness” and served as a deadline for strategy.
Stage four, entitled “Resistance” involved placing the guerrilla fighters in position in Cuba.
The fifth stage of Operation Mongoose was entitled “Revolt” and authorized the strategically placed guerrilla fighters to begin their disturbances against the communist regime.
Jon Elliston 76 17 In the CINCLANT60 memorandum dated 25 September 1962, three different contingency plans were outlined for military intervention in Cuba.
During the same time Castro countered these acts of aggression by formulating his own military schemes.
One covert military plan Castro created was known as Operation Boomerang.
Under the conditions of Operation Boomerang, Castro would authorize sympathetic Cubans living in the United States to attack military and civilian targets in the most populous American cities if the United States ever invaded Cuba.
The Castro regime also sought military aid from the Soviet Union during this time.
In the latter half of 1961, the Cuban government signed two military agreements with the Soviet government for aid and military supplies.
The first agreement, ratified on August 4, 1961 granted the Cuban government $48. million in military aid and equipment.
The second agreement, ratified on September 30, 1961 promised Cuba $149.55 million in military aid and equipment.
Cuba was obligated to repay only $67.55 million of this aid over a ten year period at two percent interest.
The third military agreement signed later in July of 1962 was Operation Anadyr66 in which nuclear missiles were transported from the Soviet Union to Cuba.
From 1961-1962 the Soviet Union and other Communist bloc nations also sent economic aid to Cuba amounting to the sum of $570 million dollars.
Russia also placed a quota for 3 million tons of sugar to be imported from Cuba in 1962.68 Khrushchev was also well aware of American aggression against Cuba that he had to protect his communist ally in the Western Hemisphere.
Therefore he began to authorize plans to put missiles and nuclear weapons into Cuba in order to deter the United States.
We wanted Cuba to remain revolutionary and socialist, and we knew Cuba needed help in order to do so . . . we had no other way of helping them meet the American threat except to install our missiles on the island, so as to confront the aggressive forces of the United States with a dilemma: if you invade Cuba, you’ll have to face a nuclear missile attack against your own cities.
Gilbert M Joseph 73 19 However, some historians have suggested that protecting Cuba from American aggression may not have been the only reason behind placing the missiles in Cuba.
Other reasons included, repairing the missile gap between the United States and the Soviet Union, bettering Soviet relations with Latin America, and regaining prestige in the eyes of their Chinese counterparts.
A Concise History that a schism occurred between China and the Soviet Union in terms of Marxist doctrine.
Munton and Welch indicated that Chinese communist leaders questioned Khrushchev’s orthodoxy in Marxist ideology and his resolve against the spread of capitalism.
Munton and Welch theorized that a possible reason for Khrushchev putting the missiles in Cuba was to prove the resolve of Khrushchev and the Soviet Union against capitalist aggression thus regaining prestige in the eyes of the Chinese communists.
If this was his intention it dramatically backfired at the end of the crisis.
Other possible ulterior motives aside, Khrushchev authorized the sending of missiles to Cuba under the guise of protecting Cuba from another American invasion.
Khrushchev was correct in predicting this as stated by previous evidence.
If what they really had was only fifty or sixty missiles, there is no doubt that the presence of those forty two missiles significantly improved the situation; it almost doubled the effective delivery systems.
Hugh Thomas in his authoritative book, Cuba, indicated that although the placement of Soviet missiles in Cuba shifted the balance of nuclear power to the Soviets’ favor using the best of the Russian’s nuclear arsenal, Soviet military strength still floundered compared to that of the United States In the early 1960s, according to Thomas, the Russian nuclear arsenal had “five times fewer nuclear delivery weapons” than the arsenal of the United States.
Therefore, although Russia sent very powerful elements of its nuclear arsenal to Cuba and such actions did shift the balance of nuclear power into their favor, the United States still was superior to the Soviet Union and any nuclear exchange would definitely annihilate Cuba.
On May 29, 1962 a group of Soviet nuclear scientists officially disguised as agricultural technicians including Marshal Sergei Biryuzov vice minister of defense,77 arrived at Cuba with the preliminary plans for placing missile launchers in Cuba.
In this preliminary stage of placing nuclear missiles into Cuba, Castro and his brother Raul met with these Soviet representatives in Havana.
After offering the information I mentioned they asked what I thought should be done to avoid the attack.
Khrushchev is reported to have responded, “Don’t worry, I’ll grab Kennedy by the balls and make him negotiate.
Acosta’s account of Khrushchev’s actions debunked Sergei Khrushchev’s theory that Premier Khrushchev was innocently pushed into placing the missiles into Cuba as a deterrent.
In order to fully understand the differences of interpretations it is necessary to understand the life and career of Acosta.
The latter joined the Cuban Revolutionary Armed Forces in 1961 and was mobilized in Cuba during the crisis as a political instructor of Military Unit 2562 in the western region of Cuba.
Acosta had access to materials from the Cuban perspective that point out the “other side” of Sergei Khrushchev’s naïve account of his father’s actions during the crisis.
In August 1962, Khrushchev sent Aleksandr Alekseev, the recently appointed Soviet Ambassador to Cuba, to Havana with a draft of the agreement that would place nuclear weapons on Cuban soil.
Castro vehemently did not agree with the text of the agreement because he believed that this agreement should appear as a military agreement for mutual defense.
Later on that month, Castro sent Che Guevara and Emilio Aragones to Moscow carrying their revised version of the agreement as a counterproposal.
Khrushchev agreed to the proposed revisions but insisted that the agreement not be published until after the missiles were operational.
This was the first of several important differences of opinion between the Soviets and the Cubans.
Although Khrushchev was confident that the missiles would be properly hidden from sight, Che and Aragones both believed that the missiles would be discovered long before they were operational.
After this meeting, the Soviet Union began to send an entire arsenal of nuclear weaponry to Cuba.
Thirty six R-12 MRBM missiles were sent in three regiments of twelve to the island.
In simpler terms, a single warhead possessed between fifteen to seventy times the destructive power as the atomic bomb dropped on Hiroshima.
The warheads for the R-14 missiles were just as destructive as the warheads designed for the R-12.
The actual missiles never reached Cuba, however, several of the warheads arrived at Cuba’s port of La Isabela on the Soviet ship Aleksandrovsk without American detection on October 23.
Had the missiles been installed in Cuba, the targeting range would have been such that virtually any city in the continental United States would have been a target as well as most Canadian and Latin American cities.
The Soviet Union also provided Cuba with an arsenal of conventional weapons.
Four reinforced motorized rifle regiments amounting to 14,000 soldiers were deployed with a wide variety of equipment at their disposal including tanks and antiaircraft artillery.
Six Luna missiles equipped with 2 megaton nuclear warheads were also sent to Cuba.
The Luna missile was a short range missile with only a range of forty miles.
Khrushchev had authorized the Luna missiles to carry nuclear missiles in September 1962.86 Every nuclear warhead required specific conditions for storage as General Beloborodov explained “One of the big problems that had to be resolved in connection with the nuclear warheads was the climate in Cuba.
If it had only been a matter of our defense, we would not have accepted the missiles.
But don’t go and think that it was fear of the dangers that could have followed from having the missiles here; it was because of the way in which this could tarnish the image of the Revolution, and we were very zealous about the image of the Revolution in the rest of Latin America; and this in our opinion had a high political cost for our country’s image.
This statement contradicted the statements he had made in 1962 which indicate possible hindsight and political flip-flopping to save face.
This is seen throughout interpretations of this event done by Cuban historians.
The storage for the missiles proved to be a tactical error in procedure.
We foresaw, naturally, the possibility that United States intelligence might discover us.
As it turned out, on October 14 they photographed white slabs of concrete.
Some of our comrades. . . thought that the missiles could be placed in such a way that they could not be distinguished from palm trees, but that was a stupid conclusion, because the missile sights had to be prepared, cables, hung, launching pads built—in other words, everything was complicated.
If we had known what those missiles were like and if the question of camouflage had been posed to us, it would have been easy to decide what to do… In a country where there are so many construction projects, so many big chicken barns and all sorts of things, it would have been the easiest thing in the world to build all those installations under roofs or something else, and they would have never been discovered.
On October 22, 1962, the crisis began when a U-2 spy plane flying overhead photographed missile silos being erected in San Cristobal, Cuba.
This is evidenced by the order given by the commander of the base at Guantanamo Bay stating that all civilian residents must evacuate.
While the United States military was reorganizing itself, President Kennedy arranged an Executive Committee on October 16, known as ExComm consisting of 25 members including himself, Vice President Lyndon Johnson, Attorney General Robert F Kennedy, Secretary of State Dean Rusk and Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara.
In their meetings, members of ExComm developed a series of options or “tracks” to choose in order to resolve the crisis.
The Administration eventually authorized a military blockade around Cuba consisting of sixteen destroyers, three cruisers, an anti-submarine aircraft carrier, and six utility ships.
These vessels were given orders to disable, instead of sink any hostile Russian vessel heading to Cuba.
During this time, Castro began to reorganize his political and military structure.
Each of these divisions had their own military presence and political jurisdiction.
Castro appointed his brother Raul as commander of the Eastern province.
Commander Juan Almeida was named the leader of the central province and Che Guevara assumed command of the western province in Pinar del Rio.
Castro remained in Havana to maintain control of Cuba from its capital.
At 5:40m. the Prime Minister, Commander in Chief of the armed forces, ordered the entire Revolutionary Armed Forces to be placed on combat alert status, taken only in cases of critical danger.
This measure was taken in response to the reports coming from the United States, and to the mobilization of United States military forces against our country.
The nation has awakened on a war footing, ready to repel any attack.5 On October 24, Castro met with his chief of intelligence Captain Manuel de Jesus Quinones to calculate how many ships and soldiers the Americans would use in order to mount an invasion of Cuba.
Quinones also noted that if the 82nd Airborne Division were ever activated, the first stage of the invasion would take place five or six hours after.6 To combat the possibility of air raids, Castro placed reserve batteries of antiaircraft artillery on the outskirts of Havana.
The DP was assembled into various combat battalions and civil defense units including health and sanitation brigades, firefighters, and repair units in order to assist the war effort should combat arise.8 On October 26, Castro met with Soviet General Issa Pliyev to discuss the issue of American planes flying over Cuban airspace.
After analysis of the situation and the reports in our possession, I consider aggression to be almost imminent—within the next twenty-four to seventy-two hours.
Should the second variant take place and the imperialists invade Cuba with the intention of occupying , the dangers of this aggressive policy for humanity are so great that after such an event the Soviet Union must never allow circumstances in which the imperialists might carry out a nuclear first strike against it.
Tomas Diez Acosta stated in the seventh chapter of his book that theories suggesting that this letter pushed Khrushchev to independently broker for a solution to the conflict “lack any objective basis114” and noted that the United States and the Soviet Union were already negotiating for peace before Castro’s letter of October 26 was sent.
Although this is true, the content of the letter and the reaction of Premier Khrushchev as told by his own son also emphasize the notion that it would not be prudent to include the Cuban people in the negotiations due to the ambitions blatantly stated by their leader.
Had this letter not been sent, or had it contained a different message, it is possible that Khrushchev may have let the Cuban people in on negotiations.
By adopting a revisionist stance, Cuban historian Carlos Lechuga attempted to clarify Castro’s intentions in his book entitled In the Eye of the Storm.
Lechuga explained that Castro dictated his letter to Soviet First Secretary Monakhov who evidently did not speak Spanish well.
Lechuga’s revisionist theory indicates that the real nature of Castro’s message was lost in translation.
If Castro’s message had been misunderstood, he would have sent a follow up message that clarified his intentions.
It is true that Castro doubted that Khrushchev fully understood the meaning of his message and did send follow up messages to clarify his intentions, but the content of those messages only serve to strengthen the meaning of the October 26th letter.
You based on the alarming news you say you have received from Cuba and, lastly, my cable of 27 October.
I do not know what news you may have received; I am simply referring to the message I sent you the night of the 26 October, received by you on the 27th.
What we did in the face of events, Comrade Khrushchev, was prepare ourselves to fight.
The eyes of many men, Soviet and Cuban, who were willing to die with supreme dignity, wept as they learned of the surprising and unexpected and practically unconditional decision to withdraw the weapons.
You may not know to what degree the Cuban people were prepared to fulfill their duty to the patria and to humanity.6 This excerpt is taken directly from Castro’s most recent biography, the most current source.
Had Castro been misquoted he would have stated so either in the letter or in the interviews conducted for this biography.
Khrushchev believed that they were more of a deterrent instead of weapons to be fired, as he would explain to his colleagues.
On October 27, the Cuban military began to open fire on American planes, as per Castro’s order.
In an act of solidarity, the Soviets began to fire their antiaircraft artillery as well.
As a result, an American U-2 spy plane piloted by Major Rudolf Anderson was shot down at 10:17 A.M. over Banes in Eastern Cuba.
As per the agreement, President Kennedy publically proclaimed that the United States would never invade Cuba.
In fact, according to his most recent biography, Castro learned of the exchange through the international press instead of Khrushchev himself.
When the news reached us . . .it produced great indignation, because we had felt that we had become some kind of bargaining chip.
Not only was this a decision taken without consulting us, several steps were taken without informing us.
The first point of Castro’s plan was that the economic embargo placed on Cuba by the United States in 1960 must be lifted.
The second point in Castro’s plan was that the United States must end all subversive activities designed to remove the communist regime from power.
Castro defined these activities as the dropping of explosives by air, sea and land vehicles, the organization of invasions by Cuban exiles or others, and acts of espionage and sabotage.
The third point of Castro’s plan was that the acts of piracy undertaken by the United States and Puerto Rico were to cease.
Che Guevara was inspecting his military units as commander of the garrison at Pinar del Rio when he received the news.
Cuban citizens began to write letters to the Soviet Embassy in disgust saying that the Soviet Union was using Cuba as a bargaining chip to resolve their issues with the United States.8 On November 1, Castro made a declaration to the Cuban people saying, “It is a shameful policy to hide the most serious issues from public opinion.
Throughout the month of November 1962, the Chinese Embassy in Havana organized large demonstrations in solidarity for the Cuban people.
During this time Cubans began to align with the Chinese communists which took prestige away from the Soviet communists.0 In spite of all these events and sentiments, Khrushchev believed the crisis was a victory for both the Soviet Union and Cuba.
We consider that we have achieved a victory for Cuba and for the Soviet Union, that the objectives we had when we placed them there have been achieved.
To which Rodriguez replied, “That’s just the problem, Nikita, he’s not your son.
Castro wanted Cuba to enter the Warsaw Pact and be militarily aligned with the Soviet Union.
As a direct result of the crisis, Soviet influence in Latin America suffered dramatically, according to Che Guevara.
The Soviets’ prestige suffered and allowed China to move in and win the hearts and minds of Cuban citizens.
Although Khrushchev succeeded in protecting Cuba from an American invasion, he did so in a way that indicated he“ thought things through or prepared backup plans for various contingencies.
Cuban historians Gott, Thomas, Acosta and Lechuga demonstrate this very well in their interpretations of the event.
Soviet historians, such as Sergei Khrushchev confirm this point especially by citing the acceleration of SovietUnited States negotiations after the startling letter from Castro to Khrushchev dated October 26.
This is the strongest element of Sergei Khrushchev’s interpretation of this event; his weakest point is his overwhelming naivety concerning the relationship between the United States and Cuba.
After researching this topic in greater detail, it has become my interpretation that the Soviet historians’ strongest point is the Cuban historians’ weakest point.
Both Acosta and Lechuga attempt to clarify Castro’s meaning and intentions in his letter to Khrushchev of October 26 by revisionist means.
These arguments, however, are poorly crafted and do not reflect the views of the parties concerned, namely Castro.
It is my interpretation that instead of viewing the missiles and warheads as a deterrent, in the way Nikita Khrushchev and other members of the Soviet leadership intended, Castro viewed the missiles as a possible offensive weapon to finally rid Cuba of the looming American presence that had threatened his government early in his regime.
Castro’s choice to view the missiles as an offensive weapon destroyed any possibility for Soviet military aid in the future as demonstrated by the repeated Soviet refusal to add Cuba to the Warsaw Pact.
This demonstrates that the Soviet leadership was aware of the volatile aggressive tendencies that existed between the United States and Cuba and that adding Cuba as an integral part of its collective would only heighten Cold War tensions to an unnecessary level.
The strain on Cuban-Soviet relations after the crisis only proved to widen the gap between Cuba and the Soviet Union.
This is demonstrated by Castro’s refusal to sign the Arms Control Treaties of October-November 1963, acts of legislation that Khrushchev had brokered with Kennedy during the crisis.
Cuba’s Struggle with the Superpowers After the Missile Crisis, James G Blight and Phillip P Brenner argue that this statement was a declaration that Russia would never “Sovietize” Cuba.
The lack of ideological and tactical unity on the side of the Soviets and the Cubans coupled with the vague assumptions made by the United States about Cuba nearly caused a chain reaction that engulfed the entire world in nuclear war.
