Never mistake horsepower for staying power; A bike on the road is worth two in the shop; Maintenance is as much art as it is science.
He also referenced the well-known book, “Zen and the Art of Motorcycle Maintenance,” by Robert Pirsig, which at Director of National Intelligence James Clapper gives a keynote speech Tuesday morning. closer look is more about philosophy and values.
One argument from the book is that quality, value and truth are what actually exist in the real world, Clapper said.
We refer to them as – DNI James Clapper see Zen and the Art of Intelligence, 14 Download the Official GEOINT Symposium App GEOINT 2012 powered by t t 5 si a 41 Vi aGo th Put GEOINT in the hands rr oo Te NT b OI of those who rely on it most GE Today’s warfighter is the most sophisticated sensor in the world.
TerraGo® Technologies geospatial collaboration software and GeoPDF® maps and imagery are among the most widely adopted COTS solutions to produce, access, update and share geospatial information with anyone, anywhere.
From virtually any mobile device, warfighters can access interactive, compact, portable and secure GeoPDF maps and imagery and easily make georeferenced updates using notes, audio, video, Web services or other information in connected or offline environments.
When armed with the most up-to-date GEOINT, warfighters can collaborate peer-to-peer in the field or with Command to produce more relevant, current products that enable better decision making.
Check out TerraGo Mobile® for Android™ www.terragotech.com » HIGHLIGHTS AND NEWS REMEMBERING THE CUBAN MISSILE CRISIS Havana Nights Welcome Reception Pays Homage to History The GEOINT 2012 Havana Nights Welcome Reception took place in the Gaylord atrium’s Emerald Plaza and Wreckers Sports Bar.
With Cuban-inspired food and live music, GEOINT attendees kicked off the week with a networking event that spanned most of the Gaylord Palms.
For 13 days in October 1962, the United States came very close to engaging in a major nuclear war.
President John F Kennedy had publicly warned the Soviet Union not to introduce offensive missiles into Cuba.
However, Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev surreptitiously brought missiles to Cuba, which were discovered by an American U-2 spy plane.
Christopher Tucker, USGIF board member and principal of Yale House Ventures.
Buses will depart WORKSHOPS from Gaylord Palms and the Caribe continually from 6:30 to 11:30m. for this optional night out.
Everglades, Kew U SGIF’s Commercial Synthetic Aperture Radar Satellite West, and St.
The tour spans more and Earth Observation Working Groups are offering training than 4. acres of space with more than 500,000 sessions throughout the week as part of the NGA/USGIF eye-catching individual plants.
Alligacan sign up as well] on various SAR and EO capabilities and application tor Alley, Brighton Collectibles, Island Paradise, areas,” said John Moeller, chair of USGIF technical programs. and PGA Tour Shops.
Rock Massage for $210, and a 50-minute Celestial The CSARS Working Group will also hold a lunch roundtable Body Wrap for $162.
These prices include a 20% on Thursday from 1 to 2m. in Sun Ballroom 4-5.
During the EO sessions, DigitalGlobe and GeoEye will highlight the ways to get access to and use commercial, high-resolution imagery through NGA’s EnhancedView program.
End users will get specific instruction on the benefits and use cases for commercial imagery, plus learn more about future capabilities.
To learn more and view the agenda, visit the news page at www.usgif. org.
MyDigitalGlobe, and DigitalGlobe Cloud Services, unlock the power of the world’s largest online library of current, commercial high-resolution imagery and geospatial information to desktops, portals, intranets, and mobile devices around the world.
UNIQUE CAPABILITIES THROUGH CONTENT, ASSETS, AND SMARTER INFRASTRUCTURE DECISIONS THROUGH ANALYTICAL EXCELLENCE SOLVING REAL-WORLD CUSTOMER PROBLEMS VISIT DIGITALGLOBE BOOTH #1401 TO LEARN MORE TASKING MAPPING ANALYSIS DELIVERY SERVICES PRODUCTS SERVICES SERVICES BUSHEHR, IRAN | 50 CM NATURAL COLOR www.digitalglobe.com/performance » HIGHLIGHTS AND NEWS GEOSPATIAL INTEROPERABILITY The Challenges and Opportunities of Information Sharing T he numbers are staggering.
That’s one reason why the reality for sharing information across all government levels in the wake of the attacks of 9-11 is harder than the vision.
James Kwolek of NGA, Dan Cotter of DHS, and Jerry Johnston of DOI discuss geospatial interoperability during a breakout session Tuesday afternoon.
The rest of the panel, which included Jerry Johnston, with the Department of the Interior, and James Kwolek, with the on authoritative data; and leverage shared computing capability.
FEMA and other response organizations with the tools to rapidly visualDuring the GEOINT 2012 Breakout Session, “Confronting ize a crisis as it develops in real time.
It’s pretty culturally specific.” intelligence market, separating temporal information from the noise of The company’s process of separating intelligence is complex, using a more than 150,000 sources to create a calendar that includes everything relationship between the past and future. from planned unrest to high-level international meetings.
The concept is to find people who are talking about the future. back a week before that and look at publications.
It’s a way of looking at source credibility. the future in recommendations to decision-makers.
Government offiIf you’ve got a source that’s been calling it in the past, and particularly cials can monitor protests in other countries or meetings between other one making a volume of good calls, not only was their veracity good but governments’ officials.
The business community can investigate risks, their predictions were fast.
That’s a source you want to monitor.” such as leaked news about upcoming product releases.
ITT Exelis handles the PHOTO COURTESY OF BATTLESPACEFS.COM government ISR business, but is presenting some new concepts from the overall ITT brand at the GEOINT 2012 Symposium.
The first is a new product, the ENVI Services Engine, which supports the ENVI software line that is in its fifth generation of processing and analyzing imagery and data gathered from airborne and satellite sensors.
The ENVI Services Engine, produced by ITT Exelis Visual Information Solutions , uses open source standards and middleware-agnostic architecture UAVS AND MORE to bring image analysis capabilities to the cloud.
This General Atomics to Display Predator Models and STARE offers potential for a wider range of exploitation and dissemination to end users and warfighters.
The openeneral Atomics will have a varied display of UAVs at source standards provide flexibility to allow the ENVI G GEOINT 2012, beginning with a one-sixth scale model of the Predator B/MQ9.
The follow-on of the Predator A UAV that established the capability of Services Engine to be integrated into many different types of systems.
General Atomics recently tested the Predator B/MQ9 Block 1-plus, an “Our message to this marketplace is a cohesiveness upgrade, at its Palmdale, Calif., facility. that we have, not only with airborne capture solutions, The Predator C Avenger will also be on display.
It’s the next generation but also ground and onboard exploitation and processUAV—jet-powered with stealth characteristics.
In addition to UAVs, the company will also feature its Lynx Multi-mode ITT Exelis will also showcase airborne solutions, Radar and the new System for Tactical Archival, Retrieval and Exploitation such as Jagwire, which is web-enabled and designed to , both of which were demonstrated at NATO’s Unified Vision offer an integrated and unified approach to processing, trial in Brekstad, Norway, in June. discovery, storage, dissemination and exploitation of STARE is designed to create intelligence at the tactical level.
It can store full-motion video and intelligence information in near data for 30 days, retrieve and fuse data sources, exploit and create actionreal-time, while optimizing bandwidth use. able intelligence, and connect to the SIPRNet and Distributed Common Ground The company also plans to showcase the Federated System for data dissemination.
Embedded inteL-server for Collaborative Operations , which brings layered intelligence to warfighters more quickly.
TRAJECTORYMAGAZINE.COM | 9 » S PEC I A L FE ATU R ES INFORMATION INNOVATION Budget Pressures Drive Collaboration Joint Information Environment and Intelligence Community Information Technology Enterprise are central to the collaboration strategy.
Along those same lines, JIE provides architecture enabling all to use an approved device whether at work, at home, or at any other mobile location.
The ability to share data securely, independent of the network across which that data travels, was another idea put forward.
This will give the data stewards a better Rob Carey, deputy chief information officer, DoD, and Al Tarasiuk, chief information officer for the Intelligence Community, discuss information sense of where their information is going innovation at Tuesday’s panel. and that it’s under control, he explained.
T uesday morning’s defense and intelligence panel on information “Fine grain, attribute-based access control is really critical to innovation discussed the importance of collaboration to oversharing information,” he said. come shared challenges.
Cloud-based computing is fundamentally changing the way secu“The relationship between the IC and the DoD is stronger than rity is handled.
From network-layer security, now down to data-layer ever because of the need to become an enterprise that serves the nasecurity, the possibility of exchanging secure, encrypted data across tion’s security apparatus,” said Rob Carey, deputy chief information unsecured networks could be a officer, DoD. short distance down the road, “The reality is that none of our agencies is going have enough Tarasiuk said.
Open source good. ics, and things like that,” said Al Tarasiuk, chief information officer for the Intelligence Community.
ITT Exelis brings precise, net-centric geospatial intelligence wherever you are, whenever you need it.
This enterprise-ready system can dramatically reduce the time needed to deliver imagery and full-motion video across the globe.
Whatever your platform or challenge, Jagwire™ is ready now to ingest, process, store and disseminate data for the military, first responders, intelligence community and more.
Learn more at exelisinc.com/Jagwire and see us at GEOINT and AUSA this fall.
ITT is a trademark of ITT Manufacturing Enterprises, LLC., and is used under license.
She was able to create a geospatial rendering of that feature and its associated characteristics.
In delivering a keynote address Tuesday at GEOINT 2012, Long prefaced the story with information about reducing redundancy, as well as streamlining data and making it available.
So, too, is collaboration between the NGA and Defense Intelligence Agency in which a Common Desktop Environment is A panel of four of NGA’s strategic objective champions discuss the new NGA 2013-2017 Strategy during a lunchtime panel Tuesday in the created.
The remainder came from agency partners, and Long is seeking plications can foster partnerships. a future in which that ratio is reversed.
It’s also a way to cope with what could be draconian budget cuts on “My goal is that by July 2013, 75 percent of the apps in our store the horizon.
Sequestration, which could hammer defense budgets next will be developed by others,” she said, adding that a commercial year, was on the minds of most who spoke during Tuesday’s general session.
In her two years as NGA head, Long has sought to Lisa Spuria, director of analysis and SOC for analytic capabilities, said that as a change its working environment, particularly when result of bringing developers and analysts together at the grassroots level, there have it comes to analysis.
Working Groups that challenge analysts to create new “It’s a huge culture change,” she added.
Then came ATMs, now there’s online banking so you don’t even have to step foot in the bank if zones and put them into a place where they collaboyou don’t want to.” rated and brainstormed with others,” she said.
We want to create an online environment, he went on, where you can access all The IWGs have begun a culture change in analythe latest and greatest information we have. sis, generating a synthesis that has contributed to the Echoing a common refrain heard throughout the day, Spuria petitioned industry Integrated Analytic Environment, Long added.
We invented the processing thread to exploit the largest volumes of data possible.
We deliver clean, correct, useful data – to increase analyst productivity by more than 10 times.
That brings us closer to the truth, to the capability for an IC cloud and common IC desktop by March 2013, elusive holy grail of perfect intelligence.” with the full target architecture in place and in use by 2018.
Following his introduction, Clapper’s keynote focused on several The other big idea for the future of the Community is activitydistinct topical areas. based intelligence, which will be fueled by a future generation of overhead architecture, Clapper said, providing greater capability to APPRECIATING ALLIES look at an activity area over time and better forecast events.
Clapper drew again from “Zen and the Art of Motorcycle Mainte“Instead of kind of predicting where we should look tomorrow, if nance,” when he spoke about United States allies, referencing the benefits of we can respond on a quick queuing and tipping basis, to me that is finding an ally who thinks alike when one is struggling or on the path what is all about,” Clapper said.
EFFICIENT SECURITY The DNI added that he had just returned last week from a trip to The Intelligence Community should set an example for the whole Australia, where he attended an intelligence policy forum for senior of government when it comes to security and avoiding leaks, Clapper level national security officials from allied nations.
The forum concensaid, referencing the two FBI investigations currently underway for trated on strengthening IT and personnel standards, which he said repwhat he called egregious leaks. resents a foundational basis for further collaboration and integration.
Clapper said he intends to continue the push to further streamline the clearance process, and move toward more efficient initial investigaACTIVITY-BASED INTELLIGENCE tions followed by continuous investigations rather than the periodic Clapper also discussed what he referred to as two big ideas for the fucheck-ups currently in place.
The first idea is the Intelligence underway with the Army and NSA, and have proved promising thus Community Information Technology Enterprise , a Commufar, he said. nity-wide plan centered on cloud computing and cloud storage.
Also important is promoting clearance reciprocity in terms of secu“As we execute this right we’ll save a lot of money,” he said. rity and efficiency, Clapper said.
Publication Management “The worst part is that if it happens it would occur during the time of one of the most perverse and demanding array of threats I’ve seen in almost 50 years in this business,” Clapper said.
Our company develops the cross-domain information-sharing, system architecture and security solutions that are critical in today’s intelligence and homeland security operations.
Cubic’s XD-10G, validated by the Unified Cross Domain Management Office, is just one example of the products we are creating to allow our customers to retain technological superiority and ensure the integrity of their data, including streaming video.
Cubic designs, innovates, manufactures and fields a wide array of technologies for combat readiness, supply chain logistics and national security for the United States and allied nations.
To learn more about our XD Solutions and other products, go to www.cubic.com/XD-solutions. www.cubic.com » S PEC I A L FE ATU R ES PHOTO GALLERY Marissa Allison of Booz Allen Hamilton addresses the audience during a Monday Air Force Junior ROTC from Dr.
Phillips High School present the colors during the GEOINT 2012 welcoming ceremonies Tuesday morning. afternoon panel session at GEOINT Foreword.
Max Baber, USGIF’s director of academic programs, and attendees enjoy the Cuban-themed Havana United States Army soldiers tour the General Dynamics booth Tuesday in the exhibit hall.
All is quiet and the stage is set for the official kick off of GEOINT 2012.
Delivering Contextualized GEOINT MG John M Custer III, Director, Federal Strategic Missions Osceola Ballroom A and Programs, EMC This break out session will explore integrating data and information sources to create context for a given observed activity [i.e., 8:30 A.M. 9:15 A.M. activity based intelligence] context that is spatially and temporally Keynote registered.
MoD provide repeatable and verifiable signatures which could be integrated into a common operating picture, thereby providing 9:15 A.M. 10:15 A.M. ‘context’ to the activity that originally motivated the question.
Young Innovators will come together to discuss how one might add ‘context’ to activEntrepreneurs and innovators are building the future vision of ity based intelligence.
This panel will investigate how the converging WELCOME – Barry C Tilton, P.E., NRO Senior Technical Advisor, worlds of Crisis Mapping, Geosocial Networks, Open Data and Integrity Applications Incorporated Location based Analytics are creating new data sets and tools.
This change is being lead by a new generation of dynamic thinkModerator – John Morris, Chief Scientist, Riverside Research ers and geodigital natives who are applying emerging technolo• MG Steve Fogarty, Commanding General, United States Army gies and analytical techniques to vast data sets.
Intelligenceand Security Command • Mark J Choiniere, NGA Liaison to the Advanced Systems Moderator Todd Huffman, Private Consultant & Technology Directorate, National Reconnaissance Office • Alex Cooper, Senior Systems Engineer, SAIC • Shay Har-Noy, Chief Executive Officer, Tomnod • Dr.
This session targets United States technology, intellectual property, trade Exhibit Hall Open secrets and proprietary information.
Our national security relies on our collective success at thwarting these persistent attacks.
Every 18 | WEDNESDAY OCT 10 GEOINT 2012 SYMPOSIUM 2012 SYMPOSIUM AGENDA time our adversaries gain access to sensitive or classified informa• Jennifer Gabeler, Assistant Deputy Director, Intel Defense tion and technology, it jeopardizes the lives of our warfighters, SecurityService CI since these adversaries can exploit the information and technol• Scott Hicar, Chief Information Officer, DigitalGlobe ogy to develop more lethal weapons or countermeasures to our • Scott O’Connell, Director, Threat Mitigation Center, National systems.
Our national security is also at risk in the potential loss Geospatial-Intelligence Agency of our technological edge, which is closely tied to the economic • G Rick Wilson, Deputy Special Assistant for Cyber NSA success of the cleared contractor community and the well being of Cyber Task Force and DoD Co-Lead for DHS-DoD Joint our economy.
This panel will bring together experts from IndusCoordination Element trial Security, Counterintelligence, Cyber and Industry to discuss the management of risk, as a function of threat, vulnerability and 4:00 P.M. 6:00 P.M. consequence, across the GEOINT cleared industrial base.
Panel Interoperability Tech Talks members include subject matter experts from DSS, NGA, NSA Innovation Pavilion, Exhibit Hall, Booth #2003 and key GEOINT industry partners.
