The young Fidel Castro was a keen student of Nazi pageantry, often seen around campus with his well-thumbed copy of ""Mein Kampf"" alongside his pistol.
Over the years a varied assortment of foreign fans and well-wishers have showered Castro with accolades.
Sadly, lunacy on the subject of Fidel Castro is hardly confined to the lunatic fringe.
A recent editorial on Castro's legacy in the London Times, considered one of the world's wisest and most respected newspapers, gives the ""mainstream,"" or even the respectably conservative, view on Fidel Castro.
He was referring to the United States State Department and CIA's role in aiding the Castro rebels, also to the United States arms embargo on Batista, also to the official United States order that Batista vacate Cuba.
Ambassador Smith knew something about these events because he had personally delivered the messages to Batista.
Castro's ""defiance"" of the United States at the time also involved his group pocketing a check for $50,000 from the CIA operative in Santiago, Robert Weicha.
Never in history had we accorded diplomatic recognition to a Latin American regime as quickly as we recognized Castro's.
The United States gave Castro's regime its official benediction more rapidly than it had recognized Batista's in 1952, and lavished it with $200 million in subsidies.
In August of 1959 the liberal United States ambassador to Cuba, Philip Bonsal, alerted Castro to a conspiracy against his regime by Cubans.
Thanks in part to Ambassador Bonsal's solicitude for a regime then insulting his nation as ""a vulture preying on humanity"" and poised to steal $2 billion from United States stockholders, the anti-Castro plot was foiled, hundreds of the plotters were imprisoned or executed, and the regime that three years later came close to vaporizing many of America's largest cities with nuclear missiles survived.
The cocksure Bundy was a guest on ""Face the Nation"" while thus assuring the American people.
Exactly 48 hours later, U-2 photos sat on JFK's desk, revealing those ""refugee rumors"" sitting in Cuba, nuclear armed, and pointed directly at Bundy and his entire staff of sagacious Ivy League wizards.
But don't think for a second that the Best and Brightest were knocked off balance.
The Camelot dream team set their jaws, rolled up their sleeves, and met the challenge head on.
Henry Kissinger, as Gerald Ford's secretary of state, renewed the pledge.
After the Missile Crisis ""resolution,"" Castro's ""defiance"" of the United States took the form of the United States Coast Guard and even the British navy shielding him from exile attacks.
Far from ""defying"" a superpower, Castro hid behind the skirts of two superpowers, plus the British Empire. "" has some real accomplishments to point to,"" claims the London Times.
In 1958, that ""impoverished Caribbean island"" had a higher standard of living than Ireland and Austria, almost double Spain and Japan's per capita income, more doctors and dentists per capita than Britain, and lower infant mortality than France and Germany – the 13th-lowest in the world, in fact.
Today, Cuba's infant-mortality rate – despite the hemisphere's highest abortion rate, which skews this figure downward – is 24th from the top.
So, relative to the rest of the world, Cuba's health care has worsened under Castro, and a nation with a formerly massive influx of European immigrants needs machine guns, water cannons and tiger sharks to keep its people from fleeing, while half-starved Haitians a short 60 miles away turn up their noses at any thought of emigrating to Cuba.
In 1958, 80 percent of Cubans were literate, and Cuba spent the most per capita on public education of any nation in Latin America.
During its war of independence near the turn of the 20th century, Cuba was utterly devastated, having lost a quarter of its population.
So, Cuba's achievements in national prosperity, health, and education came practically from scratch and in only slightly more time than Castro's stint in power.
Better still, Cubans today would be not just literate but also educated, allowed to read George Orwell and Thomas Jefferson along with the arresting wisdom and sparkling prose of Che Guevara.
I quote ""this intellectual, this most complete human being of our time"" exactly.
With such reading assignments, Cuba's classrooms amply qualify for an inspection by Amnesty International.
Without Castro, Cuba's full literacy would have come about probably as quickly – and without firing squads, mass graves, and a political incarceration rate higher than Stalin's.
Most countries in Latin America with lower literacy rates than Cuba had in 1958 have done just that.
Forget for a second that none of those regimes abolished private property, free travel, free speech.
None abolished free enterprise and mandated food rations for its subjects.
Forget that far from being ""US-backed counterparts,"" Pinochet's Chile and Somoza's Nicaragua had economic sanctions slapped on them by Jimmy Carter.
The editorial staff of the world's most prestigious newspaper is unaware that Castro's regime killed people.
No need to consult the ravings of some ""crackpot"" scandal sheet in Miami.
So, according to a scholarly work that received gushy reviews in the London Times itself, Castro's regime almost quintupled the alleged murder rate of Pinochet's And this refers only to Communist Cuba's firing-squad murders.
The Cuba Archive project, headed by scholars Maria Werlau and Armando Lago, put the death toll from Castro's regime, including deaths at sea and the desperate anti-Communist insurgency of the early '60s, at 102,000.
This project has been lauded by everyone from the Miami Herald to the Wall Street Journal.
The mind reels at the Times' ignorance until you recall that such ignorance is practically universal on matters Cuban.
A recent poll conducted clandestinely in Cuba by Spanish pollsters regarding the impact of the "" United States blockade"" revealed that fewer than a third of the respondents blamed the so-called ""Yankee blockade"" for Cuba's ills, proof that the Cuban people aren't nearly as stupid as the scholars and reporters who continuously parrot the London Times claim.
While renewing the Kennedy-Khrushchev pledge in 1975, Kissinger partly lifted the embargo, allowing all foreign subsidiaries of United States companies to trade with Cuba.
United States companies have recently done more than $1 billion worth of direct business with Cuba.
Currently, the U.S is Cuba's biggest food supplier and fourth-largest import partner.
Better even still, some obscure and long-dead Latin American bandit named Fidel Castro would merit less encyclopedia space than Pancho Villa – and no mention whatsoever in the London Times.
