Television played a crucial role in the drama in some ways a radically different role than it plays today and now it takes another look, with four retrospectives over the next few days.
However, none of the four deals in depth with the impact of the medium itself.
When President John F Kennedy shocked Americans with his televised speech on Oct., 1962, it was the first time a United States president used TV as a diplomatic tool.
Thirty years ago, the Cuban missile crisis almost brought the Cold War, and the world, to an end.
Kennedy shocked Americans with his televised speech on Oct., 1962, saying that the Soviet Union was installing offensive nuclear missiles in Cuba, it was the first time a United States president used TV as a diplomatic tool.
The president was also using regular diplomacy in dealing with then-Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev.
In addition, the attitude of the network news divisions that covered the crisis is almost unrecognizable from today's vantage.
I remember Robert McNamara saying that he did not watch TV once during the 13-day crisis.
There were no ""Crossfires"" or other shows to endlessly second guess what the president and his advisers were doing.
And after the crisis had passed and the Soviet Union backed down, President Kennedy blatantly manipulated reporters into not describing it as an American victory, fearful that this would shame and then anger the Soviets further.
The ABC documentary, hosted by Peter Jennings and opposite the first game of the World Series, is the only one that's two hours, and therefore the most thorough.
It is a superb history lesson, but doesn't add anything startling to what's already known.
Instead of being really close to nuclear war, we were really, really close.
Tonight's PBS outing is one episode from the series ""War and Peace in the Nuclear Age,"" while Arts and Entertainment has a BBC special making its United States debut.
It doesn't have can't have the perspective the new shows have, and truly proves the old saw about journalism being the first draft of history.
And we are not, in many ways, as well served by the primary medium in our lives.
Asked if he would accept the missiles, knowing what he now knows, the Cuban leader said he would not.
Kennedy's top advisers -including his brother, Robert -favored launching an air strike against missile sites in Cuba or invading the island, according to documents to be made public this week.
Only the president, the documents show, favored resolving the crisis in the way it was eventually ended -through a diplomatic trade, a promise to remove United States missiles from Turkey in exchange for the Soviet withdrawal of missiles from Cuba.
The documents, which the John F Kennedy Library plans to release Wednesday, are transcripts of the sessions held by the Executive Committee of the National Security Council on Saturday, Oct., 1962, the day before Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev announced that he would remove the missiles from Cuba.
Official ""summary records' of the Executive Committee meeting have been released in sanitized form, some five years ago, some just this month.
A former official who has seen both the summary records and the soon-to-be-released transcript says they are very similar in substance.
According to those who have seen them, the transcripts debunk a number of myths that have been built around the missile crisis during the last 25 years.
Some were concerned that the Soviets' next step would be to demand that the United States remove all nuclear weapons from Western Europe.
Those opposing the idea included Paul Nitze, an assistant secretary of defense (now President Reagan's chief arms-control adviser); Dean Rusk, the secretary of state; McGeorge Bundy, the national security adviser; George Ball, the undersecretary of state; Robert F Kennedy, the president's brother and the attorney general; and Robert S McNamara, the defense secretary.
Only after McNamara's recitation of what might follow a United States air strike did some of the advisers apparently start having second thoughts.
But that night, Robert Kennedy met with Anatoly Dobrynin, the Soviet ambassador, to convey the president's acceptance of Khrushchev's proposal, with one caveat.
The United States would take the missiles out of Turkey within five months, Kennedy said, but the Soviets must never publicly reveal a connection between that withdrawal and the removal of the Soviet missiles from Cuba.
This secret conversation with Dobrynin was not made public until 1969, with the posthumous publication of Robert Kennedy's book Thirteen Days.
After the film was developed in Jacksonville, later on that day of Oct., 1962, Ecker traveled to Washington.
One image showed large tent-like constructions that CIA analysts said appeared to be sheltering missiles that could travel up to about 1500 miles.
Wearing a black navy pilot cap, Ecker pulled out his wallet to show the black and white photograph taken the following year when Kennedy stood before him at the naval base in Key West to award him the Distinguished Flying Cross.
The visits Sunday followed a two-day gathering of American, Cuban and Russian participants in the missile crisis.
The crisis began in mid-October 1962 when President Kennedy learned that Cuba had Soviet nuclear missiles capable of reaching the United States.
Former Kennedy aide Ted Sorensen stood next to former Kennedy aide Arthur Schlesinger Jr. underneath a medium-range Soviet R-2 missile displayed outside an old Spanish fortress on Havana Bay.
Georgy A Arbatov, head of the U.S.A.-Canada Institute, a Kremlin think tank, told the conference Soviet Premier Nikita S Khrushchev erred in shipping nuclear missiles to Cuba because he hadn't anticipated the United States reaction and humiliated his country, the participant said.
William Studeman, the CIA deputy director, admitted that the agency stumbled badly by dismissing for several weeks reports that Soviet missiles capable of a nuclear strike were being installed in Cuba.
Ultimately, a U-2 spy flight confirmed the dire news on Oct., 1962, dangerously compressing the time for U.S.-Soviet diplomacy before the missiles were operational.
The documents and remarks underscored how the United States nearly missed the deployment of the SS-4 medium-range missiles in Cuba.
The deployment became known more than one month after the first batch arrived on the island.
Ironically, CIA Director John McCone had voiced a lone fear among agency chiefs about a Soviet missile deployment as early as August, Studeman said.
But his ill-timed decision to go on a honeymoon kept spy flights grounded for weeks, as lower-level officials feared a U-2 might be shot down.
Prior to the crisis, CIA informants included a Soviet colonel, Oleg Penkovsky -""one of our most important Soviet agents,"" according to Studeman -whose information was compiled under the code name Ironbark.
Another key source reported that a Castro confidant had bragged about the ""wonder weapons"" soon to be deployed on his island, Studeman said.
Recent Cuban emigrants, who had witnessed the dizzying construction efforts in their country since that summer, later identified the locations of the missile sites for CIA analysts and the U-2 plane, he said.
In a top secret analysis of its own performance four months after the missile crisis, James R Killian Jr. concluded that the agency was slow to recognize the threat, and mobilize its agents and spy planes.
Also attending Monday's symposium was Sergei Khrushchev, the son of Nikita Khrushchev, the former Soviet chairman who had locked President John F Kennedy in the chilling game of chicken.
The CIA received hundreds if not thousands of such reports, many of which its agents in Miami deemed credible, said Warren Frank, then with the agency's foreign intelligence branch.
James had been in the Army and had hoped his son would be following his lead.
These days George checks and repairs rails for the Union Pacific Railroad.
Perino was 35 in 2007, and thus had been born about a decade after the famous ""13 days in October,"" in 1962, when President John F Kennedy confronted Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev over Moscow's installation of missiles in Cuba.
The history books describe it as the closest the world has come to nuclear war.
Perino's ignorance revealed a striking shift in conservative perception.
At the time of the Cuban missile crisis, Republicans expected it would be remembered for generations as a moment when a Democratic president squandered a historic opportunity.
Barry Goldwater, Ronald Reagan and William F Buckley all suggested at the time that Kennedy's handling of the crisis represented a capitulation to the Soviets; that the president had bowed to Soviet threats when he promised not to invade Cuba.
They believed Kennedy's actions had guaranteed that a communist outpost would remain, 90 miles from our shores, and that the president should have taken the opportunity to liberate the Cubans from their communist overlords.
Even the Reagan Library in Simi Valley, Calif., gave no hint of the views Reagan once held on the matter in a Cold War exhibit it had up until a few months ago.
But at the time, it wasn't just Reagan, Goldwater and Buckley who favored United States intervention; inside the circle of Kennedy's advisers, advocates of an attack on Cuba were led by Gen.
Curtis LeMay, chief of the Air Force, who proposed bombing 1,000 sites in Cuba, to be followed seven days later by a ground invasion by United States troops.
The Soviets might have retaliated as the first bombers approached Cuba.
Even if Khrushchev did not order the firing of missiles, a Soviet commander in charge of a missile base in Cuba could have ordered a launch.
They had eight of their big missiles fueled, targeted and armed with nuclear warheads that October -missiles that could have reached Manhattan.
If all eight R-12s in Cuba had been launched, the total payload would have been eight megatons -""an explosive force equivalent to all the bombs ever dropped in the history of war,"" according to one account of the crisis.
If only a single R-12 missile reached a United States city, it would have hit with 1 megaton of explosive force -about 80 times more powerful than the Hiroshima bomb.
Even if the targeting were off, the city probably would have been destroyed.
But the Soviets might not have attacked cities on the East Coast; they might have retaliated by launching their short-range tactical nuclear missiles at the United States base at Guantánamo Bay, Cuba, which could have killed all the Americans there.
Then Kennedy would have had to retaliate -by attacking a military base or a major city in the Soviet Union.
For the past 30 years, historians have largely ignored the conservative critiques of the time.
Kennedy's actions have been challenged, instead, from the left, by those who question whether the missile crisis was necessary.
The Kennedy advocates have held that the successful resolution of the crisis demonstrated his mastery of world politics, showing how he struck the perfect balance between steely determination and strategic flexibility.
As a result, they say, he prevented nuclear war while removing the threat posed by the missiles in Cuba.
His critics have argued for the past three decades that Kennedy's taking the nation to the brink of nuclear war was an irresponsible and unnecessary risk, and that the crisis should have been resolved by less dangerous methods involving normal diplomacy and negotiation.
The Soviet missiles in Cuba, they note, did not represent an increased threat to the United States -""a missile is a missile,"" Kennedy himself said, and it didn't matter whether it was coming from Siberia or Cuba.
The Cuban missile crisis exhibit at the JFK museum in Boston, of course, celebrates Kennedy's steely resolve and tactical flexibility, and pretty much ignores his critics on the left and right.
But by focusing on the 13 days in October, it fails to explain the big picture, the larger context.
The United States had sponsored an invasion of Cuba by CIA-trained Cuban exiles at the Bay of Pigs just two years earlier, attempting to overthrow Fidel Castro by force.
The threat that the United States might invade again was what motivated Khrushchev, and especially Castro; they wanted a bargaining chip to trade for a United States agreement not to invade.
The conventional wisdom these days is that Kennedy was the big winner, Castro the big loser.
Kennedy's prestige soared, while Castro was humiliated and shown to be irrelevant, even to his Soviet overlords.
The next year, Kennedy was assassinated by a pro-Castro activist, and soon after that, Khrushchev was deposed by hard-liners opposed to his loss of face.
The conservatives, who argued at the time that Kennedy's no-attack pledge guaranteed the survival of Castro's regime, turned out to be right -about that, at least.
In those days, he was an aviation electrician responsible for keeping the squadron’s modified Crusader fighters used by the Navy as aerial mapping planes in the air.
After the Air Force U-2 spy plane spotted the missiles from on high, the Crusaders flew over to take a closer look at what the Russians were up to.
What happened, the Russians secretly installed ballistic nuclear missiles in Cuba some 90 miles from the coast of Florida which didn’t set well with President John Kennedy.
For 13 days that October, no one knew whether another world war was going to erupt.
The United States Navy blockaded Cuba with a massive fleet of war ships after telling Khrushchev his nuclear missiles in Cuba must go.
A short time later, the Russian premier sent the president a letter containing an offer that would ultimately resolve the problem the United States had with the Russian missiles.
He proposed removing the offensive missiles from Cuban soil if the United States would withdraw its nuclear missiles from Turkey aimed at Russia.
Kennedy told Khrushchev he would accept his offer if he did not tell the public the United States was pulling its offensive missiles out of Turkey.
The Russian premier’s proposition worked and both sides withdrew their missiles.
His initial experience came almost a halfdozen years earlier, shortly after he got out of aviation electronics school in Jacksonville.
There were also some ‘tin can’ sailors and some submariners with us,” he recalled.
Before we could reach our ship, the ‘tin can’ sailors and the submariners got in a brawl and before it was over all of us got knocked down at least once.
When the Saratoga left Guantanamo, it sailed for the Mediterranean and the countries of southern Europe.
It was about this point in his career he decided to switch services and go into the Air Force.
It wasn’t long afterward he was retrained as an aviation electrician Tech-Sergeant supporting the F-4 Phantom.
They gave us our orders, gave us a bunch of shots and put us on a C-130 for Vietnam.
You just can’t imagine the snakes you ran into at that base when it was raining.
If it bit you, you had just about enough time to say a ‘Hail Mary’ before you died,” he explained.
He arrived back in the United States in 1965 and as luck would have it he was sent to MacDill Air Force Base in Tampa, his hometown.
He retired in 1985 after three decades in the service as a chief master sergeant, an E-9, the highest enlisted rate.
Lo uis P o s t-Dis patch Cit at ion The Associated Press, 'KENNEDY, KHRUSHCHEV CHILDREN MEET 40 YEARS AFTER CUBAN MISSILE CRISIS', St.
Intelligence officials also never found any nuclear warheads, which they later learned had been kept on the island.
The historic papers underscored the danger of a nuclear attack either accidental or deliberate that existed during those tense October days.
A portion of the documents, made available to The Associated Press in Washington, demonstrate that the crisis did not end on Oct., 1962, with the Soviet Union's agreement to remove the offensive weapons, as was widely believed.
Weeks after the Soviet Union agreed to pull the missiles from Cuba, Khrushchev worried that an ''irrational'' Castro would renew tensions with the United States and perhaps provoke war.
During conference sessions on Friday, participants also looked at American covert actions following the disastrous CIA-backed invasion of Cuba's Bay of Pigs in April 1961 and how they intensified Cuban fears of a United States military attack.
Former Kennedy aides Arthur Schlesinger Jr., Richard Goodwin and Ted Sorensen are attending the conference, as well as former CIA analyst Dino Brugioni, who interpreted American spy photos of Soviet missiles in Cuba.
Over and over, United States President John F Kennedy wrote the words ""decisions"" and ""leaders"" on his pad as his advisers debated the next step in the Cuban missile crisis.
Four days letter, Khrushchev, toning down the volume and the rhetoric, offers to withdraw the missiles from Cuba if the United States pledges not to invade Cuba.
Ran with ""IF YOU GO"" which has been appended to the end of this story Co pyrig ht 20 0 2, The Re co rd.
Ran with ""IF YOU GO"" which has been appended to the end of this story Co pyrig ht 20 0 2, The Gue lph Me rcury.
While the crisis seemed to play out between Cuba, the United States and the Soviet Union, Maiolo dramatizes the “other story” taking place in Turkey in a compelling and frightening account of his experiences on the front line of the Cold War.
AT 5pm Washington time on October 18, President Kennedy welcomed the Soviet’s Foreign Minister, Andrei Gromyko, to a pre-arranged meeting at the White House.
Berlin and Cuba were both raised during the two-hour encounter in the Oval Office, but one key issue was not discussed at all.
Gromyko had promised to be frank but he did not address the presence of Soviet missiles on Cuba.
He was unaware that Mr Kennedy already knew of their existence but had also chosen not to discuss them.
Mr Gromyko, reading from a long statement, said that, for quite some time, there had been an unabated anti-Cuban campaign in the US, apparently backed by the Kennedy administration.
Now the United States wished to institute a blockade against trade with Cuba.
All of this, he warned, could only lead to great misfortunes for mankind.
The Soviet Government stood for peaceful coexistence and opposed interference by one state in the internal affairs of another.
Compare the two countries’ human and material resources and you would see that the United States was a giant and Cuba a mere baby, Mr Gromyko said.
Mr Kennedy, he added, was surely familiar with a speech made by the Cuban president at the UN general assembly, at which he had said Cubans only wanted to make their home and country secure.
Soviet assistance to Cuba was intended to add to the island’s defensive capabilities, to help develop its agriculture, Mr Gromyko insisted.
Mr Kennedy knew Mr Gromyko was lying about the purely defensive capabilities, but he kept his counsel.
The US, he said, had tried to push the Cuba issue aside but that the Soviets had made a serious mistake on July by starting to supply arms to Cuba without informing him.
The United States itself had no intention of invading Cuba – the Bay of Pigs operation in April 1961 had been a mistake – but the Soviets’ intervention had complicated matters and created grave danger.
Thus far, the wider world was still unaware of what was really happening on Cuba.
A number of American newspapers, however, were already reporting a substantial United States military build-up in the southeastern states.
Reporters had also noticed an increase in the number of comings and goings of top government officials.
Mr Kennedy did not express an open preference for any of them but a number of his advisers thought he might be favouring a blockade.
The Glasgow Herald’s report for October 18 said merely that the president was still considering the final details of a plan to quarantine shipping to Cuba.
By JIM ANDERSON Section: OUTLOOK 1794 Words Page: 1G OpenURL Link WASHINGTON -It started as one man's obsession, developed into the only nuclear military crisis in history and ended on a note of muted triumph whose lessons are still being argued today.
The Cuban missile crisis of 1962 brought the world to the threshhold of a U.S.-Soviet war, a clash that almost certainly would have involved nuclear weapons.
It was finally the chilling thought of Soviet and American cities being vaporized by H-bombs that broke the war fever, and persuaded the leadership on both sides to draw back and work out an accommodation in which both could claim victory, or at least no defeat.
The apocalyptic atmosphere of that autumn 25 years ago this week can be felt in a remark by President John F Kennedy in a reflective moment at the beginning of the crisis.
He decided that the Soviet Union had to establish a visible response to overwhelming American military power.
He specifically decided on nuclear missiles, and insisted they be put in secretly to present the Americans with an accomplished, unremovable fact.
The die was cast, although that did not become clear to the American side until the missile positions were in place and spotted by American U-2 planes in the late summer.
His only goal, he wrote, was to win a guarantee that the United States, still smarting from the Bay of Pigs fiasco of 1961, would not try to invade Cuba and overthrow Fidel Castro by military force.
When Kennedy had solid photographic evidence in mid-October that the Soviet missiles were being installed -despite Soviet denials -the 13 days of October began, with the two superpowers groping for a solution.
Not only was there a problem in knowing what the other side was doing -especially difficult since Khrushchev had decided on the tactic of deception to give the Soviets time to install the weapons -there was the difficulty of communicating accurate and timely messages to the other side, a deficiency that has since been corrected with the Moscow-Washington hot line.
With the flurry of messages and signals between Moscow and Washington, it was frequently impossible to know whether the latest message from the Soviets took into account the latest word from the White House.
There also was the impact of ''McNamara's Law,'' the rule laid down by the secretary of defense after an American U-2 had wandered into Soviet airspace in Siberia at the height of the crisis.
It was agreed by all of the president's advisers that the Soviet missiles were an intolerable threat to the United States mainland, a unilateral shifting of the military balance that would destroy the American nuclear advantage.
The hawks, led by former Secretary of State Dean Acheson, and some of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, wanted a military strike against the Soviet missiles and bombers, the sooner the better.
The hawks argued that the missiles in Cuba could wipe out as much as 40 percent of the United States strategic bomber force.
Theodore Sorenson, Kennedy's special counsel, recounted a conversation between Acheson and the president.
Kennedy asked what the Soviets might be expected to do if the United States attacked the missile sites in Cuba.
Acheson said that the United States forces would then be obligated to knock out missile sites in the Soviet Union.
The doves, represented by the United States envoy to the United Nations, Adlai Stevenson, argued for a diplomatic solution, possibly trading off some of the old United States Jupiter missiles based in Turkey, which were obsolete and due to be junked anyway, for Soviet concessions in Cuba.
The owls, a shifting category that finally carried the day on the American side, pushed for a combination of military and diplomatic moves, including a naval quarantine of Cuba and a flurry of messages to the Soviets warning them of the danger of a U.S.-Soviet war, and searching for verbal compromise that would defuse the larger crisis.
At one point, the Soviets, obviously just as worried as the Americans were, sought out American newsman John Scali to relay urgent messages to the State Department.
The tense crisis reached its peak at midday on Oct. when a group of Soviet cargo vessels approached the American naval quarantine line, including the aircraft carrier Essex.
As the Soviet cargo vessels approached, a Soviet submarine was detected near the American ships and the American flotilla commander was ordered to make the Soviet sub come to the surface if there was any confrontation.
But that immediate crisis dissolved when the Soviet sub slipped away and the Soviet cargo ships either stopped dead in the water or turned around and headed back east.
Three days later there was another tense point when an American U-2 was shot down over Cuba by a Cuban missile, and the hawks in the White House insisted on a ''surgical strike'' against all surface-to-air missiles in Cuba.
It was finally Robert Kennedy who landed on the formula that ended the crisis without humiliation or victory for either side.
Ignoring the latest hard-line Soviet message, he suggested that the United States respond to an earlier note, in which Khrushchev had proposed that he would permanently withdraw his missiles and bombers if the United States would bind itself not to invade Cuba, and withdraw the naval quarantine.
Khrushchev got his guarantee against a United States military strike against Cuba and the Soviet weapons were withdrawn.
Every available channel of passing information, including the United Nations, the use of overt military threats and secret ''back channels'' was used.
Some, like Peter Rodman, now of the National Security Council staff, argue that the lessons of the Cuban missile crisis, and its concept of graduated increase of military pressure, were later misapplied and led directly to the debacle of the United States military being sucked into the swamp of the Vietnam War, with no hope of victory.
There were miscalculations on both sides in the missile crisis and misunderstandings of the other's intentions.
But there were two leaders who were in control and they were able to keep a firm leash on the hounds of war.
One year and one month after the missile crisis, John F Kennedy was killed in Dallas on Nov., 1963.
Two years after the missile crisis, almost to the day, Khrushchev was stripped of his power by the rest of the Kremlin leadership in a bloodless shakeup.
It was suggested at the time that the Soviet leader paid the price for his Cuban adventure, but the bill of particulars against Khrushchev in the Soviet Politburo gave much more weight to his disastrous agricultural and economic policies.
He spent the rest of his life in retirement, writing his memoirs and even listening to Western Russianlanguage radio broadcasts in his dacha near Moscow.
In a Nov., 1962, telephone conversation with George Ball, the State Department's third-ranking official, Kennedy said he worried about how a no-invasion pledge would affect the United States ability to respond if Cuba undertook a major arms buildup, shot down United States planes or attacked a pro-American country, such as Guatemala.
In response to the last scenario, Ball said the United States had a right to take action under the Rio Pact, the common defense treaty of the Western Hemisphere.
