Khrushchev’s first deputy, Anastas Mikoyan, immediately raised a practical objection to the proposal.
The United States would easily detect the missile launchers, he pointed out, because there was no good place to hide them on a subtropical island notable for its thin canopy of palm trees.
And once the launchers were discovered, Mikoyan added, the United States military would take them out by air and likely kill Soviet soldiers in the strike.
It is tempting to think that, 60 years and multiple historical accounts later, there is nothing new to be learned or said about this seminal episode of the Cold War, the closest the world’s two superpowers of that tense era came to an outright nuclear exchange.
This perspective yields a kind of dark comedy of miscalculations, near fiascoes, and outright blunders, and that spectacle is the true tale of the crisis by the author’s account.
The Americans did quickly detect the missile sites through overflight photography.
U-2 incursions into Cuban airspace continued, but even as Khrushchev became more cautious in his posture toward Washington, a middle-rank Soviet military officer on the ground in Cuba gave an order for a surface-to-air missile strike on an American reconnaissance plane.
He did so without authorization from his indisposed superior, Colonel General Issa Pliev, the nominal commander of the Group of Soviet Troops in Cuba, who was confined to his bed by a painful kidney ailment.
Perhaps Soviet troops felt mutinous because, left unprepared for the humid, mosquito-plagued climate, they had been reduced to eating worm-infested borscht.
The U-2 was shot down and the pilot killed, but luckily the incident did not ignite wider hostilities.
General Curtis LeMay, the air force chief of staff, stayed wedded to the axiom, even as diplomacy was showing promise, that the only solution was an all-out invasion of Cuba—an air strike followed by an amphibious assault with tanks.
Castro would be toppled, the Soviets would be driven out, the Cuban people would be liberated from Communist rule, and perhaps not least, the failed Bay of Pigs operation of the year before, involving U.S.-backed Cuban exiles, would be avenged.
LeMay, the mastermind of the firebombing of Tokyo in World War II, evinced scant respect for his commander in chief, President John F Kennedy, 11 years younger, whose PT boat mishap during that war was magically spun by the Kennedy clan into a fable of national heroism.
In Moscow, the excitable Khrushchev calmed down and extracted from “that viper,” as he had once called Kennedy behind closed doors, a secret pledge to remove United States medium-range nuclear missiles from Turkey in exchange for the withdrawal of the Soviet nuclear weapons from Cuba.
Feeling betrayed by his putative patron, he boiled over into a fury—that “bastard” Khrushchev was an “asshole,” he exclaimed to a Cuban newspaper editor—but the cooler heads of the two principals prevailed.
Still, as this treatment of the harrowing affair persuasively shows, that triumph was only narrowly gained.
