His variety of audiences react to a set of direction has been given, politicians stay book is dedicated to two ‘fallen brothers’, competing narratives, rather than binary out of military execution.
The reality has and soldiers do not leave their family notions of ‘defeat’ or ‘victory’. often and rightly been more nuanced. behind when they hand in their uniform.
Simpson sees in Afghanistan For example, consider Alanbrooke’s There is so much in War From the Ground a model for other conflicts in the five-year energy-sapping campaign to Up to learn from that if the Ministry of information age, where the proliferation keep Churchill focused on purposeful Defence can bring vague notions of New of audiences to be persuaded extends grand strategy; or the relationships Employment Models and Whole Force far beyond where military force might be described in Eliot Cohen’s superb Concepts to imaginative life, a priority used to coerce them.
The waited to execute inflexible strategic policy; that direction flows one way fact that he has recently left the army plans.
The story turns on intelligence with the military executing, but not and is now studying for the Bar is sad, failures, diplomatic uncertainties and questioning policy.
He also suggests that but this reviewer strongly suspects that misunderstandings, commitment traps, © RUSI JOURNAL FEBRUARY/MARCH 2013 REVIEWS alliance credibility imperatives, tenuous to demonstrate the insidious unreliability Policy’, setting excessive expectations of command-and-control arrangements, and of assembling contemporary history decisive toughness.
As members like Robert McNamara and and Russia were doing was not illegal, with the Iliad, an endless stream of books Robert Kennedy had been much more although it was recklessly deceitful by and films appears, claiming to extract prepared to risk nuclear escalation by the rules of the Cold War superpower lessons separating elemental dynamics urging military action than they later game.
But ExComm uneasily recognised from accidental circumstances and admitted – or perhaps remembered – that American positions hovered on the personalities.
The last October, accelerating the stream of the president himself appears to have demands of global nuclear stability simply exegeses. set out consistently to minimise the did not fit tidily within international law.
President he faced constant unsatisfactory and American homeland might become John F Kennedy had secretly installed unwelcome advice, particularly from the threatened from intermediate-range a recording system there to tape all joint chiefs of staff, to take greater risks missiles based in its own traditional discussions in ExComm (the Executive of nuclear escalation.
Although he had backyard, in addition to ICBMs and Committee of the National Security selected the membership of ExComm, long-range bombers.
NATO allies were judged to fear more vividly and certainly than for any more formal staffing system he had any move over Cuba that could give the historically equivalent event. perfected during and after the Second Soviets an excuse to seize Berlin, yet World War. needed to be persuaded of continuing The solution to the crisis was American determination.
Ward Wilson, have argued that, overall, elegantly pretending, as in a Victorian the crisis proves that the universally the crisis novel, to ignore Khrushchev’s most inhibitory effect of nuclear weapons recent letter and to respond to an earlier is another myth.
The ‘Turkey Trade’ (agreeing deterred from his tropical adventure by personal anxieties about the to Khrushchev’s proposal to remove the at least ten-to-one American nuclear consequences of military entanglement Jupiter missiles from Turkey, in exchange superiority, and the United States was not deterred and nuclear escalation, which he traces for Soviet withdrawal of roughly from its, doubtfully legal, ‘quarantine’ back convincingly to attitudes expressed equivalent medium-range missiles from of Russian supply ships.
But, precisely from 1942 onwards, revealing ‘a deep Cuba) was the critical route back from the because of the immediate risks of core of realism about the world’. brink.
Back-channel negotiations were nuclear escalation, once the missile sites Kennedy was above all concerned incentivised by the realistic prospect of on Cuba had been discovered, Stern to avoid repeating the imbroglio of airstrikes and invasion, using America’s shows how insistent Kennedy was on 1914.
All this was well known, and overwhelming conventional strength in holding back from announcing a formal commendable.
But with relentless detail, the Caribbean, if the crisis could not be blockade, or attacking the discovered from years reading through the Kennedy resolved.
He shows American public, and even Kennedy’s forces and the Guantánamo naval base. how America’s mostly clandestine war successor, were allowed to learn for years But it was decades before the Americans to destabilise Cuba had helped induce afterwards.
And, crucially, Kennedy was Nikita Khrushchev and Fidel Castro to up for domestic political and allianceprepared to renounce attacks on Cuba as nuclearise the island.
Strangely, the part of the deal, even though this further was also motivated by Kennedy’s decision Soviets seem to have acquiesced in this, increased the loathing for him felt on the to proceed with his predecessor Dwight despite the public impression of defeat American Right.
D Eisenhower’s planned deployment in a global test of wills, one reason for His leadership was obviously of obsolescent, liquid-fuelled Jupiter Khrushchev’s overthrow in 1964.
Indirect decisive, and a different president might missiles to Turkey – on Russia’s doorstep. consequences were significant.
Leslie well have accepted the bad advice In his examination of subsequent events, Gelb has called this obfuscation ‘The Lie from his Cabinet.
David Patrikarakos know made of them, conditioned by Patrikarakos, by contrast, begins I.B.Tauris, 2012 the maxims of an evolving national in the 1950s, using Akbar Etemad – the strategic culture, which we can follow father of the Atomic Energy Agency them struggling to apply to unimagined of Iran – as a vehicle for the circumstances.
Etemad’s vision of a scientifically clear-cut, easily apparent or obviously advanced Iran coincided with and internationally justifiable, even during reinforced the Shah’s own technological the relatively disciplined competition of nationalism and ambitions for the Cold War.
Ten years on, Iran did not have at the heart of the first half of Nuclear Iran.
It also echoes themes one finds permanently important a single centrifuge spinning, let alone a in broader political histories of Iran – nuclear bomb.
The official’s forecast was notably, the tensions between political questions not the only one to have gone awry.
There same year, United States Defense Secretary William exists a fashionable idea that the US His book is not the ideal overall Perry claimed that Iran was potentially was willing to funnel unlimited nuclear account of the October confrontation less than five years from a bomb.
Stern Peres suggested that the number was less on such transfers thereafter.
Nor does he consider how far many years been on a perpetual precipice, were sent abroad for training – ExComm judged that, in an apparently subject to alarmist assessments.
Perhaps Patrikarakos importantly highlights what interminable East-West conflict, the United States that is to be expected in such opaque was often very bitter wrangling between had to take risks over Cuba to prevent fields as non-proliferation, especially Iran and its then-allies on these early the Soviets establishing a strengthened as it pertains to a closed and complex exchanges.
Almost right from the start, position from which they would act more political system like that of Iran.
But his book, The Birth of an Atomic State, does an to non-peaceful ends, particularly under though short, is uniquely authoritative admirable job of puncturing much of what the State Department foresaw within its own deliberate limitations, that alarmism, without dismissing the might be ‘an aggressive successor to the and illuminates permanently important fragmentary but troubling pattern of Shah’. questions.
