The request by an escorting United States destroyer to uncover all missiles aboard is refused — but a crew member partially reveals one of them.
But in 1962, when the Soviet Union and United States squared up to one another over Cuba, that logic broke down.
His first error was to mistake the United States president for a callow weakling.
Khrushchev wanted the city to himself and Kennedy worried that the Soviets might use force to get it.
Khrushchev’s real focus lay further west.The United States has a long history with Cuba.
In 1820, Jefferson had considered it a candidate for United States statehood.
In 1901, a new United States law gave Washington a legal basis for intervening in Cuba and when, in 1959, Castro’s revolution tempered this United States influence, Eisenhower wanted to get rid of him.
Kennedy tried regime change, but this ended disastrously in 1961 at the Bay of Pigs.
Khrushchev said he wanted nuclear weapons on Cuba to prevent a second United States invasion — that’s what he told Castro, at least.
The Americans had atomic weapons in Turkey which could hit targets deep inside the USSR, whereas for Khrushchev the United States mainland was out of range.
Getting warheads onto Cuba, 90 miles off the Florida coast, would change all that.Soviet arms and advisers had been heading into Cuba since 1960; but in September 1962 things changed.
Khrushchev sent in the 27th anti-aircraft missile division, whose rockets were meant to deter overflights by the CIA’s U-2 spy planes.
The nuclear arms arrived in two phases — the rockets, then the warheads, the first of which reached Cuba on 4 October.When the rocket men arrived in Cuba, they were in for a shock.
The heat was so intense that their cans of rations swelled up and exploded.
The Soviets had also failed to appreciate that the Caribbean has a hurricane season, a complicating factor when installing — and using — nuclear weapons.
Nor had the military planners grasped that Cuban roads were often little more than lanes, making it tricky for a lorry carrying a 70ft-long nuclear missile to turn corners.
More seriously, missile experts were dismayed to find that Cuban palm trees had very light foliage, offering almost no cover for their launch sites.The Americans spotted the missiles almost immediately and knew precisely what they were.
Kennedy’s reaction was one of horror, and his first instinct was to launch a conventional attack.
If they hadn’t, the outcome could have been catastrophic.The scenario he faced was nightmarish.
More ships were heading for the Caribbean carrying more nuclear weapons.
Khrushchev tried writing to Kennedy, offering to withdraw his missiles as part of a wider deal on disarmament.
Khrushchev’s attempted peace overture caused the United States military to raise its state of alert to DEFCON2, one step below all-out war.The Americans showed pictures of the missile sites at the UN, and global opinion turned against Moscow.
Under relentless pressure from Kennedy, whom he came grudgingly to respect, Khrushchev realised he needed a way out.
After a frantic round of deal-making with Bobby Kennedy, the Soviets agreed to withdraw from Cuba.
In return, the United States would remove its missiles from Turkey.As part of the deal, the Americans would inspect the departing missiles, but Castro wouldn’t let United States personnel into Cuba.
This meant the inspections had to take place at sea, an arrangement that led to perhaps the most terrifying moment of all.
A Soviet submarine commander, who was communicating with a United States inspection ship, mistakenly thought the Americans were attacking.
The captain ordered a nuclear-tipped torpedo to be loaded, a weapon with an explosive yield approximately two-thirds that of the Hiroshima bomb.
The sub turned towards the American ship, preparing to fire, but a Soviet crew member who got stuck in the shaft of the upper hatch happened to see the flashing signal from the American ship, apologising and explaining it was a mistake.
If the submarine had fired, it would have been the first shot of the third world war.
Instead, the Soviet captain shut his torpedo tubes and moved on.In Moscow, Khrushchev tried to frame the Cuban confrontation as a great victory, but for him it was a disaster.
Serhii Plokhy’s book is remarkable and troubling, especially for the insight it gives into Khrushchev’s thinking.
But it is when the author turns to the present day that the writing becomes most urgent.
Modern atomic weapons, of the sort the British government now intends to develop, are more efficient and precise than their Cold War predecessors.
But what lingers is the question of how present-day nuclear-armed states such as China, Pakistan and India would act if a similar crisis were to arise.
There is no answer to that, but what is certain is that the Cold War ‘balance of terror’ has gone.
