Formal authorization for action 2 Planning 3 Execution 4 Assassination proposals 4.
Late 1962 until well into 1963 5 Legacy 6 Media portrayals 7 See also 8 References 9 External links Origins Fidel Castro's rise to power had been watched by the CIA since 1948.
As he rose to power, the CIA became increasingly concerned with his actions and political views.
In the late 1950s, the CIA began gathering more intelligence on Castro, suspecting that he was a communist.
The organization could not initially discover hard evidence that Castro was a communist.
However, the CIA remained concerned with how Castro's government took pro-communist stances.
CIA intelligence concluded that Castro's close confidants, Ernesto Che Guevara and Raul Castro Ruz, both had communist tendencies.
Cabell noted in November 1959 that while Castro was not a communist he allowed free opportunity to the communist party in Cuba to grow and spread its message.
Nonetheless, by December plans were already being tossed around between high ranking United States Foreign Policy Officials that called for overthrowing the Castro government.
An official report from the CIA states that, by March 1960, the United States had already decided that Fidel Castro must be displaced.
Due to the United States' fear of repercussions from the United Nations, the plan was kept at the highest level of secrecy, and as thus, ""plausible deniability"" was made a key focal point in American clandestine service policy.
The CIA's budget estimation for this covert operation was approximately $4. million.
The paper signed by Eisenhower was also the sole report issued by the government throughout the entire project.
This program required the agency to work around the clock and collect a large amount of detail-specific information, as well as to cooperate with other agencies.
To secure the needed financial backing, the “Bender Group” was developed as an organization that would provide American businessmen a secret avenue through which to trade with Cuban groups.
Propaganda activities included using print and radio mediums to broadcast anti-Castro messages.
Large amounts of real estate were purchased by the agency for use in this operation.
A communications station was also established on June 15 by using an Army operation as a cover.
The CIA also acquired properties in different United States cities and abroad for various reasons.
From March through August 1960, the CIA had plans aimed at undermining Castro and his appeal to the public by sabotaging his speeches.
The schemes thought up were aimed at discrediting Castro by influencing his behavior and by changing his appearance.
One plan discussed was to spray his broadcast studio with a compound similar to LSD, but was scrapped because the compound was too unreliable.
The CIA's plans to undermine Castro's public image went so far as to even line his shoes with thallium salts which would cause his beard to fall out.
The plan was to lace his shoes with the salts while he was on a trip outside Cuba.
He was expected to leave his shoes outside his hotel room to be polished, at which point the salts would be administered.
The plan was abandoned because Castro cancelled the trip.The United States' opposition to Castro was based on the United States government's position that coercion inside Cuba was severe and that the government was serving as a model for allied anti-colonial movements elsewhere in the Americas.
A month after the failure of the Bay of Pigs Invasion, the CIA proposed a program of sabotage and terrorist attacks against civilian and military targets in Cuba.
In November 1961, Robert Kennedy and Richard Goodwin suggested to President Kennedy that the United States government begin this campaign, and it was authorized by the President.
They believed that a centralized effort led by senior officials from the White House and other government agencies to remove Fidel Castro and overthrow the Cuban government was the best course of action.
Following a meeting in the White House on November 3, 1961, this initiative became known as Operation Mongoose and would be led by Air Force Brigadier General Edward Lansdale on the military side and William King Harvey at the CIA.Other agencies were brought in to assist with the planning and execution of Operation Mongoose.
Representatives from the State Department, the Defense Department, and the CIA were assigned larger roles in implementing the operation's activities, while representatives from the United States Information Agency and the Department of Justice were also called on occasionally to assist with the operation.
Under Eisenhower, four major forms of action were to be taken to aid anti-communist opposition in Cuba at the time.
At this stage, it was still not clear that these efforts would end up leading to the Bay of Pigs invasion.Some of the outlined goals of the operations included intelligence collection and the generation of a nucleus for a popular Cuban movement, along with exploiting the potential of the underworld in Cuban cities and enlisting the cooperation of the Church to bring the women of Cuba into actions that would undermine the Communist control system.
The Departments of State, Defense, and Justice were responsible for a combination of these objectives.
Kennedy and the rest of SG-A hoped to dispose of the Castro regime and bring change to Cuba's political system.
President Kennedy, the Attorney General, CIA Director John McCone, Richard Goodwin, and Brigadier General Lansdale met on November 21, 1961, to discuss plans for Operation Mongoose.
Robert Kennedy stressed the importance of immediate dynamic action to discredit the Castro regime in Cuba.
He remained disappointed from the failure of the Bay of Pigs invasion just a few months prior.
By the end of November, President Kennedy had finalized details for Operation Mongoose.
Lansdale remained in charge of the operation, and access to knowledge of Operation Mongoose remained strictly confidential and limited.
Planning The United States Defense Department's Joint Chiefs of Staff saw the project's ultimate objective to be to provide adequate justification for United States military intervention in Cuba.
They requested that the Secretary of Defense assign them responsibility for the project, but Attorney General Robert F Kennedy retained effective control.
On January 8, 1960 General Cabell, the Deputy Director of Central Intelligence , held a joint briefing on Cuba for the Department of State and the Joint Chiefs of Staff.
White had mentioned that Fidel Castro was going to need to be dealt with.
At this time the DDCI also discussed the need to increase covert and semi-covert programs aimed at Castro.
These programs included psychological warfare, political action, economic action, and para-military action.
By the 18th of January, the DDCI had come up with various Cuban operations.
Later it was discussed that a separate branch should be created to handle everything about the anti-Castro movement.
The White House division organized Branch 4 as the new task force to run Cuban Operations.
The task force included 40 personnel, with 18 at headquarters, 20 at the Havana station, and two at Santiago base.
The state department was concerned that if Castro were overthrown, then the people to come after him would be worse than him – primarily Che Guevara and Raul Castro.
So they proposed a way of getting a better leader that they approved of in his place.
The CIA began to worry that their involvement with the anti-Castro movement would lead to an anti-US movement.
On March 14 of 1960, Dulles presented a “General Covert Action Plan for Cuba” that would focus only on the Cuban problems.
Guerrilla capacity in the anti-Castro groups both in and out of Cuba was discussed.Richard Bissell, Deputy Director for Plans, asked Sheffield Edwards, Director of Security, if Edwards could establish contact with the United States gambling syndicate that was active in Cuba.
The objective clearly was the assassination of Castro although Edwards claims that there was a studied avoidance of the term in his conversation with Bissell.
King, then Chief of WH Division, although King now recalls having had only limited knowledge of such a plan and at a much later date – about mid-1962.
The press statement announced the unification of forces against Castro and outlining the platform of their mission.
The press statement listed the prerogatives for agrarian policy, economic policy, systems of law, education reform, military structure, etc.
Specific goals were identified for Cubans on-boarded to the Cuban Opposition Front, the principal goal is to restore the 1940 Cuban constitution.
The Cuban Opposition Front's purpose can be summarized as 1) to act as a beacon to attract other anti-Castro groups, 2) to serve as a scapegoat in case covert operations were discovered, and 3) to act as a potential replacement to Castro after his fall.
For the Cuban Operation, the CIA made a list of potential guerilla fighters within the Cuban provinces.
They consisted of political prisoners and guerillas that the CIA believed could be convinced to enlist in the operations against Castro.
Due to a recent declassification of thousands of pages from the CIA in 2011 , it is now known that the CIA task force in charge of the paramilitary assault knew the operation could not succeed without becoming an open invasion supported by the United States military.
According to Peter Kornbluh, this was the most important revelation of the declassification of the official history of the CIA.On April 12, 1961 the CIA prepared a full report on the Cuban Operation that outlined its orientation and concept.
The report further emphasized particular steps to be taken to achieve the appearance of internal revolution.
These 4 included the San Antonio Air Base, the Campo Liberated Air Base, and finally the naval bases located at Batabanó and Nueva Gerona.
Additionally, the number of B-26 crafts to be used in the strike was reduced from 15 to 5, which ultimately limited the United States air coverage.
The CIA's Official History of the Bay of Pigs Operation notes that limited air cover left the Brigade air force open to attacks by Castro's forces.
Both Kennedys ignored the fact that limited air strikes would prevent the Brigade air force from being effective because of the risk of counterattack by the Cuban air force.
A White House staffer was quoted as saying, ""...the plan was to destroy Castro's air force on the ground before the battle began and then provide air support, with an anti-Castro ""Air Force"" consisting of some two dozen surplus planes flown by Cuban exiles.
On the 18 April there was an air transport scheduled from the USAF and that was the best day for the Brigade B-26's mobilization to occur.
During this strike there were no aircraft lost and there was a successful strike made on the Castro column moving from Playa Larga to Playa Giron.
The Official History notes that the use of napalm had not been officially approved until the next day, April 18, 1961. 10 days later TIDE dropped 5 B-26 bombs.
Lansdale was chosen due to his experience with counter-insurgency in the Philippines during the Hukbalahap Rebellion, as well as because of his experience supporting Vietnam's Diem regime.
The formerly classified memorandum depicts the way in which the CIA and the Joint Chiefs of Staff sought a reason to invade the island of Cuba that would be acceptable to the American people.
Another significant consideration was that any United States military intervention in Cuba should not involve the Soviet Union.
Given that Cuba was not a part of the Warsaw pact, and there had yet to be any significant evidence of a connection between Cuba and the Soviet Union, military intervention was believed to be able to take place without major consequences from the Soviet Union still.There were 32 tasks or plans considered under the Cuban Project, some of which were carried out.
The plans varied in efficacy and intention, from propagandistic purposes for effective disruption of the Cuban government and economy.
Plans included the use of United States Army Special Forces, destruction of Cuban sugar crops, and mining of harbors.
There was a meeting of the Special Group in Secretary of State David Rusk's conference room on August 10, 1962 at which Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara broached the subject of the liquidation of Cuban leaders.
The discussion resulted in a Project MONGOOSE action memorandum prepared by Edwards Landsdale.On October 4, 1962, a Special Group on Operation Mongoose met to discuss proceedings.
The Attorney General, Mr Johnson, and General Lansdale were there amongst others.
While they discussed some self-interests in acquiring Cuban waters for mining rights, planning military contingency plans, and attacking Guantanamo, these beliefs and ideas were not shared by all participants.
They needed to increase the amount of sabotage their agents were involved in.
That regulations and restrictions needed to be realized so that the CIA as an agency and their operation agents could take some shortcuts in training and preparations.
That the CIA would do anything they could to dispose of Castro and stop the spread of communism into the Western Hemisphere.
On October 26, 1962, Castro wrote a letter to Khrushchev outlining his beliefs pertaining to what would happen in the act of aggression, and told him to rest assured that Cuba would resist and act with opposing forces of aggression.Operation Northwoods was a plan proposed in 1962, which was signed by the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and presented to Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara for approval, that intended to use false flag operations to justify intervention in Cuba.
Among courses of action considered were real and simulated attacks on United States or foreign soil which would be blamed on the Cuban government.
These would have involved attacking or reporting fake attacks on Cuban exiles, damaging United States bases and ships, ""Cuban"" aircraft attacking Central American countries such as Haiti or the Dominican Republic, having shipments of arms found on nearby beaches, faking a Cuban military plane destroying an American civilian aircraft, and the possible development of other false-flag terror campaign on United States soil.
The Project's six-phase schedule was presented by Edward Lansdale on February 20, 1962; it was overseen by Attorney General Robert Kennedy.
President Kennedy was briefed on the operation's guidelines on March 16, 1962.
Lansdale outlined the coordinated program of political, psychological, military, sabotage, and intelligence operations as well as assassination attempts on key political leaders.
Each month since his presentation, a different method was in place to destabilize the communist regime.
Some of these plans included the publication of Anti-Castro political propaganda, armaments for militant opposition groups, the establishment of guerrilla bases throughout the country, and preparations for an October military intervention in Cuba.
Execution CIA covert operations and intelligence gathering station JM/WAVE in Miami was established as the operations center for Task Force W, the CIA's unit dedicated to Operation Mongoose.
The mafioso John Roselli was introduced to the CIA by former FBI Agent Robert Mahue.
Mahue had known Roselli since the 1950s and was aware of his connection to the gambling syndicate.
Under the alias ""John Rawlson,"" Roselli was tasked with recruiting Cubans from Florida to help in the assassination of Castro.
Rabe writes that reports from the Church Committee reveal that from June 1963 onward, the Kennedy administration intensified its war against Cuba while the CIA integrated propaganda, ""economic denial,"" and sabotage to attack the Cuban state as well as specific targets within.
At this time, the CIA received authorization for 13 major operations in Cuba, including attacks on an electric power plant, an oil refinery, and a sugar mill.
Rabe has argued that the ""Kennedy administration... showed no interest in Castro's repeated request that the United States cease its campaign of sabotage and terrorism against Cuba.
Harvard Historian Jorge Domínguez states that Operation Mongoose's scope included sabotage actions against a railway bridge, petroleum storage facilities, a molasses storage container, a petroleum refinery, a power plant, a sawmill, and a floating crane.
Actions were subsequently carried out against a petroleum refinery, a power plant, a sawmill, and a floating crane in a Cuban harbor to undermine the Cuban economy.
The operation was suspended on October 30, 1962, but 3 of 10 six-man sabotage teams had already been deployed to Cuba.
Operation Mongoose consisted of a program of covert action, including sabotage, psychological warfare, intelligence collection, and the creation of an internal revolution against the communist government.
The United States still lacked the capability of effectively getting information to the majority of the Cuban people.
They had a trade embargo, denial of bunkering facilities, increased port security, and control procedure on transshipment, technical data, and customs inspection.
The United States also used diplomatic means to frustrate Cuban trade negotiations in Israel, Jordan, Iran, Greece, and possibly Japan.
From the outset, Lansdale and fellow members of the SG-A identified internal support for an anti-Castro movement to be the most important aspect of the operation.
American organization and support for anti-Castro forces in Cuba was seen as key, which expanded American involvement from what had mostly been economic and military assistance of rebel forces.
Therefore, Lansdale hoped to organize an effort within the operation, led by the CIA, to covertly build support for a popular movement within Cuba.
It was difficult to identify anti-Castro forces within Cuba and there lacked a groundswell of popular support that Cuban insurgents could tap into.
By January 1962, the CIA had failed to recruit suitable Cuban operatives that could infiltrate the Castro regime.
Lansdale criticized the CIA effort to ramp up their activities to meet Operation Mongoose's expedient timelines.
Robert McCone of the CIA complained that Lansdale's timeline was too accelerated and that it would be difficult to achieve the tasks demanded in such a short timeframe.
Reconnaissance picture showing the missiles In February, Lansdale offered a comprehensive review of all Operation Mongoose activities to date.
He asked for a ramp-up of efforts from all agencies and departments to expedite the execution of the Cuban Project.
He laid out a six-part plan targeting the overthrow of the Castro government in October 1962.
In March 1962, a key intelligence report, written by the CIA, was produced for Lansdale.
It showed that although roughly only a quarter of the Cuban population stood behind the Castro regime, the rest of the population was both disaffected and passive.
McCone criticized the handling of the operation, believing that ""national policy was too cautious"" and suggested a United States military effort to train more guerrillas, and large-scale amphibious landing military exercises were conducted off the coast of North Carolina in April, 1962.
The Special Group provided plans on March 14, 1962, for the first phase of the operation until the end of July 1962.
There were four main objectives for Phase 1; was to gather hard intelligence on the target area, Undertake all other political, economic, and covert actions short of creating a revolt in Cuba or the need for United States armed intervention, Be consistent with United States overt policy and be in the position to pull away with a minimum loss of assets in United States prestige, Continue JCS planning and essential preliminary actions for a decisive United States capability for intervention.
During Phase I the Punta del Este conference was a major United States political action to isolate Castro and neutralize his influence in the Hemisphere.
President Kennedy's successful visit to Mexico was another major United States political action with an impact upon the operation but was not directly tied to the operation.
Another key interest for Operation Mongoose was the Cuban refugees as it was thought they wanted to overthrow the Communist regime in Havana and recapture their homeland.
The refugees were given open United States assistance to remain in the country, yet were involved in covert actions in a limited way.
Policy limitations of audibility and visibility were taken into consideration for the handling and use of the refugee potential.
As Phase 1 drew to a close Phase II projected plan was written up and considered four possibilities.
The first option was to cancel operational plans and treat Cuba as a Bloc nation and protect Hemisphere from it.
The next possibility was to exert all possible diplomatic, economic, psychological, and other pressures to overthrow the Castro-Communist regime without overt employment of United States military.
Another possibility was to help the Cubans overthrow the Castro-Communist regime with a step-by-step phase to ensure success including the use of military force if required.
The last possibility was to use a provocation and overthrow the Castro-Communist regime by United States military force.
In his July review, Lansdale recommended a more aggressive short-term plan of action.
He believed that time was of the essence, especially given intensified Soviet military build-up in Cuba.
New plans were drawn to recruit more Cubans to infiltrate the Castro regime, to interrupt Cuban radio and television broadcasts, and to deploy commando sabotage units.However, by late August, the Soviet military build-up in Cuba disgruntled the Kennedy administration.
The fear of open military retaliation against the United States and Berlin for the United States covert operations in Cuba slowed down the operation.
Assassination proposals The CIA allegedly recruited Mob bosses Sam Giancana , Santo Trafficante and other mobsters to assassinate Fidel Castro.
In April 1967, the Inspector General issued a report on the various plots conceived to assassinate Fidel Castro.
A key form of documentation used to construct the timeline of plots was oral testimony collected years after the plots were originally planned.
Prior to August 1960 The Inspector General report details “at least three, and perhaps four, schemes that were under consideration” during a time range between March and August 1960.
It is speculated that all of the schemes considered at this time could have been in the planning process at the same time.
Esterline later admitted that even though he couldn't exactly recall what the cigars were intended to do, he didn't believe they were lethal.
Richard Bissell had CIA contact Robert Maheu pull in Johnny Roselli, a member of the syndicate of Las Vegas.
Maheu, disguised as a personal relations executive for a company suffering severe financial losses in Cuba due to Castro's actions, offered Roselli $150,000 for the successful assassination of Castro.
Roselli provided involved a co-conspirator, “Sam Gold”, later to be identified as Chicago gangster Sam Giancana and “Joe, the courier”, identified later as Santos Trafficante, the Cosa Nostra chieftain of Cuba.
According to Bissell, the most viable option presented was bacterial liquids.
The final product, however, was solid botulin pills that would dissolve in liquid.
Roselli, along with associate “Sam Gold”, used their connection to coerce Cuban official Juan Orta to perform the assassination through his gambling bills.
The Inspector General's report asserts that Orta had lost his access to Castro prior to him receiving the pills and thus could not complete the task.
April 1961 to late 1961 The plan to assassinate Castro by poison pill was canceled after the Bay of Pigs; Furthermore, the Inspector General's report speculates that this attempt failed because Castro no longer visited the restaurant where the pill was supposed to be administered to him.The second phase of the Gambling Syndicate operation began in May 1961 with Project ZRRIFLE, which was headed by Harvey.
Harvey was responsible for eight assassination attempts on Castro but none of these attempts were proficient at accomplishing any foreign policy objectives.
Project ZRRIFLE main purpose was to spot potential agents and research assassination techniques that might be used.
Project ZRRIFLE and the agency's operations in Cuba funneled into on program in November 1961 when Harvey became the head of the task force for Cuba.
Late 1961 to late 1962 Conflicting accounts in the Inspector General's report of how later events during this time period played out make it difficult to discern the path of how the Cuba task force handled its operations.
However, there was a consensus that Roselli again became involved with the agency along with Verona.
The connections between Roselli and the CIA fell apart once Harvey had been notified that Roselli was on the FBI's watch list.
Chomsky says this sabotage killed “four hundred workers, according to a Cuban government letter to the UN secretary general.That certainly may be Garthoff's view, but such direct provocations of the Cubans and Soviets ran at odds with both JFK's Missile Crisis-defusing pledge to remove United States Jupiter missiles from Turkey in exchange for the withdrawal of Soviet missiles from Cuba, and efforts made towards rapprochement with Castro in the aftermath of the crisis.
The missile swap had been seen by many as an even trade that saved face for both sides when considering the capabilities of each to deliver a serious strike to the other.
Kennedy had subsequently sought dialogue with Castro to reverse the two nations' acrimonious relationship.
As a result of the CIA's continued defiance, tensions between the President and the Agency, festering since the failed Bay of Pigs invasion, continued to escalate.
The plan was never implemented but it is speculated that a diving suit had been purchased with the intention of giving it to Castro.
Various other methods of assassination that had been thought of by the CIA included exploding seashells, having a former lover slip him poison pills, and exposing him to various other poisoned items such as a fountain pen and even ice cream.
Along plans to assassinate Castro was one to eliminate Rolando Cubela, a Cuban revolutionary hero.
The plot for Cubela began as an operation to recruit someone close to Castro to launch a coup.The United States Senate's Church Committee of 1975 stated that it had confirmed at least eight separate CIA run plots to assassinate Castro.
In a report written by the CIA's inspector general in 1967, he admits that this is the reason behind the fanciful nature of many of the assassination attempts.
He also said he warned that assassinating Castro would not necessarily destabilize the government in the manner that is desired.
He didn't think the assassination of Castro would do much to free Cuba from communist control.
He mentions that people became too focused on the idea of killing Castro when ""getting rid of Castro"" doesn't have to mean killing him.
Due to this micro-focus, broader, more complex plans with greater chances of success were not made.Many assassination ideas were floated by the CIA during Operation Mongoose.
While numerous sources state the exploding cigar plot as fact, at least one source asserts it to be simply a myth, and another dismisses it as mere supermarket tabloid fodder.
Another suggests that the story does have its origins in the CIA, but that it was never seriously proposed by them as a plot.
Rather, the plot was made up by the CIA as an intentionally ""silly"" idea to feed to those questioning them about their plans for Castro, in order to deflect scrutiny from more serious areas of inquiry.Another attempt at Castro's life was by way of a fountain pen loaded with the poison Black Leaf 40 and passed to a Cuban asset in Paris the day of President Kennedy's assassination, November 22, 1963.
Notably, the evidence also indicates that these two events occurred simultaneously, in the same moment.
Rolando Cubela, the potential assassin, contests this account, saying Black Leaf 40 was not in the pen.
United States Intelligence later responded to say that Black Leaf 40 was merely a suggestion, but Cubela thought that there were other poisons that would be much more effective.
Legacy After Operation Mongoose was ended the Kennedy Administration made some attempts to mend relations with the Cuban government.
As some documents released by the National Security Archive reveal, this happened fairly soon after the project ended.
One document comes in the form of an options paper from a Latin American specialist about how to fix relations.
The document goes on to push for further studies into how exactly they would go about improving relations.
The document also states the two possible outcomes that would come along with a better relationship with Cuba.
The effort to mend the relationships would be framed heavily by the negative relations formed due to Operation Mongoose.One issue that caused distrust between the relations of US-supported Cubans and the Agency was a ""shaky"" front due to no real agreement among the Cubans and the Agency.
Further investigation proved that the 1,500 men would not have been enough from the start against Castro's large military forces, as well as Agencies' lack of ""top-flight handling,"" which altogether led to the complete failure of Operation Mongoose as well as the Bay of Pigs invasion.A commission led by General Maxwell Taylor, known as the Taylor Committee, investigated the failures of the Bay of Pigs invasion.
In one of his volumes of an internal report written between 1974 and 1984, CIA Chief Historian Jack Pfeiffer criticized the Taylor Committee's investigation, as it held the CIA primarily responsible for the Bay of Pigs fiasco.
The Church Committee traced documented plots against Castro to have originated in 1962.
In the fall of 1963, Desmond Fitzgerald, a high-ranking official once under the tutelage of Frank Wisner and a good friend of future CIA Director William Colby, who had served in CIA stations across the Far East during the 1950s, pursued Cubela's clandestine services.
In their meetings, Fitzgerald duplicitously presented himself as United States Attorney General Robert F Kennedy's personal representative.
Some scholars saw this plan-of-attack as a ""carrot and stick"" approach of Kennedy in dealing with Castro.
Other historians, however, see these efforts by the CIA as the means to undermine President John F Kennedy's peace initiative toward Castro.
Some revisionist historians claim attempts to eliminate Castro represented a facet of a ""Kennedy obsession"" purportedly unshared by the rest of Washington.
Media portrayals In the Oliver Stone film JFK, Operation Mongoose is portrayed in flashback sequences as a training ground where, among others, Lee Harvey Oswald becomes versed in anti-Castro militia tactics.
Officially, the United States favored only peaceful means to pressure Cuba.
United States operatives attacked civilian targets, including sugar refineries, saw mills, and molasses storage tanks.
Operation Mongoose and various other terrorist operations caused property damage and injured and killed Cubans.
In early November, six months after the Bay of Pigs, JFK authorized the CIA's ""Program of Covert Action"", now dubbed Operation Mongoose, and named Lansdale its chief of operations.
This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain.
Retrieved 2019-03-01. ^ a b Volume 1 Cuba Plans. ^ a b Central Intelligence Agency.
America's Quest for Global Dominance, Henry Holt and Company, 80. ^ a b ""History Matters Archive – 00/00/67 Report on Plots to Assassination Fidel Castro, pg"". www.history-matters.com.
AP. ^ a b c d e f g h i ""Castro Assassination Plots"". www.maryferrell.org.
In this passage, Chomsky cites Garthoff but erroneously cites the wrong work by Garthoff.
Meeting with the Attorney General of the United States Concerning Cuba, CIA minutes, 19 January 1962.
Justification for United States Military Intervention in Cuba, Joint Chiefs of Staff, 13 March 1962.
