Navy History and Hertigae Command Kennedy, feeling that he had not been served well by the CIA in the Bay of Pigs, replaced CIA Director Allen Dulles with John McCone.
The President also felt the advice he had received from the Joint Chiefs of Staff was not up to par, so he brought General Maxwell Taylor back to active duty in the newly created post of military representative to the President.
On 1 October, Taylor was formally named Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.
Within the White House, Kennedy sought to bring the reins for foreign policy and national-security management more fully into his hands.
He named McGeorge Bundy the first national security adviser to the President, with his office in the West Wing.
He also created his own national-security information staff—the Situation Room—in the West Wing.
Contrary to complaints that he was bypassing his military advisors in these drastic alterations, Kennedy met regularly if not frequently with the Joint Chiefs of Staff.
But the President centralized military decision-making in the office of his civilian Secretary.
These “Whiz Kids,” as they were nicknamed, supplemented the military experience of the generals and admirals with economic, political, and other analyses.
As newly appointed Chief of Staff of the Air Force, General Curtis E LeMay joined the chiefs in 1961.
It had been a matter of continuing concern, and I personally sensed that there was a very high manifestation of the competitiveness of President Kennedy and Bobby Kennedy to make up for what had gone on.
As a matter of fact, as soon as I became a member of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, it was clear that there was a weekly meeting at the higher political State Department level as to what could be done to redress the situation.
The Chiefs agreed; Lemnitzer arranged the meeting, and McNamara came down accompanied by Deputy Secretary Roswell Gilpatrick.
On 27 July, Castro announced that Cuba would soon have new defenses against the United States.
The sites were being constructed in the outlines of trapezoids, which indicated to United States photo interpreters and analysts that they were not there to guard against air attack.
They were point defenses, similar to SAM sites protecting ballistic-missile launch sites in the Soviet Union.
On 15 October, U-2 film revealed ballistic-missile carriers, associated equipment, and support trucks.
The camera had caught a medium-range ballistic-missile convoy pulling into the cover of a wooded area.
The President, Secretary of Defense, and Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff were shown the photographic evidence.
The President then convened the first of many Executive Committee meetings in the White House.
U-2 photographs taken on 17 October revealed construction of an intermediate-range ballistic missile site just west of Havana.
The SS-5 IRBM had a range of over 2,200 miles and could hit almost any United States target.
Intelligence analysis showed that the Soviets and Cubans were working nonstop to set up 24 MRBM launchers plus 18 reserves for a total of 42 SS-4 MRBM nuclear missiles, as well as three fixed IRBM launch sites, each with four launchers.
If these sites were completed, their missiles would significantly alter the strategic balance.
Intelligence had additionally photographed the shipboard arrival of the first of 42 disassembled, nuclear-weapons-capable Ilyushin Il-28 bomber aircraft.
On 18 October, the President proceeded with an office call by Soviet Foreign Minister Andrei Gromyko, an appointment that had been made many weeks before.
Without tipping his hand about the United States discovery of the Soviet MRBMs, IRBMs, and bombers in Cuba, the President underscored to Gromyko the unacceptability of Soviet offensive nuclear weapons on the island.
Gromyko responded with assurances that the weapons being introduced were strictly defensive.
Those favoring the blockade—or a quarantine, which would not be an act of war—included McNamara.
They argued that it applied pressure on the Soviets at the same time that it did not risk pushing Khrushchev beyond the brink.
It would demonstrate United States resolve, while giving the President time and leverage in demanding that the Soviet Union withdraw its missiles and bombers from Cuba.
McNamara reinforced his argument with the point that a surprise United States air strike against the missile bases alone—a surgical strike—was impractical, even in the eyes of the military, and that all military installations would have to be attacked.
On 19 October, with the United States response still undecided, the President invited the Joint Chiefs of Staff to the White House.
In an Executive Committee meeting on 21 October, at the request of the President, Anderson described in detail how the Navy would carry out the quarantine, from the first signaling to approaching ships, to boarding procedures, to warning shots, and then actual disabling shots into the rudder if a ship refused to stop.
So we had gotten into the position of moving our forces around to the best military posture the Navy could adopt, and we had a pretty formidable position at that time.
For example, we had all our available Polaris submarines at sea; we had a line of defensive submarine barriers across the Atlantic; we had our patrol squadrons scouring the Atlantic from the best possible bases for reconnaissance and, particularly, Russian submarines.
With the Navy already moving into position, on 22 October at 1900, the President gave his radio and television report to the American people on the Soviet arms buildup in Cuba.
First : To halt this offensive buildup, a strict quarantine of all offensive military equipment under shipment to Cuba is being initiated.
Navy units operating under the flagship heavy cruiser USS Newport News steamed into place implementing the quarantine around Cuba.
Army troops boarded trains and convoys for a potential invasion jumping-off point in southern Florida.
On 25 October, the United States raised the readiness of Strategic Air Command forces to DEFCON 2.
Anderson and his Navy staff managed control of the naval operation in the Pentagon’s Flag Plot.
With the quarantine in place, as the Navy tracked surface shipping and Soviet submarines, he recalled One incident occurred.
One evening, McNamara, Gilpatric, and an entourage of his press people came down to Flag Plot and, in the course of their interrogations, they asked why that destroyer was out of line.
I sort of tried to pass it off because there were some of McNamara’s people there who were not cleared for this information, but some of my own watch officers were not cleared for it in the general area of Flag Plot.
After some discussion, I said to McNamara—he kept pressing me—“Come inside,” and I took him into a little inner sanctuary where only the people who had clearance for that particular type of classified information were permitted, and I explained the whole thing to him and to his satisfaction, as well.
I heard nothing of that until after the TFX , then the story was leaked through his own public information people that I had insulted him by making this remark over the incident in Flag Plot.
The Soviets’ measured response to the quarantine was of critical importance to the President’s measured approach to the crisis.
No ships with prohibited or even questionable cargoes tried to run the blockade.
The first couched the Soviet Union’s conditions for the withdrawal of its missiles and bombers from Cuba in terms of a requirement for an end to the United States blockade and a United States promise not to invade Cuba.
The second message added an additional, more difficult demand, that the United States also remove its missiles from Turkey.
In a 27 October meeting of the Executive Committee, Robert Kennedy proposed that the United States reply to Khrushchev’s first message.
He stressed that work had to stop on the missile bases and that all offensive weapons had to be removed.
The United States, in turn, would lift the quarantine and would assure the Soviets that it would not invade Cuba.
United States surveillance units and the United States Navy monitored the withdrawal.
