Jefferson Citians who lived through that dark day in history can always remember were they were and what they were doing when the United States was placed on a Defcon 2 alert and ready to rain 2,952 nuclear missiles on the Soviet Union.
One of them is Dino Brugioni, a former Jefferson Citian who at the time was a senior photo interpretation expert with the United States Central Intelligence Agency.
U-2 spy plane photos had provided unmistakable evidence of the clandestine insertion by the Soviet Union of nuclear missiles in Cuba, just 90 miles from the United States.
Low-flying United States jets later captured even more detailed photos of the missile sites.
Brugioni was one of a 10-member United States National Security Archive delegation who traveled to Cuba last October to meet with retired Russian and Cuban military officers who orchestrated the insertion of nuclear missiles in Cuba.
The former Jefferson Citian was an eyewitness to history on Oct., 1962.
He had first-hand knowledge of United States spy plane photos of the secret Soviet nuclear missile buildup in Cuba.
Brugioni prepared the CIA briefing that was given to President John Kennedy informing him of the secret missiles in Cuba.
He joined the CIA in 1948 and became one of its top photo analysts before his retirement in 1982 as a senior CIA officer.
Brugioni asked the Russian general in charge of the missile project why the Russians thought they could build the missile sites undetected.
The Russian general replied that he had informed his superiors in Russia that the Americans would detect the missiles but he was ordered to continue building the sites.
At least 24 Soviet medium-range ballistic missile sites were operational in Cuba, each with nuclear missiles capable of reaching Washington, D.C., and states throughout the South.
The Russians also had 24 more much larger missiles on the way to Cuba in ships that were turned back by the United States naval quarantine.
Those missiles were capable of reaching virtually every city in the United States.
Eventually, the Soviets agreed to withdraw all of the nuclear missiles in exchange for a secret pledge by the United States not to invade Cuba and to remove United States missiles from Turkey that were aimed at Russia.
Cuba has preserved some of the missile sites and deactivated missiles as museums.
Brugioni and other participants of the 40th anniversary reunion last October of American, Russian and Cuban officials toured the missile site museums.
Since his 1982 retirement from the CIA, Brugioni has written numerous scientific articles on peaceful uses of satellite photos as well as articles and a book on the United States Civil War.
In addition to ""Eyeball to Eyeball"" he has written ""Photo Fakery,"" the history and techniques of photographic deception and manipulation.
The book includes numerous Russian fake photos of purported Soviet technology.
He joined the United States Central Intelligence Agency in 1948 and was a founding officer of the National Photographic Interpretation Center.
Since his retirement from the CIA, Brugioni has become known around the world as a leading expert on satellite photography.
Today, the site serves no official use, but is a relic of the height of the Cold War in South Florida.
To continue to preserve the oral history of the site, Everglades National Park is seeking volunteers to lead tours and collaborate with veterans.
The site's official use ended in 1979, but remnants of a pivotal point in contemporary United States history are open to the public.
In 2004, the United States Department of the Interior's National Register of Historic Places listed the missile base as a historic district.
Today, the site serves no official use, but is a relic of the height of the Cold War in South Florida.To continue to preserve the oral history of the site, the park is seeking volunteers to lead tours and collaborate with veterans.
When military veteran Ted Swanson served on the base from 1966 to 1968, missiles at the center was capable of traveling 2,700 mph and could be launched in just 15 minutes.
As the base became recognized as an historical site, Swanson began collecting the names of veterans who served at the base.
It was a nervous time period and they brought missiles down in planes and on trucks and trains,"" he said.
To continue to preserve the oral history of the site, the park is seeking volunteers to lead tours and collaborate with veterans.
But the true impact is that the base serves as a reminder that there wasn't nuclear war and that these fears were alleviated. "" reminds people that with a strong military you can actually avoid a conflict.
It's part of our history and if you don't pay attention to history you're going to relive it,"" Swanson said.
A mandatory volunteer training for the Nike Missile Base programs will be held from 8:45m. to 3m., Oct. starting at the Ernest F Coe Visitor Center, 40001 State Hwy.36.
Lunch will provided and volunteers are expected to read Appendix One of Cold War in South Florida Historic Resource Study before the training.
Studying newly declassified documents at a conference on the crisis, Cuban, American and Russian protagonists were told the most dangerous day of all was Oct., 1962 when a United States Navy destroyer dropping depth charges off the Cuban coast almost hit the hull of a Soviet submarine carrying a nuclear warhead.
The United States military ""did not have a clue that the submarine had a nuclear weapon on board,"" Thomas Blanton, director of the National Security Archives, told reporters Friday night.
The depth charges ""exploded right next to the hull,"" Vadim Orlov, the submarine's signals intelligence officer, said in a written account of the incident.
At first, submarine crew members considered using the nuclear weapon, thinking that war had erupted, Orlov wrote in his account.
But they ultimately surfaced, showing themselves to their American pursuers and defusing the tension.
Another document showed that United States intelligence officials had photographed only 33 of the 42 mediumrange missiles in Cuba that the Americans later discovered were there at the time.
Intelligence officials also never located any nuclear warheads, which they later learned had been kept on the island.
The historic papers underscored the danger of a nuclear attack either accidental or deliberate during those tense October days.
Cuban President Fidel Castro participated in the conference's closed-door sessions Friday and yesterday, as did former Defense Secretary Robert S McNamara and other key advisers from the Kennedy administration.
As events began spinning out of control in late October 1962, Castro began expecting a United States air strike on Soviet facilities on the island and was prepared to shoot down American combat aircraft if they invaded Cuba, according to a top-secret military directive to Gen.
A portion of the documents, made available to the Associated Press in Washington, demonstrates that the crisis did not end, as was widely believed, on Oct., 1962, with the Soviet Union's agreement to remove the offensive weapons.
Weeks after the Soviet Union agreed to pull the missiles from Cuba, Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev worried that an ""irrational"" Castro would renew tensions with the United States, and perhaps provoke war.
During conference sessions on Friday, participants also looked at American covert actions following the disastrous CIA-backed invasion of Cuba's Bay of Pigs in April 1961, and how those actions intensified Cuban fears of a United States military attack.
With graduation approaching and his college deferment about to expire, he enlisted in the Navy.
Because he'd studied the effects of radiation on living creatures in college, Hays was selected for training as a nuclear weapons officer.
By 1970, the young man who had grown up during the Cold War with the specter of nuclear annihilation hanging over his head was in the midst of a shooting war in Southeast Asia, where he was put in charge of around two dozen nuclear warheads aboard the USS Oklahoma City, a Navy guided missile cruiser.
Though the USSR was not officially involved in the war, the Soviets provided lots of support for their North Vietnamese proxies, including the operation of mobile radar units tracking United States ships and aircraft.
For Hays, on station in the Gulf of Tonkin aboard the Oklahoma City, the Soviet radar trucks were important targets and he helped take one out with a missile strike.
Like every other missile fired by either side in that war, the one Hays launched that day was a conventional weapon, but there was no shortage of nukes in the theater of operations.
He has no idea how many nukes the Army, Air Force and Marines may have had or how big the Soviet nuclear arsenal in the area might have been.
But he has no doubt there were more than enough nuclear weapons on both sides in Vietnam to have created a holocaust if anyone had gotten trigger-happy.
As a nuclear weapons officer, Hays had access to classified information about mishaps involving America's arsenal, and while he said there were some alarming accidents that could easily have become catastrophes, the United States and USSR never really came close to blowing each other up after those tense days back in October 1962.
Both sides took a step back after that, installing a hotline between Washington and Moscow and instituting a series of fail-safes intended to prevent any accidental or hasty use of nuclear weapons.
At no time during Hays' service did he ever receive an order to prepare a warhead for launch, much less fire one.
Instead, he spent much of his time making sure the warheads were properly stored, handled correctly and kept secure.
But that doesn't mean he didn't consider the possibility that he might actually be called upon to push the button and what it would mean if he did.
During the Cuban missile crisis, Soviet nuclear brinkmanship caused the world to hold its breath, as President Kennedy battled with Nikita Khrushchev, the Soviet Communist leader, to prevent Moscow from installing nuclear missiles on the island.
Western diplomatic sources said that the Russian leader was resorting to strong rhetoric to appease his political opponents.
He is under pressure from Communists and nationalists who argue that he is selling out his country's interests.
President Yeltsin's comparison with 1962 precedes next week's crucial meeting between Yevgeni Primakov, the Russian Foreign Minister, and Javier Solana, the Nato Secretary-General, to try to agree a special security charter between Moscow and the West.
The President's remarks were also seen as part of Moscow's attempts to gain last-minute concessions on the proposed agreement between Russia and the alliance, which both sides want signed before the Nato summit in Madrid in July, when Poland, the Czech Republic and Hungary will be invited to join the organisation.
As if to confirm his twin-track approach of berating the West over Nato expansion plans and reaching a deal on a security partnership with the alliance, Mr Yeltsin said that an agreement with Nato was nearly ready.
He told reporters at a Victory Day ceremony in the Kremlin that he might join the talks in Moscow next week between Mr Primakov and Senor Solana.
Nato sources said that although a deal with Russia was ""very close"", and should be ready in time for a summit in Paris at the end of this month, final agreement was being held up by Moscow's attempts to stop the alliance from constructing any form of military infrastructure on the territory of new member states.
The sources said a number of compromises were being discussed with the Russians.
There was no question of Nato agreeing to abandon plans to create basic infrastructure on the territory of the new East ern European members.
This would be aimed at reassuring Moscow that Nato did not intend to build bunkers for tactical nuclear missiles or new garrisons for the permanent stationing of alliance troops.
Nato has already included in the draft text of an agreement a declaration that it has ""no intention, no plans and no reason for deploying nuclear weapons"" on the territory of the new member states.
If the negotiations in Moscow on Tuesday are successful, a ""Nato-Russia Act"", laying down the new strategic partnership between the alliance and Moscow, will be signed in Paris on May 27 by Nato's 16 heads of government and Mr Yeltsin.
However, opposition leaders in Russia have denounced the proposed agreement and have condemned the Government.
As a counter to Nato's expansion plans, Russia has been trying to improve relations with former Soviet republics.
Negotiations are under way for economic and political union with Belarus and yesterday President Yeltsin presided over the signing of a peace memorandum between Moldova and its breakaway Russian-majority region of Transdnestr.
Garthoff, a senior fellow at the Brookings Institution and a State Department participant in the crisis, based his article on Soviet sources who are beginning to publicly discuss formerly taboo subjects.
The highest official United States intelligence estimate was 22,000 in early 1963.
Nikita S Khrushchev, then the Kremlin leader, decided to secretly place nuclear-tipped SS-4 and SS-5 missiles in Cuba without a formal decision by the ruling Politburo.
Khrushchev considered running a naval blockade ordered by President Kennedy, but was dissuaded by Anastas Mikoyan, then deputy Soviet premier.
Khrushchev did not authorize a proposal by Alexander Fomin, KGB station chief in Washington, to U.S. journalist John Scali that was long thought to have been the key to ending the crisis.
The deal, which was very close to the final resolution, called for withdrawal of Soviet missiles from Cuba in return for removal of United States missiles from Turkey.
Soviet leaders hurriedly cut a diplomatic deal to get their missiles out of Cuba because they thought a United States invasion of Cuba was imminent.
The decision to shoot down a United States U-2 spy plane over Cuba during the crisis was made by a Soviet onestar general on the scene, Igor Statsenko.
Fyodor Burlatski, who was a member of Khrushchev's inner circle, and Sergo Mikoyan, the son of Anastas Mikoyan and an expert of SovietCuban relations.
CUBA remained in the news but as yet the world was unaware of the discovery of offensive Soviet nuclear weapons on the island that were capable of reaching the American mainland.
The United States press had been intrigued by rumours of a coup or crisis in Cuba.
The previous week, a Cuban exile group, Alpha 66, had staged a raid on the Cuban coast and killed a number of Russians.
And a reported sinking of a Cuban patrol boat by exiles in the Bahamas had coincided with news of a Soviet protest to the United States Embassy in Moscow over the impounding of a cargo of Cuban sugar in Puerto Rico.
Case Put Before UN’: The United States alleged today that Russian troops and military equipment in Cuba had been requested by the Cuban government to protect itself from the Cuban people.
The head of the United States delegation to the UN, Adlai Stevenson, made this charge in a document circulated to all UN. members, replying formally to a speech by President Osvaldo Dorticos Torrado of Cuba in the General Assembly on October 8.
Mr Stevenson did not reply in the assembly because, he said, a reply to a Head of State would be a violation of UN traditions.
Cuba was also proving an attractive issue for Republicans gearing up for November’s midterm elections.
It now seems clear that foreign policy will become increasingly a matter for partisan controversy in the next three weeks in spite of Mr Kennedy’s attempts to limit the range of this debate.
The President has carefully refrained from replying in kind to predecessor General Eisenhower’s rootand-branch condemnation of the conduct of foreign policy by the Kennedy administration.
Mr Kennedy brushed aside Mr Eisenhower’s criticisms with the quiet rejoinder that former presidents were always eager to defend their record of leadership with some vehemence, and appropriate discounts must therefore be made for violence of language against political opponents Thus far, however, Mr Kennedy’s magnanimity had been matched by no corresponding restraint on the part of the Republicans, who believed they could win votes from the Cuban issue.
They increased the campaign of criticism which they had been directing for some days against the administration.
Kennedy and his senior advisors were understandably pre-occupied by the discovery of Soviet missiles.
On October 17 American military units began moving en masse to the south eastern US; and intelligence photos gathered from another flight showed the presence of additional missile sites on Cuba and between 16 and 32 missiles.
Matthew’s Cathedral in Washington in order to observe the National Day of Prayer.
Afterwards, he had lunch with Crown Prince Hasan of Libya, and then made a political visit to Connecticut to support Democratic congressional candidates.
October 17 was also notable for more than 40 United States warships heading for the Puerto Rican island of Vieques to stage a practice invasion of Cuba.
Michael Dobbs’s bestselling book on the missile crisis, One Minute to Midnight, says the five United States Joint Chiefs, sceptical of the ongoing and top-secret Operation Mongoose, and seeing “no prospect of early success” in stirring up an anti-Castro uprising on Cuba, had been urging an invasion of the island for months.
Months earlier, they had warned Mr Kennedy that the United States could not tolerate the permanent existence of a communist government in the Western hemisphere and that if Castro remained in power, other Latin American countries might fall under Communist domination.
Once the task force got to Vieques, the Marines would storm ashore, depose an imaginary dictator, and secure the island for democracy.
Hurricane Ella was making its presence felt, compelling the task force not only to switch course in order to avoid its worst effects but also to delay plans for an amphibious landing by 4,000 Marines.
Most Americans believe 'twas a famous victory won by a resolute president prepared to take the world to the brink of nuclear war.
Actually, there was not much of a brink, and no triumph worth celebrating.
The meeting was last April at a Florida resort with the wonderfully inapt name of Hawk's Cay.
Because the crisis began when the Soviet Union began putting missiles in Cuba and ended when the missiles were removed, it was considered an unambiguous triumph achieved by a president more hawkish than some dovish advisers.
Now much is being made of a letter from former Secretary of State Dean Rusk, a letter read at the April reunion.
In the crisis, Robert Kennedy notified Soviet Ambassador Dobrynin that United States missiles in Turkey would be withdrawn within months of withdrawal of Soviet missiles from Cuba, but it was imperative (obviously for domestic American political reasons) that the linkage of the withdrawals not be announced.
Rusk's letter reveals that if the Soviet Union had insisted on public linkage, Kennedy would have complied.
Kennedy succeeded because his military advantage was huge and his goal was tiny.
The Soviet Union was not going to war at a time when United States advantages were three to one in long-range bombers, six to one in long-range missiles and 16 to one in warheads.
The Kremlin must have been astonished and elated when Kennedy, in spite of advantages that would have enabled him to insist on severance of Soviet military connections with Cuba, sought only removal of the missiles.
The stunning revelation in Lukas' report is not Rusk's letter; it is something said at the reunion by Ted Sorensen, the aide closest to Kennedy.
Kenneth Keating, trusting information received from intelligence and refugee sources, said offensive missiles were going into Cuba.
Republicans were making an election issue out of Soviet shipments to Cuba.
Thus it is fascinating that he says, in praise of Kennedy, that Kennedy wanted to practice appeasement but calculated incorrectly.
In 1978, MIG-23s (nucleardelivery vehicles far more menacing than the 1962 missiles) were introduced into Cuba.
Kennedy's noninvasion pledge, given as part of the crisis-ending deal, guaranteed the survival of this hemisphere's first communist regime and makes attempts to remove or reform the second seem disproportionate.
The Reagan administration, which began by talking about dealing with Nicaragua by ''going to the source'' Cuba, is reduced to clawing for piddling sums for the Contras, a recipe for another protracted failure.
Today, most ''peace plans'' for Central America postulate the moral equivalence of United States and Soviet involvements in the region, another legacy of the missilecrisis ''triumph'' that killed the Monroe Doctrine.
The romanticizing of the missile crisis makes such triumphs more likely.
Frankel wrote that previous accounts of high-stakes tension on the thermonuclear brink had misstated the danger.
Frankel said that neither John F Kennedy nor Nikita Khrushchev would have allowed a nuclear war over a marginal issue like Cuba.
Enter Ulster-born, British-educated historian Michael Dobbs, now living in Maryland.
He has written ""One Minute to Midnight,"" yet another history of the crisis.
In great detail, and in a tight chronological order that lends the tale a touch of a Tom Clancy thriller, ""One Minute to Midnight"" explores some of the slip-ups that set pulses pounding.
For example, an American U-2 spy plane went astray over Soviet Siberia at the worst possible time.
In this day and age of GPS navigation, we may find it hard to believe that the U-2 pilot was navigating the old-fashioned way, by the stars and with a sextant.
But he was, until an outburst of the Northern Lights masked the stars and led the pilot perilously astray.
An Air Force F-102 that deployed to an auxiliary base in Wisconsin with a nuclear air-to-air missile aboard ran off the end of a runway and could have spread radioactive toxins.
In northern Minnesota, a Soviet commando tried to sabotage an interceptor base.
Turns out that the ""commando"" was a bear, and only at the last minute did officials halt a massive launching of interceptors.
At great risk, American recon planes looked high and low in Cuba for the central marshalling point for Soviet nuclear warheads.
Turns out that the Soviets had been forced to store the warheads at a humble, singlefence site.
Some of those warheads found their way to a Soviet cruise missile site just 15 miles from the United States base at Guantanamo Bay.
The Soviets were prepared to close Guantanamo forever, with a Hiroshima-size blast.
Now and then, Dobbs steps back from the details to take in the Big Picture and to counter what he calls myths.
The ""eyeball-to-eyeball"" moment when Soviet ships stopped heading toward a blockade line around Cuba had actually happened a full day earlier, when both sides' eyeballs were too far apart to notice. The famous ""back channel"" in Washington between a Soviet diplomat and ABC reporter John Scali was a dead end that led nowhere. The decision to sidestep Khrushchev by ignoring an angry message and instead respond to an earlier, more conciliatory message was less a matter of finesse than it was a matter of fatigue.
Dobbs says that by that time, United States decision-makers were hollow-eyed from lack of sleep.
The missile crisis is merely the best known of the close calls with nuclear war.
American intercontinental ballistic missiles were alerted, jet fighters were scrambled, and an airborne command center took to the air.
When ground-based radars showed no incoming missiles, no counterattack was launched.
It was later determined that a training tape simulating a Soviet attack had been mistakenly inserted into the computer system.
But the commander in the Soviet early-warning bunker went with his instincts, overrode his computer and told his superiors up the line it was a false alarm.
The rocket was headed away from Russia, but Russian radar technicians thought it could be a United States Trident submarine-launched missile intending ""to blind Russian radars by detonating a nuclear warhead high in the atmosphere,"" Forden said.
An expert on economics, he was appointed to the inter-American affairs post in March 1962.
In choosing him, the Kennedy administration was seen as moving to reinforce the Alliance for Progress, a United States aid program for Latin America.
But by late April 1962, the indications were that he had become the closest thing to an overall ""boss"" of Latin American policy that the Kennedy administration had had.
Before the missile crisis began, he coordinated United States endeavors to cut Cuba off from other Western Hemisphere governments.
In the summer of 1962, Nikita Khrushchev made a secret decision to put Soviet ballistic missiles in Cuba.
Then United States aerial reconnaissance showed that missile-launching sites were being secretly built on the island.
After President John F Kennedy learned about the missiles, he formed a special group of advisers, including Mr Martin, which came to be called the Executive Committee of the National Security Council, or ExCom.
On Oct., Kennedy announced a United States naval and air ""quarantine"" -a blockade -on the shipping of offensive military equipment to Cuba.
