President John F Kennedy, nuclear devastation of the globe was avoided.
This essay seeks to explore Khrushchev‟s role in the crisis and to discuss its effects, including the further SinoSoviet split, the downfall of Khrushchev, and Cuban-Soviet relations.
The actual crisis began on October 16 and 17 of 1962, when President Kennedy and members of his administration saw photos taken by American U-2 of missiles on Cuban soil that had nuclear capabilities and a range of over 1,600 kilometers.
The origins of the crisis and Khrushchev‟s involvement, however, occurred three months earlier in July when the Premier met with Fidel Castro‟s brother Raúl.
Khrushchev would later write in his memoirs that the purpose of the placement of nuclear-capable missiles in Cuba was “to maintain the independence of the Cuban people” after Kennedy had endorsed the United States orchestration of an invasion of Cuba at the Bay of Pigs in 1961.
Although the United States had no “direct evidence that the Soviet Union had placed nuclear warheads in Cuba,” strong, forceful reactions on part of the United States would take Khrushchev by surprise.
It is not surprising, then, that Khrushchev‟s actions during the crisis underscored his resolve to avoid a nuclear Third World War with the United States.
When Kennedy announced a blockade of Cuba on Monday, October 22, in order to prevent further Soviet ships from reaching the island, Khrushchev could have plowed ahead and 1 Roy Medvedev, Khrushchev, trans.
On Friday, October 26, ten days after the Kennedy administration saw the U-2 photos, the Premier received an intelligence report of plans of a U.S invasion of Cuba.
Khrushchev was shocked; he knew then that the United States was serious about removing Soviet missiles from its Cuban neighbor.
That same day, on October 26, rather than request the removal of certain United States missiles in Europe as he had previously planned, Premier Khrushchev decided “not to complicate negotiations” and only requested in his letter a pledge from Kennedy that the United States would not invade Cuba.
The next day, however, the Premier awoke to news that an invasion would not happen so soon.
The information related to the threat of invasion was obtained in two informal meetings between Soviet embassy official Georgi Kornienko and reporter Warren Rogers.
To begin, there were the immediate outcomes of the negotiations during October.
It had been determined that the Soviet Union would withdraw its nuclear-capable missiles from Cuba, and in return, the United States would pledge not to invade Cuba and promise to dismantle its Jupiter missiles in Turkey.
The latter can be considered rather insignificant, for the United States had already considered dismantling the missiles in Turkey, and it soon replaced them with more effective nuclear rockets that could be launched by submarines.
The United States‟ non-invasion pledge yielded more significant effects.
After a failed invasion, assassination plots, and myriads of other schemes to kill or oust Fidel Castro, the USSR succeeded in securing the survival of its fledgling island ally.
In addition, relations between the two nations “remained firm,” with Fidel Castro taking a forty-day tour of the Soviet Union only six months after the resolution of the crisis, despite his previous anger over the removal of the missiles.
However, there were also negative side effects for the Soviet Union concerning its Cuban relations, namely, the dependency of Cuba on Soviet economic assistance.
After the United States eliminated exports of oil and prohibited sugar imports from Cuba, the Soviet Union stepped in and footed the bill in order to keep the Cuban economy from collapsing, buying sugar that it did not need.
By the early 1980s, Cuba had become a $4. billion liability per year for the Soviet Union.
Even though Khrushchev achieved one of his objectives by securing the safety of his ally, it was not enough to maintain his reputation.
As Jeremi Suri writes, “The withdrawal of Soviet missiles from Cuba loomed much larger than the American noninvasion pledge.
Instead of bolstering the international prestige of the Soviet Union, Khrushchev discredited Moscow‟s commitment to its allies,” most notably China.
In October 1964, two years after the Cuban missile crisis, Nikita Khrushchev was peaceably removed from power.
The crisis had still more effects that produced different agreements, policies, and reactions.
One example is the infamous “crisis hotline” that was established between Washington and Moscow.
The direct result, Suri says, was an acceptance of the situation as it was, or the “status-quo,” in order to maintain security at the expense of progress.
But, Suri continues, instead of producing the security that was so ardently sought, improved Soviet-American relations contributed to the destabilization of many areas of the globe that would mark the rest of the sixties and seventies.
Although Nikita Khrushchev arguably made a serious tactical blunder by secretly sending nuclear-capable missiles to Cuba, his actions during the crisis, along with Kennedy‟s own response, prevented atomic war from scarring the globe.
It is possible to speculate as to whether Khrushchev could have struck a better deal for the Soviet Union.
Hindsight, however, provides a very different perspective of the situation, and Khrushchev deserves respect for setting aside his pride, risking his career, and withdrawing the missiles.
The crisis perhaps provided a more realistic grasp of what nuclear war would mean to Soviet and American policy-makers, which produced a stronger resolve to avoid it.
This has represented a thorn in the side of the United States, which has sought through various means to topple the island nation‟s government, including the establishment of a trade embargo that is still in place today.
The Castro government, still dedicated to communism, despite recent, small changes, inspires others in the world.
Socialist leaders Hugo Chavez of Venezuela and Evo Morales of Bolivia find inspiration and friendship in the Cuban revolutionaries.
And in 2007, Michael Moore released his documentary Sicko, which included an excursion to Cuba in which he praised the socialized medical system of Cuba and encouraged the United States to adopt a similar system.
The unbroken presence of a Cuban socialist state since the crisis of 1962 is a successful product of Cuban-Soviet relations and continues to be a victory for the Soviet Union, even though it no longer exists.
Thus, the Cuban missile crisis produced important consequences for the twentieth century, and it continues to do so in the next.
