Amid the trivia of American politics, voters can forget that they are entrusting the winning candidate for President with the nuclear codes, the power to annihilate all life on the planet, a reality that reporter Don North witnessed up close a half century ago in the Cuban missile crisis.
By Don North Saturday, Oct., 1962, now known as “Black Saturday” was the day I arrived in Havana to report on the Cuban missile crisis, completely oblivious that 50 years later it would be considered “the most dangerous moment in human history,” the day we came closest to nuclear Armageddon.
I had visited Cuba as a freelance journalist six months earlier and was fascinated by the country.
A hush fell over the bar and waiters stopped serving to hear his words.
A United States naval blockade of Cuba had begun the day before Kennedy’s speech.
As Kennedy spoke the United States Strategic Air Command had gone to DEFCON-3, two steps down from nuclear war, and dispersed its nuclear-armed bomber fleet around the United States.
Bobby Kennedy made a pre-emptive strike on history by writing and publishing his book, Thirteen Days, a self-serving recollection of the crisis.
We now know that JFK’s covert war against Cuba dubbed “Operation Mongoose,” a campaign of harassment and sabotage had contributed to the war of nerves that led the Russians to step in to the defense of Cuba.
However, as transcripts of the taped White House meetings of the Executive Committee of the National Security Council would reveal when declassified decades later, JFK used cool political skill and all his intellect to prevent a possible nuclear war.
The taped record of how JFK played his hand trying to contain the chaotic forces of history in the face of unyielding pressure from hawkish advisers like Generals Curtis Le May and Maxwell Taylor shows the crisis was a supreme test of the President’s ability to maintain an open mind, while holding to his entrenched abhorrence of war.
It is a cautionary tale to remember as we fear a possible future showdown with a nuclear-armed Iran and are about to choose a President in an election 50 years after the missile crisis of October 1962.
Sound judgment and emotional stability can make the difference between a peaceful compromise and a catastrophic war.
Self-Assigned to Havana Although a few weeks earlier I had finally landed a job as a news writer on the NBC evening news, I was ready to chuck it for the opportunity to report from a key city during the missile crisis where few foreign journalists were based.
I walked across the street from NBC studios in Rockefeller Center to the Life magazine office.
Although I hadn’t worked for Life before and only owned an inexpensive Kodak, I was ushered in to see a senior editor and was immediately loaded down with several Leica camera bodies, an assortment of lenses and a brick of fast 35mm film.
Life didn’t have a man in Havana and for this story they would risk taking a chance on a youthful broadcast news writer with some Cuba contacts willing to travel into ground zero for American ICBM’s and bombers.
Friends made plans to drive their children to relatives’ homes in less vulnerable areas of the country.
My sister Helen had recently arrived from Canada to work as a nurse at the Roosevelt Hospital in central Manhattan.
I was reluctant to leave her alone in a city perhaps facing a devastating enemy attack.
My first stop was Miami to consult with my friend Miguel Acocca, Time magazine’s man in the Caribbean.
The first was to link up with the United States Second Marine Division preparing landing craft in Key West for an invasion of Cuba.
It would be called Operation Scabbards and be comparable to the Normandy landings in 1944.
It would involve eight divisions, around 120,000 troops, and land on a 40-mile front between Mariel and Tarara Beach, east of Havana.
Or my second choice was to try to get on a Cubana Airlines flight left outside Cuba when the blockade went into effect, that would be returning to Cuba in the next few days from Mexico City.
We had shared many a rum and coke at the Delegates Lounge in the United Nations when he was the Cuban delegate and I was an announcer for United Nations General Assembly sessions.
If there was any chance of a visa and a ticket on that flight, Mario could arrange it.
I cabled the Embassy explaining my situation and took the next flight to Mexico.
With a visa in hand, purchasing a ticket on the Cubana flight was easy.
The only passengers confirmed were members of an East German soccer team.
Boarding the flight I was aware from monitoring recent radio broadcasts that it was a sensitive time to be arriving in Havana.
The first Soviet ship to test the American blockade, the Grozny, was reported about to encounter United States Navy ships.
Not Welcome in Havana Walking from the plane into the dark, hot, humid Havana air was not unpleasant and costumed guitarists strummed a welcome as we entered the passenger terminal.
A giant poster declaring that Cuba was “en pie de Guerra” graced the terminal building.
A letter listing the names and nationalities of detained journalists is dropped from the ninth floor of The Capri hotel but lands on a guard outpost causing the arrest of two of North’s friends.
Inside, men in battle fatigues with side arms or carrying machine guns eyed arriving passengers suspiciously.
My visa was stamped and I was directed to an adjacent room where my fellow journalists were being held.
In a few minutes, soldiers with machine guns at the ready ordered us in Spanish to take our luggage and board an army truck waiting outside.
We were driven to the center of Havana to a small, modern hotel called The Capri.
We were given room keys and escorted under armed guard to rooms on the ninth floor.
The Capri Hotel was located in the heart of downtown Havana, a few blocks from the Havana Hilton and the old Hotel Nacional.
I lay in my bed trying to sleep but kept thinking about a United States Pentagon study of nuclear war effects on different size cities.
Of the two million inhabitants hundreds of thousands living in central Havana would be killed instantly.
Fires would rage across the rest of the city as far as the Soviet military headquarters in El Chico, 12 miles from city center.
Any one of these incidents could have provoked a nuclear response in the tense “eye-ball to eye-ball” atmosphere that prevailed that day.
For instance, the CIA flew slightly better U-2’s than the United States Air Force; they had a more powerful engine and could fly 5,000 feet higher.
President Kennedy preferred to have Air Force pilots flying over Cuba than CIA pilots as fewer questions would be asked if they were shot down.
The CIA reluctantly agreed to lend several of its U-2’s to the Air Force and they were repainted with Air Force insignia.
As one U-2 approached the missile site at Banes, in Western Cuba near Guantanamo, an order came from Soviet military headquarters in El Chico near Havana, “Destroy target number 33.
A proximity fuse detonated the SAMs as they closed in, spraying shrapnel and killing Major Rudolf Anderson instantly.
Declassified Soviet sources have confirmed the missile was not cleared to fire by the Kremlin.
Furious, Krushchev ordered no further firings take place without his direct orders.
Curtis Le May ordered rocket-carrying fighters readied for an attack on the SAM site.
The White House ordered Le May not to attack unless he had direct orders from the President.
The Soviets could well have regarded this U-2 flight as a last-minute intelligence reconnaissance in preparation for nuclear war.
Soviet MIG aircraft tried to intercept the U-2 flying at 75,000 feet but could not reach that altitude.
Alaskan Command sent up two nuclear armed F-102 interceptors to protect the U-2.
Six United States Navy “Crusaders” flying at tree-top level under Soviet radar headed westward to photograph the missile sites of Pinar Del Rio.
Antiaircraft guns manned by Cuban crews opened fire as the Crusaders approached the San Cristobal missile site.
The pilots, aware of multiple hits, aborted the mission and flew home to Key West.
Soviet submarine commanders were highly disciplined and unlikely to trigger their nuclear torpedoes by design, but we now know the unstable conditions on board the subs raised the specter of an accidental nuclear launch.
United States Navy ships had located four Soviet “Foxtrot” submarines lurking in the waters south of the Turks and Caicos Islands.
Each day the subs had to surface to charge their batteries and report to Moscow.
Once located the subs were forced to surface by United States Naval ships dropping hand grenades and practice depth charges.
On “Black Saturday,” Oct., 1962, one sub B-59, commanded by Captain Valentin Savitsky, had been chased for two days.
His batteries were low and he had not been able to communicate with Moscow.
Carbon dioxide levels were becoming critical and sailors were fainting from heat and exhaustion.
Submerged several hundred feet the sub came under repeated attack from the USS Randolph dropping practice depth charges.
There is no greater humiliation for a submarine captain than to be forced by the enemy to surface.
Forty years later, a senior sub officer on B-59, Vadim Orlov, described the scene as Captain Sevitsky lost his temper.
He summoned the officer in charge of the nuclear torpedo, and ordered him to make it combat ready.
Fellow officers persuaded Savitsky to calm down and a decision was made to surface in the midst of four American destroyers.
A Spy and Journalist Out of Their Depth In Washington, a Russian KGB officer and an ABC News reporter inserted themselves in the drama.
Aleksandr Feklisov, the KGB station chief, had approached ABC News State Department correspondent John Scali with a plan to dismantle missile bases in Cuba in return for a United States pledge not to invade.
Their meddling was a classic case of miscommunication between Washington and Moscow at a time when a misstep could have led to nuclear war.
What Scali thought was a feeler from Moscow was in reality an attempt by the KGB to measure Washngton’s conditions for a settlement.
Soviet Ambassador Anatoly Dobrynin said he had not authorized this type of negotiation and refused to send Feklisov’s messages to Moscow.
Feklisov could only send his negotiation report with Scali by cable to KGB headquarters.
There is no evidence the cable was ever read by Khrushchev or played any part in Kremlin decision-making.
Yet, the Scali-Feklisov meetings would become part of the strange mythology of the Cuban missile crisis.
I later came to know Scali as a very undiplomatic diplomatic correspondent given to outbursts of temper.
I was a correspondent for ABC News in Vietnam and not supportive of the war.
Scali was a hawk whose Vietnam visits were choreographed by President Lyndon Johnson and Gen.
He often trumpeted his role as mediator in the missile crisis and was later named United States Ambassador to the United Nations by President Richard Nixon.
The CIA determined for the first time that five out of six medium-range missile sites in Cuba were fully operational.
With the sand in the glass almost gone that evening, Kennedy sent his brother Robert to meet with Soviet Ambassador Anatoly Dobrynin to warn him United States military action was imminent.
Pull his missiles out of Cuba and the United States would promise not to invade and also withdraw missiles from Turkey.
Radio News In Havana, our Japanese colleague Horikawa had a powerful Zenith shortwave radio and we spent a lot of time Sunday listening to news broadcasts from Miami.
Moscow radio broadcast a long letter Khrushchev wrote to Kennedy agreeing to remove the missiles from Cuba under United Nations inspection.
However, Fidel Castro was furious over the settlement and felt betrayed by his Soviet friends.
And to make meals an even more festive occasion we ordered Cuban cigars and Russian Vodka at a nominal price in United States dollars.
We spent a lot of time trying to be journalists, jotting in our journals whatever we could observe from our room windows.
Looking down toward the harbor, we could see a lot of ships, including Soviet freighters that had passed through the blockade.
On the Malecon, the seaside street, we could see an anti-aircraft battery manned by Cuban soldiers.
Regularly, United States Navy “Crusader” reconnaissance planes flew over our hotel very low.
But we never saw the anti-aircraft battery engage them as the speedy jets screamed overhead.
Platoons of “milicianos,” male and female civilians on military duty, often marched through the streets in view of our hotel.
On Cuban radio or even the hotel sound system, patriotic music interrupted by urgent announcements of news bulletins and excerpts from speeches of Fidel kept the country charged up for war.
From the first day we began plotting ways to draw attention to our dilemma.
One afternoon I could hardly believe my eyes when I saw two old friends from my childhood in Canada drinking at an outdoor cafÃ© just below my window.
Doug Buchanan and Rod McKenzie were pilots for International Air Freighters flying Toronto to Havana.
We hastily wrote a letter addressed to the Havana Associated Press office listing our names, nationalities and the circumstances of our house arrest and tossed it through the window louvers to the old friends lurking below.
As fate would have it, the letter floated down nine stories and came to rest on the roof of a guard post below.
The two pilots perhaps emboldened by rum and cokes climbed up to the roof of the guard post to retrieve the letter, whereupon the guards seized them and marched them off at gunpoint.
The next day, Alan Oxley, the British journalist whose home was Havana, spotted a girlfriend in a bikini sunning herself on the roof of an apartment building adjacent to our hotel.
Alan shouted to her to bring her baby and try to visit us in the hotel.
Within an hour she arrived pushing a baby buggy and the guards allowed her in to visit with Alan.
Before she left we slipped the letter to AP into the baby’s diaper but the crafty guards searched on the way out and found the letter.
Phone Home The following day, Horikawa, the Japanese journalist suggested a new plan to make contact with the outside world.
We screwed off the plates in the wall where the phone wires entered and found a gathering of multicolored wires.
With a razor blade we slit each of the wires and inserted the phone terminal connections.
Our theory was that by trial and error we would eventually tap into wires connected to another room and the call would register at reception as coming from another room.
We intercepted conversations in Russian, Spanish and Chinese, before finally tapping into phone lines of an empty room.
At last we got a dial tone and called the number for the Associated Press.
The AP already knew who we were, but promised to contact the Embassy of each of us being held.
All the wires were somehow jammed back into the wall as if they had never been tampered with.
It was just in time, as the hotel manager and receptionist came to the ninth floor and ordered the guards to inspect an empty room where they claimed telephone calls were being made.
Later that day, the Miami radio station reported our names and that we were being held under house arrest in The Capri.
It involved hitting a half penny with your palm and sending it into a pattern of lines on the table.
On our fourth day of confinement, Oct., we heard on the radio that Castro had rejected the Washington-Moscow settlement.
Three days later, on Nov., the Soviets sent in their prime negotiator, Anastas Mikoyan, to reason with Castro.
Free at Last Raul Lazo, a young junior officer at the Cuban Foreign Ministry, quietly called on us that evening and simply said we were free to go and report as we liked.
To celebrate our freedom, Robert MacNeil and I checked out the thriving nightclub in The Capri, whose loud music had kept us awake while under house arrest.
The big Havana hotels still featured lavish floor shows, typical of pre-revolutionary decadence with leggy dancers in brief costumes.
Enjoying our first night of freedom we took a late night stroll that took us past the Havana TV station.
A large black limousine pulled up and out stepped Commandante Che Guevara wearing army fatigues, his signature beret with a red star and a large Cohiba cigar clenched in his teeth.
Che had been in his military headquarters in a limestone cave in Pinar Del Rio throughout the crisis.
A small group of admirers quickly surrounded him and he signed a few autographs.
Che smiled without removing his cigar and I shot a close-up head shot against the night background.
Robert and I took a table and ordered a final Daiquiri to toast our freedom.
Sitting in the spotlight was Yevgeny Yevtushenko, the famous Russian poet.
America, I’m writing to you from Cuba, Where the cheekbones of tense sentries And the cliffs shine anxiously tonight Through the gusting storm.
A shoemaker cleans an old machine gun, A showgirl, in a soldier’s laced-up boots, Marches with a carpenter to stand guard.
America, it will be difficult to regain the grandeur that you have lost Through your blind games, While a little island, standing firm, became a great country.
First thing Monday morning all six of us who had been held in The Capri turned up at the Foreign Ministry as instructed to obtain press credentials so we could cable or phone our reports.
Dangerous Company On my first trip to Havana, in March 1962, I had met Larry Lunt, a friendly American who owned a large ranch called Finca San Andres in Pinar Del Rio province, about a hundred miles west of Havana.
He had been very helpful to me and had brought me along to many Embassy parties.
Larry was a World War II and Korean War veteran and had been a rancher in Wyoming until moving to Cuba in 1955.
He had not been a fan of Batista and was pleased when Castro took over in 1959.
Soon he was appalled by Fidel’s move to Communism, but in conversations with me did not harshly denounce the regime or its ruinous economic policies.
The maxim that a person is known by the company he keeps is especially true in Cuba.
In numerous trips to Cuba as a journalist and a tourist I always assumed the phones in my hotel were bugged, but I never felt I was under surveillance.
Certainly Larry Lunt was under surveillance when I befriended him in March 1962.
I read a newspaper in 1965 that reported Lunt had been arrested and imprisoned in Havana.
There were no other reports that came to my attention until I learned of a book he had written and published in 1990 Leave me my Spirit.
It’s a remarkable memoir of Lunt’s 14 years in a Cuban prison and his work as a CIA agent.
Under the agency’s guidance, he bought the farm as a base for secret operations.
In his book, Lunt described running numerous Cuban agents who were in a position to provide intelligence.
His ranch covered hundreds of acres and was ideal for air drops of saboteurs, arms, explosives and ammunition.
He had provided early reports that the San Cristobal missile site photographed by U-2’s in October 1962 was a Soviet intermediate-range missile site.
Each month, Larry relayed a report from one agent who was an engineer at the Matahambre copper mine near his ranch.
The mine produced 20,000 tons of copper a year, mostly for export to the Soviet Union.
The CIA in its “Operation Mongoose” unsuccessfully tried to sabotage Matahambre 25 times.
Even during the October crisis, two agents who had planted bombs at the mine were captured by Castro forces.
However, his book is an eloquent view of inhuman conditions in Cuban prisons and of his unconquerable spirit that helped him to survive.
Pacifying Fidel Every day we assembled at the Foreign Ministry in quest of Cuban press cards and every day we were told to try again tomorrow.
Fidel was furious with his Soviet friends for caving in to United States demands and had even rejected a Soviet proposal for international inspection.
U Thant had come and gone from Havana, and on Nov., Krushchev’s principal deputy Anastas Mikoyan arrived in Havana to persuade Fidel to agree to inspection and removal of the Ilyusian-28 bombers.
Castro grudgingly met Mikoyan’s plane, but refused to meet with him for days.
At the bar of the Havana Libre Hilton, I chanced to meet a Canadian pilot who had flown in with Mikoyan’s plane.
In 1962, Canadian pilots were required on flights out of Gander airport in Newfoundland.
He would be pleased to keep me informed on Mikoyan’s schedule and planned departure date which would indicate his tough negotiations with Castro were over.
The Hilton bar was probably the most conspicuous watering hole in Havana and again if Cuban intelligence was noticing the company I kept, it would not enhance my daily request for a press card.
One of the most well-informed and influential diplomats in Havana was Dwight Fullford, second secretary at the Canadian Embassy.
I learned he had pressed the Foreign Ministry hard for my release from house arrest.
On the fourth evening after my release from the hotel, Dwight and his wife Barbara invited me for dinner at a popular Havana restaurant.
We had just met on a street corner and Dwight excused himself to buy cigarettes.
Standing on the corner talking with Barbara, I was astonished to see a black limousine pull up and two men in suits jump out.
They grabbed me forcefully, shoved me into the car and in a screech of tires sped away leaving Barbara to explain the sudden disappearance of their dinner guest.
Dwight, like the responsible diplomat he was, went back to the Embassy to again work the phone lines on my behalf to the Foreign Ministry.
I was taken to a small jail near the harbor which was used for immigration cases.
Within an hour most of the journalists held in The Capri had been rounded up and again became guests of the government, this time in a grimy cell.
The next morning a diplomat from the Canadian Embassy dropped by to say the Cubans had decided to deport us to Mexico, the only place Cubana Airlines was flying that week.
The Mexicans had refused to receive supposed criminals from a Cuban jail.
We scratched our names and the date on the cement wall along with thousands of other past prisoners.
A young Nicaraguan who spoke excellent English said his name was Raul and tried to engage us in constant conversation.
He was obviously a government plant and we regaled him with glowing admiration for the Cuban revolution, Fidel and Che, hoping he would report on us favorably.
There was a TV set mounted high on the wall that we could view through the bars.
Each evening of our stay they broadcast a serial based on Ernest Hemmingway’s For Whom the Bell Tolls.
In his later years Hemmingway had lived in Havana and his books were still popular there.
One morning our luggage that we had left in the hotel when we were seized was brought to our cell.
Nothing seemed to be missing from mine, but books, letters and private papers had notes pinned to them with Spanish translations written on stationery of the Cuban Security police.
Several of the songs, like a Scottish drinking song, had been labeled as secret code.
The next morning, the head guard announced we would be released later that day.
However, pointing at the substantial beard I had grown since arriving in Cuba, he said, “Senor North, before you can be released you must shave your beard.
A dull Gillette was produced with no shaving soap or hot water and with a gun in my back I stood at the sink and painfully shaved.
Summing Up Fifty Years Perhaps the best book looking back on the dark days of October 1962 is One Minute to Midnight by journalist Michael Dobbs.
Nikita Krushchev and John Kennedy both understood that such a war would be far more terrible than anything mankind had known before.
They also understood that a commander in chief could not always control his own armies.
The danger which troubled my husband was that war might be started not so much by the big men as by the little ones.
In retrospect it is clear the United States needs its President not to be so overdosed with his own testosterone or so obsessed by his own insecurities that he not only understands the meaning of nuance but is actually prepared to conduct relations with the rest of the world in a balanced, thoughtful manner.
Ultimately it means showing the judgment of a John Kennedy rather than the belligerence of a Gen.
The danger today may not be as high as in October 1962, but it is not hard to imagine that another nuclear crisis could arise.
In March 2001, at a conference on the missile crisis held in a hotel at the Bay of Pigs in Cuba, I interviewed Arthur Schlesinger who had been a close adviser and speech writer for Kennedy at the time of the crisis.
No historian would use the word definitive because new times bring new preoccupations and we historians realize we are prisoners of our own experience.
Don North has covered some of the most dangerous stories of the past half century, including the Cuban missile crisis and conflicts in Vietnam, Afghanistan, El Salvador, Nicaragua and the Middle East.
North’s upcoming book, Inappropriate Conduct, will be published in November, the story of a Canadian war correspondent in Italy in 1944 who operated at the risky front line between truth and propaganda in wartime.
Archivista October 14, 2012 at 23:09 “At the same time, Krushchev was offered a possible way out.
In truth, it was the US’s way out; and Teddy Roosevelt’s presumptive occupation of the Cuban playground was effectively guillotined.
George E Lowe October 14, 2012 at 16:48 Hi, One of the best articles on the “DAY WE CAME CLOSET TO NUCLEAR ARMAGEDDON”– BLACK SATURDAY, 27 OCTOBER, 1962.
Note that those two F-102s sent to protect the lost U-2–were armed with NUKE WARHEADS–DEFCON #2.
ALSO, SOMEONE WAS GIVING ORDERS IN ENGLISH TO THE “LOST” U-2–to turn WEST DEEPER INTO RUSSIA, rather than EAST toward Alaska.
George E Lowe rosemerry October 14, 2012 at 12:22 interesting to see the old anticommunist fear, and to see the present mention of nuclear-armed Iran, as if it were a fact.
One wishes that Mr North had put this text aside for a few days before submitting it.
Last Name: Email: .memberCode{display:none;} Optional Member Code Publisher Consortium for Independent Journalism, Inc.
Board of Directors Diane Duston, President Chris Hedges Diana Johnstone Margaret Kimberley John Kiriakou Garland Nixon Nat Parry John Pilger Gareth Porter Julie Bergman Sender Jill Stein Sen.
