He has written books, essays and articles on Latin American history, intelligence, espionage, and semiotics.
Server costs, site development and maintenance, research, and creating content all cost a lot of money, and without advertising revenue, our site may fade from existence.
He is the author of several books on the subjects of globalization, the New World Order and the 9/11 events.
Until recently, however, I didn’t know that Professor Chossudovsky had a soft spot for Fidel Castro.
From October 12 to 15, 2010, Professor Chossudovsky had extensive and detailed discussions with Castro in Havana, pertaining to the dangers of nuclear war, the global economic crisis and the nature of the New World Order.
In it, Castro expressed his concern about the threat of nuclear war and the future of mankind.
It seems, however, that either Chossudovsky is a careless researcher — which I doubt — or he doesn’t want to see the facts that deny his beliefs of a Castro pacifist and anti-nuclear war advocate.
On the contrary, the available record shows that Fidel Castro has always been an advocate for nuclear war.
Actually, Fidel Castro is the man who in 1962 brought the world closer to a nuclear Armageddon than never before or after.
So, lets examine the facts to take a look at Castro’s true feelings about nuclear war.
In an interview Che gave a few weeks after the crisis to Sam Russell, a British correspondent for the Daily Worker, Guevara said that if the missiles had been under Cuban control, they would had fired them off.
It is a matter of public record that Castro was extremely dissatisfied with the peaceful solution of the Cuban missile crisis.
The fact that nuclear war had been averted, and the Russians had allegedly received from the American government a pledge for the non-invasion of Cuba, was apparently not important for Castro.
Actually, Castro was itching for a fight—in this case the definitive fight, a nuclear one.
Castro admitted to laughing with his advisers even as the possibility of nuclear war loomed, as documents published by the French daily Le Monde show.
Santiesteban had just been appointed to a minor post at the Cuban mission to the United Nations.
His diplomatic passport identified him as an “attaché” to the Cuban mission.
Quite the contrary, he was an expert in terrorist techniques, just graduated from a highly secret school of sabotage and subversion, not far from Havana.
FBI estimates of how many others were involved in the plot range from twenty-five to fifty people.
The secret mission of the terrorist team was to accomplish Castro’s orders to blow up a big portion of Manhattan, including the Statue of Liberty, Macy’s department store, several subway stations, the 42nd street bus terminal and Grand Central station, as well as several refineries along the New Jersey shore, including the Humble Oil and Refining Company in Linden.
To this effect they stored a huge cache of explosives at Garcia’s shop.
Had their plan worked out the way it had been conceived, it would undoubtedly have ignited American public opinion and prompted retaliation against Cuba.
Had it occurred during the tense days of the missile crisis, as Castro had planned, it may have been taken for a Russian preemptive attack on the United States and may have triggered a spasm-like retaliatory strike on the Soviet Union, with unpredictable consequences.
After his failed attempt to create a provocation that may have brought a nuclear confrontation between the superpowers, Castro pulled another ace from his sleeve.
In 1975 Castro told Senator George S McGovern that, during the crisis, he would have taken a harder line than Khrushchev.
But, apparently not happy with the Soviet premier’s non-committed answer to his plight, Castro took some specific steps to “help” Khrushchev push the button.
Following Castro’s orders, and disregarding Soviet advice, in the morning of Saturday, October 27, antiaircraft batteries manned by the Cuban army began firing at American low-flying reconnaissance planes, damaging at least one.
Nevertheless, at about 10:00m. on that same Saturday morning, an American U-2 was shot down by a SAM fired from a battery at Los Angeles, near Banes, Oriente province, in the eastern part of Cuba.
According to Seymour Hersh, there is strong evidence that, on October 26, 1962, a Cuban army unit attacked and overran a Soviet-manned SAM base at Los Angeles, killing many Soviet soldiers and seizing control of the site.
Hersh based his article on information partly drawn from an interview with former Department of Defense analyst Daniel Ellsberg citing classified material from a post-crisis study of the event.
The speculation is based on an intercepted transmission from the Soviet base at Los Angeles indicating heavy fighting and casualties.
Adrián Montoro, former director of Radio Havana Cuba, and Juan Antonio Rodríguez Menier, a senior Cuban intelligence officer who defected in 1987, confirmed Ellsberg’s report.
Though both Castro and the Russians have categorically denied that the attack took place, Raymond L Garthoff, Special Assistant for Soviet bloc Political/Military Affairs in the State Department during the Kennedy administration, claims that, in fact, from October 28, the Cuban army did surround the Soviet missile bases for three days.
It is evident that, whatever really happened, Castro was frantically trying to precipitate a nuclear confrontation between the Soviet Union and the United States which would have destroyed most human life in the Northern hemisphere.
Actually, there is evidence that this is exactly what Castro had in mind.
Late in the night of October 26, Castro visited the Soviet embassy in Havana and stayed through the early hours of the next day writing a letter to Khrushchev.
The most important part of the letter is Castro’s efforts to convince Khrushchev that an American invasion of Cuba was imminent, and his request that the Soviet Union should launch a preemptive nuclear attack against the United States.
Castro’s words were, I tell you this because I believe that the imperialists’ aggressiveness is extremely dangerous and if they actually carry out the brutal act of invading Cuba in violation of international law and morality, that would be the moment to eliminate such danger through an act of clear legitimate defense, however harsh and terrible the solution would be, for there is no other.
Rather than a simple strike, it would have been the start of a thermonuclear war.
During Castro’s visit to the Soviet Union in 1963, he brought the subject up again, but Khrushchev energetically refuted him.
In his memoirs, Khrushchev mentioned that he explicitly told Castro “You wanted to start a war with the United States.
If the war had begun we would somehow have survived, but Cuba no doubt would have ceased to exist.
The Cuban missile crisis was finally resolved in a peaceful way, which apparently was not the way Castro envisioned.
Strangelove Castro was still planning to destroy the United States and the world in a nuclear Armageddon, and took strong steps to fulfill his cherished dream.
In 1989 General Rafael del Pino Díaz, the highest ranking Cuban defector, said that at the time of the Grenada operation in 1983, Castro ordered Cuban MiG 23 pilots to program their computers to attack targets in Florida.
Among the selected targets was the Turkey Point nuclear plant, which Castro said had the potential of producing a nuclear disaster larger than Chernobyl.
In another interview, Gen. del Pino claimed that, in 1968, when a group of Cubans were authorized to recover a MiG-17 taken to the U S. by a defector, Cuban agents secretly made detailed photographs of Homestead Air Force Base in Florida.
The base, Gen. del Pino said, had been targeted for an air attack by Cuban planes.
Even more, it seems that Castro’s dreams of nuclear Armageddon are still alive.
Since 2010, Castro has been consistently warning the world about the inevitability of nuclear war.
Castro is old, but he is not finished yet, and it is too early to tell his whole story.
As long as he is alive and in power in Cuba he will persist in his nuclear Armageddon dreams.
Seemingly his grandiose plan is to go to the trashcan of history with a big bang.
Like an ancient hero, Castro wants to go to his grave with human sacrifices.
Castro’s own sister, Juana, said a long time ago that her brother’s plans for Cuba are as sinister as Nero’s for Rome.
Testifying before the House Committee on Un-American Activities, Juana Castro affirmed that “Fidel’s feeling of hatred for this country cannot even be imagined by Americans.
Despite his pacifist claims in Chossudovsky’s interview, the available record shows that if Castro did not become the greatest eugenicist of all times, murdering more people than Attila, Stalin, Mao and Hitler together, it was not for lack of trying.
Due to space constraints, however, I have mentioned in this article just a few of Castro’s efforts to spoil our day.
Professor Chossudovsky must keep in mind that, even though it is true that the enemy of my enemy is my friend, the pseudo-enemy of my enemy most likely is still my enemy.
On the other hand, it is surprising, to say the least, that Professor Chossudovsky, author of the excellent book The Globalization of Poverty and the New World Orderand a strong fighter against globalization, has failed to realize that Fidel Castro, a secret agent of David Rockefeller and the CFR conspirators, has enormously contributed to the globalization of poverty.
He also failed to see that Castro, following his masters’ orders, turned Cuba, one of the most economically and socially advanced countries in Latin America, into a proving ground for the New World Order where the people’s poverty cannot be more evident— which explains why some key CFR members are convinced that Castro’s Cuba is the socioeconomic model to follow.
It is difficult to understand that Professor Chodussovsky, the alleged anti-globalist and fighter against the New World Order, fully agrees with the CFR globalist conspirators that Castro’s Cuba is the model to follow.
Moreover, I recently discovered that he has devoted a large part of his site Global Research, Center for Research on Globalization, to publish the lies of globalist Fidel Castro.
Some time ago Castro provided himself definitive proof that he is actually an agent of change working on behalf of the New World Order globalist conspirators.
On October 12, 1979, Castro gave a surprisingly short speech at the 34th UN General Assembly.
The fact that Castro’s words are so similar to CFR agent Bush’s cannot be the product of happenstance or a coincidence.
I suspect that both scripts were written at the same place — most likely, the Harold Pratt House in Manhattan, headquarters of the Council on Foreign Relations.
There is the possibility that Professor Chossudovsky is just another naïve, gullible academic who fell under Castro’s mesmerizing powers.
The most virulent parts of Guevara’s words were suppressed by the Daily Worker, but a full version of Guevara’s interview was obtained and published by United Press International.
Le Monde, November 24, 1997; also in “Castro Fond of Missiles,” AP report, August 16, 1997.
Tully mistakenly believes the plot was a Soviet idea, but it was Castro’s.
May 1975,” a Report by Senator George S McGovern to the Committee on Foreign Relations, August 1975, 14.
Castro’s letter to Khrushchev of October 26 is part of a set of documents obtained by the Cold War International History Project, Woodrow Wilson International Center, Harvard Collection.
Castro’s letter of October 26, 1962, to Khrushchev is part of a set of documents obtained by the Cold War International History Project, Woodrow Wilson International Center, Harvard Collection.
Ernesto Betancourt, “Is Castro Planning a Preemptive Strike Against the U.S.?” , 4.
Report of the Committee of Un-American Activities, House of Representatives, June 1965.
In 2001, World Bank President James Wolfensohn, , praised Castro for doing “a great job” in providing for the social welfare of the Cuban people.
A search on Global Research’s site shows that Castro is mentioned 2,550 times.
Notable among the people who have fallen under Castro’s spell are ex-Soviet ambassador and KGB officer Aleksandr Alekseev, Colombian Nobel Prize-winner Gabriel García Márquez, former Head of United States Interests Office in Havana Wayne S Smith, Italian publisher Giangiacomo Feltrinelli, French philosophers Jean-Paul Sartre and Regis Debray, Senator George McGovern, UNESCO’s director Federico Mayor, media mogul Ted Turner, Robert S McNamara, Jerry Brown, Arthur M Schlesinger, Jr., and a large group of the American liberal press and Hollywood stars who have met him.
The opinions expressed in each article are the opinions of the author alone and do not necessarily reflect those of SonsOfLibertyMedia.com.
Obama on Smart Guns and No Guns About the Author: Servando Gonzalez Servando Gonzalez, is a Cuban-born American writer, historian, semiologist and intelligence analyst.
If, at any time, you see something that needs updating or correction, please click the contact link at the top of the page and advise of correction with a link to the article you are referencing.
We believe that the Judeo-Christian ethic has provided the principles upon which this nation was founded.
It is our belief that these principles provide not only the foundation and framework for American government and society, but are also essential to the maintenance of a fair and just society.
