The 13-day showdown brought the world’s two superpowers to the brink of nuclear war.
In the Fall of 1962 the United States demanded that the Soviets halt construction of newly-discovered missile bases in communist Cuba, just 90 miles from United States shores.
Soviet premier Nikita Khrushchev had pledged in 1960 to defend Cuba and had assumed that the United States would not try and prevent the installation of mediumand intermediate-range ballistic missiles in the communist Caribbean country.
What followed was a tense standoff played out almost exclusively at the highest levels.
United States President John F Kennedy and Khrushchev and a handful of their top aides did all the negotiating, with little input from the foreign policy bureaucracies of either country.
The crisis was rife with miscommunications, threats and miscalculations, but was ultimately diffused.
Richard Heyser takes hundreds of photos of newly-built installations in the Cuban countryside.
As Heyser will recall years later in an Associated Press interview, he worries that he will be looked upon as the man who started a war.
CIA analysts spot launchers, missiles and transport trucks that indicate the Soviets are building sites to launch missiles capable of striking targets nearly across the United States, according to a 2013 article by Peter Kornbluh, a senior analyst and Cuba expert at the National Security Archive in Washington.
President John F Kennedy meets with a team of advisers known as Ex-Comm, to discuss how to respond to the missile threat.
Kennedy rejects the attack, and favors a quarantine to buy time to negotiate a missile withdrawal.
JFK and his advisers are careful to call it a quarantine because a blockade is considered an act of war.
In a dramatic 18-minute television speech, JFK shocks Americans by revealing “unmistakable evidence” of the missile threat, and announces that the United States will prevent ships carrying weapons to reach Cuba, while demanding that the Soviets withdraw their missiles.
United States ambassador to the Soviet Union Foy Kohler delivers to a letter from JFK to Khrushchev.
Kennedy writes back, bluntly reminding Khrushchev that he started the crisis by secretly sending missiles to Cuba.
As United States ambassador Adlai Stevenson explains the matter to the United Nations Security Council, United States ships already move into position in the waters around Cuba.
Soviet submarines menacingly move into the Caribbean as well, posed as if they might try to break a blockade.
But Soviet freighters bearing military supplies headed for Cuba stop in their tracks.
Khrushchev sends an indignant letter to Kennedy, accusing him of threatening the Soviet Union.
The Soviet arms freighters turn back toward Europe, but the oil tanker Bucharest approaches the United States quarantine zone, directly headed for Cuba.
Two American warships, the USS Essex and the USS Gearing, prepare to intercept it, which could have led to war.
Castro sends a letter to Khrushchev, urging him to launch a nuclear first strike against the United States, which the Soviet leader disregards.
However, JFK correctly concludes that Khrushchev had not, himself, given the order to shoot down Anderson's plane.
The incident prompts both leaders to realize the situation is spiraling dangerously out of control.
How the Death of a United States Air Force Pilot Prevented a Nuclear War On the same day, Khrushchev sends another letter to Kennedy, in which he demands that the United States withdraw missiles from Turkey as part of the deal.
JFK responds by offering to promise not to attack Cuba after the Russians withdraw.
That evening, JFK’s brother, Attorney General Robert Kennedy, meets with Soviet ambassador Anatoly Dobrynin, and says that the United States already planned to remove its missiles from Turkey, but could not say so publicly.
Stallard-Blanchette sees this as the moment that both nations stepped back from the brink of war.
Khrushchev concedes, writing an open letter to Kennedy saying that the Soviet missiles will be dismantled and removed from Cuba.
The Kennedy White House portrayed the withdrawal as the result of the president’s tough stance in the face of Soviet aggression.
Author:Patrick J KigerPublish date:Jun 17, 2019SPL/Getty ImagesThese are the steps that brought the United States and Soviet Union to the brink of nuclear war in 1962.
The 13-day showdown brought the world’s two superpowers to the brink of nuclear war.In the Fall of 1962 the United States demanded that the Soviets halt construction of newly-discovered missile bases in communist Cuba, just 90 miles from United States shores.
But the weapons could potentially reach much of the United States.What followed was a tense standoff played out almost exclusively at the highest levels.
CIA analysts spot launchers, missiles and transport trucks that indicate the Soviets are building sites to launch missiles capable of striking targets nearly across the United States, according to a 2013 article by Peter Kornbluh, a senior analyst and Cuba expert at the National Security Archive in Washington.October 16: President John F Kennedy meets with a team of advisers known as Ex-Comm, to discuss how to respond to the missile threat.
JFK responds by offering to promise not to attack Cuba after the Russians withdraw.That evening, JFK’s brother, Attorney General Robert Kennedy, meets with Soviet ambassador Anatoly Dobrynin, and says that the United States already planned to remove its missiles from Turkey, but could not say so publicly.
