Chronology of Various Statements and Events During August 1962 April 1963 July, August and September 1962 U S. naval units photographed all Soviet ships bound for Cuba.
That is why we have cut off our trade . . . why we worked in the OAS and in other ways to isolate the Communist menance in Cuba ... ""why we will continue to give a good deal of our effort and attention to it.
Mentioned more ominous reports that the Soviets are constructing missile bases and sending over technicians and troops to man them.
But if you press us in Berlin, then we will put the screws on you in Cuba.
But this is no justification for not fully disclosing the activities of the Soviets in Cuba, the number of troops or technicians, the types of equipment, the number of missile bases, the length of time required to convert what are now called defensive missile installations to offensive ones, and similar information.
Photographed Soviet medium range ballistic missile complex at San Cristobal.
During the following week, military preparations for blockading Cuba were completed.
In the past week, unmistakable evidence has established the fact that a series of offensive missile sites is now in preparation on that imprisoned Island •» ""Our goal is not the victory of might, but the vindication of right -not peace at the expense of freedom, but both peace and freedom in this hemisphere, and, we hope, around the world.
The President, speaking to the Nation last night, stated further action would be taken to achieve the second objective.
There are eight to ten bases located in areas near the cities of Cuanajay, Remedios, San Cristobal, Sagna LaGrande, with each base having about four launchers, more or less.
Reports from all intelligence sources confirm at least 30 missiles, and more than 20 IL-28 jet light bombers are present in Cuba.
The intermediate range ballistic missile which did not reach an operational status.
One has to be careful about making conclusions because there are certain evaluation procedures to be observed in order to insure accuracy of the results obtained.
In a'ddition, the time since Chairman Khrushchev's message Sunday morning is too short to allow us to expect conclusive evidence.
The cable conduits between the control points and the launch pads have been broken up.
The concrete pads at the launch erectors appear to have been broken up by an air hammer.
Assistant Secretary of Defense Arthur Sylvester's Statement ""The Soviet Union has reported that ships are leaving Cuba with missiles aboard.
Arrangements are being made with Soviet representatives for contact with these ships by U S. naval vessels and for counting the missiles being shipped out.
VESOLE"" Premier Castro announced that if the Soviet Union wished to remove the IL-28 bombers he would not obstruct such a move.
News and World Report Inter view Senator Keating said he made his first speech on the military build-up in Cuba on 31 August 1962.
Between 31 August 1962 and 12 October 1962 he made 10 Senate speeches and 14 other public statements or speeches in which he urged that something be done about this build-up.
He did not understand why there were no U-2 flights ■ from 5 September to 14 October 1962.
Does not believe our information is sufficiently accurate to know the number of missiles the Soviets have in Cuba, even though we could count those being taken out.
Chairman Khrushchev . . . agreed to remove from Cuba all weapons systems capable of offensive use, to halt the further introduction of such weapons into Cuba, and to permit appropriate U N. observation and supervision to insure the carrying out and continuation of these commitments.
We, on our part, agreed that once these adequate arrangements for verification had been established, we would remove our naval quarantine and give assurances against invasion of Cuba.
IL-28 bombers and 36 of the missile/transporters were uncovered for photographic and visual along -side inspection, while Soviet vessels were at sea and the remainder of the missiles were observed and covered in exactly the same observable condition at the specific missile sites.
Photographic evider.ee ai^o supported the outioading and outshipping of missile erectors and of fuel and oxidizer trailers.
Senator Keating , who was one of the first to sound the alarm last year over reports of offensive Soviet missiles in Cuba, said he has 'confirmed by official government sources' that a new intensive build-up is under way.
Let me make clear that I have no confirmed evidence now that there are still ground-toground missiles or mobile missile launcher o or aimers for these missiles in Cuba but the Soviet activity around these sites cannot hep but raise a number of serious 17 ""questions.
Without on-size inspection, it is hard to see how we will eve. know for sure the true missile situation in Cuba.
Heports that ""Senator Kenneth B Keating told the Senate yesterday that the Soviet Union is pressing a new military buildup in Cuba.
There is no evidence that these sites are useiabie, that they are being used for any military purpose t or thai they are being maintained.
Ke wanted to knew wherein Defense information differed from his own in regard to these statements.
Kis fourth point was, • ""I stated that the medium {not intermediate) range missile sites (not the missiles or the mobile equipment or the launchers) are still in place, under Soviet Surveillance and that equipment and launchers cor"" -"". be moved into place even more quickly now than was the case in September.
John rlughes, Defense Intelligence Agency, reviewed evidence that ail offensive missiles and bombers known to have been delivered to Cuba have been removed.
Secretary McNamara affirmed specifically that ""The only Soviet weapons that, we can detect in the Island are defensive.
After Secretary IvicNamara's television appearance, Senator Keating said, ""It rs interesting to note that the Secretary did not dispute in any manner. any of the statements that I have made.
As he pointed out, he exposed a good deal of information, and also he went further than under ordinary conditions we would have liked to have gone in telling our story.
McCone has asked, that if anybody has any information in regard to the presence of any military force or weapons on the island of Cuba, I think they should make it available to General Carroll, who is in charge of Intelligence for the department of Defense --if they would turn that information over.
Keating said he had turned over to the CIA Chief new information on the Soviet build-up in Cuba that he has not released to the public and has not been able to confirm.
Provide full information with, regard to the nature of the menace provided by the continued ercistonce of a Soviet-bloc military base in Cuba.
Discard the sharp distinction between offensive and defensive weapons and emphasize that the presence of Soviet MIGS, torpedo ""ooats, tanks, missiles and other equipment in Cuba cannot be tolerated.
Make it clear that in the absence of on-site inspection, it is impossible to obtain adequate assurance that nuclear weapons are not in or will not be brought into Cuba.
Embark on an effective and increasingly severe program of economic sanctions.
Simultaneously with the application of these economic sanctions, steps should be taken to increase the effectiveness of anticommunist propaganda inside Cuba, to infiltrate Castro -gencies, to encourage guerrilla activities, and :o block Castro-inspired terrorism in Latin America.
News and World He-'-ort Ir.terview In response to questions, Senator Keating reiterated the substance of his 31 January 1963 Senate remarks on the ships bearing military equipment to Cuba.
As the Secretary of State, Dean Rusk, said recently, the only way to prove that is by an on-site inspection.
But, in whr^'; I am about to say, I am r;oir.; ;o assume that those missiles and bombers are out of there as we have been told they are.
This gives rise to the very reel possibility that the Russians hope to return heavy missiles to Cuba or even more ominous --is they may have missiles left on the Island and need only to wheel them out of caves.
I have no evidence that there are — or that there aren't — and I don't believe there is any way of finding that out except to go there and look.
A tank or a I.IIG fighter or a gun has both offensive and defensive capabilities.
It's ,. little hard to view torpedo boats or amphibious vehicles as defensive weapons.
They seem to have more of an offensive than a defensive character but perhaps it would be fairer to say that anti-aircraft guns and ammuni.ion, on the other hand, have greater defensive than offensive connotation.
Yet, today, we are told that the same IviIG's --in fact, even later and better models man those available to Castro in April 19cl -are no cause for concern and no threat whatsoever to the United States or to our Latin American friends.
Let me quote a statement made oy the Deputy Secretary of Defense, Roswell L Giipatric on November 11, 1962.
Until we. have so called ensize inspection of the i3land of Cuba, we could never . be sure that '12 was the mar:imum number that the Soviets brought into Cuba.
I am satisfied that there are no major elements of offensive weapons systems in the caves of Cuba.
And it is a fact even now that U S. knowledge of the cargo of certain vessels landing in Cuba is considerably less than we would like.
The director of the CL ; 29 ""made his position clear whir, he admitted that without on-site inspection, we can have no absolute assurances that these .missiles have been completely removed.
In my judgment, however, we would be placing the onus on\^ vrong source if we blamed the fact gatherers rather than the policy makers for the failure to give the American people an accurate and complete picutre of Ccmmuni-t activities in Cuba.
Senator Keating said that on19 February he inquired whether at that time it was considered advisable to discuss publicly these recommendations.
On 20 February, he said he v/as advised by Mr McCone that the President was not attempting to inhibit any Senator from discussing any matter but that the President felt that disclosure c£ these subjects at that time might be harmful and mi^ht adversely affect the promised Soviet troop withdrawal go counter to the President's views regardless as :e whether he agreed with the rationale of the decision.
