Skyhorse® and Skyhorse Publishing” are registered trademarks of Skyhorse Publishing, Inc.®, a Delaware corporation.
The weekly tabloid was not generally known for its investigative veracity, but this particular story was thoroughly documented.
The subject was Mary Pinchot Meyer, a Washington socialite who’d been shot twice and murdered while walking near the Potomac River on October 12, 1964.
Since the originally accused assailant had been acquitted, the identity of her killer remained unknown.
Publicly, so did the identity of her lover, until the Enquirer story alleged that for almost two years before his assassination on November 22, 1963, Mary Meyer had been having an affair with President John F, Kennedy.
The Enquirer recounted—and this would soon be corroborated in other periodicals—that Mary had kept a diary.
The weekend after her death, a small group of people were said to have gathered at her Georgetown home in search of it.
So was James Angleton, head of the CIA’s counterintelligence division, and his wife, Cicely, a close friend of Mary’s.
Also present was Tony Bradlee, Mary’s sister and the wife of Washington Post editor Ben Bradlee.
For more than twenty years, Angleton had been a “spook’s spook” who roamed the Agency corridors looking to ferret out penetrations by the Soviet Union.
Then in 1974, a new CIA director, William Colby, leaked word to the media that Angleton had also been in charge of Operation Chaos, a domestic intelligence-gathering program that far exceeded the CIA’s original charter.
Not long thereafter, he began meeting with journalists for the first time, obviously intent on getting his side of certain stories on the record.
I was one of those journalists, although I never really understood why Angleton chose to wine and dine me on three occasions at his customary meeting place, Washington’s Army and Navy Club.
And I did not disguise the fact I was looking into a probable conspiracy in the death of President Kennedy.
Indeed, the first time we met, late on a mid-December afternoon in 1975 in the plush club lounge, I gave him one of my Voice articles to leaf through.
After the assassination, Angleton’s counterintelligence branch had been assigned as the CIA’s direct liaison to the Warren Commission, of which former CIA director Allen Dulles was a member.
Pretty obviously, he was trying to steer my thoughts toward possible foreign involvement.
In April 1976, we met for the second time, and one of the first things I asked him about was the Enquirer’s revelatory piece about Mary Meyer and her diary.
Then he replied that he had been acting in a private capacity for the family, and in no way for the CIA, which he hastened to add had nothing to do with her death.
Angleton and his wife had planned to go out to dinner and a show with Mary Meyer that October evening in 1964.
When news came over the radio that someone had been killed in a park not far from where she lived, Cicely Angleton had a premonition that it was Mary.
So that night, they drove over to her house, but found it completely dark.
Angleton said he’d called Meyer’s answering service, which at first simply said that she wasn’t in.
But when Angleton explained they had a date with her, and that his wife was hysterical in the car, he was told of Meyer’s death.
The entire time Angleton was relating this, I noticed that he was digging his fingers deeper and deeper into the wooden arm of the comfortable chair in the Army and Navy Club.
Over the course of time, I read Timothy Leary’s memoir, which only added to the mystery of Mary Meyer.
They clearly implied that JFK had been assassinated by elements within our own government.
Now, with Peter Janney’s remarkable book Mary’s Mosaic, the questions that long haunted me have been largely answered.
Not only about Mary Meyer, but about who killed Kennedy, which all but certainly involved the same element of individuals.
Those questions had long haunted Janney as well, and in a deeply personal way.
For, as a child growing up in close proximity to the Meyer family home in McLean, Virginia, one of the Meyer boys had been his best friend.
When that son set out on his many-year quest to ascertain who was behind the death of his best friend’s mother—and how this may have been related to the assassination of President Kennedy—the journey was one with many surprising, and heart-wrenching, twists and turns.
In painstaking detail, he sets down the sequence of events around Meyer’s demise, a sequence that leaves no doubt that the “official version” was concocted and an innocent black man charged with the crime.
Mary’s Mosaic is also a story about intertwined destinies, about human strength and weakness, and finally about forces of good and evil.
The book makes a reader consider those possibilities within each of us, even as what unfolds is on a Shakespearean stage.
For those were, indeed, momentous times, and times that reverberate to this day across our national landscape.
As we live in one of the most polarized junctures in American history, Peter Janney gets at the root of the origins, the “primary causes” of dysfunctionality and disunion that we need to understand.
The author has given us a penetrating insight into the still-hidden history of an era that few other books have achieved.
In Mary’s Mosaic, you will learn not only how covert actions are orchestrated, but the many-layered duplicity it takes to conceal the truth about them.
You will see how, to use a cliche, “love conquers all”—-when a woman of integrity is able to help bring a transcendent vision to the most powerful man in the world.
You will observe her courage in seeking to bring out the truth of what happened to him, even knowing full well the powers-that-be she was up against.
And you will contemplate, too, the courage of author Janney in pursuing what became a terribly agonizing truth about the role of his own father.
I wish I could anticipate that Mary’s Mosaic will be widely reviewed by the major media.
But after finishing this book, you will know why this cannot be the case.
The CIA set out to manipulate the free flow of information long ago, a blow to our democracy that now sees near-total control by fewer and fewer large corporate owners.
The Rupert Murdochs of today would not have been possible without the Ben Bradlees of yesterday, no matter their seeming ideological differences.
That is another sad legacy of what happened almost fifty years ago to JFK and Mary Meyer.
So be prepared to be surprised, even astonished, and ultimately outraged by what is set forth in these pages.
Not all the answers to what bedevils our nation are here, but enough to make you take a deep breath and realize that if we do not fight for what we believe in, and from the personal depths of our being, then America is doomed to the fate that befalls all imperial powers.
Denial will be our downfall, the illusion that things like this do not happen here.
You see, I’ve been so very fortunate in my life, when they who were born more deserving, have not.
Vintage International Edition, 1989, originally published by Random House, 1935.
At seventeen, I was full of both testosterone and a lust for freedom that didn’t find much outlet at a New England prep school.
Just a year and half more of this, I kept telling myself, and I’d be out of what seemed like jail.
Adolescence, with all of its possibilities, sometimes felt like prison.
As the plane began its final approach into Washington’s National Airport, I picked out a number of familiar places stretched out below, including my old alma mater, Georgetown Day School , the sight of which stirred a flood of memories from my childhood.
Something had been lost while I was a student there; and, nearly a decade later, emotional scar tissue still lingered.
My best friend and classmate, Michael Pinchot Meyer, had been killed when we were both just nine years old.
It had been my first experience with death—losing someone I had been deeply fond of.
I consoled myself instead with the promise of freedom that lay before me.
My father would still be at work when I got home, but my mother and my younger brother would likely be around.
I would have most of the afternoon to cruise about town with old friends— certainly enough time to sneak a beer or two and a few cigarettes.
A long, split-level structure, spacious and light-filled, with large picture windows in most rooms, the house was nestled in one of the last enclaves of Washington’s woods, sheltered from the cacophony of distant traffic.
At dinner that evening, I looked out from the split-level dining room through the living room’s floor-toceiling windows.
Beyond the verdant lawn was the concrete swimming pool, half-drained and dotted with logs to prevent winter ice from cracking its walls.
I took my usual place at the table facing my brother, Christopher, with my mother to my left and my father to my right.
On the wall behind my mother, an original black-and-white Morris Rosenfeld photograph, Spinnakers Flying, announced the family passion—sailing.
My parents had met during summers spent on Cape Cod, and they had imparted their love of navigating the open sea to my brother and me.
By the age of seventeen, I had already spent long stretches offshore in the Atlantic racing to Bermuda, and from Annapolis to Newport, Rhode Island.
During dinner that evening, my father mentioned that it was not too early to think about racing our sailboat from Annapolis to Newport again in the coming year.
Sailing was a rite of passage for me, and I looked forward to continuing to master its intricacies under my father’s guidance.
The previous summer had already extended my knowledge and experience with a small group trip down the Dalmatian coast from Venice to Athens on a seventy-seven-foot Rhodes ketch.
Its colorful skipper, a gallant, distinguished former World War II Marine combat captain named Horace Fuller, had been a delightful legend to sail with.
An accomplished sailor, he sometimes kindly took me aside for tutorials on some of the idiosyncrasies of sailing in the Adriatic Sea.
There were, however, a couple of instances during the trip that disturbed me.
Late one night, I had awakened to the sound of Hod Fuller having what sounded like combat nightmares from his World War II experiences.
A bit stunned, I curiously inquired as to how he went about his assignments.
In at least one instance, my father said, Hod had taken his victim out in a rowboat and shot him in the back of the head and then dumped him overboard.
But on the evening before Thanksgiving, diving into a sumptuous meal of veal scaloppini, I was happily anticipating the short recess that lay before me, and dreaming about being on the ocean again, a place where my freedom flourished.
It was comforting to be home, to have a reprieve from academic pressures and boarding-school life, and to be with my family.
Amid the challenges and turbulence of adolescence, hearth and home was still a place I could count on.
I asked, trying to orient myself over the eruption of pounding in my chest.
I remember my mother mentioning Mary’s funeral, and then something about how my father and another man had gone to the airport to meet Cord Meyer, who had been away on the day of his ex-wife’s murder.
After a while, I excused myself from the table, saying that I had plans to go out for the evening.
Seeing Georgetown Day School from the plane earlier in the day had already stirred something in me, and now there was no escape.
My mother, Mary Draper, and Mary Pinchot had been classmates in Vassar College’s class of 1942.
Our families were socially entwined —we went camping together, played touch football, visited each other’s homes frequently.
Michael and I had been born less than one month apart, and Quentin—or “Quenty,” as we called him—was a year and a half older.
Mark and my brother, Christopher, were the same age, about two years younger than Michael and I By the time Michael and I were seven, we were best friends, and often inseparable.
We had been in the same class at Georgetown Day School for three years, our desks side by side for two of them.
As I lay crawled up in a fetal position that night, the shock of Mary Meyer’s murder brought back a flood of memories of being at Michael’s house in McLean, Virginia, just a few miles from my own house.
One sunny spring day, we had been hunting for copperheads in the backyard forest behind the Meyer house.
Brandishing knives like the “young bucks” we thought we were, Michael pulled a long stick out of a hole we’d been investigating.
Suddenly, a snapping snake came out right behind it, narrowly missing his face.
We finally stopped, both of us shaking with an adrenaline rush and laughing uncontrollably.
Regaining a bit of composure, we realized that both of us, out of fear and excitement, had urinated in our pants.
Humiliated, a bit defeated, but still giddy from the adventure, we returned to the house.
Michael’s mother, Mary, was painting in a small studio just off the patio.
Even then, I distinctly remember feeling that there was something unique about Michael’s mother, beyond her glistening, radiant beauty.
Calm and still, at peace with herself, she had a presence and demeanor that struck me.
Less than a year before, Michael and I had been playing baseball in front of their house when Michael sent one of my pitches zooming off his bat and over the house.
I ran around to the back in search of the ball and came upon Mary reading on a blanket.
She hadn’t heard me coming, and I stood there for what seemed to me a very long time, gawking.
At the time, I had no words for the vision that I beheld, but I knew that beauty such as hers was something I longed to know better.
When Mary finally looked up and saw me, she wasn’t embarrassed or upset, or even startled.
She just smiled, letting me know that it was okay; no sin had been committed.
I found the ball, ran back to play with Mikey, and felt somehow irrevocably altered, even blessed.
Mary’s outer beauty seemed to be a manifestation of her inner freedom and peace.
Here we were—dirty, sweaty, and soaked in piss, to boot—and Mary responded by being tender.
She had guessed what must have happened and, laughing, directed us to the laundry room.
We slipped out of our soiled clothes, put them in the washing machine, and put on the clean underwear that Mary had given us, along with a pile of clean clothes to wear.
Mary made intricate designs that we took to be tribal symbols on our faces and arms while we began emitting loud Indian war cries.
While Mary was painting my face, Michael went in search of two Indian headdresses.
Flapping our hands over our mouths like trumpeters with plunger mutes, we shrieked louder and louder, jerking our bodies in wild leaps across the room.
We strapped our knife sheaths onto makeshift belts, donned the headdresses, and descended into a kind of primal expression of childhood glee and human joy, running barefoot in circles.
It was as if Mary’s brushstrokes of “war paint” had transported us into a primal place of wildness that demanded a surrender to the life force itself.
In a sudden, simultaneous move that was pure, unbridled innocence, we stepped out of our underwear.
We ran through the woods toward a small barn, chased each other around a riding circle, and back to the patio, waving our knives in flagrant violation of every childhood safety rule known to man.
As our excitement subsided, we dropped to the floor, laughing and exhausted from the thrill of what we had just experienced.
A bit disoriented, I was calm—yet also exhilarated by the sense of an unknown powerful life force that had just moved through me.
It was as if she had extended her freedom to me, giving me permission that day to explore and experience my own boyhood wildness like no other adult ever had.
Mary’s persona contrasted sharply with that of Michael’s father, Cord Meyer.
Insensitive and dismissive, Cord was arrogantly patronizing and never fun to be around.
One day Michael and I went fishing on the Potomac River with Cord and his CIA friend and colleague Jim Angleton, who was also godfather to the three Meyer boys.
Michael and I took turns climbing out onto a set of rocks that jutted out from the shoreline.
There, we snagged herring by casting into a huge school of passing fish with a three-pronged snag hook.
Cord’s demeanor that day had been as intimidating as it was uncomfortable.
Already self-conscious, I had to watch my every move lest I provoke one of Cord’s or Angleton’s withering stares.
His dread of his father was such a contrast to the connection he had with his mother.
Sleep, if it came at all that dreadful night before Thanksgiving, was fitful as I wrestled with Mary Meyer’s death.
Ominously, one horrid thought was the realization that Quenty and Mark would now have only Cord, their aloof father.
In my agitation, I continually tossed and repositioned myself, hugging a second pillow for comfort.
I was soaked in moisture, then realizing that in my sleep, I had been crying for my lost childhood friend Michael, and the memory of what had occurred on December 18, 1956.
Just before Christmas vacation began, our school’s holiday festivities took place—a Nativity play, Christmas caroling in the Georgetown Day School assembly, and painting omaments in the school’s art studio where Mary Meyer and Ken Noland sometimes taught together.
The Meyer family didn’t have television in the mid-1950s—only because Mary was against it.
Her prescience regarding the docile passivity that television engendered was remarkable.
But it didn’t keep the two older Meyer boys—Quenty and Michael—from stealing away to a friend’s house to engage the technological marvel.
The way home to the Meyer farmhouse required crossing a busy thoroughfare known as Route 123.
Two years earlier, the family’s beloved golden retriever had been hit by a car and killed crossing that roadway.
In the waning winter solstice light of Tuesday’s evening rush hour, some cars had not yet turned on their headlights.
The agile Quenty made his way across first, dodging cars as he ran from one side to the other.
The next day, after returning home early from work, my father and mother summoned me from my bedroom, where I had been playing.
I joined them in the living room, taking a chair opposite the fireplace.
My mother sat on the sofa and my father reclined into his favorite orange Eero Saarinen Womb chair, his legs stretched out on the ottoman before him.
Our house was resplendent with FAO Schwarz Christmas pageantry—holly, mistletoe, a towering spruce pine that twinkled with lights and omaments, with colorfully wrapped gifts everywhere.
It was an idyllic scene, but I sat with the unease of one who hears his name called and wonders what he’s done wrong.
I turned toward my father as though he might have a different version of the story to offer.
Hysterical, I threatened to throw a heavy ashtray through the living-room picture window.
I don’t remember what came next, but I eventually found myself in my father’s arms with my head against his chest.
Later that evening, I overheard my parents talking about going to visit Cord and Mary after I went to bed.
During the fifteen-minute drive to Michael’s house, darkness enshrouded everything, overtaking me.
We entered the front door and walked down an unlit hallway into the Meyers’ living room, where their own postcard-perfect holiday scene—the tree, the wrapped presents—seemed out of place.
As my mother embraced Mary, I felt this house, so familiar just days before, was now alien to me.
In spite of—or, perhaps, because of—the joy I had once felt in that house, it was almost 3” | unbearable to be there now.
No longer would it be Michael’s house; nothing would ever be the same again.
She looked into my eyes, as she had done so many times before, but this time it was her sadness, not her serenity, that moved me.
I was overwhelmed by it and wanted to look away, but she drew me into her arms.
We were equals in our grief, connected by the loss of someone we both had deeply loved and cherished.
Even as a young insecure boy, I gladly stood to embrace and hold her, as she had done for me so many times before.
It was a moment of transcendence at a very tender age—an experience of connection unlike any I had known before.
And it would be decades before I understood the deeper gift she had bestowed upon me.
She left me alone in his room to contemplate, to face yet another level of the reality of my best friend’s departure.
I would never again be in that room with the Michael I had known and loved.
Michael’s funeral was held several days later in Bethlehem Chapel inside the National Cathedral.
I was still perhaps too numb to register details of the service, but I will never forget the sight of Ruth Pinchot, Michael’s maternal grandmother, sobbing on the sidewalk as we left the church.
There was something so pure and powerful about her explosion of grief, the kind of public display of emotion that was simply “not done” among her set.
But in that moment, Ruth didn’t care what anybody thought, or how she might be perceived.
Michael’s casket was taken to the Pinchot family’s estate, Grey Towers, in Milford, Pennsylvania, and then laid to rest in the Pinchot family plot in the Milford cemetery.
He had always shared with me so much about Grey Towers— its bountiful trout streams, waterfalls, and forests—but it would take me nearly fifty years before I could bring myself to actually visit his grave.
The late 1950s were not an auspicious time to be a grieving nine-year-old.
The “in-vogue” thinking at that time was that beyond a certain point, displays of sadness were unbecoming.
In my attempt to do so, I sometimes stayed overnight with Quenty and Mark at the Meyers’ house, and would wake up crying in the middle of the night.
Quenty revealed that his parents were divorcing, and that everyone was moving to Georgetown.
Meanwhile, at my home, my parents were ill-equipped to handle my grief.
They sent me to a psychiatrist, who, in true Freudian fashion, kept making a lot of allusions to my penis.
Unmoored and untethered, I packed on weight as I turned to sugar in an effort to self-medicate.
The woman who had comforted me in sorrow and reassured me in so many other ways was now gone forever.
Like a volcano, the reality of her death had erupted, and reawakened something awful and inescapable.
As I lay in my bed at dawn that Thanksgiving morming in 1964, the apprehension of uneasiness, even dread, engulfed me.
There was something foreboding, something terrible—something I couldn’t possibly know or understand at the time.
My father knocked on my bedroom door; it was time to get ready to go hunting.
As I dressed, I thought back to what a terrible year it had been for Washington—and the nation.
In my American history course at school that fall, we were discussing something called the Warren Commission and its final report.
Reminding us that America was a republic, not a totalitarian state, he urged us to reflect on how President Kennedy’s assassination would have been handled in a country that didn’t have a democratically elected government.
Two years later, in 1966, New Orleans district attorney Jim Garrison was challenging the entire veracity of the Warren Report as a massive cover-up, implicating the CIA in President Kennedy’s assassination.
Sadly, it was the beginning of a never-to-be resolved rupture in our relationship, and a dramatic separation from my family into adulthood.
The Vietnam War was approaching its full escalation, and I made it my focus to begin to understand what was taking place.
Further enraging both my parents, I became increasingly vociferous about America’s incursion into Southeast Asia, as well as what the CIA, and my father, were actually doing in the world.
Ten years later, in 1976—twelve years after Mary Meyer’s murder—the National Enquirer broke the story about her relationship with President Kennedy.
Awakened, but not yet fully conscious, I began a journey that culminated in this book.
Somewhere inside the recesses of my being, I instinctively suspected there was a connection between the assassination of our president, and the slaying—less than a year later—of the woman he had come to trust and love.
INTRODUCTION History would be an excellent thing, if only it were true. —Leo Tolstoy It’s all about witness, brother.
Every person who bears witness has to have the depth of conviction of a martyr.
Nearly five decades have passed since I sat at my family’s dinner table on the night before Thanksgiving in 1964 where I first learned that my best friend’s mother had been murdered.
In the intervening time span of nearly half a century, nothing has the dimmed the memory of what took place that night, nor the seminal childhood event of losing my best friend, Michael, eight years earlier, in 1956.
Sometimes tormented, even haunted, I came to realize the necessity of a deeper reckoning—and not just emotionally or psychologically, as my chosen profession dictated, but some final resolution of knowing a more complete, unvarnished piece of the truth, and the direction from which it lay.
As I meticulously attempted to unveil the facts surrounding Mary Meyer’s murder, I repeatedly took refuge in Castaneda’s words as the aftershocks of this event reverberated throughout my life in unimaginable ways.
My journey—a rigorous, thorough research endeavor informed by my education as a Princeton undergraduate and later by my training as a clinical psychologist—began in 1976.
There was nothing pretty or easy about waking up early one morning in 2006 and finally realizing that my own father—Wistar Janney, a career highlevel CIA officer—had been involved in the “termination” of Mary Pinchot Meyer, someone I had grown to love and care about.
Yet there is another horror in the death of Mary Meyer, a horror that reaches far beyond the personal.
It is the intimate and undeniable connection between her murder and that of her lover, President John F Kennedy, on November 22, 1963 in Dallas, Texas.
It is clear that a highly compartmentalized, elite segment of the CIA, the United States military, the United States Secret Service, the Federal Bureau of Investigation , certain wellknown organized crime figures, and, finally, Vice President Lyndon B Johnson all colluded to overthrow the elected government of the United States.
Certainly, no one individual, or group of disaffected anti-Castro Cubans, or even elements of the Mafia, could have undertaken such a conspiracy independently, as some authors over the years have wanted to maintain.
No domestic or foreign entity, other than America’s own National Security apparatus, had the leverage, flexibility, mobility, and authority to orchestrate such a massive enterprise, which included the manipulation of all major media outlets.
Today, the CIA continues its efforts to cover up its role in the Kennedy assassination.
According to author Joan Mellen, a special committee of archivists and librarians at the National Archives was convened in 2000 to examine a set of sealed records relating to the Kennedy assassination in order to determine whether they should be released to the public.
Before any determination could be made, however, the group was visited by a man identifying himself as a representative of the Agency.
Schweiker was never convinced the CIA at any time came clean with what it knew.
In 1979, the House Select Committee on Assassinations concluded its three-year investigation with a finding of “probable conspiracy” in the assassination of President Kennedy, thereby calling into question the entire veracity upon which the foundation of the 1964 Warren Report had been built.
Despite the recommendation that the Department of Justice investigate further, nothing ever took place—except that the most sensitive, most revealing files uncovered by the House committee were “lawfully” locked away until the year 2029.
A “shadow government”—what Cold War intelligence historian L Fletcher Prouty once called “the Secret Team,” and what Winston Churchill once referred to as the “High Cabal” that ruled the United States *—has eviscerated America’s fledgling experiment in democracy.
And yet they are connected, one to the other, in ways that became increasingly apparent to me as I dug ever more deeply into her relationship with Jack Kennedy and the circumstances surrounding her demise.
To understand the complex weave of elements that led to her death is to understand, in a deeper way, one of the most abominable, despicable events of our country’s history.
The CIA’s inception and entrance into the American landscape fundamentally altered not only the functioning of our government, but also the entire character of American life.
The CIA’s reign during the Cold War era has contaminated the pursuit of historical truth.
While the dismantling of America’s republic didn’t begin in Dallas in 1963, that day surely marked an unprecedented acceleration of the erosion of constitutional democracy.
Today, in 2012, the ongoing disintegration of our country is ultimately about the corruption of our government, a government that has consistently and intentionally misrepresented and lied about what really took place in Dallas in 1963, as it did about the escalation of the Vietnam War that followed, and which it presently continues to do about so many things.
Once revered as a refuge from tyranny, America has become a sponsor and patron of tyrants.
Her iconic torch of freedom ablaze, her tabula ansata specifically memorializing the rule of law and the American Declaration of Independence, the chains of tyranny are broken at her feet.
While her presence should be an inescapable reminder that we are all “immigrants,” her torch reminds us that the core principles for which she stands require truth telling by each and every one of us.
As long as any vestige of our democracy remains, each of us has a solemn duty to defend it, putting our personal and family loyalties aside.
There is a higher loyalty that real patriotism demands and encompasses, and that loyalty is to the pursuit of truth, no matter how painful or uncomfortable the journey.
Many people in Washington who had known Mary Meyer felt Burleigh’s account left out important details that were either overlooked or not considered, thereby creating more questions than answers.
Some, like me, having given Burleigh considerable input, were further disappointed by her conclusion that Mary had indeed been murdered by the downtrodden, helpless Raymond Crump Jr.
This had not been the conclusion reached by two other attempts before the Burleigh volume was published.
Most outstanding was author Leo Damore’s book project “Burden of Guilt,” which had been scheduled for publication in 1993.
The Chappaquiddick Cover-Up, an incriminating exposé of Senator Ted Kennedy’s nightmare on Martha’s Vineyard and the death of Mary Jo Kopechne, Leo Damore established a reputation as a thorough, prodigious researcher.
The Anatomy of a Murder and The Crime of Dorothy Sheridan , found renewed readership with the success of Senatorial Privilege.
Robertson Davies, one of Canada’s foremost men of letters, once remarked that Damore’s work spoke to “a strong moral backbone.
Drawing on anecdotes from neighbors, employees, friends, and acquaintances, the book sought not to sensationalize or focus on Kennedy’s politics, sex life, or even his presidency, but to focus on capturing the flavor of the area where the young John Kennedy and his family spent their summers.
After the release of Senatorial Privilege, Damore returned to his research on Mary Pinchot Meyer, which had originally been sparked by President Kennedy’s longtime friend and closest adviser Kenneth P O’Donnell.
Kenny O’Donnell and Dave Powers were President Kennedy’s two closest aides and confidantes, part of the “Irish Mafia” that served the political careers of both Jack and his brother Bobby.
In 1966, Damore had the good fortune to be introduced to O’Donnell by attorney James H Smith, Esq., of Falmouth, Massachusetts.
Both would work for O’Donnell’s unsuccessful Massachusetts gubernatorial campaign in 1970.
Shortly before O’Donnell’s death in 1977, Leo Damore did a favor for the ailing Kennedy insider, having located an estranged family member.
In appreciation, O’ Donnell agreed to allow Damore to interview him in depth about Mary Pinchot Meyer, her involvement in the Kennedy White House, and her love affair with the president.
He had already been researching Mary Meyer’s life for nearly three years.
For nearly two years, we spent hours talking on the phone, interspersed with my visits to his Connecticut residence.
Knowing Mary Meyer’s family and some of her community as I did, I was often able to assist in his understanding certain dynamics of some of the people in Washington.
While Leo shared with me a good deal of what he had uncovered, it was by no means everything, as I discovered many years later.
In the spring of 1993, a groundbreaking event occurred in the course of Damore’s research.
However, later that same year, Leo began a mysterious downward spiral of paranoia and depression, the causes of which may never be fully known.
Several of his closest friends reported he believed his phone had been wiretapped, and that he was being followed.
In October of 1995, Leo Damore shot himself in the presence of a nurse and a policeman.
An autopsy later revealed an undiagnosed brain tumor, but this was not without suspicion.
Damore never completed a final manuscript for “Burden of Guilt,” but his research—most of which eventually came into my possession—became one of the cornerstones for my own sojourn, as did my friendship with him.
As news of Leo’s death spread, two wellknown authors and one newcomer would begin vying to pick up what Damore had started.
In November of 1995, less than a month after Leo’s death, Hersh wrote to Damore’s principal research assistant, Mark O’Blazney, seeking Damore’s materials, saying that he knew how “active and very diligent Damore had been in his research—some of those he sought to interview told me of his requests, not only for his book Senatorial Privilege but in his current pursuit about the story of Mary Meyer.
Hersh’s courtship of O’Blazney, who closely guarded Leo’s vault, was short-lived, however.
O’Blazney rightly claimed that Damore had bequeathed his research to him, since the author had been unable to remunerate O’Blazney for the work he had done during the last year of his life.
Within a year, two other journalists came upon the scene almost simultaneously.
The first was John H Davis, an author of six books, who was a wellknown, respected Kennedy assassination researcher, himself a Kennedy insider and a first cousin to Jackie Kennedy.
Davis had an inside track to the Kennedy family that gave him a unique perspective.
As a relative who had ingratiated himself, he knew many of the confidential workings of the Kennedy clan, including some family members’ real beliefs about the Kennedy assassination.
Davis himself had absolutely no confidence whatsoever in the Warren Report.
Carlos Marcello and the Assassination of John F Kennedy has remained a highly respected work with regard to the role of organized crime in JFK’s assassination.
With the assistance of attorney Jimmy Smith, Davis acquired access to Leo Damore’s research on Mary Meyer.
In May 1996, editor Fred Jordan at Fromm Publishing International offered Davis a hefty book contract that included an immediate advance of $110,000.
Kennedy and Mary Pinchot Meyer: A Tale of Two Murdered Lovers, and was scheduled to be completed by June 30, 1997.
Bolstered by Damore’s research, Twyman’s book further substantiated for Davis why the CIA had a keen interest in Mary Meyer after the Warren Report was made public.
But like Leo Damore, John Davis would never complete his book about Mary, despite his access to Damore’s discoveries and what certain members of the Kennedy family had shared with him.
John H Davis was a cum laude graduate of Princeton and, like Leo Damore, a prolific author and respected researcher.
It was possible that Davis’s alcoholism, well known to his close friends, prevented the book’s publication, and the fact that he eventually suffered a severe stroke, though that didn’t occur until 2002.
But his friend Jimmy Smith, who had been Damore’s attorney and close friend, recalled a chilling telephone conversation with Davis in early 1999.
Davis’s previous books on the Kennedy assassination and the Mafia made him no stranger to the world of organized crime.
He likely would have been able to discriminate between a serious threat and one that wasn’t.
Journalist Nina Burleigh contacted me in 1996 to talk about Mary Meyer.
I was heartened at the time by some of her insights, and for the next two years or so continued to offer suggestions when asked.
Though Nina would eventually acknowledge my assistance, as well as quote me throughout, I was very disappointed by her conclusions in A Very Private Woman.
Despite some well-researched biographical information on Mary’s early life, Burleigh’s portrayals of Mary’s relationship with Timothy Leary, the nature of her relationship with Jack Kennedy, and her final disposition toward Mary’s alleged assailant, Ray Crump Jr., and his attorney, Dovey Roundtree, were not only shortsighted, but also ultimately inaccurate and misinformed.
It is his burden—and Mary Meyer’s—that I have ultimately endeavored to shoulder.
Members of my immediate and extended family, as well as Wistar Janney’s remaining friends and community, may find my conclusions all too outrageous and troublesome.
Everyone is, of course, ultimately entitled to his own opinion —but not to his own set of facts.
And the hidden history of this narrative—the true facts beneath the surface, much of which is revealed here for the very first time—strongly supports the conclusions that I have established.
Whatever remaining anguish—mine, as well as the blemish upon the soul of America—my faith dictates that eventually it will have a redemptive impact, only because truth, when it is confronted and finally understood, has the power to heal.
Fate’s Engagement There are very few human beings who receive the truth, complete and staggering, by instant illumination.
Most of them acquire it fragment by fragment, on a small scale, by successive developments, cellularly, like a laborious mosaic. —Anais Nin A patriot must always be ready to defend his country against his government. —Edward Abbey In some far place, where all the lovely things Of earth are born, the gods no longer weep.
A CHILLY OCTOBER wind sent leaves scudding across the cobblestones of Washington’s elegant Georgetown streets as Mary Pinchot Meyer set out on her customary early morming walk to her art studio.
She was lithe and feminine, radiant with a beauty that still turned heads.
Her svelte frame belied the strength within her, fed perhaps by a rare reservoir of spiritual intensity.
In spite of the raw autumn temperature just above freezing that signaled winter’s approach, there was the promise of an impending sun’s warmth.
Still, the weather called for several layers of clothing in anticipation of the longer walk along the Chesapeake and Ohio Canal that had become her daily ritual each afternoon after she painted.
The walk from her Thirty-Fourth Street home took less than ten minutes.
Her artist’s studio, a converted brick garage with two skylights in its tin roof, was located in the alleyway behind her sister Tony and brother-in-law Ben Bradlee’s N Street house, itself a poignant reminder, only because its location was just seven doors away from where her lover, the president, had lived before moving into the White House in 1960.
That morning, however, she may have pondered the recent estrangement from her sister and brother-in-law.
Months earlier, a schism had developed, primarily involving Ben, whom she had come to distrust.
The capital city was still reeling from the unfathomable trauma that had taken place eleven months earlier in Dallas.
It had left a deep wound in the fabric of America’s soul and identity, and in the meaning of civilization across the globe.
That would require, among other things, an elixir called truth, not its subversion in the form of the so-called Warren Report that had emerged three weeks earlier from Supreme Court justice Earl Warren’s commission on the assassination of President John F Kennedy.
For Mary, the report may have been further evidence of the infection that had already taken hold, long before the nightmare in Dallas.
Like a viral cancerous army, rogue elements within the highest levels of the American government had usurped the hope and vision she and Jack had shared and nurtured, ending America’s dream for the president’s new trajectory toward world peace.
Since Dallas, Mary had experienced a rough year of adjustments, with no real end in sight.
For months, she had attempted to retreat into her discipline as an artist.
Her dream of recognition as a contemporary abstract painter had started to be realized just five days before the horror in Dallas had struck.
Her first solo art opening at the Jefferson Place Gallery in Washington had been a solid success.
Reviewing her paintings on November 24, Washington Post art critic Leslie Judd Ahlander heralded Mary’s artistry, writing, “Her work has always shown a quality which made one want to see more.
Describing Mary’s tondo approach using acrylic paint, Ahlander had praised her presentation as “lJuminous and carefully thought out.... a lyrical and emotional statement rather than a cooly calculated one.
The recognition was an affirmation of the creative path she had long desired.
Three of her most recently completed works, Fire Island II, Clearing, and Foxglove, had been included in the show.
In November, it was due to be shipped to the Museum of Modern Art in Buenos Aires for an international opening, her first worldwide public exhibition—one she would not live to witness.
Tormented since Jack’s death, Mary had refused to accept the lies being peddled to the public.
Bobby did have a plan, Walton told her, to attempt to retake the White House, but time would have to pass first.
Best to keep throwing herself back into her work, Walton counseled, as Walton himself was doing.
Throughout the past year, she had made it her business to learn what had really taken place in Dallas that late-November day.
Like most Americans, Mary grieved over the violent death of her president; for her, however, his departure had also been uniquely personal.
She and Jack had not only been lovers, but had also grown into the deepest of allies—kindred spirits in the pursuit of peace for the world.
Nearly fifteen years earlier, she had worked tirelessly with her then-husband, war hero Cord Meyer, to promote a world government structure that might maintain the hard-won, fragile peace of a postwar nuclear world.
But Cord had ultimately chosen a different path and, in doing so, had foreclosed on their marriage.
Her prior access to Jack and his White House coterie had allowed her to quietly interrogate the few who would talk about that day in Dallas.
She had read and collected some of the various reports and articles that questioned the falsehoods that had been propagated and were now worming their way into the public mind.
Those writings occupied a special place in the bookcase in her bedroom, next to her diary, the final repository of reflections and analysis of what she had come to understand.
Mary bemoaned to her dear friend Anne Truitt before she had left for Japan earlier that year.
Neither, however, had prepared her for the unspeakable horror of losing her son Michael in 1956.
That tragedy had propelled her into an emotional typhoon that she struggled long and hard to resolve.
While scar tissue might stop the bleeding, the wound of such a loss never really healed.
With her friends Anne and Jim Truitt having left for Tokyo in early 1964,” Mary had recently, perhaps mistakenly, spoken to another woman she knew only peripherally, not realizing the woman had been sent to find out what Mary had learned about the dastardly deed in Dallas and its orchestration.
The cover-up had reached its final public crescendo with the release of the Warren Report on September 24, about three weeks earlier.
Mary had bought the abridged paperback version and read it with her trained editor’s eye, making numerous notes in the margins and turning down page corners for markers.
Of course, it hadn’t been the first time she’d openly spoken out against their beloved Agency.
Her morning ritual included turning on the electric space heater, pouring coffee from her thermos, and lighting up a Salem, so as to begin.
The transition into painting allowed her to quiet, if only for a while, the challenges she knew she would soon ace.
Whether that morning’s endeavor was further informed by her recent thematic, ongoing analysis of peace and harmony wasn’t known, but Mary’s former intimacy with artist Ken Noland in the late 1950s had given her a particular vantage point for her evolving exploration.
Noland’s “target” paintings had influenced her, as they had expressed a distinct commentary about war.
She had taken this target circular device in her most recent painting, Half Light, and expressed the four elements —fire, wind, water, and earth—using color to underscore harmony with the earth, and the universe itself.
Her “one-world” harmony in the past year may have been an homage to Jack and their shared vision for world peace.
It was, after all, only a vision—perhaps her vision, or their vision—of where mankind should always be focused now and in the future.
There was still purpose to be explored, and she would continue to fight, even without Jack.
Seven years later, someone by the name of John Lennon would sing a song called “Imagine,” capturing where Mary had been headed.
While Mary’s work that morning may have echoed her recent painting Half Light, something within Half Light’s conception of one-world harmony might have died in order to be reborn.
Hope and despair in the end had been engaged in an epic battle, and not just in her life alone.
Stepping back from her morning’s work, she might have thought of naming the painting Lost Light, or just No Light at all.
The title would eventually emerge—as it always seemed to—however private the artist’s meaning for the world to see.
Her mother’s discipline, from which she had built her own, would ensure it.
Her usual long walk after a morning’s artistic focus was another workday ritual she always looked forward to.
There was no need to take her purse; she liked to walk freely with no encumbrance.
Her paint-spattered PF Flyer canvas sneakers likely squeaked across the wooden floor as she pivoted out the door.
The October breeze suggested the cooler days ahead, bringing welcome relief from Washington’s oppressive humidity, which sometimes lingered well into September.
Circling the block to N Street, Mary walked down the steep incline of Thirty-Fourth Street toward the C & O Canal towpath.
Crossing the inevitable M Street traffic, she found herself face-to-face with an approaching limousine, the long, black, official kind with government license plates that at an earlier time could have been taking Jack to some official function or meeting.
The wife of Frank Wisner, one of the founding fathers of CIA covert operations, Polly was preparing to fly to London without Frank, whose descent into a labyrinth of depression, mania, and compulsive talking, or logorrhea, had finally ended his intelligence career in 1962.
Mary would never know that a year later, in 1965, Wisner would be found dead, an apparent suicide, a small-gauge shotgun his final companion.
Just a year earlier, in August 1963, Mary’s friend, Philip L Graham, owner-publisher of the Washington Post, had allegedly embraced such a firearm for himself.
Mary would not survive to witness the self-destruction that would explode in the years to come.
She passed Polly Wisner, undoubtedly waving in response to Polly’s greeting, and moved onward toward the canal towpath.
As she continued walking, Mary might have cheered herself with thoughts of Thanksgiving and the anticipation of being reunited with her two boys, Quenty and Mark, due home in a little more than a month from their respective boarding schools, Salisbury and Milton Academy.
She had been to Salisbury the preceding academic year to visit Quenty, the handsome son she’d called “mouse” when he was younger.
There were those in the extended family who privately felt Quenty had been scarred by his father, Cord, and, of course, by the death of his brother Mikey.
Like his father, Quenty had been known to exhibit a cruel disposition that was often visited on those more vulnerable and defenseless in their immediate and extended family.
The meanness was a phase that Mary hoped he would grow out of, as children sometimes did.
At Salisbury, Quenty was coming into his own, his athleticism in basketball and tennis readily apparent.
The towpath was nearly deserted that Monday as Mary proceeded westward from Georgetown out to Fletcher’s Boat House, a distance of about two and a quarter miles.
Still, there was one young couple up ahead walking in the same direction as Mary.
Just as they disappeared around the first bend, a young man wearing red Bermuda shorts ran past her on his way west.
Once doomed to be replaced by a freeway, the Chesapeake and Ohio Canal had been saved through the efforts of Supreme Court justice William O Douglas.
Douglas had led protest hikes the entire length of the canal in 1954, wanting the most perfectly preserved example of America’s canal-building era to be designated a national historic park.
He had personally undertaken the campaign in the spirit of his boyhood hero, Gifford Pinchot, Mary’s uncle and a pioneering conservationist who had twice been elected governor of Pennsylvania.
In 1905, Gifford Pinchot had been appointed the first head of the United States Forest Service by President Teddy Roosevelt, his close friend.
Jack was, according to one insider, amused by Mary’s entreaties; he found them endearing.
After Dallas, Mary’s towpath excursions had become a sacred refuge, even in inclement weather.
Not a drinker like so many of the other women in her circle, and willing to face the fury within, she had made walking an antidote for her agitation.
But about a month or so after Jack’s assassination, she later told her friend Jim Truitt, she had set out on the towpath one day in wintry weather, determined to sustain her fragile equilibrium, only to confront further anguish instead of the solace she’d sought.
A short but violent snow squall had materialized, making visibility difficult, if not impossible.
Coming toward her through the blinding snow was a ghostlike chimera taking form as it neared.
It wasn’t until she was nearly face-to-face with the person, she said, that she recognized Jackie.
Mary’s discretion was always paramount, her capacity to comfort someone else even amid her own deepest anguish somehow readily available when called for.
Her life—and all of history—dramatically, irrevocably shattered, she needed as many anchors as she could find.
Historian Herb Parmet, in a groundbreaking biography of Jack, had interviewed a close confidential source who knew the score.
The source had observed that Jack enjoyed a very different, and very special, life with Mary.
Mary continued walking in her customary westerly direction, as the October noonday sun warmed the morning chill.
Throughout the past year, there had been several incidents of someone intruding into her home.
Then, after being away for some time that summer, she was sure someone had been inside her house while she was gone.
In another instance, she had found the heavy basement door, which was impossible for her to move even with the help of her two sons, ajar.
But the finale had been seeing somebody leaving her house as she had walked in.
As an artist, Mary’s philosophical perspective had undergone a major transformation when she embarked on a jourmey of personal exploration of mind-expanding potions in the late 1950s.
It may have also allowed her some deeper resolution about her son Michael’s death, though nothing would ever dishonor his spirit in her life.
Nonetheless, despite Michael’s departure, Mary’s awareness had expanded into the recognition of the connectedness of all living things, the breathing atomic structure of everything physical, all coexisting peacefully in harmony with one another.
Here, cosmic joy was real, a blessing given to all who were willing to surrender.
At first, it had only been a pipe dream, something she imagined mostly within.
She had sought Leary’s counsel, but her discretion once again erected the boundary.
He had kindly given her some tools, suggestions for how to guide others through the psychedelic Garden of Eden.
She had shared her emerging experience with a small group of eight women who were willing to engage a few powerful men in Washington.
Leary, unaware of what was really taking place, said he would continue to periodically make himself available to help her.
At first, he had become “hungry” for food—”soup and chocolate mousse”—before their amorous embrace that evening, where she might have held a more tender man.
Like Mary’s ex-husband Cord, Jack too, was broken; and unwilling, or too frightened, to confront his world of wounded vulnerability—ironically the gateway from which real intimacy often sprang.
Later on, she had admittedly made “a mistake in recruitment” in her small psychedelic group of eight women.
With her husband dead, Katharine Graham now wielded more power in Washington than ever before.
Mary had considered Katharine’s husband, Philip L Graham, whose name she never mentioned to Leary, to be “a friend of mine,” a friend whom she described as “losing the battle, a really bloody one.
Leary hadn’t realized at the time that Mary’s “boyfriend” was the president.
But the worst part was that Phil Graham had just allegedly committed suicide, another detail she kept from Leary, who couldn’t quite fathom why the usually bold, courageous Mary was so upset.
That day with Leary at Millbrook, she had voiced her worst fear, that even her own life might be in danger, finally asking whether, if she showed up unexpectedly at some point, he would be able to hide her.
Maybe Phil Graham did commit suicide after all, she may have thought as she kept walking, perhaps not realizing that her paranoia had in fact been a case of heightened awareness.
The Potomac River was to her left as the towpath also veered left, narrowing a bit as it paralleled the elevated Canal Road to her right.
Mary approached the narrow, thirty-foot-long wooden footbridge that spanned the shallow spillway drainage.
It was almost the halfway mark to Fletcher’s Boat House, her usual destination before turning back.
It was likely one of her favorite parts of this particular route because of its comforting solitude.
Dappled by sparking sunlight, the Potomac could be seen through a scrim of branches down a steep embankment and beyond a thicket of fire-scarred trees.
But for the intermittent drone of passing cars above and to her right, she was alone with her thoughts and all of nature.
Unaware that she had been under surveillance for the past several weeks, and oblivious that day to the fact that she was being stalked, Mary might well not have heard the footfalls gathering speed behind her.
Park Service police regularly patrolled the area, though for some reason they weren’t present that day.
Other pedestrians, bicyclists, and the fishermen and boatmen who frequented the river almost guaranteed the towpath’s security in daytime.
Mary had never feared for her safety in this place, or any other for that matter, despite the concerns her friend Cicely Angleton would later express that day.
Her assailant wrapped her in a close, hard embrace, pinning her arms against her side.
Immobilized, the vigorous, athletic woman came alive as she fought hard to escape the lock of an aggressor she probably couldn’t see.
She must have smelled the stench of burning flesh and gunpowder as something hard and hot seared into the left side of her skull just in front of her ear.
A gush of wet warmth poured down her face, soaking the collar of her blue angora sweater, turning it red.
With a desperate lunge, Mary broke away, stumbling across the towpath to the wooded embankment border.
Seeking refuge somewhere at the border’s edge, holding onto a nearby birch tree, she brought her gloved hand to her left temple, only to draw away great smears of blood that darkly stained the leather glove.
Assaulted by waves of nausea and weakness, falling to her knees and fighting to retain consciousness, she braced herself from falling farther, clinging to the smooth birch tree trunk.
Failing to kill her with his first shot, the assailant seized her again, even more roughly.
This time, he dragged Mary from the embankment clear across the towpath, out of the shadows and into the sunlight toward the canal’s edge, her paint-spattered PF Flyers vainly seeking traction against the pebbled dirt, leaving parallel tracks that would mark the last path of her earthly life.
As she lost strength, her voice may have been quieted by both pain and fear.
Or perhaps she silently beseeched the passing cars above, before something hard was pressed against her body over her right shoulder blade.
There was only the hot path of metal that tore through her chest, severing her aorta.
As the last echo of gunfire faded, death forced her final surrender and she fell upon the grassy ledge at the water’s edge.
Together, they were to service a stalled Nash Rambler sedan abandoned somewhere in the 4300 block on the north side of Canal Road.
They had just arrived and Wiggins was taking out his toolbox when he heard screams coming from the canal.
But then, he said, both he and Branch had thought they heard a woman screaming.
Henry Wiggins was a heavy-set, twenty-four-year-old black man who had served in the Army in a Military Police unit in Korea, and he was still fast on his feet.
On hearing the shot, he had dashed across Canal Road toward a stone wall at the edge of the embankment overlooking the canal.
When he peered over the wall and down across the canal, Wiggins saw a man, “a Negro male,” standing over a woman who lay motionless and curled on her side.
Minutes later, Wiggins would give the police a description of the man, recorded on the department’s Police Form PD-251.
Police would later measure the distance from where Wiggins stood at the wall to the murder scene to be 128. feet.
It was close enough to make out specific details, certainly close enough to see that the woman was white, that the man standing over her was black, and that he stood with his hands down at his sides.
Wiggins ducked behind the wall, but when he peeked back over it, he saw that the man held some kind of a dark object in his right hand.
From the considerable distance of 128. feet, he couldn’t say with certainty what the object was, but given the gunshots he had just heard, he assumed that it was a gun.
But nowhere in Wiggins’s initial description to police, or in his testimony nine months later at the trial, did he ever mention seeing any stains, blood or anything else, on the fully zipped light-colored beige jacket the man had been wearing.
Indeed, the “Negro male” and his clothes, which Wiggins had described, appeared to be neatly in place; nothing was disheveled.
He hopped into the truck, started the ignition, made a U-turn, and sped back to the Key Bridge Esso Station, six-tenths of a mile away.
Wiggins immediately phoned the Seventh Precinct of Washington’s Metropolitan Police Department.
Before he had finished talking with the dispatcher, a police cruiser, already responding to the radio alert about the incident, pulled into the Esso station, sirens wailing.
Wiggins climbed into the back seat of the cruiser, which took off in the direction of the Foundry Underpass, a distance of about four-tenths of a mile, to access the C & O Canal towpath.
Reaching the Foundry’s arched stone tunnel, which was as narrow as its roadway was rutted, “we dismounted from the police car,” Wiggins recalled.
Together, police officers Robert Decker and James Scouloukas approached the fallen woman with Wiggins.
There was a bullet wound near her left eye, and blood covered her face.
The scuffed ground indicated that there had been a struggle, and parallel tracks in the dirt from the towpath to the embankment indicated that the woman had been dragged to the spot where she lay.
Surmising that the killer might still be in the vicinity, police officer Scouloukas returned with Wiggins to the cruiser to broadcast the description of the man Wiggins had seen.
They pulled up on Canal Road, directly across from the murder scene, and climbed out of their cruiser.
At that point, Decker motioned to them to drive to Fletcher’s Boat House, which was just over a mile and a half to the west, in order to block off one of the canal’s four marked entrances.
Arriving at the boathouse area, Sylvis and Bignotti drove through the tight underpass tunnel below the canal and parked facing the canal from the south.
From that vantage point, they would be able to see anyone leaving the towpath to access Canal Road, and they would have a full view of the canal itself, particularly the point where visitors could use an old, leaky skiff attached to a rope and pulley to pull themselves across the seventy-foot canal.
As the officers began to position themselves, they saw a young white couple, thirtyish, walking westward on the railroad tracks, just below and parallel to the towpath.
After several minutes, the two officers made their way east in the hope that they might yet encounter the assailant.
Perhaps, acting in haste, they let the couple go without requesting identification or contact information.
At that point, Bignotti entered the woods adjacent to the railroad tracks and Sylvis took the towpath, walking east toward the murder scene.
Officer Sylvis continued on the towpath “for about a mile” in the direction of the murder scene, slowly and vigilantly scouring the area for other people.
After a while, a man poked his head out of some woods to the right and ahead of where Sylvis was walking.
Slowly, and with caution, the young officer approached the area where he had seen the man.
The tangle of underbrush, vines, tree roots, and rocks that covered the embankment made it difficult to penetrate.
Nothing disturbed the stillness of the woods but the breeze that rustled the fallen leaves.
Hoping that his partner, Bignotti, was in the woods to his right, Sylvis yelled for him a number of times.
Coming out of the underbrush on the tracks, he finally spotted Bignotti crossing the tracks and caught up with him.
More than a half hour had passed since he and Officer Scouloukas had called in the report.
Sergeant Pasquale D’Ambrosio of the Seventh Precinct Criminal Investigations Division arrived to escort Wiggins back to the towpath and to secure the scene.
The Homicide Squad arrived a few minutes before 1:00 PM., just after the arrival of Chief Detective Art Weber, a twenty-three-year veteran of the police force, and three men wearing trench raincoats.
Twenty-nine-year-old detective Bernie Crooke was the youngest member of the Homicide Squad and had been on the job for only eighteen months.
Even so, he had already seen a number of murdered women, “but none who looked beautiful when dead,” he recalled years later upon first seeing the dead Mary Meyer.
He also found a blue button with two frayed threads in the grass by a birch tree at the edge of the embankment, twenty-two feet from the body.
Blood on the tree suggested that the victim might have grasped it from a sitting or a kneeling position.
Detective Crooke joined Detective Weber, who was questioning Henry Wiggins at a spot approximately thirty feet from the body.
Wiggins explained that he had arrived at the 4300 block of Canal Road at approximately 12:20 pM. to service a stalled Nash Rambler sedan.
Laying out the sequence of events—the woman’s screams, the sound of one gunshot and then a second—Wiggins told Crooke and Weber that he had ducked behind the stone wall because he didn’t want the man he’d seen standing over the victim to see him.
As he later testified, “I thought that would frighten him and cause him to act more quickly.
Weber then ordered police officers to search both sides of the canal and to sweep the woods all the way to the Potomac River.
But if the Wiggins time chronology was correct, approximately forty-five minutes had elapsed since the murder.
In response to the bulletin, Warner and Schultheis turned right onto K Street and drove down the Key Bridge underpass to the woods’ edge, where the towpath began.
From there, they could look down on the set of railroad tracks that ran parallel to both the canal and the towpath.
Taking intermittent detours to search the woods between the railroad tracks and the high embankment to the towpath, Henry Warner soon discovered that some of the underbrush was so thick he couldn’t get through it.
After walking approximately half a mile, he came upon a five-foot-tall concrete culvert, large enough to conceal a man inside.
He continued to explore the nearby underbrush, and looked under the tunnel where the spillway flowed into the Potomac.
But as Warner walked back to the railroad bed and continued westward, he saw a young black man walking on the tracks.
The man was wearing a yellow sweatshirt over a white T-shirt, navy-blue corduroy trousers that were torn six inches below the left pocket, and black wingtip shoes.
Water dripped from the wallet Crump took from his pocket before he handed over his driver’s license.
Warner had to have observed that he didn’t fit the description given in the police broadcast alert.
He told Warner that he had cut his hand on a rock as he fell into the river, before attempting to climb out.
He and Warner then walked a little more than a tenth of a mile along the railroad bed toward the area where Crump said he had been fishing earlier that day.
Voices and commotion then drew Detective Warner’s attention to the fifty-foot embankment to his right.
Sergeant D’Ambrosio, standing at the edge of the towpath, descended the embankment to join Warner and Crump.
D’ Ambrosio viewed Crump’s slight stature and wet, disheveled appearance, and noticed his open fly.
As Wiggins looked down the embankment, he told the young detective that Crump looked like the man he’d seen.
That was a goodenough identification for Crooke to confront the suspect.
He identified himself as a detective assigned to the Homicide Squad and placed an incredulous Ray Crump under arrest.
Detective Crooke warned him that he didn’t have to talk or make a statement, but that if he did, it could be used against him at a trial.
He had left his house in Southeast Washington that morning, he told the detective, with a fishing rod and some chicken innards as bait, and he had taken the bus to Wisconsin Avenue and M Street.
He’d walked down the towpath and through the woods to the river to go fishing.
Crump told the detective that he had been wearing what he had on, and nothing else.
Crump hesitated, looked down at his trousers, and replied that Crooke had caused it to unzip when he grabbed his belt.
Crump appeared to Crooke to be disoriented as he patted him down, and Crooke thought he smelled alcohol on his breath.
Handcuffed, Ray Crump was led up the embankment to the towpath and past Chief Detective Art Weber.
Like Detective Warner, Chief Detective Weber would later admit, under cross-examination at trial, that the man they had taken into custody that day didn’t match the description that had gone out on the police radio bulletin.
In spite of this, Weber instructed Crooke to take Crump to Homicide and book him for murder.
Ray Crump was put under arrest at approximately 1:15 pM., and he waited quietly in handcuffs at the murder scene for almost a full hour before being taken downtown to Homicide for booking.
He still didn’t appear to understand what was happening, or what was about to occur.
With a suspect now in custody, Sergeant Pasquale D’Ambrosio walked down to the Potomac riverfront where Ray Crump said he had been fishing.
Homicide Detective Ronald Banta, who was overseeing a search for a jacket, a cap, and a murder weapon, joined D’ Ambrosio.
In response, Byers slowly navigated his police patrol boat through the Georgetown channel of the Potomac River.
Close to 45 minutes later, three hundred yards upstream from Three Sisters Island—an outcrop of rocks covered with sparse vegetation—Byers observed a jacket floating in the water two feet from the shoreline.
He maneuvered his boat as close as he could to the jacket and used a boathook to fish it out of the river.
Inspecting the jacket, Crooke removed a sodden pack of Pall Mall cigarettes from the right-hand pocket.
Linwood L Rayford arrived at the murder scene by 2:00 P.M. and pronounced the unknown victim dead at 2:05.
Rayford observed that rigor mortis had not yet set in, which meant that she couldn’t have been dead for more than two hours.
He also noted that the dead woman had been shot twice—once in the left temple anterior to her ear and once in the back.
A tear in her corduroy slacks revealed an abraded knee, suggesting that the woman had been dragged or had crawled through brush.
Fire Department ambulance that had been parked at the Foundry Underpass.
Police informed the coroner that a suspect, identified by an eyewitness, was now in custody.
Before going downtown to police headquarters, Henry Wiggins returned with Detective Edwin Coppage and United States Park Police detective Charles Stebbins to the exact spot from which he had seen the man standing over the dead woman.
The stalled Nash Rambler that he and Bill Branch had been called to fix that morning was gone.
The work order to service “a broken down car” on Canal Road had originated at the Key Bridge Esso Station.
A trip ticket should have existed, but station manager Joe Cameron wasn’t able to produce any record of the service call for the Nash Rambler.
There was no sales slip, no receipt of payment, no indication that repairs had even been attempted.
His partner, Bill Branch, hadn’t repaired the car, either, he later said.
He was still shivering in his wet clothes, and Crooke suggested that he might be more comfortable if he took off his wet sweatshirt.
In a white T-shirt that clung to his narrow chest, Crump appeared frail and childlike, much younger than his twenty-five years.
A press photographer was waiting for the arrival of the black man suspected of murdering a white woman on the towpath.
Crump bowed his head to avert the glare of flashbulbs as the photographer captured his arrival at police homicide headquarters.
Just a few months earlier, on June 22, 1964, the Supreme Court under Chief Justice Earl Warren had ruled in a 5-4 decision that a suspect had the right to have an attorney present during questioning.
The ruling emanated from Escobedo Illinois and became known as the Escobedo Rule.
Crooke was well aware of the ruling but chose not to inform Crump of his right to an attorney.
The Miranda decision, which would have required Crooke to notify Crump, prior to questioning, of his right to an attorney, would not be decided for another two years.
One year earlier, a judge ruled in a defendant’s favor arguing that the confession that Crooke had extracted from him was no good.
Crooke apparently didn’t want to suffer the humiliation of losing again.
Detective Crooke ordered Crump to put on the jacket that had just been fished out of the Potomac.
Crooke felt certain that he was on the verge of extracting a confession when a lieutenant burst into the room, in complete contravention of the prohibition against interrupting an investigation, and he demanded to know when Crooke was going to set up the lineup.
By the time Crooke returned to the interrogation room, Crump appeared to have pulled himself together.
What Henry Wiggins didn’t remember that day was that he and twenty-fiveyear-old Ray Crump Jr. had been classmates, first at Briggs Elementary in Washington, then in junior high school, from which they had graduated in 1954.
Neither school at the time was integrated, but Wiggins had gone on to Western High School and had graduated.
A friend of Wiggins’s had reminded him that he knew Crump after Wiggins had identified him.
Henry Wiggins was “satisfied” that he’d made law enforcement’s case against Ray Crump.
According to this version of events, Crump had said that “he was trying to retrieve his fishing rod,” said Wiggins.
Another version had it that Crump was in the water to wash the victim’s blood off, while still another held that Crump was apprehended while he hid behind some rocks in the woods that bordered the river.
Some parts of the canal, such as the concrete abutment and first arch supports of Key Bridge, had acquired unsavory reputations as havens for vagrants, truants, and dealers who supplied the affluent of Georgetown with recreational drugs.
Henry Wiggins overheard one officer speculate that the murdered woman might have flirted with her killer.
Detective Crooke gave Wiggins his card and told him not to talk to the press or anybody else about the case.
Wiggins, who had once fancied himself cop material, apparently enjoyed his status at the center of this murder investigation; in fact, he had hoped to become a police officer in Washington, D.C., after his discharge from the Army.
He had done some coursework—“in psychology, search and seizure, all that stuff’—and had passed the written exam, even dieted to meet the weight requirements, but “they still wouldn’t take me,” he said.
He suspected that the color of his skin had something to do with his rejection.
In any event, even though he hadn’t passed muster as a potential police officer, Wiggins—a black man pointing the finger at another black man—seemed to be the ideal witness.
That afternoon, Ray Crump had been fingerprinted, photographed, weighed, and measured, but he wasn’t tested for gunpowder burns or residue, which would have indicated whether he had recently fired a handgun.
The Legal Aid Society of the District of Columbia had been alerted to Ray Crump’s arrival.
Legal Aid public defenders typically represented indigent clients at preliminary criminal hearings, at coroner’s inquests, and at mental health hearings.
D.C. had the most restrictive laws on preliminary hearings of any federal court in the United States.
Police were required to bring an arrested person before a magistrate as soon as it was feasible.
Lamb was one of five new lawyers brought into the office by Edward “Ted” O’Neill, the sharp-tongued, indefatigable public defender.
Lamb had been working in the Public Defender’s Office of the Legal Aid Society for just one month when he met Ray Crump.
Lamb considered himself part of the revolution that was taking place in criminal law to balance the inherently unequal contest between the individual and the state.
As a public defender, Lamb reserved particular admiration for Judge David Bazelon of the United States Court of Appeals.
Whatever could be done for the richest of the rich, it was our job to do for the poorest of the poor.
He didn’t own real estate, an automobile, or any other valuable property, nor did his wife, Helena, his parents, or any other person who might have been able to assist in paying the costs of his defense.
Lamb conducted a background check on his new client and found that he was married with five children.
He had been twice arrested for disorderly behavior and he had served sixty days for shoplifting.
He repeatedly told Lamb that he didn’t know what had gone on at the canal, that he hadn’t killed anybody, and that the police had arrested the wrong man.
In a first-floor hearing room, the police would try to establish before a magistrate that there was enough evidence to hold him for a grand jury.
What Lamb didn’t tell his client was that with United States Commissioner Sam Wertleb presiding—a “curmudgeon,” in Lamb’s opinion—the chances were slim that Crump would be let go.
With bail denied, “you’ve got to move quick to try to prevent the government from bringing an original indictment,’ Lamb said.
Already there was some strong heat coming down on this case from somewhere—we didn’t know where.
That’s why we were in court so damn fast, to try to set up a preliminary hearing.
The reason you wanted a prelim, it was the only chance you had to crossexamine witnesses and find out what the police had for evidence.
So you freeze the case in a timeline so that it never gets any better, unless the police find something new.
The guard urged him to confess, saying that if he did, he would get the help he was entitled to, possibly even a deal with the prosecutor, but Crump remained confused.
Meanwhile, something weighed heavily on the freshly minted public defender, George Peter Lamb.
Though new to his job, he was savvy enough to know that it was highly unusual for Assistant United States Attorney Donald Smith to be representing the government at Ray Crump’s hearing.
Donald Smith’s presence signaled that somewhere within the corridors of the United States Department of Justice an alarm had sounded.
Surely not because of Ray Crump, who wouldn’t have merited such high-level attention.
Detective Bernard Crooke, on arriving at the D.C. morgue, was immediately granted access to an autopsy room where Randolph M Worrell, the morgue technician, had already logged in the body of a white female, name and address unknown.
Worrell had taken a sample of blood that would be delivered for classification to the FBI the following day.
He had prepared the body for examination by removing her clothes in the presence of Deputy Coroner Dr.
Rayford, a tall, light-skinned black man with a military bearing and a handsome face, medicine had been a second career choice.
Now a surgeon, Rayford had performed more than four hundred autopsies on gunshot victims, but none had been as disturbing as this one.
Rayford had lifted the woman’s arms and rotated them across her torso to determine the degree of muscular rigor.
He touched her thigh, stomach, and chest; the pale, almost translucent skin was cool, which told him that she had been dead only a few hours.
Both entry wounds were a quarter of an inch in diameter and bore dark halos typical of powder burns.
The first bullet had entered the left side of the skull, “traversed into the right temporal lobe, fractured it, and ricocheted back where the slug was found in the right side of the brain,” where Rayford recovered it.
The woman likely survived the first shot to her head, but Rayford said that such a wound’s attendant hemorrhaging and brain lacerations would probably have rendered her unconscious.
In contrast, the second wound would have produced more internal than external bleeding because of its position under the shoulder blade.
He had seen some messy gangland-style slayings, but nothing like the neat accuracy of the wounds inflicted on this victim.
He would deliver them to the FBI Crime Lab for testing the next day, but first he inspected the clothes for some kind of mark that might identify the victim.
On the silk lining next to the fraying Mark Cross label inside one of the bloodsoaked gloves, the name “Meyer” had been written in blue ink.
By telephone from the morgue, Crooke instructed the desk officer at the Seventh Precinct at Volta Place in Georgetown to call all the Meyers in the Washington telephone directory.
The dead woman could well be visiting from another city, he remembered thinking, but it was more likely that she was a local resident on an afternoon stroll not far from her home.
It was a crime-ridden ghetto of dilapidated houses where the majority of residents were black.
Crooke knocked on the door of 2109 Stanton Terrace, S.E., and was invited into a tidy, spare living room by Helena Crump, a slender young woman who held the youngest of her five children, a baby, in her arms.
To the black community, the police represented both a threat and indifference.
Crime festered in poor neighborhoods like Anacostia, mainly because law enforcement officials allowed it to do so.
Helena Crump had learned about her husband’s arrest from a neighbor who had heard it on the radio.
Ray Crump had been working as a day laborer at the Brown Construction Company’s building site at Southeast Hospital.
It was better than hustling trash or the other menial work available to uneducated black men.
He had recently told his coworker Robert Woolright that he didn’t think he’d be able to keep it up.
Woolright had driven to Crump’s house to give him a ride to work on the morning of the murder.
She had been arguing with her husband, who’d said he was too tired to go to work that day and was “tired of hearing all that shit” about money.
Helena handed Woolright a set of keys to the work shed at the construction site and returned to the house.
Helena didn’t know where he was going, but, she told Detective Crooke, he wasn’t going fishing.
She also identified the damp Windbreaker that Crooke had brought with him in an evidence bag.
It had been a Father’s Day present from her and the children the preceding June.
That’s how we can tell the difference in our cigarettes,” she told Crooke, who had knocked on her door after leaving Helena Crump.
Good-humored and garrulous, Perkins told Crooke that she was close with the Crumps and that she and Helena Crump maintained an informal security system.
That’s how she happened to see Ray Jr. leaving his house around eight in the morning.
Crump got as far as the tree at the end of the sidewalk, then turned around, Perkins said.
Crump had been wearing a yellow sweatshirt, a half-zipped beige jacket, dark trousers, and dark shoes, she said.
She had watched Ray Jr. until he got halfway down to the bend that led over to Stanton Road.
She had never seen Ray Jr. with a gun in his possession, or known him to have one.
Crump accosted a well-dressed white woman walking along on the C & O Canal towpath.
When she resisted, he panicked and shot her in the head without killing her.
Still conscious, she had broken free and made it to the other side of the towpath at the top of the embankment, where Crump grabbed her, dragged her some twenty-five feet back to the edge of the canal, and pressed a gun to her back, this time issuing a fatal shot.
The police maintained that it was Crump, who, they alleged, had fled the murder scene by descending the embankment to the Potomac, where he disposed of the murder weapon, as well as the hat and the jacket on the basis of which Wiggins had identified him.
Because of their quick response in getting to the scene and cutting off all of the park’s exits, the police believed they had trapped the assailant—who they now believed was Crump.
The police claimed that Crump had tried to swim away since the river had been the only means of escape, but that the river’s dangerous current had stopped him.
So, the police speculated that Crump had taken to the woods, trying to avoid capture.
Discovering the exit at Fletcher’s Boat House blocked by police, then momentarily being spotted by police officer Roderick Sylvis, he had made his way back eastward toward Key Bridge, where he was finally encountered by Detective Warner.
Police suspicions were bolstered by the fact that Crump had lied about going fishing.
And he had lied about what he was wearing on the morning of the murder.
The circumstantial evidence, the police believe, was mounting against him.
But what wasn’t clear was how a panicked mugger, in the wake of a botched holdup, could have killed a woman with the cool dispatch of a professional assassin.
Two shots were fired, the second of which came about eight to ten seconds after the first.
Yet Wiggins had not witnessed the murder; he had only heard the shots and observed a man standing over the victim in the aftermath.
The viciousness of the attack and the calm of the assailant were hard to square with the demeanor of the frightened, meek Raymond Crump Jr.
By the end of the day, the murder weapon had not been recovered; and in its absence, the police had only Henry Wiggins’s inconclusive account to link Crump to the murder.
October 12, 1964, had finally unfolded into an Indian summer gem with a temperature that rose into the low sixties.
By the time the late afternoon sun had begun to set, every Meyer in the Washington telephone directory, save one, had been contacted.
The one remaining Meyer lived in a modest two-story house, 1523 Thirty-Fourth Street, N.W., in Georgetown.
Homicide Detective Sergeant Sam Wallace located number 1523, wedged into a narrow lot amid a cluster of houses.
The block was familiar territory to the Seventh Precinct police because they had assisted the Secret Service in protecting President-elect John F Kennedy until he moved from the neighborhood into the White House in 1960.
Ben Bradlee had been close to the senator from Massachusetts, who lived in a red brick, three-story townhouse several doors down from his own.
Increasingly certain by process of elimination that the victim was Bradlee’s sister-in-law, Wallace asked him if he would come identify the woman murdered earlier that day on the C & O Canal towpath.
He would repeat the process for Deputy Coroner Rayford the following morning in the presence of his friend and pharmacist, Harry Dalinsky.
The article identified neither Mary Meyer nor the lead murder suspect, Ray Crump Jr.
In fact, the jacket had been found along the Potomac River shoreline, not the canal.
The inaccuracy aside, it wasn’t known how or from whom the press acquired the detail about the jacket.
Its inclusion in the article, however, seemed to support the emerging narrative that had Crump ditching his jacket before trying to flee the scene by swimming away from it.
By the following morning, Tuesday, October 13, the national print and television media had latched onto the story.
In Washington, both the Evening Star and the Washington Post ran front-page stories that featured photographs of Mary Pinchot Meyer and Ray Crump, the latter shown in handcuffs at police headquarters.
Shock waves reverberated throughout the tiny Georgetown enclave in which Mary had been so vivid a presence.
With no murder weapon found, Chief Detective Art Weber returned to the towpath to direct a search that would become unprecedented in its scope and manpower.
Weber led forty Metropolitan Police officers, assisted by members of the United States Park Police, on a foot-by-foot search of the towpath area.
Park Service police also closed a canal lock upstream from the murder scene.
As the waters receded, two United States Navy scuba divers entered the canal.
Six more Navy divers entered the Potomac River adjacent to the shoreline where Crump’s jacket had been found the day before.
Harbor police probed the river with grappling hooks and dragged the bottom with magnets in an area near the site of Crump’s capture.
They found a brimmed golf cap at the water’s edge in the area where Crump had said he’d been fishing.
The FBI Crime Lab would later link a single hair found on the cap to Crump.
Detective Weber was buoyed by the find and felt certain that Ray Crump must have also disposed of the gun in that vicinity.
The searches ended at dusk and resumed the following morning, “when we returned with more men,” Weber recalled.
But two days of intense searching still did not produce the.-caliber pistol that had ended the life of Mary Meyer.
In the absence of a murder weapon and with the attempted robbery theory seeming less likely, the police next considered sexual assault as the motive.
This report, illegally withheld from Crump’s defense attorneys for nearly nine months, was finally produced for the defense at the time of the trial in July 1965.
Had it been available subsequent to October 16, when it was first delivered to police, Ray Crump Jr. would likely have been released for lack of evidence.
In fact, the police had no real evidence against Ray Crump at all, other than his being in the vicinity of the crime.
There was no blood, hair, semen, saliva, urine, or fibers from Ray Crump’s clothing—no forensic evidence whatsoever— that linked Crump to Mary Meyer or the murder scene.
Given the quantity of blood found at the scene and on the victim, it seemed unlikely that Crump—had he administered the gunshots that killed her—would have escaped without a single drop of her blood on his skin or clothing.
It also seemed unlikely that Ray Crump, shorter than Mary Meyer and weighing not much more than she, would have been able to drag her twenty-five feet across the towpath in the midst of an intense struggle.
To be sure, Crump had denied wearing the Windbreaker and golf cap, and he had lied about going fishing the morning of the murder—both of which had severely damaged his credibility.
But without a murder weapon and any forensic evidence linking him to the crime, police lacked sufficient evidence to hold him.
Nonetheless, despite this evidentiary void, it seemed as if Crump’s fate was being quickly sealed.
The morning after the murder—October 13—the case against Ray Crump received an unexpected boost.
While Detective Crooke was delivering evidence to the FBI Crime Lab, a United States Army lieutenant named William L Mitchell arrived at police headquarters.
Introducing himself to Captain George R Donahue of the Homicide Squad, Mitchell said that he had read about the woman’s murder that morning and believed that he had passed her while running on the towpath the day before.
Stationed nearby at the Pentagon, Mitchell explained, he ran on the towpath most days at lunchtime.
According to police, Mitchell “described in detail the clothes worn by Mrs.
He said she was crossing the narrow wooden footbridge, walking west “away from Key Bridge,” when he had come to a complete stop to allow her to cross before him.
About two hundred yards later, he said, he passed “a Negro male” wearing a dark cap and a light-colored Windbreaker jacket with dark trousers and dark shoes.
The clothing description was almost identical to that given by Henry Wiggins in his recollection of the man he had seen standing over the dead body at the murder scene, noted the Evening Star two days after the murder.
Meyer’s apparel and that of the man he saw following her,” said a reporter for the Washington Daily News.
Mitchell’s account, however, left a few details unexplained, and the police didn’t seem to want to consider them.
And if Ray Crump had been “two hundred yards” behind Mary only a few minutes before the crime was committed more than a tenth of a mile away, after Mitchell passed him, he would have had to run with the strongest of intention to subdue Mary by the time Henry Wiggins claimed to have seen him standing over the body.
However foreboding, Mitchell’s intrusion into the landscape boded ill for the poor, black day laborer Ray Crump.
His account was enough to convict Crump in the minds of police, the public, and the media.
The archetypical racial subtext of a downtrodden black man sexually assaulting an aristocratic white woman had immediately ignited the subliminal racial bigotry of Washington’s elite corridors of power.
He was also white, and like it or not, his statement—and credibility—carried more weight than that of a black tow truck driver named Henry Wiggins Jr., though it further legitimized Wiggins’s account as well.
With no other leads, and certainly no other suspects, Mitchell’s and Wiggins’s statements taken together were enough to support a murder charge against Ray Crump, regardless of the dearth of real evidence.
The burial service took place at 2:00 pM. in Bethlehem Chapel on the lower level of the church.
It was the same place that Mary had chosen for the funeral of her nine-year-old son Michael in December 1956.
After the funeral, Mary Pinchot Meyer was laid to rest next to son Michael on a ridge at the Pinchot family burial plot in the Milford, Pennsylvania, cemetery, just a short distance from her family’s estate, Grey Towers.
The previous year, the Pinchot family had donated a portion of their estate to the United States Forest Service.
Mary, along with her sister and other family members, had accompanied President Kennedy to Grey Towers for the dedication on September 24, 1963, of the Pinchot Institute for Conservation.
Publicly, the event had celebrated the environmentally conscious pioneering work of Mary’s uncle Gifford Pinchot, but privately, the furtive glances between Mary and Jack that day marked a turning point for the secret lovers and their mission together.
The unprecedented speed with which the treaty had been negotiated during the summer of 1963 was due in large part to his Soviet counterpart, Nikita Khrushchev.
Kennedy and Khrushchev had become secret partners in the pursuit of world peace; both wanted to bring the Cold War to an end.
The significance of the treaty ratification that day was not lost on Mary.
Though there was no possibility of a public declaration of love, the two secret lovers had exchanged smiles and small nods on hearing the news from Washington that day.
But at her funeral a year later, among the elite of Washington who filled the pews—their presence a testament to her social standing and appeal—very few knew how extensive Mary’s influence had been.
The mourners included historian and presidential insider Arthur Schlesinger Jr.; journalist Theodore White; former presidential assistant McGeorge Bundy; Richard Helms, the CIA’s deputy director for plans; Katharine Graham, owner of the Washington Post; and Madame Hervé Alphand, wife of the popular French ambassador.
Also present was journalist Charlie Bartlett, a Yale classmate of Cord Meyer’s and a very close friend of President Kennedy’s, and his wife, Martha.
But Jacqueline Kennedy, flaunted as “a close friend” of Mary Meyer’s, did not attend.
Several of Mary’s Vassar College classmates were also in attendance, including Scottie Fitzgerald Lanahan, the daughter of F Scott Fitzgerald; my mother, Mary Draper Janney, and my father, Wistar Janney; and journalist Anne Chamberlin, also a dear friend to Mary.
Two of the four pallbearers—William Walton and Kenneth Noland— were artists, like Mary herself.
He was a close, discreet confidante to both Jack and Bobby Kennedy, as well as to Jackie.
Divorced, and reportedly more inclined to the same sex, Walton had functioned as Mary’s escort to many White House social functions where she and Jack often captured a few intimate, stolen moments together.
Ken Noland had been a progenitor of the Washington Color School of art in the late 1950s.
He and Mary had been intimately involved immediately after her separation and divorce from Cord.
Of course, the mercurial, almost emaciated and ghostlike presence of James Jesus Angleton wasn’t at all surprising.
A close friend of Cord’s since Yale, their friendship had endured and deepened as CIA colleagues.
Angleton’s outward proclivities and hobbies—photography, poetry, orchid growing, and flyfishing, including designing and crafting his own fishing lures—suggested a modern-day Renaissance man of considerable talent and interest.
She appreciated what appeared to be a man of unusual complexity and knowledge—so much so, in fact, that Jim Angleton had been designated as the godfather to the three Meyer children.
But Mary’s close friendship with Angleton’s wife, Cicely, had long ago made her aware of the shadows that lurked beneath Jim’s exterior, nurtured by the endless rivers of gin and bourbon that spawned a kind of paranoia that demanded control and domination.
Nonetheless, in 1964 Angleton was at the top of his game, and had already become something of a legend.
Angleton’s reputation within the world of intelligence would remain epic during his entire life, and would extend even after his death in 1987.
No one at Mary’s funeral, however—except Angleton’s titular boss, Richard Helms, and possibly one or two other Agency honchos— was aware that with the recently released Warren Report, Jim Angleton and his former chief, Allen Dulles , had just masterminded possibly the greatest cover-up in American history.
Mary Meyer had come to disdain the work of the intelligence establishment.
It was one of the reasons why she had finally initiated her divorce from Cord.
In 1951, Cord had succumbed to the recruiting tactics of Allen Dulles, seeing no possibility for the fledgling United World Federalists to keep the tenuous peace in an emerging Cold War.
Seduced into betraying the vision that had originally united Mary with him in 1945, Cord’s entrance into the CIA would eventually foreshadow a rupture in their union that would never heal.
The Dulles inner circle soon surrounded Mary’s life, complete with its lordly Ivy League sense of entitlement.
No law, and certainly no moral compass, would be allowed to stand in the way of American hegemony, she soon learned.
Her fights and pleadings with the man to whom she had pledged her deepest trust were to no avail.
Mary’s eventual escape in 1957, followed by divorce a year later, had been final, or so she thought.
Like Cord Meyer and so many others who joined the CIA in its infancy, Wistar Janney was part of an idealistic group of World War II veterans that never again wanted to see the possibility of a world at war.
A strong, centralized post-World War II intelligence apparatus seemed like an almost ideal solution, and a good career for a group of men who were already, by birth, financially well endowed and secure.
The youngest of six children of a wealthy, prominent investment banker, my father was raised in Bryn Mawr on Philadelphia’s Main Line.
His given name at birth, resembling an almost royal title, was Frederick Wistar Morris Janney.
Educated at Phillips Exeter Academy, Wistar Janney graduated from Princeton in 1941.
About to be drafted, he enlisted in the Navy to become a naval aviator, allegedly after viewing the movie Flight Command, starring Robert Taylor—in addition to having had yet another fight with his aloof, investment banker father.
Piloting a Grumman Avenger torpedo bomber off the deck of an aircraft carrier in the Pacific theater, Wistar was not expected to survive by anyone in his family, including his father.
He had not had the chance to reconcile with his father, who died unexpectedly just a few days before the largest naval battle in history.
The father-son duo had remained estranged, in spite of the fact that Wistar’s father—Walter Coggeshall Janney—knew his time was near.
At the end of the summer of 1944, “Lord of the Manor” Walter elected to return to Bryn Mawr from his summer estate on Cape Cod in the station wagon driven by his caretaker-gardener John Martin, not in his customary chauffeur-driven Packard.
Midway across the Bourne Bridge, which connected Cape Cod to the mainland, he ordered Martin to stop the car, whereupon he got out and took one last gaze at the Cape Cod panorama where his family and beloved progeny had, since the late 1920s, thrived amid the bounty and fortune he had amassed.
At that moment, he told Martin that he would not live through another winter.
The father-son schism, however, remained—passing through invisible ethers into the next generation and beyond.
Wistar Janney made sure that Eddie Larkin would be awarded the Navy Cross posthumously.
Finally emerging victorious from battle, Janney himself came home with his own, and a slew of other medals.
Every workday, he proudly wore his Navy Cross pin on his suit jacket’s left lapel, sometimes along with his naval aviator necktie.
Awarded one of Yale’s first master of arts in Russian area studies in 1948, my father was soon recruited into the CIA by Allen Dulles, also a Princeton graduate.
Technically, he was for many years a Soviet analyst in the Agency’s Office of Current Intelligence , but it wasn’t ever clear what Wistar’s job actually entailed.
More time would pass before I finally began to understand what that might mean.
At Mary’s funeral, Wistar’s pallbearer assignment had been requested by Cord in his hour of need.
Wistar himself was never fond of Mary, particularly after she jettisoned Cord, devastating him, by all accounts.
Moreover, what infuriated Wistar even more was the fact that over the years Mary had become increasingly outspoken about her displeasure with what the CIA was doing in the world.
No other CIA wife had ever dared such public bluntness, certainly not Wistar’s.
But that hadn’t stopped Mary Meyer, even if my father’s well-oiled temper might be the kind of assault any civilized person would want to avoid.
His signature point of view was that if you didn’t work for the Agency, you really didn’t know anything; furthermore, “opinions were like assholes—everyone had one,” he would say as one of his favored retorts.
Cord, habitually imperious, sobbed uncharacteristically throughout the ceremony.
Comforted by his CIA colleagues, as well as by Mary’s mother, Ruth Pickering Pinchot, Cord was the recipient of a magnanimous show of support that included Ben and Tony Bradlee, Mary’s younger sister and only sibling.
After the funeral, he would “advise” his two remaining sons that there were to be no more tears over the loss of their mother.
A close friend of both Ben Bradlee and Cord Meyer, the bishop, like Cord himself, had gone to St.
Paul’s School, in Concord, New Hampshire, and then Yale, graduating in the class of 1941, a year and a half ahead of Cord.
She and Cord and my first wife and I were very close friends when Cord came back from overseas the same time I did, around the time they were married.
I didn’t see much of Mary in later years, so I wasn’t close to her,” he recalled.
But he could not answer the question that no doubt plagued many of those in attendance, although not all of them.
Perhaps at the time publicly oblivious, the suffragan bishop wasn’t about to speak to any “pattern,” invisible or not, among those who thought it possible to play God for the purposes of a well-ordered world.
While Moore, like most Americans, may have been initially seduced into believing that Lee Harvey Oswald had killed the president, a few years later his personal awakening would impel him to champion civil rights for African Americans, stridently oppose the Vietnam War, and ordain an openly gay woman as a priest in the Episcopal Church.
Moore’s highest priority, he said, was “my relationship with the Pinchot family, which goes back to my parents.
But even in the elite, affluent neighborhoods of Georgetown, home to many of Washington’s global power brokers, the rumbling of rumors had already begun.
Bishop Moore had not intended to presume guilt on the part of Ray Crump Jr.
Moore’s uncertainty, however, even in 1991, nearly thirty years after the murder took place, was not unique.
There were a number of facts —and stories—that didn’t add up, and were even contradictory, with more to come, leaving loose ends that inevitably “bothered” a lot of people, including me.
The answers to these questions, depending on whom you ask, are riddled with confusion and ambiguity that persist to this day.
The truth—elusive though it has been—about when and how Mary’s friends and family learned of her death is part of the key to unraveling the mystery of who killed her, and why.
The details of the story had been given to the Enquirer by James Truitt, a close friend of Mary’s , who had been a vice president of the Washington Post before he was abruptly fired by Ben Bradlee in 1969.
The Enquirer story was strangely, even remarkably, well-documented, because Mary Meyer had confided her affair with President Kennedy to her friends, the Truitts.
Jim Truitt, a seasoned journalist himself, had kept a record of everything Mary had shared with him.
The Enquirer exposé revealed the fact that Mary had been keeping a diary of her affair, as well as the fact that she and the president had smoked marijuana in the First Family’s residence in the White House.
It also disclosed, for the first time, the fact that following her death, Mary’s diary was found by her sister, Tony, in Mary’s studio, and that this diary—labeled by Mary’s closest intimates as just an “artist’s sketchbook”—along with “several love letters” from JFK and other “private papers” belonging to Mary, had been given to the CIA’s counterintelligence chief Jim Angleton to be burned, which he never did.
The Enquirer story became an overnight bombshell that rocked Washington, already roiling and swirling through post-Watergate congressional hearings on illegal CIA activities, as well as further investigation into the Kennedy assassination.
Rightly sensing that there might be more to this story, Yale-educated journalist Ron Rosenbaum and his colleague Phillip Nobile went to work interviewing a number of principals close to Mary Meyer, including Jim Angleton and Ben and Tony Bradlee, as well as continuing to draw upon the input of Jim Truitt.
In July, several months after the National Enquirer article appeared, Nobile and Rosenbaum published “The Curious Aftermath of JFK’s Best and Brightest Affair” in the investigative weekly magazine New Times.
The article has remained a seminal account of what allegedly took place during the immediate aftermath of the murder.
The two journalists spent considerable time researching and interviewing their article, finally conceding the story was “immensely complex,” and incomplete, primarily because many of Mary’s friends and relatives “understandably drew back from the public controversy.
At some point during the afternoon of October 12, Cicely Angleton allegedly heard a radio bulletin about a murder on the C & O canal towpath.
It is not known what level of detail the bulletin included—perhaps only that the victim was a middle-aged white female —but the location of the murder seemed enough to supposedly cause Cicely to fear the worst for her friend, who she knew was in the habit of daily walks on the towpath.
Jim Angleton was in “a big conference at CIA headquarters” when his wife’s urgent call reached him.
More than three decades later, Cicely Angleton would be the only close woman friend of Mary Meyer willing to talk with author Nina Burleigh, whose book, A Very Private Woman, was published in 1998.
In interviews with Burleigh, it appeared that Cicely never mentioned the alleged radio bulletin on the day of Mary’s murder—nor her alleged panicked call to her husband at CIA headquarters.
Angleton might have forgotten such a detail, and that Burleigh—who acknowledged Rosenbaum’s groundbreaking work—would not have asked her about it.
In addition, it also appears that Cicely Angleton may have revealed another layer of her husband’s deceit, which her three children would inadvertently make public after their mother’s death in the fall of 2011.
Even more perplexing, and certainly no less disturbing, was Ben Bradlee’s account of who first learned the tragic news about Mary Meyer.
More than thirty years after her murder, and twenty years after being interviewed by Rosenbaum and Nobile , Bradlee finally offered his own answer to the question of who first learned about the murder.
In his 1995 memoir A Good Life, the former executive editor of the Washington Post wrote that “t was just after lunch” on the day of the murder when he received a telephone call from “my friend,” asking if he had been listening to the radio—a reference, presumably, to the broadcast bulletin that Cicely Angleton claimed had alarmed her.
At the time of this call —""just after lunch,” wrote Bradlee—Mary had been dead for less than two hours, but the police still didn’t know her identity.
Until he wrote about it in 1995, Bradlee had never publicly mentioned the phone call, nor was this call ever referenced in any police report, or elicited in Bradlee’s testimony at Mary’s murder trial in July 1965.
Furthermore, while Bradlee revealed the identity of the caller in his 1995 memoir, a fact that will later be discussed in some detail, he neglected to mention, or omitted deliberately, that his caller “friend” was a career, high-ranking CIA official.
Bradlee has never said why he waited more than thirty years to reveal the mysterious phone call.
By the time Bradlee published A Good Life in 1995, his CIA friend—the man who had first alerted him on the day of Mary’s murder—had died.
This distinction is critical, and it goes to the heart of the mystery surrounding Mary Meyer’s murder.
The CIA caller’s suggestion that something might have happened to Mary Meyer was plausible enough to send Bradlee rushing home to prepare his family for the possibility that the dead woman might, in fact, be his wife’s sister.
But it would not be until that evening— sometime before six, in Bradlee’s recollection—that the police would knock on his door to inform him that the dead woman might be Mary.
It was only then, shortly before six, that Bradlee went to the morgue to identify Mary’s body.
According to the 1976 Rosenbaum and Nobile account, Jim and Cicely Angleton arrived at Mary Meyer’s house the evening of her murder to pick her up on their way to a Reed Whittemore poetry reading.
It wasn’t clear whether Mary’s house was locked, or whether, and how, the Angletons gained entry at that time.
According to Angleton, it was at his wife’s urging that he called Mary’s answering service—perhaps from inside Mary’s house, perhaps from another location; it was never known.
Either way, Rosenbaum and Nobile’s article claims that it was from Mary Meyer’s answering service that Jim Angleton first learned that she was dead.
The Angletons then went straight from Mary’s house to Ben and Tony Bradlee’s house where, according to Rosenbaum, they gave their condolences and offered to help with funeral arrangements.
Ben Bradlee returned home that evening after identifying Mary’s body at the D.C. morgue.
As he recalled in 1995, the Bradlee house was filling up with friends, “the phones rang, the doorbell buzzed.
She and her husband, Newsweek journalist James Truitt, had moved to Tokyo in early 1964.
As already noted, Anne and her husband had been well aware of Mary’s relationship with the president, because Mary had confided to both of them about the affair.
A number of other people in Jack Kennedy’s intimate circle knew about the relationship as well, but Ben Bradlee, once again, couldn’t seem to get his story straight.
Anne Truitt’s reason for calling the Bradlees wasn’t only to offer sympathy.
According to Bradlee’s 1995 account, the purpose of Truitt’s call was to inform Ben and Tony of Mary’s “private diary,” and the fact that Mary had asked her— not Jim Angleton—”if anything ever happened to me,” to take possession of her diary.
Yet, according to Rosenbaum, Anne Truitt was desperately trying to locate Jim Angleton and found him at the Bradlees, whereupon she informed him about the need to procure Mary’s diary immediately.
Mary Meyer “had entrusted to her friends James and Anne Truitt the fact of her affair with JFK and the existence of a diary recounting some of her evenings with the President,” noted Rosenbaum.
Presumably, the revelation of this detail came from Jim Truitt himself, since Anne did not make herself available to be interviewed for the 1976 Rosenbaum article.
More important, however, there was never a record or any mention of Mary Meyer herself instructing the Truitts, before they left for Tokyo, to make sure Jim Angleton took charge of her diary, should unforeseen events in her life take place.
The actual search for and discovery of Mary Meyer’s diary immediately following her murder, and the differing accounts given by the people involved, have taken on a mythology in Washington that to this day remains an impenetrable labyrinth of confusion and deceit.
Like idiot Keystone Kops, none of Mary’s closest friends and family members could even get their own stories straight.
And a fifth account, which emerged in December 2011, casts doubt on the veracity of almost every one of the principal actors in this drama.
The first account of the search for Mary’s diary came from the July 1976 Rosenbaum and Nobile New Times magazine article, just four months after the National Enquirer exposé in March.
In Rosenbaum’s version, the search took place inside Mary’s house on Saturday, October 17, five days after her murder.
It involved the Angletons, Tony Bradlee, Cord Meyer, and Anne Chamberlin.
Inside it was one of Mary’s artist sketchbooks, a number of personal papers, and “hundreds of letters” of a personal nature.
Tony Bradlee later claimed that the presence of a few vague notes written in the sketchbook—allegedly including cryptic references to an affair with the president—persuaded her that she’d found her sister’s missing diary.
The second account of the search for Mary’s diary came from Ben Bradlee’s 1995 memoir A Good Life.
There, he asked the reader to believe that an iconic journalist wouldn’t have bothered reviewing the material already published in 1976 , or even have checked his own sworn testimony in 1965 at Mary Meyer’s murder trial, before delivering to the public his final statement about one of his sister-in-law’s most intimate possessions.
According to Bradlee, he and his wife, Tony, first looked for the diary the morning after the murder—Tuesday, October 13.
Bradlee said they first went to Mary’s house that morning, where they were taken aback to find Jim Angleton already inside.
Angleton was said to have “shuffled his feet” in apparent embarrassment when he was discovered.
At that point, Bradlee claims, the three of them together looked for the diary but found nothing.
Later that same day , Bradlee wrote, he and Tony decided to search Mary’s converted brick garage studio, located in the alley behind their N Street house.
What’s stunning and fascinating about this account was that it completely contradicted Bradlee’s sworm testimony at Mary’s murder trial in 1965.
There, he testified he was inside Mary’s studio on the night of her murder—with no mention of any trouble whatsoever gaining entrance.
Presumably, this took place after Anne Truitt’s phone call from Japan alerting both Angleton and Bradlee that Mary had kept a diary of her affair with Kennedy, though Angleton was undoubtedly already aware of Mary’s diary long before her murder, as the reader will come to understand in a later chapter.
Subsequent to the death of Mary Pinchot Meyer, did you make any effort to gain entry to this studio that was occupied by Mrs.
If Mary’s actual diary was in her studio that night, it was likely stolen by Bradlee and Angleton at that time—the night of the murder—and given to Angleton for safekeeping.
This error occurs in Mr Bradlee’s account of the discovery and disposition of Mary Pinchot Meyer’s personal diary.
The fact is that Mary Meyer asked Anne Truitt to make sure that in the event of anything happening to Mary while Anne was in Japan, James Angleton take this diary into his safekeeping.
When she learned that Mary had been killed, Anne Truitt telephoned person-to-person from Tokyo for James Angleton.
She found him at Mr Bradlee’s house, where Angleton and his wife, Cicely had been asked to come following the murder.
That unidentified friend was Anne Chamberlin, still not wanting her name brought into the fray even thirty years later.
But the Angleton-Truitt letter never revealed the date of the search, though it did assert that neither Cord Meyer nor Ben Bradlee were present.
Angleton followed this instruction in part by burning the loose papers.
Some years later, he honored a request from Tony Bradlee that he deliver it to her.
According to journalist William Safire, “in the mid-1970’s” (the time when both the National Enquirer exposé and the Rosenbaum article had been published), Angleton’s spiel was that it was only his “loyal concern for the slain President’s reputation led him to search for and destroy Meyer’s diary,”“ yet he never once mentioned that Mary Meyer herself had requested him to take possession of her diary, or destroy any part of it.
Jim Angleton was a consummate, pathological liar and a master of duplicity—not only to Safire, but to everyone else—except to his close friend and colleague Cord Meyer and possibly in this instance Ben Bradlee, as the reader will eventually discover.
Anne Truitt, a friend of Tony Bradlee and Bradlee’s sister, Mary Meyer, was abroad when Meyer was killed in the District.
James and Cicely Angleton were with Ben and Tony Bradlee at the Bradlees’ home when Tony Bradlee received the call.
He burned the pages that Meyer had asked to be burned and put the rest in a safe.
Therein the diary’s “Rubik’s Cube” becomes even more mysterious, only because there were two conspiracies taking place simultaneously, both masterminded by the “Master Angler” himself—James Jesus Angleton.
It is not known how Angleton twisted the arm of Anne Truitt to declare that on the night of Mary’s murder she should call the Bradlees and inform them that such a diary existed and that Mary had told her to make sure Angleton took charge of it, should anything happen to her.
Angleton’s ostensible concern was to protect the reputation of both President Kennedy and Mary Meyer, and the emerging myth of Camelot.
The other women—Cicely Angleton, Tony Bradlee, and Anne Chamberlin— then fell in line, wanting to protect their dear friend Mary and the fallen president.
There, Truitt revealed to the Enquirer that Mary and Jack had, in fact, smoked marijuana in the White House residence in July 1962.
Whether the two together went on to share a psychedelic journey with a hallucinogen such as LSD or psilocybin will be discussed in a later chapter.
None of the women in this caper, however, was ever aware of the fact that Jim Angleton had already absconded with Mary’s real diary on the night of her murder, or what the diary actually contained.
The only people who knew the diary’s contents immediately following the murder were Jim Angleton and Cord Meyer, the two CIA honchos, though Ben Bradlee certainly knew of its existence if it was retrieved from Mary’s studio on the night of the murder.
Whether Bradlee actually read the real diary in its entirety isn’t known.
Later on, as will be discussed subsequently, it appears Angleton shared the diary’s contents with at least one other CIA colleague and one other individual.
Ana so the charade for the search for Mary’s diary became a camouflage and deflection for something more sinister.
Subsequent to the March 1976 National Enquirer bombshell, Tony Bradlee played down the contents of her sister’s sketchbook, purported to be her diary, as inconsequential.
By all accounts, Mary’s artist sketchbook had allegedly been discovered by Tony Bradlee, though it’s not known exactly when—possibly on Tuesday, October 13, the day after Mary’s murder, or possibly not until Saturday, October 17.
It was kind of a loose leaf book, nothing like Ben’s book he was taking things down in, just a woman’s notes about what she had been doing.
Sometime before 2004, Tony Bradlee also told author Sally Bedell Smith that “everyone thought it was full of all kinds of gossip which it wasn’t.
Even more ludicrous, the principals in this caper couldn’t keep their stories straight as to what the sketchbook actually contained.
Every now and then in a little unused corner of a page, there would be writings.
Yet Bradlee, too, never mentioned anything about Mary’s request that Angleton burn designated pages of the diary upon her death.
Anne Truitt’s final reflections about “Mary’s sketchbook” may have revealed some of her confusion about what had taken place.
Having been in Japan when Mary was murdered, it appears she only saw the sketchbook right before it was bumed by Tony Bradlee in 1976.
She told Smith that it “consisted mostly of jottings about Mary’s art, and paint swatches on otherwise blank pages.
Even more revealing, Anne Truitt was “just floored,” she said, about its lack of details.
Her statement implied that sometime between March and July of 1976, someone—or possibly a group of people—decided that the updated story to be given to the public would now include Angleton returning the sketchbook to Tony, who would then burn it in her fireplace in Anne’s presence.
It appeared that Tony made the decision unilaterally, but there was never any confirmation as to how this decision was made, who exactly made it, or when it occurred.
And, again, Anne Truitt never said anything about Mary’s alleged specific request that Angleton burn particular diary pages.
Finally, for some reason it has appeared that Mary’s close friend Anne Chamberlin couldn’t stand the heat.
She didn’t want any part of it, and she didn’t want her name mentioned in any subsequent account.
Anne Chamberlin left Washington abruptly after Mary’s murder and fled to Maine.
Twenty-five years later, in the late 1980s, she spoke to author Leo Damore, then went completely silent after Damore’s “suicide” in 1995.
Chamberlin’s public, long-standing “omerta pledge” of silence has always aroused suspicion.
Whatever she knew, she took with her to her death on the last day of 2011, save for what she shared with author Leo Damore, which the reader will come to know in a future chapter.
Mary Meyer was a pensive, complex individual who had a lifelong penchant for serious reflection in written form.
Having been a professional journalist for several years right after college, and having kept an extensive diary at the time of her half-sister Rosamund’s 1938 suicide as well as a chronicle of her father’s grief and mental deterioration, she had long embraced the tool of journal writing and the outlet it provided, particularly during times of crisis and duress.
Moreover, during her marriage to Cord, she was well aware of her husband’s diary, and sometimes even invaded it to write comments on what he had written when she was unable to reach him any other way.
Obviously, Mary knew the value of keeping a separate, special notebook for the pursuit of deeper reflection.
But her artist sketchbooks were just that—sketchbooks that were clearly devoted to the details of her pursuits as a painter with a few notes to herself that she probably intended to reflect upon in more depth at a later time.
Furthermore, she had confided to both Anne and Jim Truitt in 1962 that she was having an affair with the president.
Before the Truitts left for Japan, she had told them that she was keeping a diary and that she wanted that diary safeguarded in the event of her demise so that her eldest son, Quentin, could read it when he turned twenty-one.
Jim Truitt, in turn, kept a diary-journal of his own about everything that Mary had shared with him.
Curiously, Truitt’s journal and “his 30 years of carefully kept records,” according to his widow Evelyn Patterson Truitt, were stolen right after his 1981 death, an apparent suicide.
The missing papers, of course, included Jim Truitt’s own documentation of Mary Meyer’s affair with the president.
Angleton had earlier absconded with the personal papers of his colleague Winston Scott, the Mexican CIA station chief, two days after Scott’s suspicious death in 1971.
Significantly, Scott’s papers included classified documents, tapes, photographs, and a manuscript, most of which not only contradicted the findings of the Warren Commission, but further revealed Lee Harvey Oswald’s connections in Mexico—things that the CIA wanted nobody to know about.
However overwhelmed she had felt by the vast implications of what had occurred in Dallas, not only for herself, but for the world at large, her temperament and moral rectitude demanded that at the very least she attempt to make sense of it all.
Neither a recluse nor one to be intimidated by authority, Mary wanted to understand what had occurred.
The sheer magnitude of Jack’s assassination had catapulted her through endless shock waves, eventually forcing her to recognize the enormity of what had occurred—not only the events in Dallas, but the subsequent cover-up taking place right before her eyes.
This cover-up, in fact, is the subject of a later chapter of this book.
The “diary as MacGuffin” in this piece of history doesn’t need any Hollywood embellishment; the story is stranger than fiction, only because it’s real.
Yet no one has managed to put together the factual sequence of events that would unravel the mystery that has enshrouded this caper for nearly fifty years.
One of the most significant details in the 1976 Rosenbaum and Nobile article may have even eluded its own authors.
Mary was “accustomed to leaving her diary in the bookcase in her bedroom,” Rosenbaum noted.
Perhaps Angleton wanted to be seen searching for the diary so that no one would suspect that it was already in his possession.
But more likely, as the reader will come to understand, Mary’s actual diary was highly incriminating of Angleton himself and the CIA’s role in orchestrating what had occurred in Dallas.
Determined to erase as much as possible from the last years of Mary Meyer’s life, Angleton wanted to take into his possession and eliminate any other documents, papers, letters, or personal effects that might further jeopardize the Warren Report and the public’s acceptance of Lee Harvey Oswald’s guilt.
In a situation such as this, the unwritten rule of any CIA undercover operation is that the fewer people in the know, the better; compartmentalization is an absolute necessity—as long as it’s maintained, and the story is kept straight.
The only people who really knew what was taking place were the mastermind himself, Jim Angleton, his colleague Cord Meyer, and to one extent or another Ben Bradlee.
What incriminated Bradlee, as will be further detailed later, was that he never once revealed during the trial the telephone call from his “friend”—the career high-ranking CIA official—that came “just after lunch,” less than two hours after Mary’s unidentified corpse lay sprawled on the C & O Canal towpath.
Instead, he allowed the court to believe that it was only when Sergeant Sam Wallace of the D.C. police arrived at his house shortly before six that evening that he first became aware of his sister-in-law’s demise.
No one in this cesspool’s morass could ever be trusted, but it appears some part of the deceit was passed down to some of participants’ children.
After Anne Truitt’s death in 2004, I talked with her daughter Alexandra in the latter part of 2005.
When I introduced myself and told her of my book project, Alexandra was momentarily hopeful that I might be taking a different slant from author Nina Burleigh’s.
Intriguingly, she made it clear that subsequent to Mary Meyer’s death she had been “coached” that the subject of Mary’s murder was taboo.
Alexandra became eager to know what I had discovered, but I wouldn’t divulge any information over the phone.
I then attempted to defend some of Burleigh’s early descriptions of the Pinchot estate, Grey Towers, and their life in Milford, Pennsylvania—if only to keep our conversation going.
Tn late 1990, author Leo Damore conducted a two-hour face-to-face recorded interview with Timothy Leary, which will be discussed in some detail in a later chapter.
During the interview, he told Leary that Mary’s real diary still existed and he had discovered its whereabouts.
Damore had sometimes cryptically referred to Mary’s diary as “the Hope Diamond” of the Kennedy assassination, but he guarded the fact that he had come into possession of it and only finally shared this bit of information with his attorney at the end of March in 1993.
Meanwhile, Cord Meyer would maintain that Jim Angleton was a “very close friend of ours, and he successfully dealt with a diary that might have been embarrassing, assured that it didn’t come out.
IWO INO Cicely Angleton twice declined to be interviewed for this book.
Truth itself becomes suspicious by being put into that polluted vehicle.
Her son, twenty-five-year-old Raymond Crump Jr., was in police custody, charged with committing the crime.
Reverend Brown spoke to Martha Crump that day not only of matters spiritual, but of matters practical as well.
Something had to be done to help “Mr Ray,” whom he believed had been wrongly accused.
Like most black churches in the 1960s, Second Baptist was a stronghold in its community, a spiritual refuge with a social conscience.
Community outreach, drug and alcohol abuse counseling, care for the elderly, housing assistance— Second Baptist offered guidance that went beyond tending to the souls of the faithful.
The church had a well-established record of fighting racebased discrimination and social injustice.
The civil rights movement of the 1960s owed much to churches like Second Baptist, where members gathered to stoke the causes of equal and fair treatment under the law.
The black church functioned independent of white interference— that is, until the churches became centers of organized activism.
When that occurred, they also became targets for those who would rather see the churches burn than have their congregations achieve equality.
Across the American south, black churches were being firebombed, members of their faithful lynched.
Shortly after Ray Crump’s arrest, Reverend Brown had been trying, through ministry channels, to reach attorney Dovey Johnson Roundtree, someone he often referred to as a “righteous lawyer” and something of a legend already in the black community.
In addition to being a “righteous lawyer,” Roundtree was also a highly regarded associate minister of the Allen Chapel African Methodist Episcopal Church, and a sought-after public speaker.
She was an attractive, petite woman with delicate features, and a complexion that belied her fifty years.
The only hints of her age were the strands of gray that streaked her hair.
Roundtree had been raised with a fierce understanding of—and belief in— justice.
Dovey Roundtree had seen up close the failings and abuses of power in an American legal system rife with racism.
Born Dovey Mae Johnson on April 17, 1914, in Charlotte, North Carolina, she never forgot the night her grandmother, Rachel Bryant Graham, pushed her, her mother, and her sisters under the kitchen table as members of the Ku Klux Klan approached.
Grandma Rachel extinguished the kerosene lamp, closed all the shutters, and braced her daughter and crying grandchildren for the worst.
Like an approaching freight train, howling men on horseback galloped past their house.
Grandma Rachel clutched a broom in case she needed a weapon, and her husband, the Reverend Clyde L Graham, kept vigil through the slats of a shuttered window.
After Dovey’s father died during the influenza epidemic of 1919, Grandma Rachel brought her daughter’s family to live with her and her husband in the parsonage attached to the African Methodist Episcopal Zion Church, where he pastored.
To the white bankers in Charlotte, Rachel Graham was just the Negro woman who did their laundry and ironed their shirts.
While Grandpa Clyde took cover from summer thunderstorms, Grandma Rachel went out to the front porch to shake her fist at the lightning.
The way she saw it, it was Mother Nature who was scaring her family, and that just wouldn’t do.
The inquisitive little girl wanted to see how the driver steered the vehicle and punched the tickets, so she took the seat behind him.
Grandma Rachel took her granddaughter by the hand, yanked the stop cord, and, once descended, walked with her the entire way into town and back again.
They listened by the light of the kerosene lamp, the family Bible open in front of Grandpa Clyde.
During the years of struggle that followed, Dovey never forgot her grandmother’s words that night.
Many years earlier, her grandmother had had a galvanizing moment of her own.
When she was still a girl, Rachel had been attacked by the white overseer of a Greensboro farm where her parents had been slaves.
The broken bones in Rachel’s feet never set correctly, and every night after that, she had had to soak her feet and massage them with a homemade salve of mutton tallow and turpentine, just to be able to endure the discomfort of wearing shoes.
Dovey listened carefully to what her grandmother told her, and she heard loud and clear that the path forward was one of education.
Rachel had regaled her grandchildren with stories of her friend, author and educator Mary McLeod Bethune, who had worked her way from the cotton fields of South Carolina to found a black women’s college in Florida.
She would go on, during the 1930s, to be appointed by President Franklin D Roosevelt as special adviser for minority affairs and director of African American Affairs in the National Youth Administration.
When Dovey was in seventh grade, Mary McLeod Bethune came to speak at Charlotte’s Emancipation Day celebration.
Dovey Mae Johnson attended Spelman College, where she worked three jobs, juggled majors in English and biology to prepare her for the medical career she envisioned, and edited the school newspaper.
While there, she met Bill Roundtree, a student at Morehouse College, Spelman’s brother school.
The job blew open the young woman’s horizons, introducing her to the day’s leaders, including First Lady Eleanor Roosevelt.
Despite her initial ambivalence, Dovey distinguished herself in the fight for a racially integrated WAAC regiment.
The experience set her on a path to pursuing a career in justice and legal protection for those who needed it most.
As her biographer, Katie McCabe, wrote of Dovey’s passion for the law, “There was a simplicity about it, and an intricacy, and a logic.
In addition to her regular law courses, Dovey did legal research for the NAACP legal team, which was headed by future Supreme Court justice Thurgood Marshall.
She passed the D.C. bar exam in December 1950 and was sworn in a few months later, in April 1951.
In the ten years during which Dovey practiced with her law partner, Julius Robertson, before his untimely death in 1961, the two established a thriving practice.
After Robertson’s death, Dovey, who had led the vanguard of women ordained to the ministry in African Methodist Episcopal Church that same year, went on to make a name for herself as a one-woman legal aid society and a force to be reckoned with.
By the fall of 1964, Dovey Roundtree was a sought-after defense attorney.
So when Reverend Brown contacted her in October 1964 and asked if he could bring a member of his church to her office, attorney Dovey Roundtree had already formed an opinion about the “Towpath Murder” from the front-page newspaper accounts that she had read.
She had read the newspaper reports that a tow truck driver near the scene, Henry Wiggins, had identified Ray Crump as the man standing over the corpse.
She had also read about the jogger, Lieutenant William L Mitchell, who had come forward the next day and told police he’d seen a black man dressed like the man Wiggins had described, trailing Mary Meyer as she walked along the canal.
She was afraid there was going to be a killing in the D.C. jail—which eventually became one of my concerns.
He was in the D.C. jail, and they had predominately white guards in those days.
On her very first trip to the D C. jail to meet Ray Crump, Dovey found him to be a diminutive little man.
She asked him to try to remember everything he did on the day of the murder.
But Crump couldn’t remember very much, and what he did remember he had a hard time expressing.
Crump had had a fight with his wife, Helena, that morning and he had refused to go to work.
Instead, he had met up with a girlfriend named Vivian, whose last name was never made public.
Both Crump and his mother, Martha, had finally offered that last bit of information, but Ray hadn’t wanted to reveal his paramour’s identity for fear of repercussions with his wife and the woman’s husband.
The couple stopped to buy beer, a half pint of whiskey, a bag of potato chips, and some cigarettes.
The next thing he knew he was trying to get himself together and he slipped and fell into the water.
Crump said he heard something ‘like the backfire of a car,’ but he paid no attention to it.
I was trying to get out of there and I couldn’t get myself together,” she remembered him responding.
His brother Jimmy had22 rifle because Jimmy used to go hunting, but not Crump.
He had never owned a gun and wouldn’t have one with five children in his house, Roundtree recalled.
Convicted of shoplifting, he’d been sentenced to sixty days in jail, a substantial sentence for a first offense.
And it may well have been, according to what Ray told me, that he was drinking at the time.
And again, Roundtree tried to explain that a woman had been murdered and that he had been arrested for the crime.
He was withdrawing and was increasingly unable to help with his own defense.
Roundtree believed that Crump didn’t have the temperament to be a killer.
He was of such meekness, I came to know him to be frightened half out of his wits in fear of his life.
But Crump had lied to police about going fishing, and he had lied again about what he had been wearing the day that he was apprehended.
Trying to conceal his affair with Vivian, he had put himself in jeopardy with police.
For Roundtree, the immediate priority was to find Vivian, his only alibi.
She did so with the assistance of her private investigator, Purcell Moore.
But Vivian made it clear from the outset she didn’t appreciate Dovey Roundtree’s out-of-the blue telephone call to her home.
Vivian did, however, corroborate Ray Crump’s story—right down to the details about the beer, potato chips, whiskey, and cigarettes.
They had walked out the towpath to a spot adjacent to the Potomac River, she told Roundtree.
But unfortunately, like Crump, Vivian feared the repercussions of exposing her extramarital affair—she believed her husband might kill her if he learned of it.
Only after Roundtree explained that Crump would likely face the death penalty did Vivian agree to sign an affidavit verifying she’d been with Crump the entire morning of the day of the murder, and that he had carried no gun.
But without an appearance at trial, the affidavit was all but worthless.
Crump’s fabrications to police would then form the only cornerstone of the government’s case against him.
When Ray Crump was moved to a cellblock with other prisoners, guards taunted him at night.
Dovey Roundtree believed the guards were trying to extract a confession from Crump.
Convinced of Ray Crump’s innocence, Roundtree contacted the two attorneys in the Public Defender’s Office of the Legal Aid Society who had been representing him—George Peter Lamb and Ted O’ Neill.
Even before her formal court appearance on Crump’s behalf on October 28, Roundtree had begun her own investigation.
She learned that her client-to-be was a high school dropout who had married at seventeen.
A father of five, Crump had sustained injuries in a serious automobile accident a few years earlier, and then had been beaten up and robbed by a gang in 1962.
During his convalescence from both events, he had become addicted to alcohol.
He was dirt poor—he didn’t have a bank account and didn’t own stocks, bonds, real estate, a car, or other valuable property, nor did his wife, parents, or any other person who might be able to assist him in paying the costs of his defense.
Roundtree decided to visit Georgetown, “to familiarize myself with that community,” she explained years later.
They were still around but I had no conversation with them, though I’m sure one of the police officers recognized me, knew who I was.
Retracing Mary Meyer’s route on the day of her murder, Roundtree approached the intersection of 34th and M Streets at the base of the steep hill, where she came upon Dixie Liquors, a small package store adjacent to Key Bridge, known at the time for selling alcohol to the underage well-to-do children of Northwest Washington.
Turning west on Prospect Place, Roundtree approached the picturesque bridge over the C & O Canal to the towpath.
She crossed the bridge and followed Mary Meyer’s westerly route, tracing the path that, according to the press, had been Mary Meyer’s daily routine.
She passed under the aqueduct from the first column of Key Bridge, and from there she headed toward Fletcher’s Boat House, a total distance of just over two miles.
About a half a mile west, she would cross the wooden footbridge and continue to walk the 637. feet westward (just over a tenth of a mile) to the exact spot where Mary Meyer’s life had ended.
The towpath was usually well patrolled, with Park Police cruisers covering the area from Georgetown to Seneca, Maryland, a tour of twenty-two miles.
Mounted police on horseback usually covered the four miles from Georgetown to Chain Bridge, patrolling the towpath and the woods between the canal and the Potomac River.
Park Police officer Ray Pollan knew the area under the Key Bridge well.
He had come to know the regulars who gathered there drinking cheap wine out of paper bags, but he had never seen Ray Crump among them.
Even before she became Ray Crump’s attorney, Roundtree was aware of the “heavy heat” coming down on Crump’s case.
The young, ardent public defender, George Peter Lamb, had been keeping her informed after she expressed interest in the case.
At the time, Lamb was focused on preparing for the preliminary hearing to which Crump was entitled to, regardless of innocence or guilt.
Typically, a “prelim,” as public defenders referred to it, would establish the evidence that the police had to support their charge of first-degree murder.
Most important for a defendant, the preliminary hearing would afford the accused an opportunity to learn in advance the basis of the charges against him, as well as to allow his attorney to argue a lack of probable cause for his continued incarceration.
Without significant evidence, particularly forensic evidence linking a defendant to the crime, there would be no legal basis for further detention.
But it wasn’t an “accident” or “oversight” that the Public Defender’s Office hadn’t been made aware, as they legally should have been, of the FBI Crime Lab report that had been delivered to police chief Robert V Murray on October 16, just four days after the murder.
Had this occurred, there would have been no further grounds to detain Ray Crump.
The report clearly documented the lack of any forensic evidence linking Crump to the murder scene or the victim.
Compounding that travesty of justice, not only was Ray Crump being denied a preliminary hearing, but the coroner’s inquest was conducted with an unusual lack of protocol.
In 1964 in Washington, the inquest was typically held in a room at the D.C. morgue.
While the inquest carried no actual legal authority, its outcome might influence a judge on matters involving bail or extended incarceration.
Most lawyers didn’t even bother to attend a coroner’s inquest, but attorneys in the Public Defender’s office usually attended because it was an opportunity to find out what the government actually had in terms of evidence against their client.
But on the morning of October 19—before the scheduled eleven o’clock coroner’s inquest into the murder of Mary Meyer—a grand jury had indicted Ray Crump for first-degree murder.
Grand juries were usually convened after completion of a coroner’s inquest.
It was, in the view of Crump’s Legal Aid attorneys Jake Stein and George Peter Lamb, a deliberate attempt by the government to circumvent a preliminary hearing for Crump.
At the inquest itself, Crump’s attorneys asked for a continuance in order to subpoena additional witnesses.
The coroner denied the request and proceeded with the inquest over their objections.
Asserting that inquest protocol had been violated and that Crump deserved a preliminary hearing, both Stein and Lamb refused to participate in the hearing.
In spite of the objections, the coroner’s inquest found that there was sufficient evidence to bring Ray Crump Jr. to trial for the murder of Mary Meyer.
This was not only a physical impossibility, it was factually incorrect.
The distance—128. feet, to be exact—had already been measured by police the day after the murder.
The all-white six-man jury, many of who were retired government employees, never even questioned the discrepancies.
With the government’s case fortified by both the grand jury’s indictment and the outcome of the coroner’s inquest, Commissioner Sam Wertleb not only denied the defense’s request for a continuance, but also its motions to subpoena six witnesses.
Wertleb argued that the grand jury indictment had dispensed with any need for a preliminary hearing.
Had Crump been given a preliminary hearing, as he should have been, the FBI Crime Lab report would legally have to have been produced, and it freely acknowledged the holes in the government’s case.
For nine months, the report would be buried, until finally a frustrated Dovey Roundtree demanded it be delivered.
This was Clear-cut malfeasance on the part of the government to manipulate the case.
They did everything possible to prevent any of the real details of the case being made public.
The standard device in hot cases like this was to avoid the discovery process in a preliminary hearing or a coroner’s inquest, and they got away with it.
Lamb’s representation of Ray Crump Jr. had left him with an indelible memory.
Crump appeared for his arraignment on his indictment for murder two days later, and entered a plea of not guilty.
Roundtree, who had been in contact with Crump’s former defense team, was aware of the prosecution’s strategy.
Her first move was to request bond for her client so that he could return to his work and his family.
Roundtree hoped that she might have a sympathetic ear in federal district court judge Bumita Sheldon Matthews—a Truman appointee who had been a supporter of the Equal Rights Amendment since its inception in 1923 and was active in the suffrage movement.
As far as George Peter Lamb was concerned, “Judge Matthews believed all blacks were guilty, and the reason they were guilty was because they were indicted, and therefore they should plead guilty.
Sorrow over the death of her grandmother Rachel just five days into her representation of Ray Crump only intensified her commitment to justice for her downtrodden client.
The day of Ray Crump’s arraignment, Roundtree had already filed a writ of habeas corpus on his behalf.
Rather than attack the validity of the indictment, Roundtree charged that police had beaten Crump following his arrest on October 12, and that there had been a number of irregularities in the legal proceedings, chief among them the denial of a preliminary hearing.
The D.C. district judge denied the writ of habeas corpus on November 9, 1964.
She knew that the appeal wouldn’t be decided for months, and the delay would afford her legal team much-needed time to prepare for trial.
She also hoped that the media scrutiny focused on her client would abate in the intervening months.
Dovey Roundtree had another, more immediate situation that needed remedy.
She filed a motion on November 12, 1964, for a mental examination of Ray Crump.
Wondering whether her client was fit to stand trial, Roundtree also feared that brutality and taunting by prison guards would undo Crump completely.
Later that November, Ray Crump underwent a sixty-day psychiatric evaluation at St.
Having already established that Crump had been robbed and severely beaten in 1962, Roundtree underscored that Crump had endured a head trauma that had never been properly evaluated or diagnosed.
He suffered from excruciating headaches and had been known to have blackouts from binge drinking.
Having removed her client from the perils of the D.C. jail, if only briefly, Dovey Roundtree awaited word on her appeal of Crump’s denial of a preliminary hearing.
The appeal, handed down on June 15, 1965, was denied by a 2-1 decision.
Judge Washington also noted that only one witness, Detective Bernie Crooke, had been called, and that he “gave mostly hearsay testimony,” and that he was not subjected to cross-examination.
A dissenting opinion was better than a unanimous decision, but it would do little for Ray Crump’s defense or mental equilibrium. li was now inevitable that Ray Crump would stand trial for the murder of Mary Pinchot Meyer.
Already, Dovey Roundtree had begun to acquaint herself with the neighborhoods where Mary Meyer had lived and painted.
As the trial date approached, Roundtree redoubled her efforts to retrace the dead woman’s—and her client’s—steps.
It was during this time that Roundtree became aware that there were many more entrances and exits than the four that the government maintained they had guarded on the day of the murder.
On one exploration of the canal towpath, Roundtree and Hunter ran into Detective Bernie Crooke, who wanted to know why they were bothering to investigate the area.
Someone else was also bothered by Roundtree’s investigations of the towpath.
The sun shone, the park and towpath echoed with the shouts and laughter of runners and picnickers and fishermen on the autumn afternoons when we visited, but I could not shake off the sense of something sinister.
The more we visited the crime scene, the more persistent the calls became, but I kept returning to the towpath area with George and Jerry because I was so absolutely convinced that only by memorizing the area, every tree and blade of grass, would I be fully prepared for anything the prosecution might bring up at trial.
This was a complete fabrication; the police had recovered no such forensic evidence.
But they launched a crusade to permit them to take a sample of Crump’s hair.
Eventually, and against his will, they did, and it yielded a match of hair found inside the brimmed golf cap that had been recovered on the day after the murder on the shore of the Potomac River—684 feet west of the murder scene.
Given the eyewitness reports of Henry Wiggins and Lieutenant William Mitchell, both of whom claimed to have seen a “Negro male” wearing a dark-brimmed golf cap, the government, with nothing better to go on, would extol this alleged match as proof that Crump was the cold-blooded killer.
The witnesses’ statements, however, proved only that Crump had lied about wearing the cap.
After all, his cap and Windbreaker had been found in the area where Crump claimed to have slipped off some rocks.
At that juncture on the Potomac River shoreline, any attempt to swim the quarter mile across the dangerous river current and undertow would have been daunting even for an accomplished swimmer, let alone someone who was terrified of being in water over his head.
She was familiar with the newspaper accounts that identified the slain woman as an up-andcoming artist, the niece of former Pennsylvania governor Gifford Pinchot, and a friend of former First Lady Jacqueline Kennedy’s.
Roundtree knew also that Mary had been divorced, though she was not yet aware that she had only obtained the divorce after granting Cord control over her sons’ education.
Police had reported finding nothing of significance when they searched Mary Meyer’s house.
She concluded that someone must have gotten there before them and wiped the place clean.
Unaware of Mary Meyer’s affair with the late President Kennedy, her diary, or her relationship with psychedelic guru Timothy Leary, Roundtree’s instinct told her that something suspicious had taken place, and that this was not some random murder.
She pressed her private investigator, Purcell Moore, to find a repair order for the car, or the car’s owner, but he came up dry on both counts.
Acheson had been the Justice Department’s United States attorney at the time of Crump’s arrest.
In fact, Acheson, son of former secretary of state Dean Acheson, had the distinguished pedigree typical of Mary Meyer’s Georgetown neighbors.
He had personally known Mary well, and had attended Yale in the same class as her ex-husband.
He was fully aware that Cord was not the generic “government clerk” that Washington newspapers had made him out to be.
In a murder case like this where you have a plausible suspect, and you don’t have enough evidence to go against anybody else, you really have to go to trial.
Without Dovey Roundtree’s commitment to Ray Crump’s defense, Mary Meyer’s murder might well have been relegated into history as a random sexual assault gone awry, a twist of fate for a woman who had been so fortunate in so many respects up to that point.
Yet Roundtree was committed not just to the defense of her client, of whose innocence she was convinced, but also to the heart and soul of justice itself—the principle of equal protection under the law.
And so, before the end of 1964, Dovey Roundtree was prepared to stake her entire professional reputation—as well as her own financial resources—on one of the biggest trials ever to take place in Washington.
The next day—June 12, 1963—-Medgar Evers, a leader of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People , was shot and killed in front of his wife and three children in his Mississippi driveway.
His killer, the white supremacist Byron De La Beckwith, evaded conviction twice with hung juries in 1964 and would not be finally convicted for the murder until 1994.
Two months later, in August, Martin Luther King Jr., the civil rights movement’s most eloquent and charismatic leader, had filled the nation’s capital and captured the country’s attention with his inspiring dreams of racial equality.
Nearly two years later, as Ray Crump’s murder trial approached in the summer of 1965, civil rights advocates were still marching across the American South.
African Americans tear-gassed, beaten by police, bitten by police K-9 dogs, and lynched by racist mobs.
Hatred and fear of the black man pervaded America in the months leading up to Ray Crump’s trial for the murder of a white woman.
The surrounding political and racial climate was not lost on Dovey Roundtree.
For Dovey Roundtree and her legal team, the United States attorney’s pursuit of Raymond Crump Jr. for the murder of Mary Meyer was further evidence of the lingering racism that permeated the corridors of the American judicial system.
It represented all that was unfair and unjust when it came to the failure of equal protection under the law for anyone who wasn’t white.
Without any financial remuneration and with only her own resources, Dovey Roundtree would stake her professional life on defending a victimized, dirt-poor young black man.
For Roundtree, it wasn’t just the life and future of one man that was at stake.
Justice itself was on trial; and if the cause of justice was to be served, then everything in its way had to be confronted and overcome.
The prosecution’s “declaration of war” on Ray Crump would unleash a righteous power for justice.
Ray Crump couldn’t pay his legal fees, so Roundtree committed her own resources to his defense.
It was a terrific gamble, but one that Roundtree and her team considered supremely worthwhile.
She would employ every skill she possessed to confront and defeat the government’s case against her client, of whose innocence she was categorically convinced.
Four months after the murder itself, Roundtree still hadn’t been able to get a clear statement from the government’s lawyers, and therefore she wasn’t sure whether a murder weapon had even been recovered.
Assistant United States Attorney Charles Duncan, the young black prosecutor initially assigned to the case by senior United States attorney David Acheson, was normally an ebullient man and quite friendly with Dovey.
But he wasn’t being helpful or cooperative when she ran into him on the elevator in the courthouse one day before Christmas.
Duncan had shrugged his shoulders, said something to the effect that he didn’t know whether he was going to continue with the case, and proceeded to walk away.
Meanwhile, Dovey Roundtree and her legal team had lost the battle for a permanent injunction that would have restrained the government from forcing Ray Crump to give samples of his hair.
In early February, Crump was taken to the police captain’s office to give a hair sample.
He refused, and was then forcibly held down by several officers while hair was cut from his head.
In mid-March, she filed a motion to suppress evidence—not only her client’s hair, but any chemical analysis from the hair, as well as his shoes, and the cap and jacket , all of which she argued had been taken either against his will or without his consent, violating his Fourth Amendment right to protection from unreasonable searches and seizures.
Determined to establish exactly what evidence the prosecution had in its possession, she filed a motion for a complete bill of particulars.
The motion would compel the prosecution to list everything or be held in contempt.
In addition, they would have to turn over all evidence collected in connection with the murder, including eyewitness accounts, the murder weapon, the FBI Crime Lab report, items taken from Crump’s home, and everything that Crump had used or worn on the day of the crime.
Finally, in early March, five months after the murder itself, the prosecution was forced to cough up what it had.
No murder weapon had been found, but the two.-caliber lead bullets taken from Mary Meyer’s corpse would be entered into evidence, as well as Ray Crump’s hair, the clothing he had been wearing that day—the beige-tan zippered jacket, the dark-plaid golf cap, dark corduroy trousers, black shoes—and an open package of Pall Mall cigarettes.
A complete list of all persons at the scene, interviewed, or connected with the crime would also be produced.
What struck Roundtree as ominous, however, was the signature on the statement of evidence.
With Hantman on the case, she knew they were bringing in the heavy artillery.
As Assistant Chief of the Criminal Division in the Justice Department, Hantman would have a full staff, as well as a small army of ancillary personnel.
He was counted among the top three attorneys in the criminal division of the Justice Department, where his career would span twenty-three years.
Hantman had already tried a range of felonies, including murders; observers described him as “a screamer and a bully” in the courtroom.
Tall, prepossessing, an imposing figure with bristling eyebrows and an extraordinary legal mind capable of prodigious feats of memory, he conveyed a formidable authority; and defense attorneys were known to work into the wee hours of the morning preparing to face him in a courtroom.
Dovey Roundtree was well aware of Hantman’s reputation, and she was troubled by this turn of events.
In the District of Columbia, first-degree murder carried the death penalty.
For that reason, he would attempt every possible maneuver to gain advantage in the months leading up to trial, including dueling with the defense over pretrial motions, evidentiary hearings, and the admissibility of various pieces of evidence.
The rulings were almost always in Hantman’s favor, an advantage that he maximized, and sometimes embellished.
In one pretrial conference, Hantman went so far as to allege that Ray Crump had cleaned Mary Meyer’s house—a complete fabrication that nonetheless introduced the possibility of the defendant’s prior association with the victim.
In response, Dovey Roundtree produced every single payroll receipt that Crump had received from the Brown Construction Company.
In doing so, she made it clear that she would countenance no further deceptions of that sort.
The Honorable Howard F Corcoran had just been appointed by President Johnson to be a United States District Court Judge for the District of Columbia.
In spite of the embarrassed silence that followed, his nomination was approved.
Judge Howard Corcoran was the brother of the legendary Tommy “the Cork” Corcoran, an influential lawyer and D.C. power broker who had drafted much of the New Deal legislation for Franklin D Roosevelt.
Judge Corcoran’s pedigree and education—Phillips Exeter Academy, Princeton, and then Harvard Law—placed him in the social class of Mary and Cord Meyer, as well as that of United States Attorney David Acheson, signaling an easy access to power.
Pedigree aside, many felt that Judge Corcoran was not ready for a case like this.
Some even speculated that because of his lack of experience, he would rule according to the letter of the law to avoid being overturned on appeal.
For Roundtree and her team, it was another bad break, something that might work against her.
Judge Corcoran’s law clerk for the trial was a young, agile attorney fresh out of Harvard Law School’s prestigious Master of Laws program.
Twenty-fiveyear-old Brooklyn-born Robert Stephen Bennett had graduated from Georgetown Law in 1964.
He salivated at the prospect of being part of the action, and no place would be hotter than Washington in the summer of 1965.
Thirty years later, having become one of Washington’s and the nation’s eminent criminal defense attorneys, he would find himself standing at the podium in the marbled United States Supreme Court representing President Bill Clinton in a sexual harassment lawsuit.
In response to Roundtree’s wish to enter into evidence the fact of Mary Meyer’s divorce and two surviving sons, Corcoran refused.
It seemed an odd response to the request, since “lack of relevance” might have kept it out just as well.
The judge sustained Hantman’s objection, however, when Roundtree tried to establish for the jury that Ray Crump was the father of five children.
Judge Corcoran also barred any testimony that referred to the Central Intelligence Agency.
That was unknown, but it appeared likely that as a first-timer on the bench, Corcoran sought to avoid any controversy whatsoever, and in that regard, any mention of the CIA would seem especially off-limits.
The Warren Report’s lone gunman assertion was already beginning to be challenged.
There were rumblings swirling all over Washington and elsewhere about CIA involvement in President Kennedy’s assassination, and Corcoran likely sought to steer clear of any mention of the Agency altogether.
Prosecutor Hantman, for his part, knew he was involved in a high-profile case, but at the time of the trial, he was unaware how high profile the case might become.
He didn’t know that Mary Meyer had kept a diary and that in it, she had written about her lover, the slain president.
Nor did he know that Mary’s diary was now in the hands of CIA counterintelligence chief Jim Angleton, and that Angleton’s wife would be in court every day, observing the trial.
On Monday, July 19, 1965, a three-hundred-person jury pool convened in Courtroom 8, where the laborious process of jury selection would take all day.
Dovey Roundtree and her defense team scored a partial victory with a jury of eight blacks and four whites; seven of the twelve jurors were women.
Edward O Savwoir, a forty-four-year-old African American program specialist at the Job Corps in the Office of Economic Opportunity in Washington.
Also present every day was Martha Crump, Ray Crump’s mother, always accompanied by members of her church community.
The courtroom’s racial mix and class disparities reflected the divide between the murdered woman and the accused defendant, all interspersed with a noticeable number of unsmiling white men in impeccably tailored suits, reminding Roundtree of the significance of this case.
Sam Donaldson, a young broadcast news reporter for the CBS affiliate, WTOP-TV, in Washington, sat directly behind the defense team, as did two nuns.
Crump had tried to take her by surprise from behind, Hantman maintained, but she had struggled so powerfully that he had been forced to resort to brutality—shooting her in the head to subdue her, then dragging her twenty-five feet while she continued to struggle, before fatally shooting her again.
Designed for high-impact courtroom drama upon the jury, the Hantman delivery was intended to be as brutal as it was damaging.
The government’s prosecutor extolled the professionalism and alacrity of the police response in closing off all of the exits in the towpath area “within four minutes” of the broadcast bulletin about the murder.
Crump had tried to escape, said Hantman, by swimming across the Potomac but realized he wouldn’t be able to do so.
Detective John Warner finally apprehended Crump, who then lied about having been fishing that morning, as well as about the clothes he had been wearing.
Concluding his statement, Hantman once again implied that Crump had acted out of a premeditated intent to commit a sexual assault, thus casting the murder of Mary Meyer not a spontaneous act, but a killing in cold blood, the result of an attempted rape that had been derailed by a particularly feisty victim.
Hantman made certain the jury knew that when Crump was apprehended, the fly on his pants was open, that his pant’s pocket was torn, that he was soaking wet, that he had blood on his right hand, which was cut, and that he had a small cut or abrasion over one eye.
All this could have only happened, Hantman maintained, from his struggle with Mary Meyer.
To bolster his contention that Crump’s injuries must have resulted from his struggle with Mary Meyer, Hantman concluded his presentation with Lieutenant William L Mitchell’s statement to police the day after the murder.
Mitchell had jogged past Mary Meyer at approximately 12:20 pM., he said, about four minutes before the first shot was fired.
The prosecutor’s opening statement left Dovey Roundtree in a kind of legal and emotional quicksand.
Not only had Hantman’s recitation been convincing and thorough, he had promised the jury that his witnesses would dispel any doubt as to the defendant’s innocence, in spite of the fact that no murder weapon had been recovered.
Regardless of the fact that the prosecution’s case was built entirely on circumstantial evidence, it would take a grueling, formidable effort on Dovey Roundtree’s part to rescue her client.
If she had been staggered—even a bit undone—by Hantman’s performance, Dovey Roundtree had not shown it.
She decided to reserve her own opening statement, then implored Judge Corcoran to let the record show that Hantman’s statement had been so inflammatory, so prejudicial, that it was grounds for a mistrial.
Roundtree then insisted on seeing “the bloodstained tree” that Hantman said he would be bringing into the courtroom.
The judge agreed, saying he wanted to see it, too; but already the proceedings were spiraling out of control.
In an effort to maintain decorum, Judge Corcoran ordered an immediate fifteen-minute recess.
The first witness to testify was Benjamin C Bradlee, who was then the Washington, D.C., bureau chief for Newsweek.
Metropolitan Police Department, where he had identified the body of his sisterin-law, Mary Pinchot Meyer.
The inference of Bradlee’s testimony was that it wasn’t until Sergeant Wallace arrived at Bradlee’s home that evening, just before 6:00M., that Bradlee had any knowledge of the murder.
Strangely, Hantman never directly asked Bradlee when he had first learned of the event.
Instead, he inquired whether Bradlee had, subsequent to Mary Meyer’s death, made “any effort to gain entry to this studio that was occupied by Mrs.
At no time was Hantman aware that Mary Meyer had kept a diary, or that she had been romantically involved with President Kennedy.
Ben Bradlee was well aware of both, but he wasn’t about to reveal anything further.
Appearing to tread lightly, Dovey Roundtree began her first crossexamination.
Ben Bradlee had withheld the fact that a group of Mary Meyer’s intimates, including Bradlee himself, had immediately conspired to commandeer Mary Meyer’s diary, letters, and personal papers—and given the entire collection to CIA counterintelligence chief James Jesus Angleton.
During the first morning of the trial, Deputy Coroner Linwood L Rayford testified that he had pronounced the then-unknown victim dead at the murder scene at approximately 2:05m.
The first shot to the head, just anterior to the left ear and surrounded by a dark halo, traversed the skull across the floor of the brain, angling slightly from the back to the front.
The second bullet wound, also surrounded by a dark halo, had been fired over the victim’s right shoulder blade, traversing it and the chest cavity, perforating the right lung and severing the aorta.
Hantman questioned the significance of the “two darkened halos” that surrounded each gunshot wound.
Hantman wanted the jury to know that there had been a violent struggle before and after the first shot had been fired, that Mary Meyer had fought hard, and that she had been dragged “clear across the path,” after she clung to a tree, leaving traces of her blood.
The coroner’s description of the precise angles of each shot implied that the assassin was likely ambidextrous and had expertise in the surgical use of a handgun.
There had been no evidence that Ray Crump had traces of nitrates on his hands.
The lack of powder burns didn’t prove Ray Crump’s innocence, however; it only proved police negligence.
In their zeal to pin the murder on Crump, and in their certainty that he was the man they were looking for, the police hadn’t bothered to test his hands for traces of nitrates.
Moreover, no one in Crump’s family or community had ever seen him in possession of any firearm, much less use one with any skill or precision.
Crump, however, had in fact been weighed and measured at police headquarters on the day of the murder after his arrest.
It was just one of fifty exhibits that Hantman would present at trial, including the bloodstained tree limb that Mary Meyer had clung to moments before she died.
Such flamboyant displays by Hantman would eventually backfire, as the prosecution increasingly failed to fill the void of any real forensic evidence.
Hantman then called the map’s creator, Joseph Ronsisvalle of the National Park Service, to the witness stand.
Hantman asked about the distances between exits, and made a point of telling the court that within four minutes the police were guarding and closing off all four exits.
The many hours that Roundtree had spent combing and familiarizing herself with the towpath area were about to pay off.
Roundtree had raised doubts about Ronsisvalle’s knowledge of the towpath area—in fact, openly challenging his expertise.
According to Judge Corcoran, Roundtree was “asking about his knowledge of the area.
She now revealed not only Ronsisvalle’s complete unfamiliarity with many of the area’s hidden exits, but also the fact that he had never himself walked along or explored the towpath, or any of the areas in question.
It was a stunning revelation that undermined the prosecution’s case, in addition to Ronsisvalle’s credibility as an expert witness.
Roundtree objected to Hantman adding that detail, but Judge Corcoran allowed it.
On the witness stand, Henry Wiggins recounted having been sent by his manager, Joe Cameron, to pick up Bill Branch at the Key Bridge Esso Station, from which he proceeded to the north side of the 4300 block of Canal Road to service a stalled Nash Rambler sedan.
Wiggins estimated that it was approximately 12:20m. when he and Branch reached the stalled vehicle and got out of their truck.
Branch, said Wiggins, went to the Rambler’s passenger side to unlock it, while Wiggins himself started to remove his tools from the truck in preparation for diagnosing and fixing the stalled vehicle.
When the screaming stopped, Wiggins testified, he “heard a shot,” again coming from the direction of the canal.
In response, he “ran diagonally across the road” toward the three-foot wall overlooking both the canal and the towpath on the southern side of the canal.
Peering over the wall, Wiggins testified that he observed “a man standing over a woman lying on the towpath.
Hantman wanted to know how much time had elapsed between Wiggins hearing the second shot and his seeing the man.
I ducked down behind the wall at that time, not too long, and I came back up from behind the wall to see him turning around and shoving something in his pocket.
Just turned around and walked over straight away from the body, down over the hill.
Wiggins recalled that the man wore a cap “that buttons onto the brim,” with a lightcolored jacket, dark trousers, and dark shoes, all of which the prosecution contended that Ray Crump had been wearing that day.
The clothes did, in fact, belong to Ray Crump, who had been seen wearing them as he left his home the morning of the murder.
The following morning, the prosecution’s star witness would squander his credibility in less than an hour.
Hantman needed Wiggins to identify the clothes Ray Crump was wearing on the day of the murder, and confirm the exhibited items.
His one concession to the prosecution was to “allow lookalike testimony” only.
That Hantman had been, for the second day, engaged in loud gumchewing did not endear him to the judge.
In fact, Judge Corcoran had taken his young clerk, Robert Bennett, into his chambers during one earlier recess and had admonished him “never to chew gum” when presenting in a courtroom.
I first saw these articles when they were being worn by the defendant when he was standing over the victim at the scene.
Roundtree used this opportunity to highlight the discrepancy between what Wiggins had reported to the police and the actual size of the defendant.
Well, this information which I gave them at that time which I was looking across the canal down on the subject there, would not be very accurate but as close as I can give.
His star eyewitness, and his case, were crumbling on the second day of the trial.
During his redirect, Hantman asked Wiggins again whether his view of the murder scene had been obstructed in any way.
Seeking to bolster Wiggins’s credibility regarding Crump’s clothing, Hantman had attempted something similar with Wiggins’s description of the suspect’s height and weight —both of which in no way matched Crump’s.
Inadvertently, Hantman had damaged the credibility of his star eyewitness so badly that his case would never recover.
This was the description, they all testified, of the man they were told to look for, and it didn’t come close to describing the defendant.
By midmorning of day two, the defense strategy of reasonable doubt had started a crusade.
If there was a weakness or discrepancy to be exploited, she would find it and expose it to the jury.
Bu Branch, Henry Wiggins’s tow truck assistant on the day of the murder, took the stand right after Wiggins.
Branch had told police that after Wiggins left the murder scene to call police, he, Branch, was too afraid to keep watch over the wall that overlooked the canal towpath.
Yet on the witness stand, he testified that he had remained at the wall overlooking the murder scene until Wiggins returned with police.
It now appeared that Hantman, who had painstakingly rehearsed and written out the testimony of each of his twenty-seven witnesses,“ had coached Branch to alter his statement to police.
Surely, Hantman was aware of Branch’s written police statement—that he had stayed in the car, and not remained at the wall overlooking the towpath.
Between the time that Wiggins had left and returned with the police, no one had been monitoring the murder scene.
After the day two lunch recess, the trial proceeded with the testimony of two police officers, patrolman Roderick Sylvis and Detective John Warner.
Together, the testimony of Roderick Sylvis and John Warner would reveal one of the most important facts never before understood:Someone else was eluding capture by police.
They arrived, Sylvis told Hantman, at “12:30 pM. or 12:29 pM.,” having driven their patrol car through the narrow underpass beneath the canal itself.
Anyone attempting to leave the entire C & O Canal towpath area would either have to walk through the narrow underpass or cross the canal in an old leaky rowboat that was attached to a rope and pulley on each side of the canal.
In fact, that meant there were two exits at Fletcher’s Landing—two entirely different ways to exit the area—that offered immediate access to Canal Road and beyond.
Sylvis would walk along the towpath toward the murder scene, while Bignotti would walk through the woods adjacent to the railroad tracks parallel to the towpath, both heading east toward the murder scene.
Leaving the entire Fletcher’s Boat House area unattended, they risked allowing the killer to walk out unnoticed.
Sylvis and Bignotti exited their patrol car and spent about five minutes positioning themselves for their eastward trek toward the murder scene.
As soon as they started out, “maybe 50 feet at the most” from Fletcher’s Boat House, Sylvis testified, they spotted a young white couple walking westward on the railroad tracks.
He yelled to his partner Bignotti for assistance, but Bignotti didn’t respond, so Sylvis tried to “wave down someone on Canal Road” to assist him.
That meant that it took him even longer to arrive at the spot where the “Negro male” had peeked out from the woods.
Reunited, Sylvis and Bignotti spent even more time searching the area together.
The problem, however, was that he had blown the answer he had rehearsed with Hantman, and Hantman knew it.
At this very moment, the government’s case against Ray Crump was in peril, and about to be pushed off the edge of a cliff.
In fact, Crump had been in the company of Detective John Warner at a location of one-tenth of a mile east of the murder scene for a period of at least ten to fifteen minutes—before he was arrested at 1:15 pm.
The significance of this detail was that the “head” of the “Negro male” seen by patrolman Roderick Sylvis could not have been Ray Crump’s.
If Sylvis and Bignotti arrived at Fletcher’s Boat House at approximately 12:30m. and they returned to their patrol car by 1:15, they came back just in time to conveniently hear the police radio broadcast that a suspect had been arrested.
There were no police radios at the crime scene or adjacent to the site of Crump’s arrest.
Someone would have had to walk back to a police vehicle at the Foundry Underpass to make the call, but no such a call—if one ever took place—was ever mentioned in the trial transcript or any police report.
This may have been one of the few moments during the trial where Dovey Roundtree missed a significant opportunity.
It was, in fact, accurate that about an hour later, “about 1:45 or 1:50 ,”—Sylvis’s initial response to Hantman—that he spotted the head of the mystery “Negro male,” who could not have possibly been Ray Crump.
When Roundtree confronted Sylvis with the discrepancy, he had to have realized that by first telling the court that it was 1:45 pm. when he saw the “Negro male,” he had risked sabotaging the prosecution’s case against Crump.
But his initial answer to Hantman’s inquiry of “about 1:45 or 1:50 ” was the correct answer, and he confirmed that with me in 2008.
Indeed, a cornerstone of the prosecution’s case was that the man Sylvis had spotted was, in fact, the fleeing Ray Crump.
Prosecutor Hantman hammered that point home repeatedly throughout the trial.
Should that assertion be successfully challenged, the case against Crump would crumble.
That was about to happen, although it would again elude the scrutiny of the defense and remain hidden in the trial transcript until now.
Detective John Warner, scheduled to testify after Sylvis, had not been in the courtroom during Sylvis’s testimony.
It was customary to keep witnesses from hearing other testimony in order to reduce the possibility of collusion and fabrication.
Warner was therefore unaware of the various conflicting time stamps that had jeopardized the prosecution’s case.
Warner testified that he had arrived at the Key Bridge entrance of the canal towpath at 12:29 pM. with his partner, Henry Schultheis.
Warner proceeded to walk westward toward the murder scene through the woods adjacent to the railroad tracks for what he estimated had been “forty-five minutes” before discovering the wet, somewhat disoriented Ray Crump more than one-tenth of a mile east of the murder scene itself.
Under direct examination by Hantman, Warner proceeded to alter his testimony, saying that it had been 1:15 pM. when he first saw Crump at a location one-tenth of mile east of the murder scene.
The government’s case was slowly spiraling out of control, yet the Roundtree defense team appeared to be missing another critical moment.
Detective John Warner’s testimony was undermining the prosecution’s case.
Warner told Hantman that he stopped Crump on the railroad tracks and identified himself as a police officer, and Crump took out his sodden wallet and handed over his D.C. driver’s license.
He took his wallet out, and when he took his wallet out, water dripped out of his wallet as he handed me his D.C. driver’s license.
I asked him then if he would point out the spot as to where he was fishing from, I would help him, see if I could retrieve his fishing gear for him.
This incensed Dovey Roundtree, who discerned in Warner’s conflicting testimony further evidence of prosecutorial shenanigans.
Ray Crump was not the only black man in the towpath area on the day of the murder.
Detective Warner had clearly first come upon the defendant well before 1:15 P.M. and at a distance of more than a tenth of a mile east of the murder scene.
Detective Warner’s testimony had, therefore, inadvertently corroborated the fact that a second, unidentified “Negro male” had eluded police capture.
Collectively, their testimony offered nothing in the way of incriminating evidence against Crump and, instead, expanded the grounds for reasonable doubt.
A neighbor of Crump’s testified that she saw Ray leaving his house the morning of the murder wearing his lightcolored beige jacket and golf cap.
In fact, some facsimile of a light-beige Windbreaker jacket—seen by eyewitnesses Henry Wiggins and allegedly by Lieutenant William L Mitchell on the “Negro male” each of them saw—was the most conspicuous evidence that, according to the prosecution, identified the killer.
For Henry Wiggins in particular, it had been the distinguishing piece of clothing, and it was a jacket very similar to the prosecution’s exhibit that lay before the court.
So important was the jacket as evidence, its very existence— including its location and whereabouts—seemed to have a life of its own.
And so, before the end of day three of the trial, a fascinating element—its real significance never realized during the trial, or afterward—was revealed.
Moreover, neither the defense nor the prosecution questioned the time—”about one o’clock”—that Byers asserted he received the call, nor why he had been asked only to search for a jacket, and not a golf cap.
That was very possibly before Crump had even been spotted by any police officer, much less apprehended, and before Henry Wiggins identified Crump, subsequent to his arrest at 1:15 pM., as the man he had seen standing over the victim wearing a jacket and cap.
Detective Warner, by all accounts the first police officer to encounter Ray Crump, had likely done so in the vicinity of 1:00 pM., but he had had no means of communication with any other police officer until Sergeant Pasquale D’Ambrosio spotted him with Crump right before 1:15 pm.
If there had been, Henry Wiggins and patrolman James Scouloukas would not have had to return to the police cruiser parked at the Foundry Underpass to call in a radio broadcast description of the killer.
Someone, other than police, was monitoring the murder scene and the events unfolding around it.
And it appears that someone, other than police, who had access to police band radio frequencies radioed Byers and gave him instructions to start looking for the jacket, and told him where to look for it.
When the trial recessed for a three-day weekend on Thursday, July 22, Dovey Roundtree was still holding her own; her strategy of establishing reasonable doubt at almost every juncture was bearing fruit.
Weber: We were looking for—to the best of my recollection—a Negro who had on a lightcolored jacket and a dark cap.
From my recollection that I remember from the lookout, I had—one of my ways of doing this—I had a picture in my mind of a stocky individual.
That this came from the most senior ranking police officer at the murder scene, the man in charge of the entire investigation, would not be lost on the jury.
But there was still one eyewitness left to testify, and that individual was potentially lethal to the defense.
The lean, trim William L Mitchell took the witness stand the afternoon of Monday, July 26.
The reader will recall that Mitchell, an Army lieutenant stationed at the Pentagon in the fall of 1964, claimed to have been out for his daily lunchtime run on the towpath the day of the murder.
He had come forward to police, he said, because he recognized the victim from newspaper accounts, and believed she was being followed by a “Negro male,” who was wearing clothes identical to those Henry Wiggins had seen.
The presence of Lieutenant William L Mitchell had troubled Dovey Roundtree from the very beginning.
Mitchell had refused to return her phone calls in the months before the trial; she had little to go on.
At a murder trial where the innuendo of an attempted sexual assault by a black man upon a white woman had captivated the attention of an entire city, William L Mitchell indeed presented a formidable threat.
Without testimony from Crump’s girlfriend, Vivian, Roundtree still feared the possibility of ruination for her client.
When asked by Hantman to identify the exhibits of Crump’s and Mary Meyer’s clothing, Mitchell made certain to say only that they were “similar to the clothes worn by the individual,” not the exact clothes he had seen that day.
Mitchell was careful to stop short of saying that Ray Crump was the man he had seen.
Doing so would have invited a fierce cross-examination from Roundtree, which might have aroused suspicion and damaged Mitchell’s testimony.
Instead, Mitchell slyly and repeatedly implied that the man he’d seen was indeed Crump.
Hantman asked Mitchell if he had seen anyone else on the towpath the day.
The runner in Bermuda shorts was never identified, and he never came forward.
Patrolman Sylvis had already testified about seeing the couple, a point that corroborated Mitchell’s account, bolstering his credibility, but Sylvis had obtained no identification and the couple never came forward to police.
Aside from his own claim, no one ever substantiated that Mitchell had been on the towpath that day, or any other day.
In spite of Mitchell’s calm demeanor, Roundtree probed for weak spots in his testimony, in which Mitchell reported with military precision his time on the towpath, and approximately when and where he was located at each of several critical points on the line of the murder.
Mitchell was forced to concede that he hadn’t; he couldn’t be entirely certain that the times he gave were exact.
It was a small but significant detail, again establishing a degree of reasonable doubt about Mitchell’s account.
It was too close for comfort, in spite of Mitchell’s claim that the man he had seen was “about my height, about five-feet eight ,” clearly taller than Ray Crump.
The weight match wouldn’t be lost on Hantman, who would exploit it for all it was worth, along with one other detail, in his summation.
At the end of his testimony, William Mitchell’s sheen was still untarnished; he remained a model citizen, and he had delivered precise eyewitness testimony that corroborated the less-than-stellar witness Henry Wiggins, thereby indirectly and ironically resuscitating the Wiggins testimony.
At that point in the proceedings, in the eyes of the jury, it may have still been anyone’s case to win.
Agent Warren Johnson, an FBI firearms expert, told Hantman there were no powder burns or nitrates on Crump’s hands or clothing because he had been in the water that day.
Roundtree, however, had already established that the police had never tested Ray Crump, or his clothing, for the presence of nitrates.
Moreover, she confronted Johnson with the fact that the standard paraffin test for nitrates in gunpowder typically involves the suspect being asked to wash his hands repeatedly throughout the testing procedure.
If a suspect had fired a gun recently, the presence of nitrates would still show up.
Since there had been no nitrates discovered on Crump’s clothing or on any part of his body, she argued, there wasn’t any evidence he had fired a firearm that day.
Agent Johnson’s testimony did confirm—and underscore—that whoever killed Mary Meyer had shot her from close range and was likely highly skilled, possibly ambidextrous, in the handling of38-caliber revolver.
In describing the shots, Johnson had corroborated Deputy Coroner Rayford’s testimony about which hand had fired which shot.
This forensic analysis, he maintained, linked both the jacket and cap to the defendant.
The cap and jacket on exhibit did belong to Ray Crump, but the hair match wasn’t evidence that he was guilty of murder.
In her cross-examination of Stombaugh, Roundtree called into question the entire field of hair and fiber analysis.
In preparation for the cross-examination, she had read a number of textbooks, a dozen of which were stacked on the defense table.
Stombaugh wasn’t able to answer questions about the latest literature in the field, because he hadn’t read it.
She then compelled Stombaugh to admit that he had never published anything in the field and that he was not, in fact, an expert.
He explained that his FBI laboratory relied heavily upon something called neutron activation in analyzing hair and fiber samples.
That admission inadvertently succeeded in making Roundtree’s case for her.
In the end, Stombaugh’s testimony dealt more than one blow to the prosecution.
The FBI’s state-of-the-art forensic laboratory in Washington, D.C., had failed to find any forensic evidence—hair, clothing fibers, blood, semen, skin, urine, or saliva—that linked Ray Crump to either the murder scene or the body and clothing of Mary Meyer.
Similarly, there had been no traces of Mary Meyer’s blood, hair, fibers, or saliva found on Ray Crump.
Even if the killer had jumped into the Potomac River in an attempt to flee, it was unlikely that all traces of the victim’s hair, blood, saliva, or clothing fibers would have been completely washed out of his clothes or body.
But absolutely nothing had been found on the body, or clothes, of Ray Crump.
In his description of the man he had seen standing over the dead woman’s body, Henry Wiggins had made no mention of any stains, blood or anything else, on the man’s lightcolored jacket.
Given the intensity of the skirmish and the fight that Mary Meyer had put up, as well as the amount of blood that likely squirted from her head wound, the assailant would probably have been covered with bloodstains easily visible on a lightcolored, zipped-up beige jacket, even from a distance of 128. feet.
Furthermore, the man’s golf cap was in place, not askew, only seconds after the fatal second shot.
In the immediate aftermath, the man Wiggins saw exhibited no signs of having been in a violent struggle.
A\tter calling twenty-seven witnesses and introducing more than fifty exhibits, the prosecution rested its case at the end of the day on Tuesday, July 27.
The next morning, Dovey Roundtree delivered her opening statement on behalf of her client.
In five full days of testimony, she stated, the government hadn’t produced a shred of forensic evidence linking Ray Crump to either the murder scene or the body of Mary Meyer.
There was no proof that Crump had handled or fired a gun the day of the murder, and no firearm had been produced.
Three character witnesses testified for the defendant, the last of whom was Crump’s pastor at the Second Baptist Church in Southwest Washington.
Each witness stated that he or she had known Ray in his church and community for more than fifteen years, and testified to his good character.
Over the preceding weekend, Dovey had discussed with her defense colleagues, George Knox and Alan Robeson, the possibility of putting Ray Crump on the stand.
She thought that doing so would persuade the jury, once and for all, that the shy, meek, harmless man was incapable of such a crime.
The prospect of her helpless defendant being metaphorically lynched in open court was too big a risk.
As Crump’s last character witness left the stand, Roundtree stunned the prosecution by announcing that the defense would rest its case.
She then told Judge Corcoran that she wished to renew a number of motions, including an immediate judgment of acquittal.
Judge Corcoran denied each of Roundtree’s motions, but he and the prosecution had been taken by surprise.
For days, he had eagerly awaited the opportunity to interrogate Ray Crump on the stand, believing he could lead Crump to obliterate any chance of an acquittal.
In his summation rebuttal, he held up the shoes that Ray Crump had worn when he was arrested.
Hantman drew the jury’s attention to the two-inch heels in an attempt to make the case that Crump would have been taller than the 5 feet 5% inches that had been recorded at the time of his arrest.
His closing ploy, along with everything else he had presented, still amounted to little; his case was, at best, circumstantial, if he had any case at all.
Dovey Roundtree, in response, delivered her arguments for reasonable doubt regarding Crump’s guilt.
Next, she noted that officers Sylvis and Bignotti had left the rowboat and the exit at the Fletcher’s Boat House underpass unattended; anyone could have left the area undetected during the time they went on their search.
Roundtree also explained that had there been a struggle between the victim and the assailant, such as the prosecution had underscored throughout, fibers from Mary Meyer’s blue angora sweater would have been found on the defendant; yet there were none.
Similarly, blood from Crump’s cut finger would have been found on the victim’s clothing, but had not been.
Roundtree also reminded the jury that mapmaker Joseph Ronsisvalle didn’t know about a number of exits out of the towpath area, through which an assailant could have easily fled.
Because, she argued, the real killer had escaped from the towpath area with the gun.
The following moming, Friday, July 30, 1965, the jury found Raymond Crump Jr. not guilty of the murder of Mary Pinchot Meyer.
Dazed and nearly catatonic, Ray had been standing behind the table along with his defense team.
His mother, Martha, began singing praises to the Lord and other church members shouted hallelujahs throughout the courtroom.
Mary Meyer’s longtime friend Cicely Angleton was reportedly sitting in the back of the courtroom and showed little emotion.
As Dovey led the now-wobbly Ray Crump out of the courtroom, her adversary, Alfred Hantman, cast one final, embittered look toward her.
He had just lost the most important case of his career, and he would never congratulate Roundtree or even acknowledge her victory.
His view was upheld by the Justice Department, which would always maintain that Crump had been guilty.
United States Attorney David Acheson complained that Henry Wiggins had been a huge disappointment.
That night, an exhausted Dovey Roundtree, still very concerned for Ray Crump’s safety, put him on a bus for North Carolina, but only after his belongings were released to him.
From the $1.50 that he had had in his possession at the time of his arrest, Crump handed his defense attorney, the woman who had saved his life, the dollar bill, thanking her in the only way he could.
In the wake of the trial, jury foreman Edward Savwoir resented the insinuation, widely reported in the media and shared by the police department as well as many of Mary Meyer’s friends, that the jury’s decision had been racially motivated and that Crump had gotten away with murder.
They never proved he was at the murder scene, they never proved he had anything to do with it.
The case catapulted Dovey Roundtree, awash in accolades in the wake of her victory, to citywide and national prominence.
Dovey’s soul was rooted in the law and the fair application of justice for everyone—white or black.
One of the first people to call and congratulate her was former United States assistant attorney Charles Duncan, now general counsel for the EEOC, the prosecutor who was first assigned by the Justice Department to prosecute the case.
She reminded him of how many times she had tried to reach him in the beginning.
Dovey Roundtree believed that Crump’s nine months in jail had transformed him from a gentle man into a violent one.
Convinced he had been taunted, beaten, abused, and possibly raped during his incarceration, Roundtree was heartsick.
Within the next few years, he would be charged with arson, assault with a deadly weapon, and violently threatening two girlfriends.
In one fit of rage, Crump reportedly set his home on fire with his wife and children inside.
His family escaped unhurt, and Ray was given a stiff prison sentence in North Carolina.
Upon his release, he maintained his downward trajectory, committing arson once again and serving more jail time.
The condition known as Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder wasn’t formally recognized until 1980, though working models dealing with its cluster of symptoms were engendered in the early 1970s.
Like the innocent, ill-prepared young men sent into harrowing and prolonged traumatic combat conditions in places like Vietnam, Iraq, Afghanistan, and elsewhere, Ray Crump had been psychologically and physically maimed by the violence and brutality he was subjected to during his nine-month incarceration.
Continually threatened, terrified, and increasingly unable to cope, what little ego strength he possessed disintegrated over time.
Like many returning combat soldiers, he became a broken, shattered man, capable of violence to others and to himself.
Unfortunately, for many of Mary Meyer’s community and family in Washington, as well as people in the Justice Department, including Alfred Hantman, Ray Crump’s subsequent path of violence and crime merely served to bolster their belief that Mary Meyer’s true killer had gotten away with murder.
Crump’s post-trial criminal career also impressed high-profile criminal defense attorney Robert S Bennett, who had closely observed the trial as Judge Corcoran’s law clerk.
In his view, Hantman had failed to get “into the heart and soul of jurors,” because he had overtried the case, most notably with Henry Wiggins.
According to Burleigh, “Dovey Roundtree the advocate would always contend in public that Crump was innocent,” insinuating that she might believe otherwise in private, and even going so far as to suggest that the attorney’s religious belief in Christian forgiveness rendered the factual basis of her clients’ earthly guilt or innocence irrelevant.
For twelve years, those who knew about Mary Meyer’s diary and her relationship with President Kennedy chose to remain silent, until the National Enquirer finally broke the story in 1976.
Dovey Roundtree never abandoned her belief that Ray had been a scapegoat, a “patsy,” who had been set up to take the fall.
In the nearly fifty years of research and reporting on the murder, nothing of the sort has ever been suggested.
In her community of friends and acquaintances, Mary had always been highly regarded and respected.
His pristine, unstained clothes appeared to closely match the clothes worn by Ray Crump that morning.
A screeching overhead is then heard, as an approaching group of children that includes Claudius and his sister Livilla grow louder with the awareness of eagles fighting above them.
A small animal drops from the claws of one of the fighting eagles and lands in Claudius’s lap.
And yet, at the end, from a rare height, we also see that our dream was our fate.
It’s just that providence had other ideas as to how we would get there.
Destiny plans a different route, or turns the dream around, as if it were a riddle, and fulfills the dream in ways we couldn’t have expected. —Ben Ohkri There is no such thing as chance; and what seems to us merest accident springs from the deepest source of destiny. —Friedrich von Schiller Tar Mary MEyYer’s murder would become “officially” regarded as an erratic, random act of savagery, simply another unsolvable crime, ignored the flourishing multidimensional panorama of her life and the particular network of relationships it had engendered.
Far from indiscriminate, her murder was deliberate; and, as the reader will eventually come to understand, precisely motivated.
For Mary Pinchot Meyer was in no way ordinary—nor easily intimidated—particularly during the years just prior to her murder in the fall of 1964.
In order to arrive at some understanding of why, and how, Mary Meyer’s murder was orchestrated, certain details of her extraordinary life warrant deeper exploration.
For her life’s mosaic—the events, the people, the choices she made amid life’s vicissitudes and circumstances—only begins to reveal the complexity and uniqueness of a woman who ultimately came to thrive within the Cold War’s hidden history, a defining moment of which was President Kennedy’s assassination in 1963, followed by Mary Meyer’s less than a year later.
Achieving a new level of understanding requires one to look a number of heretofore unseen details—events, experiences, and people—that formed the tesserae of a rich, complex mosaic that would finally illuminate Mary’s life and death. li their seminal 1976 article “The Curious Aftermath of JFK’s Best and Brightest Affair,” Ron Rosenbaum and Phillip Nobile were the first to pay homage to the relatively obscure woman who had made more than a considerable impression in the life of John F Kennedy.
How and why Mary Meyer and Jack Kennedy became intimately involved during the last few years of their lives is only part of the focus of Mary’s mosaic.
Both seem to have been deeply affected by their union, sometimes taking enormous risks, in part for the sake of a better, hopefully more peaceful world in the future.
According to folklore, Mary’s French great-grandfather, Cyrille Constantine Désiré Pinchot, as a nineteen-year-old captain in the French army, had set out to rescue his hero, Napoléon, from the island of St.
From there, he and his father, Constantine, and his mother, Maria, made their way to the United States in 1816, hoping that the New World would be a safe haven.
Constantine and Cyrille, the father-son team, embarked on a series of entrepreneurial projects that over time brought them considerable wealth and standing, using the crossroads of Milford as their hub.
Mary’s great-grandfather Cyrille Pinchot married and had five children.
In addition to his business acumen, James Pinchot possessed a highly developed social conscience—he created no slums, fouled no rivers, and accepted no deals with corrupt politicians.
He never wasted any valuable resources, nor did he enslave any workers.
Retiring at the age of forty-four, James began concentrating his wealth on philanthropy.
The manor’s panorama captured the entire village of Milford and the Delaware River valley, stunning any onlooker with the sheer size and scale of the mansion.
Referred to as a “summer castle,” it “drew all eyes—tourist and local alike—upward.
The sons of James Pinchot—Gifford and Amos—were both Yale educated and members of the secret society Skull and Bones.
President Theodore Roosevelt eventually named Gifford Pinchot the first chief of the newly created United States Forest Service in 1905, in which post he served for five years.
Gifford would lose the senate race against Boies Penrose, but would subsequently become the governor of Pennsylvania in 1922 and again in 1930.
In between campaigns, he managed to marry Cornelia Bryce, the daughter of a wealthy and prominent family from Newport, Rhode Island.
Cornelia, affectionately known within her family and friends as “Lelia,” was an outspoken woman who greatly influenced her niece Mary Pinchot as she grew up.
During Gifford’s campaigns, Comelia had addressed hundreds of housewives, urging them to demand the right to vote.
She also marched in picket lines and supported factory workers and miners seeking safety, decent wages, and job protection in their work.
Cornelia was yet another female role model for Mary and her sister, Tony.
An ardent, self-styled feminist who wrote for the Masses, the New Republic, and the Nation, she became the associate editor of Arts and Decoration.
Ruth’s commitment to feminism entailed a rejection of the traditional female culture of the day.
She was the kind of rare woman who dared to define herself, resisting the prescribed roles that most women found themselves playing.
She became very active in the women’s suffrage movement, and for many years shared a house with political socialist activist Max Eastman, his sister, Crystal Eastman, and Eugen Boissevain, who later married poet Edna St.
Amos was by then a wealthy lawyer who supported a number of liberal left-wing causes.
Whatever the cost to him socially, Amos was apparently willing to bear it in order to be with Ruth.
An ardent pacifist, Amos exerted considerable influence in reformist circles and did much to keep Progressive ideas alive in the 1920s.
He believed that World War I had, in fact, been caused by American and European imperialists, many of whom were bankers.
He would become one of the founders, along with Norman Thomas and Roger Baldwin, of the American Civil Liberties Union in 1920.
Always outspoken, Amos was a champion of causes, no matter what it might cost him politically or socially.
The 1920s were a heightened, progressive era for feminism and a wide spectrum of progressive causes.
With the ratification of the Nineteenth Amendment to the Constitution in August 1920, women were granted the right to vote in all United States elections.
Ruth Pickering Pinchot and Cornelia Bryce Pinchot became the grand dames of the Pinchot clan they had married into, shaping their family’s values and mores.
In 1926, the Nation invited Ruth, Cornelia, and fifteen other women to explore and comment on the nature of their personal feminism.
Cornelia considered herself a “public feminist,” committed to women’s issues from a political and civic perspective.
Ruth called herself a “new-style” feminist of the 1920s, though she spoke out when she felt that it was watranted.
The Heterodoxy Club’s biweekly lunch meetings became a model for the Women’s Liberation Movement of the late 1960s.
At early meetings of Heterodoxy, members would openly risk revealing their deepest feelings about their experiences growing up.
Mary’s parents were therefore the kind of role models who would encourage her to become as politically and culturally engaged as they themselves were.
The Pinchot home environment fostered personal exploration of all kinds.
To be sure, wealth and privilege played their parts in this—there were no worries about dayto-day survival, and Mary enjoyed more opportunities to engage her developing self than she might have under more straitened circumstances.
But privilege didn’t deserve all the credit; there was something innate in Mary that made her extraordinary.
When Mary was just a toddler playing on a Long Island beach, her mother noted the confidence and sense of self-worth that her daughter possessed.
In a letter that Ruth wrote to Amos, she joked that their self-possessed child “is a perfect little bully.
She knows she can make Elizabeth cry easily and teases her all the time.
Mary was shaped and molded by all of these influences, as well as by her suffragist aunt Cornelia and her mother.
Brearley boasted rigorous academics for the daughters and granddaughters of many well-known figures, including Margaret Mead, Franklin Delano Roosevelt, Eugene O’Neill, and eventually John F Kennedy.
Self-expression and exploration were given top priority, complementing and supporting Mary’s family life.
Even as an adolescent, Mary was physically stunning to behold—a blonde nymph from an ethereal dimension, strong and beautifully proportioned, at once athletic and graceful, yet uncompromisingly feminine.
At the Ritz-Carlton or the Waldorf-Astoria, Mary was the belle of the ball.
Weekends were filled with parties at New England’s elite prep schools—St.
Bill Attwood would one day become President Kennedy’s ambassador to Guinea.
But in the winter of 1936, Attwood was the guy with the prettiest date at Choate.
There had been dozens of Choaties and ex-Choaties there, and Geoffrey and Bill Attwood, both fifth-formers at Choate, had competed for her attention all evening.
Young Attwood’s ardor, however, was impressive, as was his disposition.
Geoffrey, it appeared, was too much bluster and peacock strut for Mary’s taste.
Bill Attwood, on the other hand, was respectful, though not sycophantic.
They realized they both lived on Park Avenue only several blocks apart.
Boldness then inspired young Attwood on the telephone that day, for he wasted no time, and no opportunity.
He asked Mary if she’d like to go dancing at the Persian Room that afternoon.
She recognized that afternoon with Bill as an invitation for exploration.
Mary didn’t mention the fact that Bill’s nemesis— Geoffrey Monroe Bruére—had already requested her favor, but she hadn’t accepted.
By February of 1936, young Jack Kennedy, a 1935 graduate of Choate, was increasingly worried about the state of his health.
He was undergoing tests for colitis and being kept for observation at the Peter Bent Brigham Hospital in Boston that winter.
Having already confronted death during his battle with scarlet fever as a child, along with endless chronic infirmities throughout his adolescence, Jack was already facing the possibility of an early demise.
Several of Kennedy’s biographers believed this was one reason he became so obsessed, even manic, about giving himself as much sexual pleasure as possible during his adult life.
While he was recuperating in early 1936, Kennedy’s letters to his former Choate roommate Lem Billings bragged of how he was, even in precarious health, “catting about” with nurses, as well as the teenage girls he was dating.
But when it came to women, Jack already had a role model in his father.
The Kennedy males were such a libidinous wolf pack on the prowl that the young wolf cubs, at father’s behest, would deliver female “companions” to the patriarch himself.
Along with their wealth and fine Irish good looks, the Kennedy boys would inherit their father’s penchant for philandering—in addition to the duplicity and chauvinism that went along with it.
Despite Jack’s health concerns, he would leave the hospital on weekends to socialize.
The girls might stay in Choate’s Memorial House or even in their boyfriends’ rooms, while their dates would sleep on cots in the gym.
Often, the boys left secretive, lascivious notes in their beds, hoping their girls would find and read them.
The social weekend was filled with athletic events, sit-down formal dinners, and afternoon teas, culminating in a formal Saturday night dance.
Perhaps he thought the homecoming on familiar territory would be good for his selfconfidence, which had lagged since being forced to take a medical leave from his studies at Princeton, still in the Class of 1939.
Whatever the force that drew him backward isn’t known, but something propelled him; for during the gala Winter Festivities Dance of 1936, he would encounter Mary Pinchot for the very first time, etching into his being an unforgettable moment.
Anyone could see that Mary Pinchot’s beauty was alluring, and it certainly wasn’t lost on young Bill Attwood.
As the dancing progressed, Attwood unfortunately discovered he had a rival for Mary’s attention.
It wasn’t the only cut-in he had to contend with that night, but it had to have been one of the more daunting—and it happened repeatedly.
The diary that she kept during that period might offer some clues, but Mary’s descendents have opted not to disclose it, although admitting it still exists.
In his 1967 memoir, however, Bill Attwood recalled the 1936 Choate dance and the rival he had in the future president of the United States.
I remember that we sat in the garden talking about the Profumo case and reminiscing about our school days.
Mary Meyer, a Washington artist who’d been my date at a prom twentyeight years before, was between us, and Kennedy happily recalled having cut in on her on the dance floor.
It was hard, at times like that, to realize he was President of the United States.
It appeared, however, that the younger Mary had not been immediately smitten with Jack, evidenced by the fact that her relationship with Attwood lasted well into their undergraduate years, his at Princeton and hers at Vassar.
All through Attwood’s diary from late 1935 to 1939, he made entries about “Pinchy’s” impact.
His father had recently fallen ill, and his mother was afraid and upset.
He seemed to find Mary more attainable as a result of her family’s kindness toward his mother.
During his visit, he didn’t write about any intimate connection with Mary.
When activity coalesced around the tennis court, Bill noted that his girlfriend had a particularly aggressive game.
The man who had passed that game down to his daughter was also at the court that day.
Attwood’s insecurity about his sweetheart, however, reared itself in his private musings that day.
He finally allowed himself to let go romantically, recognizing that it was ever meant to be.
Amos Pinchot was so undone by his daughter’s death that he lapsed into a temporary bout of hysterical blindness.
It would be the start of a downward spiral into depression from which he would never recover.
Sixteen years older than Mary, Rosamund was a model of glamour and sophistication, endowed with an uncommon grace.
Rosamund was a prolific diary keeper, and by the time of her death she had filled some fifteen hundred pages with private thoughts and recollections that were eventually edited and published by Bibi Gaston, her granddaughter, in 2008.
The book, The Loveliest Woman in America, took its title from a compliment lavished on the twenty-three-year-old Rosamund in 1927 by British actress and poet Iris Tree.
Rosamund had also been an actress, but her fledgling acting career was largely a flop after only a few films, and the Pinchot girls didn’t take well to failure.
No doubt compounding her pain had been a failed marriage, followed by a stormy affair with Broadway theater producer and Hollywood director Jed Harris.
When she took her life in January 1938, she was thirty-four years old and had two young sons.
The event shattered Amos, and left a scarring impression on Mary and the entire family.
In fact, he feared for the future of his family, often secretly dulling his anxiety with copious amounts of alcohol.
The effects of his drinking became known to Mary one evening when she was about to graduate from Brearley.
Amos, drunk, became combative and criticized his daughter’s social life.
Mary retorted in her own defense, and Amos slapped her across the face.
Her companion that evening must have been shocked and embarrassed by the spectacle, yet already the unflappable Mary was not one to back down.
Perhaps inspired by Rosamund’s example, Mary became a committed diarist.
Starting when she was seventeen—soon after her sister died—she would use the act of writing as a tool for self-realization and reflection, especially in times of emotional crisis, and rely on it throughout her life.
As noted previously, most of her earlier diary is still in existence, but its contents are unknown outside the family.
According to Bibi Gaston, “Requiem” had first been written in Mary’s diary.
Requiem I saw her lying there so calm and still, With one camellia placed beside her head.
She looked the same, and yet, her soul and will Being gone she did not seem dead.
I thought if one so loved and beautiful Should wish to leave, perhaps there was a voice That called her back—and she was dutiful.
In some far place, where all the lovely things Of earth are born, the gods no longer weep.
While Mary’s initial path led to journalism, she had arrived at Vassar considering a career in medicine.
She was drawn to the idea of helping people, but she ultimately preferred the arts and the literary life.
Unlike many of her classmates, she frequently chose solitude over the clamor of endless parties, gossip, and Ivy League college weekends.
While her beauty ensured she never lacked for attention, she wasn’t attention seeking.
Ego gratification wasn’t her objective; her affirmation seemed to come from within.
Mary’s independence was already a well-established hallmark of her character by the time she entered college.
At one point during her undergraduate years, Vassar’s administration abruptly forbade the student body to patronize the drugstore adjacent to campus.
Mary, in flagrant violation of the new edict, recruited a reluctant classmate and went to the pharmacy—to learn its side of the story.
According to the classmate, it appeared that someone at the store—a proprietor or an employee—might have made an unwanted advance toward a Vassar student.
Mary’s former classmate had lost the specific details, but her memory of the event remained clear many years later.
In addition to maintaining a relationship with Bill Attwood at Princeton, she traveled to Yale and Williams for weekend visits with other male friends—none of them flames.
It appears that Mary met her future husband, Cord Meyer, during one of her visits to Yale, even though they didn’t date at the time.
Cord himself wrote that he only knew Mary “slightly before the war”; in fact, he was a year behind her in college , but graduated in December 1942 due to an accelerated wartime academic schedule.
During that period, Mary also crossed paths again with Jack Kennedy, but no relationship ensued.
However charming, Jack was decidedly a wealthy playboy and always on the make.
She thirsted for something deeper, a man with purpose, a partnership of allies.
In one of his impromptu campus visits to Vassar, Jack in fact introduced himself to a gullible classmate of Mary’s.
The two went on a date, during which Jack, eager to carve another notch, concocted a story that he had recently been stricken with leukemia and had only weeks to live.
His gullible date felt so sorry for him, she took pity, and slept with him that night, unaware of the duplicity young Kennedy had employed in taking her for a ride.
One of the most revealing glimpses into Mary’s psyche at Vassar was a short story she authored in the spring of 1941 for the Vassar Review and Little Magazine.
Published six times during the college year, the magazine enjoyed an independent circulation beyond the college community.
Bored by idle chitchat, Ruth stands away from the crowd, casting a gaze around Beatrice’s recently redecorated living room.
As she passes the florist’s window, she notices that the orchids have been replaced by a variety of other flowers, and that the display includes two framed paintings, one of which features sunflowers by Van Gogh.
The sight of baby’s breath elicits the sound of a calm sea washing up on a beach at night.
One dimension of Mary’s story describes what is commonly known as synesthesia.
It is, to some degree, a medical condition whereby in certain people and animals, a stimulus in one sense modality involuntarily elicits a literal sensation/experience in another sense modality.
The elicited synesthetic experience doesn’t replace the normal experience; it just enhances it.
One irony of “Futility” was that it foreshadowed a significant event in Mary’s later life.
The fictional character Ruth Selwyn was having a classic hallucinogenic experience after her operation.
As an emerging artist in the late 1950s, Mary would embark on her own exploration of psychedelics, including LSD and psilocybin.
This wasn’t superficial thrill seeking on her part; it was more the result of being in the vanguard of a group of people, many of whom were already established artists in quest of greater selfexpression.
How ironic that someone would later appear in her life who was obsessed and surrounded by orchids, someone who had presented himself as a friend, before his betrayal.
The “chicly cadaverous” women, who had succumbed to a life of wanting for nothing, horrified her; yet all around Mary and her contemporaries, social influence dictated the grooming for such a life.
By 1940 all of Europe would be struggling against the warlord march of Germany and Adolf Hitler.
Having been selected as one of the twenty-four most beautiful women in the sophomore class to carry the chain of daisies and laurel at commencement, Mary Pinchot had worn the wreath known as the Vassar Daisy Chain, Vassar’s most famous tradition.
In September, Germany began the devastating bombing of London—seventy-six consecutive nights of air strikes known as the London Blitz.
While Glen Miller and Tommy Dorsey pumped out music with time to dance, young men, many of Mary’s contemporaries, were disappearing late at night to enlist.
The sophomoric college days of endless parties and gaiety had abruptly come to a halt.
With the attack on Pearl Harbor in December 1941, an era—almost overnight—had ended.
Academic calendars were curtailed; graduation ceremonies took place in December instead of June, if they took place at all.
Everywhere, the preparations and demands of a world at war were becoming all consuming.
She found a job as a feature writer for United Press International , established her own column, and enjoyed rapid success.
Robert L Schwartz was a young Naval officer and a journalist for Yank magazine.
Hailing from a Midwestern Jewish background in Salem, Ohio, the handsome Schwartz was tall, lean, and intellectually articulate by any standard.
That night, he noticed a woman so alluring, he felt impelled to meet her.
Tim Costello, the bar owner, was particularly protective of Mary and operated as a kind of “guardian at the gate,” particularly if the men became obnoxious.
From the bar, they went out for dinner and stayed up into the early hours of the morning, talking about almost everything.
From the start, Schwartz recalled, Mary defined herself in terms of her pacifism and hatred of all wars, including the one before them in 1942.
Wars and violence were anathema to her, and she wanted Bob to know that at the outset.
Never had he laid eyes on such an astoundingly beautiful, complex woman.
Schwartz recalled with great fondness how he walked Mary home that night, how she talked about the nature of the humorous in life.
Her sophistication impressed and excited him, and he wanted to share his own sense of humor with her.
As they walked past a bookstore window, Bob pointed out a book by an author that he considered very funny.
A look came over Mary’s face, Schwartz remembered, and he read from it her aversion to his taste.
He might have been projecting, but he began to feel that Mary was thinking she had made a colossal mistake by choosing to spend the evening with him.
After they said good-bye that Friday evening, Bob chastised himself for pointing out the book to such an extraordinary woman.
Their connection deepened Schwartz’s sensitivity and prompted them both to explore life’s biggest questions.
In addition to revealing more about her pacifism, Mary allowed her spiritual sensibility and the seriousness with which she approached it to be known.
During the war, it was easy to charter big sailboats—yawls and ketches—for sailing on Long Island Sound.
Often taking weeklong cruises, both alone and with friends, sometimes exploring the Connecticut River, they found an idyllic peace during wartime on those the trips.
The pair swam naked in the estate’s waterfalls amid the property’s verdant idyllic acres.
If you’re true royalty, you don’t have to flaunt it, and she never did.
Some Fridays, the two would ride the Wabash Railroad from Newark to Pennsylvania and Grey Towers.
Excited to be together for the weekend, always enjoying a fast repartee, they played with childlike spontaneity.
On one trip, they started a raucous pillow fight, chasing each other up and down the aisles.
Laughing, feathers flying everywhere, they managed to draw other passengers into the fray.
Even as a young woman, Mary would challenge the status quo of their relationship if she perceived some inequality.
Schwartz remembered one weekend at “the country place” when Mary challenged Bob on what he recalled as “a certain failure of citizenship” that bothered her.
Alone one evening at Grey Towers, Mary brought up the fact that she was always left in the kitchen to do the dishes after they had dinner, while Bob would habitually retire to the living room to read the newspaper.
At first, the issue completely eluded Schwartz, oblivious to any problem at all.
Mary’s mother, Ruth, seemed to approve of Bob, though he often wondered whether Ruth felt that he was worthy of her daughter.
In fact, it seems that Bob might have underestimated the esteem in which Ruth held him.
Pinchot confided to Bob that her daughter’s friendship with a young woman named Liz Wheeler worried her.
At the time, Jack Wheeler’s stable of writers was impressive; it included Ernest Hemingway, Sheilah Graham, and F Scott Fitzgerald.
Liz, along with several other women boarders, had lived for a time with the Pinchots on Park Avenue.
He let it be known that he and Mary had a “vigorous” and “fulfilling” attraction to one another.
As her life progressed, people often flocked toward her, desiring the possibility of connection she offered.
As Bob Schwartz recalled, “Mary never did anything that didn’t have a sense of totality about it.
During a transcontinental train trip to California, where Bob and Mary both had journalism assignments, they stopped in Salem, Ohio, to visit Bob’s mother.
At one point during the visit, Bob asked his mother what she thought about Mary.
She made it clear to her favorite son that it was obvious Mary wanted to marry him.
I didn’t feel comfortable with everyone always looking at her on the street, but not really noticing me.
Schwartz didn’t believe that he would ever really get Ruth’s “benediction” to marry her daughter.
All the while, however, Mary had been making it clear to Bob how much he meant to her.
Obviously aware of the impending breakup, Tony had maintained a friendship with Bob throughout the time he had a relationship with her sister.
Tony confided to Bob that for years she and the rest of the family had “wearily” watched the endless parade of men that Mary kept dragging home for her parents and family to meet.
Tony then emphatically, and in no uncertain terms, told Bob that it was he who was the true standout—the only one she and her mother ever wanted in their family.
Even with that benediction, whether Schwartz believed he “needed to be out of his sailor’s suit and a full-fledged adult before he could get married,” something kept telling him his time with Mary had run its course, in spite of the fact that Mary had been so clear about wanting to be with him.
Many years later, Schwartz found himself conferring with a psychoanalyst with regard to his relationship with one of his children.
His relationship with Mary, and the memory he had forged of her leaving him, kept coming up.
After a bit of work, the analyst confronted him, not believing that it was Mary who ended it, but him.
When he did, we both accepted it, but not before we shaped each other’s future.
She never could be with anyone who didn’t have some of the things I had, and I could never be with another woman after Mary who couldn’t understand what Mary had been for me.
Even in 2008, he remained unsure what to make of it, though he didn’t want to entertain any conspiracy theories.
Now in his eighties, a connoisseur and lover of ballet, Bob Schwartz ultimately compared Mary Meyer to what he called a prima ballerina assoluta.
The term was originally inspired by the Italian masters of the early Romantic ballet and was only bestowed on a ballerina who was considered exceptional, and above all others.
The first recorded use of the title was by the renowned French ballet master Marius Petipa when he bestowed it on the Italian ballerina Pierina Legnani in 1894.
In the Soviet Union, Galina Ulanova and Maya Plisetskaya were eventually honored as such.
Others awarded the distinction included Alicia Alonso from Cuba, and Margot Fonteyn from England.
To date, no American ballerina has ever held the rank, though Rudolf Nureyev considered Cynthia Gregory to be deserving of such a title.
Husbands, go back to your young wives, who cry in the night and count the anxious days.
Farmers, return to your fields, where the grain rots and the house slides into ruin.
The only certain fruit of this insanity will be the rotting bodies upon which the sun will impartially shine tomorrow.
With the morning we shall go together and in charity and hope build a new life and a new world. —Cord Meyer Jr.
Patriotism at the expense of another nation is as wicked as racism at the expense of another race.
That evening, the thirty surviving Marines dug in for the night in their foxholes.
One had sideswiped Cord and literally cut the tip off a cigar that had been in the breast pocket of his jacket.
He lit the cigar later that day and “pretended a courage” he didn’t feel.
Cord Meyer lay alongside his sergeant in a foxhole that was barely a foot deep.
To combat his fear as the night sky darkened with rain clouds, Cord tried to conjure lust by summoning pornographic images in his mind.
With each attack, the lieutenant and his sergeant fought back and then endured the deafening silences between rounds.
In a state of mental detachment, he was able to see the entire spectacle of war that confronted him.
After all, “adult human beings of the civilized world did not slaughter one another.
The fact that guns have been placed in our hands and some of us wear one uniform and some another is no excuse for the mass murder we are about to commit.
There are differences between us, I know, but none of them worth the death of one man.
We were taken from our peaceful lives and told to fight for reasons we cannot understand.
Surely we have more in common than that which temporarily separates us.
At 0300 hours, a Japanese grenade rolled into his foxhole, exploding in his face and killing his sergeant.
Cord lay mortally wounded, contemplating death, bleeding everywhere, pieces of his teeth like half-eaten peanuts awash in his mouth of blood.
The blast had shattered one eye completely and left the other so badly damaged it was swollen shut.
Still conscious, he searched with one hand for his.caliber pistol to end his misery.
Why had he not followed his conscience and refused military service, he bemoaned as he lay there dying, cursing nation-state savagery and war.
Meyer senior had reportedly looked his four boys over, having had his own combat experience in World War I “Of all his sons, he decided Cord Jr. would be able to take it least of all,” wrote journalist Croswell Bowen in 1948.
Found the next morning, Cord was immediately transported to a nearby hospital ship, where the doctor told those around him, “He’s got about 20 minutes to live,” and listed him as dead on the battalion roster, causing his parents terrible distress.
Cord would, in fact, live—and thrive; but his mistaken death notice foreshadowed his twin brother Quentin’s loss a year later.
His twin brother Quentin was named for his father’s best friend, Quentin Roosevelt, son of President Theodore Roosevelt.
Wealthy and socially prominent with strong political ties, the Meyer family was an influential one.
Like their father, the twins Cord and Quentin were educated at the elite St.
The school was a breeding ground for those who would one day assume positions of power in business and politics.
While Quentin often stood out athletically, Cord was the academic star who also had intense feelings of social responsibility.
Paul’s, recalled in 1948 that “Cord was fundamentally a poet,” yet he was imbued with a kind of temperament “that had a fixed habit of going off the deep end; he blew like a half gale.
He may sometimes have been a little absurd in those days, but when he cooled down as he sometimes did, he amused himself as much as he did the rest of us.
In point of fact, Cord’s emotional intensity was a double-edged sword, and would remain so for the rest of his life.
Channeled constructively, it might have compelled an entire country to seek out something yet unimagined.
Paul’s, Cord entered Yale in 1939, just after war had been declared in Europe.
Despite the distant thunder of marching German armies, Cord immersed himself in the academic cornucopia that lay before him.
During late-night dormitory arguments at Yale’s Davenport College, the war in Europe inevitably took center stage.
His was the heart of a conscientious objector when it came to all things war.
The contradiction caused Cord to view war as nothing less than internationally sanctioned anarchy, and it would later become the chief organizing principle of his work for world peace.
Yet however “fundamentally a poet,” or philosophically a conscientious objector, Cord became bound by the conventions of his time.
With Japan’s attack at Pearl Harbor in December 1941, “the only question left for debate was which branch of the service to join,” Cord recalled in 1980.
Enlisting in the Marine Corps Officer Candidate School at Quantico, Virginia, Cord completed his Yale graduation requirements early.
By the time he graduated in December 1942, he had been elected to Phi Beta Kappa, played goalie for the Yale hockey team, and had been a publishing editor of the Yale Literary Magazine.
Yale president Charles Seymour bestowed the honor on Cord, his voice quivering with emotion.
Years later, journalist Merle Miller would recall that moment when Cord, in full Marine regalia, received the honor.
Like many soldiers in combat, Cord wrote letters home, chronicling his experiences and their effect on him.
So eloquent and forthright were Cord’s letters that Edward Weeks, editor of the Atlantic Monthly, when shown the letters by Cord’s uncle, decided to publish them even before Cord returned from the Pacific.
He emerged as a hero from his convalescence, having earned the Bronze Star and Purple Heart.
I owe it to those who fell beside me, and to those many others who will die before it’s done, the assurance that I will do all that is in my small power to make the future for which they died an improvement upon the past.
Their connection this time, however, fueled a passion that was as intellectual and spiritual as it was physical.
For Cord, Mary was a “roman candle” who not only demanded and supported his vision of a world without war, but also shared an emerging focus on how to convince the masses of its rightness.
It was to be a partnership of equals as their crusade began to take place on the world stage.
Throughout the fall and into the winter of 1945, Mary and Cord deepened their union while forging and exploring the possibilities for action.
Not interested in entering his family’s well-established, highly profitable real estate business, he considered a legal career to be a sound stepping-stone to public life.
But the drudgery of the law curriculum bored him; he longed to continue writing.
In April 1945, Cord received word that former Minnesota governor Harold Stassen, soon to be a United States delegate to the San Francisco Conference that would establish the United Nations, had chosen him to be one of his aides for the conference.
Cord leaped at the chance and immediately went to Washington to meet with Stassen.
Stassen had chosen Cord on recommendations from a number of American colleges.
Increasingly persuasive and articulate about his emerging vision for the prospect of a world without war, Cord was critical of the first UN conference in San Francisco.
Despite the extravagant press claims that the conference had been a major step forward in ensuring a peaceful future for the world, Cord already knew differently.
The proposed UN Security Council veto power, as well as certain other provisions, made it virtually impossible for the new organization to protect against armed aggression.
I don’t see how it can prevent war unless it grows into something more than seems to be contemplated here.
It was May 2, 1945, barely a week after the UN charter conference in San Francisco had begun.
The mission he and Mary would share for the next three years was coming into focus, and his presence at the conference wasn’t going unnoticed.
As it happened, or perhaps as fate would have it, Jack Kennedy was covering the event as a newspaper correspondent for the Hearst newspaper Chicago Herald-American.
His stories always included his picture, byline, and a short bio—”PT-boat hero of the South Pacific and son of former Ambassador, Joseph P Kennedy”—as well his authorship of the bestselling Why England Slept.
Yet Jack’s astute grasp of the unfolding post-World War II power grab was steadily drawing attention.
Like Cord, he was being courted by the Atlantic Monthly’s editor, Edward Weeks.
Still dazzled by Mary’s allure, Jack was willing to try almost anything to stay connected with her.
Testosterone sparks of territorial infringement quickly flared amid whatever social discourse was taking place.
Realizing Cord’s position as a principal liaison to United States delegate Harold Stassen, Jack wanted to interview him for one of his press filings, but Cord snubbed him, declining the invitation.
Jack never forgot the dismissal; years later, when Cord wanted out of the CIA and solicited Kennedy for the ambassadorship to Guatemala, the president ignored him.
Joseph W Shimon, a close Kennedy White House aide who talked and walked with President Kennedy daily, noted in 1975 that the president never forgave anyone who crossed him.
Jack was a strong, deep, silent guy, really more so than people realize.
Despite the many efforts to find some unifying supranational authority against “the death agony of nationalism” that forever propelled one nation against another, the United Nations was neutered even before its inception.
The press had made extravagant claims about the conference as a major step toward ensuring peace throughout the world, but Cord felt differently.
The proposed United Nations Security Council veto power, for example, made it virtually impossible for the new organization to protect against armed aggression.
The Soviets, keen to protect their independence, had opposed all attempts to give the UN real power.
So had the United States Senate, which prohibited the American delegation from proposing anything that would limit America’s hegemony.
Cord’s frustration with bureaucratic roadblocks, however, paled next to the wrenching horror he experienced upon receiving an early morning phone call from his mother on May 31.
His fraternal twin brother, Quentin, had been killed in action during an entrenched battle with the Japanese on Okinawa.
Quentin had rushed to help him and was killed by fragments from a Japanese grenade.
The war between nations had just become even more personal, taking from Cord someone whom he had loved deeply Though comforted by Mary, Cord was shattered by the death of his brother, yet there was little show of grief.
Without expression, “absolute fury” and the emotional pain that drove it would eventually extract the kind of toll that forever torments a soul.
Those closest to Cord would repeatedly remark how big a blow the death of his twin brother had been.
The letter Cord wrote to his parents after brother Quentin’s death was disciplined, stoic, and philosophical.
He spoke of his brother’s bravery, of his lack of guile, and his belief that Quentin would go on living in the hearts and minds of those who loved him.
If I could only understand clearly what it said, then it should be done no matter what the obstacles or the dangers.
Jack Kennedy’s close friend Chuck Spaulding had known Cord well enough to be “fascinated by the difference between Meyer and Jack,” perhaps sensing that either one of them might rise to the greatest of political heights.
Such became the hardened character of these men, both of whom had looked up “the asshole of death” and survived war’s slaughter.
But though he was imbued with the sensibility of a poet, the province of genuine human intimacy often challenged and eluded Cord.
His deepest emotional expression seemed confined to his journal writing, in which he demonstrated an unusually complex understanding and vulnerability that he was rarely able to express in life.
Jack Kennedy appeared content to avoid any intimacy in human relationships entirely.
After leaving the UN San Francisco Conference, Cord and Mary traveled by train to Montana to take a month-long honeymoon.
The cross-country train trip provided many hours for the essential discussion and reflection between the husband-and-wife team.
Mary’s editing attempts only provoked his ire, eventually exasperating her to tears.
Pulling no punches, Cord sternly warned that “for those of us who have fought not for power but because we believe in the possibility of peace, the Charter is nothing more than a series of harmless platitudes.
The article was due for publication in September 1945, and Cord submitted it at the very beginning of August.
Edward Weeks, the editor of the Atlantic Monthly, was so impressed with Cord’s latest essay that he advised his acolyte to give up law and go to graduate school at Harvard, a door that Weeks would help open.
Weeks considered Cord to be the brightest intellectual star, and he wanted him to be surrounded by the best minds.
He facilitated Cord and Mary’s transition to Cambridge that September by giving Mary a job on the Atlantic’s editorial staff.
In less than one month, Harvard would prove to be his launching pad to the world stage.
In October 1945, Cord was invited to the Dublin Conference on World Peace in Dublin, New Hampshire.
Reves’s book articulated the world federalist belief that the nation-state system was no longer viable.
Given economic interdependence and capitalism’s need for a borderless world, the nation-state could no longer assure prosperity or stability, now that civilization had to contend with nuclear weapons.
Only a supranational world government would create the possibility of protecting peace and promoting prosperity throughout the world, while hopefully promoting democracy as well.
Cord agreed with this assessment, and he was able to articulate the vision in a way that no one else could.
Norman Cousins, then editor of the Saturday Review, recalled walking into a bedroom and finding Cord sitting quietly on the edge of the bed, “... holding at bay some of the best minds in the country.
Cord spoke quietly and with great intellectual force,’ Cousins recalled in 1947.
Ideas for a new platform for world peace initiatives were gaining acceptance.
He was asked by the Nation to write a series of articles that would bring into sharper focus a new policy for shaping and keeping the peace in the nascent nuclear age.
Cord published “Waves of Darkness” in the January 1946 Atlantic Monthly.
It would prove to be his best writing and one of the most insightful, penetrating war stories ever produced.
The O Henry Prize story gave a lightly fictionalized account of Cord’s foxhole trauma, and the force of will it took for him to go on living.
That fall, Harvard bestowed yet another distinction on Cord, designating him a Lowell Fellow, one of the university’s highest honors.
In February 1947, all of the United States organizations committed to the possibility of achieving world government convened in Asheville, North Carolina.
His clarity of focus, entwined with his acumen for understanding, impressed the leaders of the various organizations represented at the conference.
In spite of his youth—he was only twenty-six at the time—Cord was put forward as the person with the potential to lead the new movement for world government.
Within two years, the UWF’s paid membership of seventeen thousand supporters swelled to forty thousand members.
The UWF had fifteen state branches, several hundred local chapters, and a galvanized student movement.
In addition, Cord’s new book, Peace or Anarchy, sold more than fifty thousand copies.
World Federalism became part of the American political landscape, attracting wide interest by such notables as atomic scientists Albert Einstein and Edward Teller, political figures Chester Bowles, General Douglas MacArthur, and finally President Truman himself.
In 1949, Cord delivered an impassioned statement before the House Committee on Foreign Affairs.
The July 1947 issue of Glamour featured an article entitled “Wise American Leadership Is the Hope of World,” by Vera Michaels Dean.
Written and published in three languages , it outlined six basic requirements for the preservation of world peace.
Immediately following the article was a portrait gallery of ten men, entitled “Young Men Who Care,” ranked in order of importance.
The first two, ironically pictured side by side, were none other than Cord Meyer Jr. and John F Kennedy.
Ex-Yale and ex-Marine Corps, he gives back for the eye he lost in combat.
In a democracy which needs the best of its young men, here’s one son of an influential father who didn’t settle for a soft life.
Th the end, Cord’s heroic effort to bring world government to the national political stage would be stymied by international events, as well as by his organization’s inability to connect with the average American.
Soviet Russia entered the nuclear world stage, testing its first successful atomic bomb in 1949.
Relations with the Russians were already rapidly deteriorating in the aftermath of the Czechoslovakian coup, the Berlin crisis, a Communist victory in China, and, most dramatically, the Korean War.
Such fear-laden World Federalist slogans as “one world or none” lost their appeal as the Federalist cause became enmeshed in its own complexity, internal politics, and inability to be more easily understood by the general public.
The growing paranoia over “Communism,” coupled with Russia’s elevation to superpower status, engendered a new mindset, the era known as the Cold War.
No longer persuasive concerning the darkening storms from every direction, the World Federalist movement receded.
During the years he tirelessly devoted himself to finding a solution for world peace, Cord had a companion other than Mary.
A dark melancholy had descended upon the World Federalist hero, intermingled with bouts of nervous exhaustion.
Whether driven by his “absolute fury,” or his unresolved grief over the loss of his brother Quentin, Cord turned inward, despairing that the new world order was headed for nuclear Armageddon.
Increasingly despondent, Cord took refuge in alcohol and nonstop chain-smoking, often finishing the first of several daily packs by midmorning.
Rudderless and morose, unable to envision his next move, the strain was taking a huge toll, and not just on Cord.
Not only had Mary been the stalwart figure behind Cord’s career—bearing his children, keeping house, editing his speeches and articles, and most important, aligning herself in complete support of the mission he had undertaken —she had exhausted her own reserves in the process.
Incessantly preoccupied, Cord wanted only to know what the future might hold for him as his fellowship came to an end.
Saddled with mothering two young boys, and a third son born in February 1950, she carried all the family burdens and daily chores.
Taking refuge in his journal, Cord wrote of how tired he was of his own career dilemma, “wrestling with terms of personal decision and action” as to where he should focus.
Unable to reach him directly, Mary pursued Cord in his journal, leaving comments for him to ponder.
The verse appeared as a thinly disguised expression of his feelings about Mary, and he surely meant her to take it as such when she discovered it.
Proper Tribute Beauty, she wears carelessly like a bright gown, Lent for a night by some indulgent guest And is dismissed to find that no man loves Only herself in that brief garment dressed.
In genuine surprise She smiles at praise that would-be lovers bring As proper tribute to her transient eyes.
She never earned With work or special talent her tall grace, Her full breasts or her abundant hair.
But now that beauty’s hers by nature’s gift, She must its burden bear and growing learn What damage in poor hearts her passing wrecks.
She bites her fingernails, Fails to shave under her arms, Has no sense of humor, And is a totally mundane soul.
Cora’s decision in 1951 to work for the CIA was not about following a calling or answering destiny.
He had wanted to continue writing, and he had hoped that his tenure as a Lowell Fellow at Harvard might lead to an academic post.
But postwar economics being what they were, academia was not recruiting.
He consulted Secretary of State Dean Acheson for a job in the State Department, but there was none for him.
It is not known exactly when Cord’s first contact with Allen Dulles took place.
Possibly contacted by Cord’s father, Dulles had already been apprised of Cord’s “splendid qualifications” as early as February 1951.
By March of that year, the two had met in Washington, and Cord obviously went away intrigued by what Dulles had offered him, which remained top secret and classified.
Following his interview with Dulles, he met with another Dulles protégé already at the CIA, Gerald E Miller.
It isn’t clear from Cord’s personal papers and letters what the “other possibility” was, though it may have been an academic appointment.
The O Henry Prize winner and best-selling author was so brilliant and talented, he could have excelled at anything he attempted.
With a leap of faith, he might have become a major literary figure during his lifetime.
And so Cord Meyer allowed himself to be seduced by Allen Dulles, a man bent on filling the Agency’s ranks with East Coast, patrician Ivy Leaguers, whose arrogance would become evident in their disdain for anything in their way, including the rule of law.
In making this decision, Cord turned away from his soul call, and also from Mary, abandoning the prospect of world peace for the waging of a new kind of war.
He joined what would later be called the Directorate of Plans, the CIA’s most secretive division dedicated to the manipulation of world order.
Cord easily established himself as a rising star whose acuity often surpassed that of his peers, his well-born brethren—people like Richard Bissell, Tracy Barnes, Desmond FitzGerald, Richard Helms, even Jim Angleton—many of whom had come out of the Office of Strategic Services after the war.
It was a cozy arrangement of socially connected men from prominent families.
Yet for Cord, putting his talents to work for the CIA must have been bittersweet.
There would be no more “quiet work—the labor of the mind and the heart, pure in the sense that it is done for its own sake and not for some ulterior end of wealth or power,” as he once wrote.
The Cold War was, in fact, not cold, but hot, and it promised anything but world peace.
Somewhere in the bowels of the Washington E Street offices of the newly formed CIA, Cord Meyer transformed all his poetic, insightful visionary wisdom into perfecting schemes and strategies for America’s greater power and control, the often subtle but effective attempts at world domination—no matter what the cost.
Cold Warrior by day, increasingly frustrated and intoxicated at night, like many of his colleagues, the man who one journalist had once believed was destined to be “the first president of the parliament of man” was now weathering in corrosion.
Yet still brilliant and talented, he achieved success quickly and often.
Nicknamed “Cyclops” by his colleagues, his ubiquitous cigarette dangling from the right side of his mouth, its smoke forever wafting up through the corridor of his glass eye, Cord became known for arrogantly chiding anyone who had overlooked some important detail that only he himself could have grasped.
He believed we should be spying, not the crazy things Cord had concocted.
While the FI [Foreign Intelligence] section—the spies—couldn’t do diddly squat against prime targets like the Soviets and Communist China, Cord was running all these crazy things like Radio Free Europe and Operation Mockingbird and having great success.
The boys were still very young— Quentin was five, Michael was four, and Mark was almost two.
They bought a grand old southernstyle house on nearly three acres of land, just a few miles from Chain Bridge on the Potomac River.
It had a spacious, window-lined living room, a library, and a dining room with French doors that opened onto a landscaped terrace.
Upstairs, there were six well-spaced bedrooms and two renovated full bathrooms.
Outside, there were large oak trees, rolling hills, and gardens, as well as a white-fenced riding stable, complete with a small barn.
Mary, for her part, would be reunited with her sister, Tony, now married to Washington attorney Steuart Pittman and living nearby.
Many of Mary’s former Vassar classmates were also raising families in the area.
Coupled with family life, the gaiety of the Washington social scene—dinner and cocktail parties, dances at the Waltz Group, Sunday-morning touch football games at Palisades Park—now took command as the Cold Warriors and the rest of the “Greatest Generation” ascended in their careers.
But if indeed silence sometimes “fired the imagination of the spiritually timid,” Mary wasn’t content to sit still where the life and future of her children were concerned.
The fact that she was no longer crusading for world peace didn’t mean that the future peace and happiness of her progeny could be neglected.
She wanted something different from what she had experienced as a young girl.
A new era of progressive education was unfolding in the early 1950s as Mary embarked on the search for a school in which to enroll her children.
She came upon an educational experiment that embodied something she thought important.
It was the first private, coeducational, multicultural, and racially integrated school in Washington, a city that was still mostly segregated.
The school had been founded by seven families who wanted to create not only a learning environment committed to academic excellence and educational innovation, but also an overall educational experience that emphasized children of all races learning together.
The school’s educational philosophy grew out of such bold educational experiments as Black Mountain College in North Carolina, Goddard College in Vermont, and the work of German philosopher Rudolf Steiner, father of Waldorf education.
Many of the teachers in the first racially mixed schools of the 1950s had been educated at Goddard and Black Mountain.
Many students took public transportation when their parents had little means of transporting them.
The pupils were grouped together mostly by age, ability, and social development, not necessarily by grade level.
A great emphasis was placed on each child’s unique learning style. with “slower learners” often tutored by more advanced students under supervision.
With a solid emphasis on both the performing and fine arts, the school required its students to participate in artistic endeavors such as class plays, ceramics, and painting.
Mary thought the school was attempting something unique and highly necessary.
Much to Cord’s dismay, she enrolled both Quentin and Michael, who would be placed in different groups.
How, after all, would this kind of environment prepare his progeny for St.
For Mary, however, the children’s academic journey with its emphasis on the arts paralleled her own five-year artistic turning inward.
Now seriously focusing her attention on painting, having transformed a former garden shed into a studio adjacent to the bricked terrace of the McLean house, she found herself teaching part-time in the GDS art studio, as well as taking courses with emerging Washington Color School icon Kenneth Noland.
In the 1950s, the wives of upper-echelon CIA men were appendages to their husbands, like virtually all wives in America during that era.
CIA operatives, however, were not allowed to discuss their work with their spouses.
For Mary, this meant that the days of being Cord’s partner, his chief sounding board and literary editor, were behind them—a dispiriting shift and a demoralizing change for a woman who had, in times gone by, thrived in a partnership of equals.
She confronted and argued with Cord over the CIA’s mission, and, in particular, his work for the Agency.
Her disdain manifested itself at parties and social gatherings, where she was alone among CIA wives in her critical views.
Mary was, in the recollection of one of them, “always making wisecracks” about what the Agency was really up to.
Others suspected that her joking was a sign she knew more than she would admit.
One insider, who spoke on condition of anonymity, said that Mary was well acquainted with the CIA’s drug program, MKULTRA, and that Cord, in trying to appease his wife, had told her much more than he should have about many CIA undertakings.
That source added, “Mary absolutely detested Allen Dulles and everything he stood for.
Just a few years earlier, she had been his most steadfast, trusted partner in their mission for world peace.
I haven’t seen the ocean in a long time, and though I love it, it often brings with it for me a vague sadness.
Perhaps because it’s so old and unchanging, it makes me think that I’m not young anymore and that unlike the sea, I’m changing, not necessarily for the better.
I stood there with the wind blowing keenly enough for me to turn up my jacket collar and I was aware then, perhaps more clearly than anyone else, of all my faults and past mistakes.
I counted the more than ten years since the war and could think of very few acts of spontaneous generosity toward individuals, of many once bright talents rusting in disuse.
Cord’s reflections in moments of solitude demonstrated the kind of awareness that could have been a precursor to change, had he the will and commitment to act on his insights.
Six months later, another event soon took place that might have helped Cord right his course, had he again been willing to take the first step.
During the Senate McCarthy hearings in the early 1950s, Cold War tensions fueled the public’s fear that “Communist subversives” had infiltrated various arenas of the American government.
Over the course of three years, McCarthy’s attacks on the patriotism and the integrity of anyone he deemed suspect destroyed many reputations and lives.
Accused of collaborating with Communists during his dealings with the American Veterans Committee in 1946, he learned that his loyalty had been called into question.
Authors Cass Canfield, Theodore White, and James Aldridge, along with poet Richard Wilbur, were also implicated.
It might have been his chance to leave the CIA for good—an opportunity for redemption—but he wouldn’t seize the opportunity.
He sent it to playwright Robert Anderson, who he hoped might assist him with the rewriting of certain scenes.
Nearly three months later, on Thanksgiving Day, Allen Dulles personally let Cord know that the charges had been dropped, that he had been cleared of any wrongdoing.
But the time off had already whetted Cord’s appetite for something else.
Clearly, Cord wanted out of the CIA and all government service, but was too insecure to cut his ties and strike out on his own.
While McCarthy’s witchhunt had offended him, it seems that it hadn’t been enough to cause him to walk away.
When Cord returned to work, Allen Dulles sensed his discontent and, to assuage him, promoted him to chief of the International Organizations Division.
As one of the major operating divisions within the CIA’s Directorate of Plans, the division would merge with the Covert Action Staff in 1962.
It had also opened a door to the possibility—and to Mary’s hope—that Cord might choose another path, but he hadn’t.
His unwillingness or inability to disentangle himself from the CIA, which Mary openly despised, caused her to move further away toward independence.
Increasingly, the stakes became higher—not only the stability of her family, but the integrity of her soul.
Beyond her roles as mother, CIA wife, and homemaker, Mary still identified with something deeper within and longed to experience a fulfillment more profound.
Struck and killed by a car on busy Route 123, which ran adjacent to their house, the dog had been the special favorite of Mary and Cord’s middle son, Michael.
Two years later, an even bigger horror would occur at almost the exact spot.
With Cord’s return and new promotion within the Agency, the year of 1954 would become a defining moment in the Meyer family.
Mary’s mother, Ruth Pinchot, worried that both her daughters were being stifled in their married lives.
She gave them each a round-trip ticket to Europe and a thousand dollars spending money.
That summer, Mary and Tony went on what the two later referred to as “a husband dumping trip” to Europe.
The two ended up “exploring hungers that weren’t there just days ago and satisfying them with gentle passion, new to me,” Bradlee would recall years later.
For her part, Mary met “an Italian noble,” as Jim Truitt described him in 1979, when she and Tony were in Positano.
Mary and Jean Pierre reportedly sailed the Mediterranean for a few days, before she rejoined Tony in Paris.
But during the following summer of 1955, after attending Tony and Ben’s Paris wedding, she and Cord traveled, of all places, to Positano.
Again, she spotted Jean Pierre on his sailboat, in the company of a young American woman college student.
Mary introduced Cord to Jean Pierre and suggested that the four of them go cruising on Jean Pierre’s boat.
He returned to work in Washington, while Mary stayed on in Paris, allegedly to assist Tony in her new life.
Both Tony and Ben Bradlee knew, however, exactly what Mary was really up to.
She secretly returned to Italy and to Jean Pierre, where the pair went on an extended cruise and made plans for a life together.
Upon her return from Europe the second time around, Mary told Cord the truth.
I remember also her showing me a short story she had written about a brief affair.
At dinner parties, Cord’s strident, argumentative disposition tended to dominate, even disrupt, all discourse.
Sadly for Cord, his poetic sensibility had given way to bullying when alcohol took over.
Once, years after he and Mary had divorced, he became so irked by something Ben Bradlee said that he reportedly lunged across the dinner table for Bradlee’s throat.
As a father, Cord had little patience for three exuberant boys and their attendant noise, commotion, and disobedience.
We both had witnessed the reckless and explosive alcohol-fueled wrath of our fathers; the shared fear had been one of the things that had cemented our boyhood friendship.
Looking toward the small riding stable from the Meyer’s terrace, the next house over was the six-acre compound known as Hickory Hill.
Years later it would become the legendary “Kennedy Compound,” occupied by the family of Robert F Kennedy.
But in the spring of 1955, its new inhabitants, Jack and Jackie Kennedy, became next-door neighbors of the Meyer family.
That May, Jackie suffered a miscarriage; a year later, she gave birth to a stillborn daughter, while Jack was cavorting about Europe with Senator George Smathers.
By the end of 1956, both marriages, the Meyer’s and the Kennedy’s, had been in turmoil for some time.
It appeared that some force was still at work, keeping Mary and Jack aware of one another.
Mary would follow them a year later, but not before a trauma of unimaginable proportion.
During the fall of 1956, on her thirty-sixth birthday in October, Mary told Cord their marriage was over.
Whatever grief she may have felt, Mary embraced the prospect of independence and all that it might promise—exploration as a painter, and the possibility of rekindling the flame with Jean Pierre.
Convention would not enslave her, just as the quiet life of the CIA wife and homemaker had not satisfied her.
Perhaps in time, she might have thought, they would come to recognize and understand the courage it had taken to save her own life, though initially they might blame her for such a cataclysmic disruption to the family.
Life’s vicissitudes would make an unscheduled appearance early one December evening, a week before Christmas.
As the winter solstice light waned fast into dusk, the two older Meyer boys, Quentin and Michael, hurried toward home across the well-trafficked Route 123, already having been chastised for previous dinnertime tardiness due to their hypnotic television attraction at a neighbor’s house.
Some of the fast-moving cars already had their headlights on; some didn’t.
The faster, more-agile Quenty raced to the other side without incident.
Michael couldn’t keep up with his older brother, and in the dark of the busy thoroughfare, he likely relied on the headlights of oncoming cars to tell him when it was safe to dash.
Just nine years old, Michael Pinchot Meyer would not see the car that would take his life.
His death was nearly instantaneous, and it took place where another auto had claimed the life of his beloved golden retriever just two years earlier.
If the dog’s sacrifice had forewarned the danger, it had gone unheeded.
Mary would, for the last time, hold and accompany Michael to the hospital, but not before she paused to comfort the driver who had struck her son, her rare compassion anchored in some deeper dimension.
The ever-delicate young Mikey would leave those who loved him in an interminable river of grief.
Laid to rest just before Christmas on a sloping hill near his grandfather Amos Pinchot in the Milford cemetery, Michael rested just a stone’s throw from Grey Towers, where he had loved to fish and roam.
Quenty, who would be eleven in January, could not bring himself to attend the burial; it was a decision that would later haunt him.
A month after their son’s death, Cord confided in his journal his hope that shared grief might yield reconciliation with Mary.
The woman who had once gushed to her friend Anne Truitt that Cord “rose on his toes as he walked”—a characteristic that she considered the hallmark of an interesting man*—now voiced her criticism in direct and devastating language.
Mary had told him, “Sometimes I’ve known what you were to say but you can’t because of the wine.
Finally, Cord noted that Mary had made it clear she felt that “her children might be a burden that he might come to increasingly resent.
Mary attacked Cord’s fidelity, calling him “incurably promiscuous,” and remarking on his good fortune not to have been a philandering husband at a time when he might have been challenged to a duel.
Cord’s “Notes” were a kind of last will and testament of what his life and marriage had become.
No longer able to hide in his journal alone, he’d been offered, in this final confrontation with Mary, a mirror, albeit her mirror, of who he had become and why she was leaving.
Gone was the committed, evolving conscientious objector who, in a moment of illumination as he lay dying on the beach-battlefield of Guam, realized he had betrayed his deepest conviction—that war was just “the finished product of universal ignorance, avarice, and brutality,” and decided, if he were to live through the night, he would do something about it.
His courage in that moment—to live and accept the fate of whatever mistaken path his life had wandered—had prevailed, and won the duel over the “final ignominious act” of taking his own life in selfpity.
Mercifully, she would not be alive to read the article in Ramparts magazine that would expose Cord as the director of the CIA’s notorious Operation Mockingbird, as well as head of the Agency’s secret incursion into the National Student Association.
Having infiltrated more than twenty-five newspapers and wire agencies, Operation Mockingbird had successfully manipulated the American media to promote the CIA viewpoint.
Through it, the CIA bought influence at major media outlets by putting reporters on the CIA payroll, and vice versa.
During the 1950s, an estimated three thousand salaried and contract CIA employees were engaged in propaganda efforts.
One of the biggest initial supporters was Philip L Graham, publisher and owner of the Washington Post.
Whenever the CIA wanted a news story slanted in a particular direction, it got it.
Secretly controlling the media had proven to be one the CIA’s most powerful tools.
Upon getting wind of their exposure in Ramparts, the CIA immediately went to work to undermine and destroy the magazine.
CIA operative Edgar Applewhite was ordered to organize a campaign to smear the publication and then render it financially bankrupt.
In violation of the CIA charter, as well as the United States Constitution, Applewhite and his colleagues, including Cord, nevertheless acted with unabashed impunity.
In January 1968, the Vietcong’s Tet Offensive revealed just how tenuous (and misguided) America’s incursion into Southeast Asia had become; the Vietnam War raged on amid increasing controversy.
Throughout the world, student uprisings flared on university campuses as well as in the streets, from the United States to Mexico and France.
Back home, Martin Luther King Jr. was assassinated in April 1968, Robert F Kennedy in June.
Meanwhile, the Black Power salutes of American Olympic medal winners were a provocative nod to the ongoing fight for civil rights.
Apollo 8’s successful orbit of the moon struck the only uplifting chord in an otherwise deeply polarized, traumatic year.
Amid the tumult of 1968, Mark Meyer, Cord and Mary’s youngest son, entered Yale as a member of the class of 1972.
That summer, Mark received a form letter from William Sloane Coffin, the chaplain at Yale.
Later, he reexamined that outlook and choice, abandoned the CIA, and entered Yale Divinity School.
The United States government had indicted him during the Benjamin Spock conspiracy trial for his role in counseling students to resist the military draft.
Coffin’s letter to incoming Yale freshmen introduced the many options of religious faith available at the university, but it also made a political case for ending the war in Vietnam.
Once a world-renowned peace advocate, the man who had declared all war to be “international anarchy” now likened Coffin’s letter to brainwashing.
Indignant, Cord wrote letters to former Yale classmates, including Bishop Paul Moore, Cyrus Vance, Dean Acheson, and William Bundy.
While Bishop Moore found Coffin’s letter somewhat “inappropriate,” he did not think it was grounds for dismissal.
Telling Cord that his language was far too moderate, Acheson thought Coffin’s letter lacked “taste, judgment, knowledge, and maturity.
Three years into his career at the CIA, Coffin had left the Agency, disillusioned by many of the unsuccessful covert activities in which he had taken part.
Instead, Coffin had forged a calling in the ministry, becoming a passionate advocate for human and civil rights.
He was a prolific writer and public speaker, and he published six highly acclaimed books and many articles.
Had Cord Meyer for one moment caught a glimpse of someone he once knew—a sight no doubt too painful to bear—he would have seen the apparition of his former self, walking hand in hand with Mary Pinchot Meyer at his side.
The book relied on McCoy’s harrowing tours through the war zones of Vietnam and Laos, as well as visits to Europe’s wellarmed drug lords, documenting astonishing accounts of CIA dealings within the drug trade.
Key figures in the heroin trade told McCoy on the record that American intelligence had collaborated with the drug trade dating back as far as World War II, and that CIA advisers were financing weapons to support the Hmong Highlanders by using CIA helicopters to transport Laotian opium to Vietnam markets.
McCoy also revealed that, beginning in Guatemala in 1954, the CIA had been involved in widespread terrorism throughout Central America, including the training of death squads.
The Agency had needed untraceable money to finance its clandestine operations.
They had found what they desired with narco-traffickers such as Panamanian resident Manuel Noriega, who would eventually be outed as having long been on the CIA payroll.
Cass Canfield, the head of Harper & Row, found himself caving in to CIA pressure.
He forced the young author McCoy to acquiesce to the Agency’s demand for prior review, but the book was published largely intact, in part because the major news media had exposed the CIA’s attempt to influence its content.
But the fact remained that McCoy’s research was_ particularly unwelcome in Washington in 1972.
The United States military was still trying to recover from publicity around the massacre at My Lai and other atrocities in Vietnam.
Revelations about the CIA-led assassination campaign throughout Southeast Asia, Operation Phoenix, made matters even worse.
The man whose debut short story “Waves of Darkness” had decried the futility and horror of war was now a complicit architect of secret wars and violations of democracy the world over, as well as within the United States.
Poised for a meteoric rise with a stellar political future, he had access to those who would further stimulate his vision and position him for national recognition.
His ascent and fall, however, would become Faustian, despite Mary’s steadfast love and support, As their marriage unraveled in 1955, so did that of their next-door neighbors at Hickory Hill.
Jack and Jackie Kennedy had moved into the six-acre compound that had once been the headquarters of Civil War Army general George McClellan.
The view from the Meyer terrace drew the eye straight across two small ridges to the new Kennedy compound where “Lord and Lady” Kennedy reigned, but their life together was becoming strained.
Early miscarriages and a stillborn birth, further complicated by Jack’s compulsive philandering, would have been overwhelming to any young marriage.
In fact, Jackie would eventually follow her husband’s lead where infidelity was concerned.
According to Jackie’s stepbrother and sometime confidante Gore Vidal, “She had had her share of affairs with the famous, among them the actor William Holden.
She told Jack about the fling with Holden, claimed author Peter Evans, just a few days after it happened.
Her hope was to stimulate his affection, because women who slept with powerful men were a turn-on for Jack.
When Jackie discovered not long after that she was pregnant, Jack became resentful, allegedly not believing the child was his.
After the convention, still seething over his wife’s infidelity, Jack dumped Jackie at her family’s estate in Newport, Rhode Island, and flew to Europe with Senator George Smathers of Florida.
Indulging their shared predilection for promiscuity—the yacht became a floating senatorial bordello—word reached Jack by the ship’s radio that Jackie had delivered a near-full-term stillborn girl who she had already named Arabella.
Newspapers had picked up the story that he was “traveling” in Europe and was unable to be reached.
It reportedly took Smathers another three days—and an ultimatum—to convince the Massachusetts senator to return.
After recovering from the stillbirth, she took off for London to play with her sister, Lee Radziwill, who had several affairs going at once with British royalty.
When Washington Post columnist Drew Pearson got wind of all the “fun” Jackie was having sans Jack, the patriarch again took matters into his own hands.
Jackie and Joe Sr., had always gotten along, and so rather than intimidate his daughter-in-law, the elder Kennedy struck a deal.
She wanted out of the Hickory Hill estate in McLean; she didn’t want to have dinner every night with the entire family when she came to Hyannis Port or Palm Beach; she didn’t want to play the role of political wife, campaigning endlessly for her husband.
In exchange, she agreed to keep up appearances for the sake of Jack’s future political career.
Without them, Jack’s political future might quickly dead-end; with them, any political height was scalable.
Speaking from personal experience, I can tell you that children are the secret of any marriage.
By 1957, Mary Meyer had also made Georgetown her home, just a few blocks away from the new Kennedy home.
In spite of his failed bid for the vice presidential nomination the year before, Jack still had his sights set on 1600 Pennsylvania Avenue.
The fact that his marriage was widely understood to be window dressing didn’t deter him.
Mary, for her part, was adjusting to life without Cord, and without her son Michael.
While her path and the future president’s surely crossed, her more pressing concerns took precedence.
One of her priorities was finalizing her divorce as quickly as possible.
There were many such places in Nevada, some offering luxury living with fine food and other perks.
The Bundy divorce ranch, however, was far from luxurious and offered only four residential apartments.
For Mary, it would serve her purpose splendidly, allowing her to come and go as she pleased.
Before Mary left on one of her trips to Nevada in 1958, her neighbor Jack had asked for a favor.
The sylphlike, elegant dark-haired Pamela Turnure had been a receptionist in Kennedy’s Senate office.
She would eventually join his presidential campaign and become Jackie’s press secretary, all while maintaining an intermittent sexual relationship with Jack.
Pam had been renting an apartment in the Georgetown home of Leonard and Florence Kater.
One spring night, the Katers were awakened by the sound of pebbles against their tenant’s window at 1:00m.
They looked out their window and saw Senator Kennedy begging Pam to let him in.
Enraged—as “good Catholics” would be in such a situation—the Katers set out to expose Jack and destroy his chances for the presidency.
They placed two tape recorders in an air vent that led to Pam’s bedroom and recorded Jack and Pam’s conversations, as well as their sexual activity.
I was very innocent and naive in those days and had no idea of the power I was up against.
Mary had to have known that Jack was involved with Pam Turnure, although it is unlikely she knew what the Katers were up to when she allowed Pam to house-sit for several weeks.
One evening in July 1958, while Mary was in Nevada, the Katers staked out Mary’s house and caught the senator leaving in the wee hours of the morning.
Mary returned from Nevada in September to find her house under the couple’s surveillance.
She thought Jack stupid and reckless if he seriously had his sights set on the presidency.
As Mary’s long-term former boyfriend Bob Schwartz had made clear, “Mary wasn’t flamboyant.
She took her obsession with Kennedy’s philandering to the streets, attending political rallies with signs that displayed the image of Jack taken outside Mary’s house.
She picketed former president Harry Truman’s house in Missouri while Kennedy was visiting, and she marched in front of the White House.
Kater allegedly contacted more than thirty newspapers and magazines with her proof of the presidential aspirant’s wayward habits.
As late as April 1963, she contacted FBI director J Edgar Hoover, but he refused to meet with her, though he likely seized on her revelations to add to Kennedy’s already growing file.
For a time, the Washington Star pursued the Kater story before abruptly dropping it, threatened by a Kennedy family lawsuit.
Th spite of the travails of divorcing Cord, Mary set her sights on the future.
She longed to move forward in her new life; and brooding would play no part.
She adjusted gracefully to life without Cord, who saw his sons on weekends and part of school vacations.
As agreed in the divorce settlement, he would assume full charge of their education.
Still mired in grief over Michael’s death, she embarked on a period of deep exploration.
Artist Ken Noland became Mary’s lover during this time; for the next two years, he was a significant presence.
Her introspection during this time was as much artistic as it was personal.
During her time in Nevada, Mary visited with Anne and Jim Truitt at their home in San Francisco, where they had moved for Jim’s Newsweek posting.
According to Jim Truitt, who had a keen interest in psychedelics and Eastern mystical traditions that embraced altered states of consciousness, it was during a visit in California that Mary had her first psychedelic experience.
Just south of San Francisco, the Palo Alto Mental Research Institute was exploring the therapeutic potential of hallucinogens such as LSD and the peyote derivative psilocybin.
The Beat Generation, an emerging cultural phenomenon in California’s Bay Area that counted Jack Kerouac, Neal Cassidy, and Allen Ginsberg among its members, was at the vanguard of this mind-altering wonder.
LSD and other hallucinogens had been in use as psychiatric aids among the fashionable in Hollywood since the mid-to late 1950s.
A number of actors, writers, musicians, and directors—people like André Previn, Aldous Huxley, Anais Nin, Esther Williams, Betsy Drake, Sidney Lumet, and playwright Clare Booth Luce, among them—explored the regions of their consciousness, encouraging others to partake.
Luce, for her part, convinced her husband, Time publisher Henry Luce, to experiment with her, as well as very possibly one other notables who will be discussed later.
Actor Cary Grant was so convinced of the positive impact of LSD in his life that Look magazine published an article about it in 1959.
Hubbard befriended people like psychedelic pioneer Aldous Huxley long before Timothy Leary came upon the scene.
It was Hubbard who first asserted that LSD could be enormously therapeutic, given its propensity for the inducement of transcendental mystical experiences.
On his own, Hubbard administered the drug to a number of alcoholics, many of whom reportedly emerged from the experience to successfully claim a life of sobriety, at least for a while.
Hubbard’s early success with LSD’s therapeutic possibilities moved him to set up three treatment centers in Canada in 1958, one of which reportedly attempted to treat Ethel Kennedy, wife of Robert F Kennedy, for incipient alcoholism.
Hubbard’s vast network of business contacts, as well as his personal wealth, enabled him to procure a huge supply of LSD and to distribute it at his own expense.
Hubbard wanted nothing in return; his motivation appears to have been to give humanity a new point of view.
Throughout the 1950s and early 1960s, Hubbard traveled across Europe and the United States dispensing LSD to anyone who wanted to try it.
Oscar Janiger, a Los Angeles psychiatrist who began conducting psychedelic sessions with prominent literary and artistic avant-garde figures in the mid-1950s.
Janiger, also a devotee of Captain Hubbard’s, had experienced his own personal transformation with psychedelics, which had, in turn, fueled his professional interest in using them in his clinical practice.
Allen Dulles and his CIA coterie had tried, unsuccessfully, to recruit Captain Al Hubbard in the early 1950s.
That event had caused mass hysteria, affecting close to seven hundred people for several days.
With hundreds of people gripped by terror in acute psychosis, wildly hallucinating, the town became a veritable insane asylum.
He was so disturbed by the project, he blundered further by sharing his consternation with several colleagues.
Olson soon realized that the Agency had surreptitiously dosed him with LSD as well, ostensibly to see how much greater a security risk he might become.
According to one source, Captain Al Hubbard was immediately convinced the CIA had used LSD to destabilize Olson in 1953.
When the CIA found that they couldn’t recruit Hubbard, they started keeping tabs on him.
Hubbard’s legendary purchases of LSD from Sandoz, a global pharmaceutical company in Switzerland, were being monitored.
The CIA had “an agreement” whereby Sandoz would keep the Food and Drug Administration apprised of all purchases.
Anne Chamberlin, who had been in a position to shed light on Mary’s exploration with psychedelics up until the end of 2011 when she died, vehemently declined to be interviewed.
Robert Budd, another painter who was part of the Washington Color School to which Mary belonged, recalled seeing her in the company of artist Ken Noland between 1958 and 1959.
In the late 1950s, a group of them—including Budd himself, Mary Meyer, and Ken Noland—took weekly train trips to Philadelphia to have therapeutic bodywork sessions with Dr.
Charles I Oller, a highly respected practitioner of orgonomy—a therapeutic technique developed in the 1940s by Viennese psychoanalyst Wilhelm Reich, a former protégé of Sigmund Freud.
In the 1920s, Reich had been part of Freud’s inner circle—some called him “Freud’s pet’—but he eventually broke with Freud.
If life’s traumatic events precipitated the development of character armor, there would be, Reich believed, an inadequate release in the orgasm function, thereby leading to rigidities in character and muscular tensions in the body, which eventually created maladaptive character states, such as becoming masochistic, sadistic, reactionary, submissive, or hateful.
Orgonomic therapy sought to restore the free flow of orgone energy, not only resulting in a more complete, deeply satisfying sexual orgasm, but also yielding a more fully integrated, healthy, and happy individual.
Orgonomy represented a radical departure from conventional psychoanalysis and psychoanalytic therapy.
Patients started a session by lying face up on a platform-like bed in their underwear.
There, they were encouraged to deepen and to slow their breath and to allow whatever emotional expression was in their awareness to come into their being without talking about it.
In the safety of the therapist’s office, patients gradually surrendered to the experience of feeling their bodily and emotional awareness.
Those with traumatic memories might be eventually encouraged to express themselves with fits of kicking and pounding, giving voice to screaming rage, as well as intense terror and deep sadness.
The result was often not only catharsis, but, also, over a period of time, the diminution of the fear of feeling itself, thereby restoring the capacity for living more deeply.
Mary Meyer’s foray into orgonomy lasted only a few months, but it demonstrated once again her pioneering spirit and commitment to selfexamination and personal evolution.
It also evidenced the deep pain she continued to experience at the death of her son.
Even though she was a free spirit already, to have gotten to the depths of her grief could have made a significant change in her.
He would have worked on her breathing and softening of the eyes, it would have precipitated the deepest crying and expression of her grief.
Budd suspected that it was “because Noland was using LSD and recommending others do it as well.
Noland himself initially denied that LSD had been a part of his life at that time, then several months later mentioned to Nina Burleigh that he had used LSD with Mary.
Noland also vaguely recalled something about Mary visiting Timothy Leary at Harvard in the early 1960s.
While Mary’s post-divorce activities focused on deepening self-exploration and healing, Jack Kennedy’s attention was on getting to the White House, albeit while mired in marital infidelity and personal unhappiness.
Before Jack arrived at the White House, Mary had rebuffed all his pleas for her attention, save one.
Sometime during the spring of 1959, Kenneth Noland recalled attending a cocktail party with Mary at the Bradlee house in Georgetown.
Jack was there, apparently letting it be known that he would formally announce his candidacy for the presidency at the beginning of 1960.
That summer, Mary rented a small cabin for two weeks in Provincetown, Massachusetts, before joining Noland and his children on Long Island.
Noland always suspected that she and Jack got together during that time, since the Hyannis Kennedy compound was less than an hour away.
He wanted out in the worst way but he knew it would be political suicide.
His physical health, medical difficulties were complicating things, too.
His father once remarked to Jack’s sister Eunice, who confided doubts about Jack’s political future, that “it’s not what you are that counts.
He then added that his father considered Jackie to be the best choice “for a lot of reasons.
Not long after his visit with Mary in Provincetown, Jack had another revealing exchange with Priscilla McMillan, herself an attractive and articulate woman who resisted his advances.
During one of these conversations I once asked him why he was doing it—why was he acting like his father, why was he avoiding real relationships, why was he taking a chance on getting caught in a scandal at the same time he was trying to make his career take off.
It meant that the low esteem in which he held women was once again validated.
In fact, Joe Kennedy Sr., himself afflicted, once told J Edgar Hoover that he should have gelded Jack when he was a small boy.
From the very beginning, soon after she met Jack in the spring of 1951, Jackie had been warned about what life with Jack would inevitably entail.
Jackie valiantly tried to bury her head in the sand, but the toll it took undoubtedly aggravated the possibility of further miscarriages.
The antecedents of Jack’s long-standing problem of intimacy with women had a more dynamic dimension than just the imprinting of his childhood.
Unlike Mary Meyer, he seemed to have had little interest in any sober self-examination, reflection, or understanding.
Failing any deeper internal investigation, conquering his emptiness—and keeping it at bay—required an infusion of one sexual triumph after another, however momentary the relief.
Nonetheless, the power of love beckoned him to romance during the same time that Mary Pinchot was in love with Bob Schwartz.
During his stint as a Navy ensign in the Foreign Intelligence Branch of the Office of Naval Intelligence in Washington, Jack began a serious affair with a beautiful blonde, blueeyed Danish woman who had become a close friend of his sister Kathleen’s.
Still married but estranged from her second husband, Inga Arvad was a Classic stunning bombshell.
The two had no illusion that their relationship would be anything but a passing affair.
It also had to be kept secret, so that Jack’s parents wouldn’t find out.
Jack and Inga camouflaged their connection, using Kathleen and her boyfriend, John White, making it look like just a convenient foursome.
Little did Jack know, however, that his father’s spy network was aware of the relationship right after their first date.
During World War I, many dating relationships were imbued with an ethos of “living in the present,” given the reality of an unknown, uncertain future during wartime.
Though there are no in-depth accounts of their relationship, this was probably the deepest emotional, intimate attachment to a woman that Jack had ever made in his life up until that time.
Yet, she was not the sort of woman for Jack to take home to mother and father, and he knew it.
In addition, Inga’s past soon rose to create problems from another direction.
Years before, as an aspiring journalist, Inga had manipulated her way into being given access to the Nazi elite, including Adolph Hitler.
The story was so explosive that it had the potential to relieve Jack of his commission in the Navy, given the ONI’s paranoia.
Instead, two days after the Winchell column, Jack found himself transferred to the Charleston Naval Shipyard.
Jack and Inga spent several months exchanging love letters and talking on the phone constantly, with Inga visiting Charleston on weekends.
His “fight for love” could not withstand the Kennedy family pressure, nor what would undoubtedly have been a epic confrontation with his father.
He was still shackled by the expectations of paternal authority, unwilling to assert his full separation and independence.
The epitaph of Jack and Inga, and the love they had shared, was being written.
For his part, patriarch Joe Sr. knew exactly what a toll his son’s struggles were taking.
There were FBI wiretaps on Jack’s phone calls with Inga, as well as wiretaps in her hotel room when she came to visit him in Charleston.
Not wanting to incur any ill will from a tempestuous Jack, or spur any rebellion, the cunning father never indicated the slightest disapproval of his son’s relationship with Inga.
But, according to several biographers, Winchell’s column was probably engineered by Joe Kennedy himself.
When Jack, with Inga’s acceptance, finally ended the relationship several months later, according to these same biographers, Inga had been paid off by his father to finally leave.
Heartbroken, Jack now tumed his attention to preventing his unpredictable, precarious health issues from sidelining him to a desk for the duration of the war.
More than ever, he wanted to break away from his father and the chains of the Kennedy family that enslaved him.
She was perhaps the only woman contemporary in his early adult life with whom he was able to sustain an ongoing emotional connection.
Because Rosemary’s mental retardation relegated her to an institution, Kick was the eldest daughter in the Kennedy clan, and she and Jack forged an important bond.
Both were rebellious, having contested the shackles of the Catholic Church and a mother chained to its religious dogma.
Jack admired his sister’s spunk, her ability to speak her mind and create a life of her own choosing.
He defended her when she courageously broke with her parents’ wishes by marrying non-Catholic Billy Cavendish, the young Marquess of Hartington.
Unfortunately, young Cavendish was killed in the war in 1944, less than a month after their brother, Joe Jr.
Devastated by these deaths, Kick and Jack, understanding more completely the frailty of life, shared an even deeper bond.
As a Massachusetts congressman in the summer of 1947, Jack visited Kick in Ireland.
He was overjoyed to find her now in love with wealthy English aristocrat Peter Fitzwilliam.
Fitzwilliam, however, was not only Protestant, but also still married, although the plan was that he would soon be divorced and marry Kick.
Despite both Joe Sr. and mother Rose’s eventual warning that they would disown her if she went ahead with this plan, Kick was undeterred.
Seeing how happy she was, Jack again admired and supported his sister’s boldness and independence.
Moved by and envious of Kathleen’s joy at being in love, he told his friend Lem Billings that in all of his relationships with women, except possibly for a short while with Inga, he had never lost himself, or fallen in love as his sister Kathleen had.
Her death threw Jack into deep despair, provoking a spiritual crisis about the meaning of life itself.
Losing his brother Joe to the war effort could be understood and eventually accepted, but Kick’s death utterly confounded Jack in a way nothing in his entire life ever had.
Unwilling to tolerate his mother’s glib explanation that this had been God’s way of saving her daughter Kathleen from a “sacrilegious marriage,” Jack had no one within his family to turn to for comfort.
Not only had Kick been his best friend, she was also the only woman at the time who had provided a bridge to his confused and broken emotional life.
Kick had been “the one in the family with whom he could confide his deepest thoughts,” said his close friend Lem Billings.
His reckless daring was the kind of obsessive pursuit that was not only dangerous from a national security perspective, but ultimately personally destructive.
Recurrent bouts of venereal disease, originally contracted when he was a student at Harvard from sex with prostitutes, plagued him during his years in the White House.
He had been introduced to Jack by his close friend Chuck Spaulding during the 1960 presidential campaign.
Spaulding himself was a patient of Jacobson’s, whose elixirs by injection contained any number of amphetamine derivatives.
Feel Good become that he even accompanied the president to Paris and Vienna in 1961.
He also supplied Jack with vials of specially prepared concoctions, as well as the hypodermic needles to inject them on his own.
Jack became so dependent on these drugs, he had no intention of stopping them.
Yet whatever infirmities Jack battled—including a rampant sexual addiction— however fragmented and impaired his capacity for genuine intimacy, something kept driving him toward Mary Meyer.
With all his charm, good looks, wealth, and presidential aura, Jack could have attracted almost any woman, and often did.
Certainly, there were many documented contenders—Helen Chavchavadze, Diana de Vegh, Mimi Beardsley , Judith Exner, and Marilyn Monroe among them—but none who became important to him in the way that Mary Meyer did.
Her allure for Jack wasn’t that of an imagined, superficial sexual escapade—though her eroticism, firmly imbedded in her femininity, was known to have brought many a man to his knees.
Mary’s primary attraction for Jack may have ultimately been trust—in the end, love’s most powerful aphrodisiac.
She was independent and self-contained, free of any need for any kind of entrapment or manipulation.
With Mary, the spark of redemption was likely ignited in the wounded darkness of his shadow.
After all, real love was the foundation for the approach of healing, the process of which for Jack would have required a lifelong “workin-progress” commitment to self-examination and recovery.
Yet even in the midst of an uncontrollable, compulsive sexual addiction, the question remained.
But it wouldn’t be nothing, nothing without a woman or a girl. —James Brown “Tt’s a Man’s Man’s Man’s World” It is true that my discovery of LSD was a chance discovery, but it was the outcome of planned experiments and these experiments took place in the framework of systematic pharmaceutical, chemical research.
Albert Hofmann The so-called sixties “drug culture’ was not a campus fad.
It was a worldwide renaissance of the oldest religions. —Timothy Leary Simtine AT HIS desk in a cramped office at 5 Divinity Avenue in the Center for Research in Personality at Harvard, Dr.
Timothy Leary looked up and saw “a woman leaning against the door post, hip tilted provocatively,” studying him intently.
It was April 1962, and the Harvard lecturer had for months been immersed in the onslaught of problems and crises that his Harvard Psilocybin Project had been attracting.
Mounting publicity had resulted in increasing scrutiny, not all of it by any means good.
Both Leary and his colleague, Professor Richard Alpert, had been recently “vigorously criticized” at a faculty meeting for ethical and empirical violations that involved giving the hallucinogen psilocybin to undergraduates.
Ordered to surrender their supply, they were forbidden to continue their research.
Overwhelmed by literally hundreds of outside inquiries received each week, the affable, bubbly forty-one-year-old Irish Harvard tweed Leary was looking forward to a trip to Zihuatanejo, Mexico, in search of a more isolated retreat for his psychedelic research.
As he was preparing to leave, the curious, unexpected visitor from Washington, D.C. arrived.
She was someone he would encounter seven times over the next year and half.
Twenty years later, in 1983, Timothy Leary recalled his initial impressions of their first meeting.
She had offered her hand for a formal greeting and, Leary recalled, introduced herself as “Mary Pinchot,” not Mary Meyer.
Timothy Leary hadn’t understood at that moment that Mary was alluding to the president of the United States.
Premier Khrushchev should turn on with his wife in the comfort and security of his Kremlin bedroom.
While Hollingshead explained to Mary how to guide people in the throes of panic, Leary became aware of Mary’s frowning and recalled the following exchange.
The guys who run things—I mean the guys who really run things in Washington—are very interested in psychology, and drugs in particular.
Mary seemed calculating, a bit tough, perhaps as a result of living “in the hard political world,” as he put it.
The next day Leary drove Mary to the airport, having “loaded her with books and papers” about the Harvard Psilocybin Project in preparation for her training as a psychedelic guide.
He told Mary he didn’t think she was ready to start running sessions yet.
In addition, by April 1962, when Mary allegedly first appeared at Leary’s office at Harvard, her influence in Jack Kennedy’s life was already well established.
Not simply a visitor to the White House residence when Jackie was away, Mary was seen in the Oval Office regularly.
Appearances to the contrary, Mary’s decision to become involved with Jack wasn’t motivated by a selfish, manipulative desire to turn him on to drugs.
If they did share a psychedelic experience, Jack would have undoubtedly been a willing participant.
Several accounts attest to the fact that Mary and Jack’s love relationship was serious, not a passing fling of intermittent one-night stands.
Author Leo Damore had become convinced that by the time Kennedy reached the presidency, “Jack was a broken man.
Just as fascinatingly, Timothy Leary’s account of the mysterious “Mary Pinchot from Washington,” depicted Mary as a kind of missionary for the ascension of world peace through the sagacious use of hallucinogens.
Mary’s latent intention, Leary finally realized, had not only been to invite her lover the president to take a psychedelic excursion with her, but to train a small group of eight women in Washington, all of whom who were intimately involved with powerful public figures.
Her pacifism and abhorrence of all violent armed conflict motivated a curiosity she thought worthy of exploration.
In the early 1960s, the world was fighting a war, albeit a Cold War, fraught with tensions that were constantly on the verge of escalating.
Perhaps through her own experience, psychedelic exploration had predisposed her to Allen Ginsberg’s vision.
In any case, Timothy Leary portrayed Mary as a woman in possession of considerable feminine power, someone who had undergone her own personal transformation who now wanted to become an acolyte for world peace, intent on laying the groundwork for such a mission.
Yet no one else has ever gone public to substantiate Leary’s claims about Mary’s mission, nor publicly verified the existence of any “LSD cell group” that she was supposedly working with.
There is, however, one caveat to this dilemma that will be discussed shortly.
In addition, some of Leary’s critics even doubt that he actually had any contact with Mary Meyer at all.
The majority of these critics believe he shamelessly exploited the story of Mary Pinchot Meyer, and engineered it for publicity for Flashbacks.
Two of his major books from mainstream publishers, High Priest and The Politics of Ecstasy, both published in 1968—four years after Mary Meyer had been murdered—contain no mention of her.
However, it appeared that Leary did make an initial attempt to investigate Mary’s murder in late May of 1965 when he returned from his around-the-world honeymoon with his new wife.
He told Leo Damore, and stated in Flashbacks, that he had finally called Vassar College in 1965 to find out Mary’s current whereabouts, only to discover she’d been murdered the previous fall.
It was only at this juncture that Leary learned Mary had been married to Cord Meyer.
Enlisting the support of his friends Van Wolfe and Michael Hollingshead, Leary planned to do his own investigation and write a book about it.
According to Van Wolfe, someone in “police intelligence in Washington” had told him Mary’s murder had been an assassination.
In an in-depth, nearly two-hour recorded interview in 1990, never before published, Leary told Damore that he did, in fact, know the trial was about to begin that summer, but that he had been blindsided by the emotional intensity of the breakup of his new marriage, as well as the crumbling of his Millbrook community, which included an onslaught of intimidation by local police.
The campaign of police surveillance and interference had started just after Leary’s return, right before Ray Crump’s trial for the murder of Mary Meyer.
After nearly a full year of harassment, the final hammer came down in March 1966, when G Gordon Liddy, who had been attached to J Edgar Hoover’s elite personal staff at FBI headquarters (and who would eventually become notorious as one of the Watergate break-in artists in 1972), raided Leary’s Millbrook compound.
Prompted by Damore’s query, Leary entertained the possibility that the harassment might well have been deliberately timed to coincide with Mary’s murder trial.
There had been an uptick in harassment and surveillance activity at Millbrook, said Leary, all through that summer and fall.
In spite of doing all he could to publicize and garner support for his trial, he was convicted on March 11, 1966, and sentenced to thirty years in jail and a $20,000 fine.
The judge would eventually dismiss all the charges because of a failure to advise Leary and his family of their Miranda rights.
But Leary was jailed again in 1969 on other drug charges, and then fled the country in 1970 and lived in exile for nearly three years.
For more than ten years, Timothy Leary would be under siege, fighting for his life.
Upon his release from prison in 1976, having read the National Enquirer exposé about Mary’s affair with Jack published earlier that year, Leary would attempt a second investigation of Mary’s murder after coming across a copy of Deborah Davis’s book Katharine the Great at the home of his friends Jon and Carolyn Bradshaw.
Leary would eventually oversee a further effort by Rebel magazine in the early 1980s to investigate Mary’s murder.
He produced for Leo Damore several lengthy letters/reports from a private investigator by the name of William Triplett, whom he and Rebel had hired to do investigative work.
While Timothy Leary’s biographer, Robert Greenfield, lamented that Leary’s book Flashbacks wasn’t entirely accurate, he persisted in quoting many of the events in the book to support his portrait of Leary as a narcissistic miscreant.
Moreover, Mary was using her maiden name when she began their association.
If she came to him at Harvard, that’s the period where he was out to tum on the world and the aristocracy—people like Robert Lowell, Barney Rosset, Charles Mingus, Theolonius Monk, and Maynard and Flo Ferguson.
As authoritative and well-researched as Robert Greenfield’s 2006 biography of Timothy Leary had been, Greenfield didn’t have access to the important twohour tape-recorded interview of Leary with the late author Leo Damore in November 1990.
The Leary-Damore interview focused almost entirely on Leary’s relationship with Mary and the events surrounding her death, in addition to what was taking place in Leary’s own life at the time.
During this interview, Leary offered many fascinating new details and insights about Mary and what he had learned about her activities.
She clearly understood some of the risks involved in being identified, Leary told Damore, and she had wanted to keep a low profile from the very beginning.
Throughout the interview, Leary reiterated several times that Mary never mentioned names.
Indeed, so enthralled by the potential of hallucinogenic consciousness expansion was Ms.
I helped her when I could, when she called or came up to Boston, but I never gave much thought about it until after I found out she’d been murdered.
Both at Harvard and Millbrook, we were being besieged from people all over the country and all over the world.
One person still alive today, Mary’s close friend Anne Chamberlin, might well be able to authoritatively comment on Mary’s mission, because she was, according to Damore, part of Mary’s LSD cell group in Washington.
But Anne Chamberlin has repeatedly refused to be interviewed for this book, although she did apparently talk with Damore on several occasions, starting in the late 1980s.
One of the women who was involved with Mary in the LSD group is now living in Maine.
Anne Chamberlin is a writer, an essayist, extremely wealthy, out of San Francisco, out of Washington—out of, out of fear, actually.
And Anne is more and more forthcoming because I think enough time has passed and those people in power who felt threatened by Mary Pinchot Meyer as a person who held an awful lot of information and a lot of secrets who could make certain politicians in this town very uncomfortable.
I offered her every confidentiality if she would be willing to talk with me about it.
I have nothing to say about Mary Meyer, or anything connected with Mary Meyer.
Chamberlin never wanted to make known her relationship with Mary Meyer, nor reveal why she apparently abruptly left Washington shortly after Mary’s murder.
Leo Damore was curious about other sources of information regarding Mary’s possible use of psychedelics, though he wanted primarily to hear from the LSD guru himself where Mary had gone for assistance.
There, Heymann quotes from an alleged interview with former CIA counterintelligence chief Jim Angleton.
But no record of Heymann’s Angleton interview has ever been produced, nor have records of Heymann’s other alleged interviews with Timothy Leary and Tony Bradlee, which he told Damore he had conducted.
Yet Angleton’s alleged statements might have been the sort of details Mary would have noted in her real diary—the one that Angleton stole on the night of her murder, not the artist’s sketchbook that the Bradlees and others designated as the diary, which was only a decoy.
There’s no question in my mind now that she had proposed to use LSD with Jack.
Again, Leary conceded he thought it was very possible, even likely, but would go no further.
Despite the subsequent smear campaign engineered to discredit Truitt, he was an established journalist and a former vice president of the Washington Post, who over the years had amassed a large set of papers and files that included portions of what Mary had confided.
Davis interviewed Truitt for more than ten hours over a three-day period during 1976.
Based on the information Mary shared with Truitt, there was at least one encounter when Mary and Jack smoked marijuana together in the White House residence.
She said JFK wanted to smoke pot again a month later, but never got around to it.
It wasn’t until 8:30 the next morning that she was able to reach him by phone.
According to the account Kenny O’Donnell gave to Leo Damore shortly before his death in 1977, Mary was in the White House in Jack’s company shortly after he took office as president in early 1961.
She often came into the White House, said O’Donnell, under the guise of “Dave Powers plus one” entries in the Secret Service logs before she was listed by her own name in the logs.
The “Dave Powers plus one” entries were numerous all through 1961 and beyond.
Her first documented solo private entrance into the White House residence (as noted in the White House Secret Service logs) occurred on October 3, 1961,” followed by some thirteen other documented private visits during the Kennedy presidency.
Mary also attended all six of the White House dinner dances, as well as any number of luncheons and smaller dinner parties given by Jack and Jackie.
It appeared that she established an early ground rule in her relationship with Jack.
A private person whose solitude was sacred, she didn’t want to be a topic of conversation in scandal-mongering Washington, nor of yesterday’s gossip, like so many of Jack’s dalliances.
Jack appeared to have agreed to this condition, but couldn’t always restrain his bravado.
According to Bradlee, it wasn’t the first time Jack had made the comment.
Look correspondent Laura Bergquist, married to Fletcher Knebel, a Harvard classmate of Jack’s, had had access to Jack ever since his 1952 senatorial campaign.
Many years later, she insightfully characterized Jack as deeply vulnerable.
And Mary would have demanded Jack’s self-examination, demanded that he open his eyes, his heart, his soul, the core of his being to both the artifice and the reality of his existence, including his sexual promiscuity.
She would have refused to allow him to hide behind his physical incapacity, his sense of obligation to his father or the Kennedy family, his fear of public ridicule or recrimination, or any indifference to such issues as civil rights or the dangers of the Cold War.
She would have taken him to task in a way that some part of him deeply longed for, knowing the emotional pain he would have to confront.
In order to reclaim himself, Jack would have had to brave a kind of grief and emotional intensity similar to what Mary herself had faced with the loss of her son Michael.
Mary knew the drill—the crashing surf of unbearable sorrow, and what was required to survive it.
The “prima female assoluta” would have been at once tender and firm with him, yet demanding that he show up, engage, and stop running.
For Jack, Mary may have represented the hope of a lost love, a magnetic, romantic passion, the kind of erotic chemistry he had once experienced with Inga Arvad, tempered by the same kind of no-bullshit, heartfelt bond he had shared with his departed sister Kathleen.
Indeed, there were undoubtedly moments when Mary was “rough to live with,” but something in Jack had been awakened by Mary’s entrance into his life—something that kept him engaged, and apparently wanting more.
Such was the fire and hope not only of love’s redemption, but a more clearly defined reclamation of himself and the kind of president he wanted to become.
Kenny O’Donnell confided to Leo Damore that Mary had been quite outspoken and confrontational with the president when he was about to resume nuclear testing in April 1962.
O’Donnell sometimes, according to Damore, even feared Mary because of the power she had over Jack, saying the president would “feverishly” pace around the Oval Office when he wasn’t able to get in touch with her by phone.
For a period of time the Bradlees, particularly Tony, may well have been kept in the dark about what was taking place.
Mary would have insisted that Jack keep any knowledge of their affair from them, but that presented a problem, for the Kennedys were close friends with the Bradlees, before and during Jack’s presidency.
Jack would dote on Tony and give the impression that she, not Mary, was the Pinchot sister who caught his eye.
And while they were not overtly competitive, Tony harbored a quiet jealousy toward her sister, who was always regarded as the more beautiful, more attractive, more enchanting of the two.
It was a particularly “wild party” on a hot, humid Washington evening, complete with thunderstorms and periods of torrential rain, people drinking heavily while getting soaking wet, and Teddy Kennedy ripping half his pants off at the crotch.
That observation was based in part on Smith’s interview with Tony Bradlee.
According to Tony, she played up the fact that Jack had been “following her” around that birthday evening.
Given that she was already smitten, Tony’s infatuation was as much wishful thinking as Jack’s behavior was a strategic ploy.
It appeared she had been left in the dark right up until Mary’s murder.
One person who wasn’t fooled the evening of Jack’s forty-sixth birthday in May 1963, or anytime earlier, was journalist Charlie Bartlett, a close, dear friend of Jack’s who, with his wife, Martha, had first introduced him to Jackie.
Bartlett, a distinguished journalist and Washington insider who spearheaded the Washington bureau of the Chattanooga Times, had also been a Yale classmate of Cord Meyer’s.
He was well acquainted with everyone in the Kennedy inner circle, and he and Martha often socialized with Jack and Jackie.
Emotionally closer to Jack than Ben Bradlee would ever become, Charlie Bartlett was perhaps one of Kennedy’s primary confidantes.
Jack mostly compartmentalized his close friendships, yet he confided in Bartlett what he rarely shared with anyone else.
When Jack began his presidency, Bartlett thought it a bit odd that his Yale classmate Cord Meyer, then a chief operative in the CIA’s covert action directorate, wanted to begin having a more social relationship with him.
When asked by Nina Burleigh why he never considered investigating the story of Mary Meyer, he reportedly exclaimed nervously, “Oh, I can’t.
That there were moments when Jack couldn’t contain his affection didn’t go unnoticed, either.
I even got a little mad with him on one of the boat parties, because it was more than obvious.
Charlie Bartlett’s observations further dovetailed with Kenny O’Donnell statements to Leo Damore.
O’Donnell, who was as close to Jack as anyone could be on a daily basis during his presidency, knew firsthand Jack’s affection for Mary.
Mary was in the White House residence on Monday evening, August 6, 1962, just thirty-six hours after the apparent suicide of famed Hollywood sex symbol Marilyn Monroe.
That Bobby Kennedy and Peter Lawford were at Marilyn’s house the day she died was suspicious enough; that Bobby returned a second time that evening, according to two witnesses, immediately prior to her “suicide” was a bit more unsavory.
Should she have proceeded with her intention to publicly reveal the affairs, the Kennedy political machine might have been dealt a severe blow.
Marilyn’s alleged crusade “to expose the Kennedys for what they are” has had enormous reverberations, including the close guarding of fifty-four crates of Robert Kennedy’s records at the John F Kennedy Presidential Library and Museum that are so confidential even the library’s director is prohibited from knowing what’s in them.
Toward the end of 1962, inside the White House Mary Meyer had become “almost part of the furniture,” in the words of White House counsel Myer Feldman, according to author Nina Burleigh.
Around eight-thirty, when the day was over, often I’d walk over to the residence and she’d be sitting there.
In addition, Mary’s evolving position within the Kennedy White House senior staff was never second tier.
Mention of her name could even be considered advantageous for employment, in the opinion of Kennedy aide and historian Arthur Schlesinger Jr.
In a two-page December 1962 memo in support of fellow historian Trumbull Higgins’s proposal to write the official White House account of the Bay of Pigs debacle, Schlesinger stated, “I know Higgins slightly.
A\tlen Dulles was finally granted his wish by President Dwight Eisenhower to be director of the CIA in 1953.
But Eisenhower, even before leaving office, had regretted the Dulles appointment.
With the CIA’s 1954 overthrow of President Jacobo Arbenz in Guatemala, Eisenhower finally realized the Agency was dangerously out of control.
Several year later, right before Eisenhower’s May 16, 1960, peace summit with Premier Nikita Khrushchev, the CIA engineered the May 1 downing of its own U-2 reconnaissance spy flight over Russian territory as a way to undermine any possibility of rapprochement with the Soviet Union.
Eisenhower had planned to orchestrate a Soviet détente before he left office, so that he could cut the defense budget and redirect resources toward America’s domestic needs.
That dream was quickly vanquished as tensions between the two emerging superpowers resumed unabated.
Through fear-mongering, the CIA had achieved its goal, urging upon Congress the strategic necessity for further increases in its budget.
As he left office, President Eisenhower would finally explode at Dulles.
By 1964, the Agency’s clandestine service and operations would consume nearly two-thirds of its entire budget and, according to author Tim Weiner, 90 percent of the director’s time.
Warning that “the potential for the disastrous rise of misplaced power exists and will persist,” Eisenhower pointed to “an alert and knowledgeable citizenry” as the antidote.
Established in 1947, the CIA was, from its inception, virtually unaccountable to any authority.
It was subject to little, if any, congressional oversight, a fact that would increasingly haunt both President Harry Truman and his successor, President Eisenhower.
As a career military general, Eisenhower was skeptical about the role of civilians in clandestine paramilitary operations.
In addition, he was troubled by the fact that the Agency had a carte blanche “get out of jail free card” for anything it attempted.
President Truman’s 1948 National Security Council had so imbued the Agency with unchecked, absolute power, it threatened the entire foundation of America’s constitutional premise.
That year the NSC approved what became known as “Top Secret Directive NSC 10/2,” a virtual bottomless pit of nefarious, illegal quicksand.
During the 1950s, in the interests of promoting American economic growth and hegemony, the emerging Dulles calling card was an uncanny expertise in overthrowing foreign governments, many of them democratically elected.
Eisenhower’s predecessor, President Harry Truman, had had his own confrontations with covert operations run by the Dulles cadre.
Iran, in 1951, had decided to nationalize its oil industry, which before had been controlled exclusively by Britain.
Winston Churchill had implored Truman before he left office in 1952 to order the CIA to join with British forces in MI6 and arrange for a coup against the newly democratically elected Mosaddeq government in Iran.
A year after the overthrow of Mosaddeq, the CIA (again under Dulles’s tutelage) would take down the government in Guatemala.
The Arbenz government’s “mortal sin” was land reform in its own country; it wanted to put a stop to private corporations like the United Fruit Company taking land away from the Guatemalan peasant population.
Although few knew it then, both Allen Dulles and his brother, Secretary of State John Foster Dulles, owned sizable stock in United Fruit, with Allen Dulles himself serving as a member of the company’s board of trustees.
Under Dulles-CIA auspices, similar coups would occur in Hungary, North Vietnam, and Laos before the 1960 election.
Allen Dulles wanted to take advantage of the new president’s CIA sympathies as quickly as possible.
Initially dazzled, then seduced, by Dulles and the aura of CIA covert operations, both Jack and his brother Bobby agreed to keep Allen Dulles in place—which included supporting, at least initially, the upcoming Bay of Pigs invasion of Cuba run by Dulles protégé Richard Bissell.
The CIA had been startled by Kennedy’s election; they weren’t prepared for it.
Early into his presidency in 1961, before the Bay of Pigs debacle, Jack had pushed hard against the CIA and the Joint Chiefs for the goal of a neutral and independent Laos in Southeast Asia.
He wanted to end United States support of the country’s anti-Communist ruler, General Phoumi Nosavan, whose puppet government had been installed by a joint CIA-Pentagon military force during the Eisenhower administration.
The insistence of the new president wasn’t well received; it also foreshadowed a bigger event to come.
That April, the CIA launched the Cuban Bay of Pigs invasion, hoping to get rid of Fidel Castro and install a government more sympathetic to American business interests and the interests of the Mafia, who wanted to regain possession of the lucrative casinos in Havana.
It would, however, become a defining event in the Kennedy presidency and in Cold War history.
A CIA-trained, equipped, and commanded Cuban-exile brigade was used to attempt the overthrow of Castro’s government.
Almost laughably, Fidel Castro, along with the rest of the world’s leaders, including the Russians, knew the invasion was being launched, and who was really behind it.
The invasion had originally been conceived during the Eisenhower administration.
Its success would inevitably depend on American air support, although that detail had not been revealed to the president before the operation began.
When the moment came, Jack realized he had been tricked by the Dulles inner circle, which had attempted to possibly play upon the president’s fear of appearing politically weak and inexperienced.
Dulles believed Kennedy would cave in to political pressure, and thereby fall into line to make the operation a success.
Awakened, Jack’s rectitude intervened; realizing he had been intentionally deceived, he called the operation to a halt, willing to suffer whatever political consequences might ensue.
Years later, according to Cold War historian L Fletcher Prouty, Supreme Court justice William O Douglas recalled a discussion he and the president had about the debacle.
The Bay of Pigs fiasco would turn out to be a harbinger of worse things to come.
The Kennedy administration’s maiden voyage in foreign affairs, its shakedown cruise, was a rude awakening, and it would begin to reveal the kind of ruthless treachery at work.
It was that the CIA overlords of the invasion, director Allen Dulles and deputy Richard Bissell, had their own plan of how to bring the United States into the conflict.
It appears that they never really expected an uprising against Castro when the liberators landed as described in their memos to the White House.
What they did expect was that the invaders would establish and secure a beachhead, announce the creation of a counterrevolutionary government and appeal for aid from the United States and the Organization of American States.
The assumption was that President Kennedy, who had emphatically banned direct American involvement, would be forced by public opinion to come to the aid of the returning patriots.
Unlike any president before him, President Kennedy took responsibility for what had occurred.
The American public forgave him, upsetting the well-established CIA protocol of manipulating presidents and political leaders.
The entire upper echelon of the Agency, most of which had been recruited by Dulles, were loyal to him and would remain so.
While Kennedy replaced Dulles with John McCone, a wealthy Catholic businessman, McCone was largely just a figurehead, intentionally left out of the loop, not aware of the more egregious CIA covert operations being run by people like Richard Helms, who now occupied Richard Bissell’s position at the head of the Directorate of Plans, and chief of counterintelligence Jim Angleton, both of whom would remain staunch, loyal Dulles followers.
Allen Dulles would always be their boss, and they would consult him regularly after his formal departure.
The Bay of Pigs fiasco was a demarcation in the sand, an event that ultimately identified and determined the real forces that would work to undermine President Kennedy’s objectives.
These forces were not the Soviets, or their puppet Fidel Castro, or the so-called falling dominoes of alleged Communist takeovers.
Global American hegemony was predicated on financial and _ political control, even if Communism was one way underdeveloped nations sometimes developed themselves.
Eventually, financial and economic control became paramount, once political control had been established.
Ultimately, the memoranda may not have changed anything, other than to incur the further wrath of CIA higher-ups.
So bold were these moves, according to L Fletcher Prouty, they shocked the entire national security apparatus.
Little did Dulles understand his statement was just his own psychological projection.
It was Dulles himself who, for nearly twenty years, “thought he was a god,” as he and his CIA imperium pillaged the integrity of American democracy.
On July 20, 1961, during heightened tensions over Berlin, President Kennedy attended a National Security Council meeting.
He listened attentively as the Joint Chiefs of Staff, including General Lyman Lemnitzer and Allen Dulles, who was still in charge at the CIA,® presented a plan for a first-strike, preemptive nuclear attack on the Soviet Union that would take place in late 1963, preceded by a well-orchestrated series of events designed to produce “heightened tensions” between the two superpowers.
The scheme for “heightened tensions” was eventually codenamed “Operation Northwoods,” and it had the written approval of all the Joint Chiefs of Staff in the Pentagon.
According to author James Bamford, who first reported it in his bestselling book Body of Secrets , “the plan called for called for innocent people to be shot on American streets; for boats carrying refugees fleeing Cuba to be sunk on the high seas; for a wave of violent terrorism to be launched in Washington, D.C., Miami, and elsewhere.
People would be framed for bombings they did not commit; planes would be hijacked.
We need only to remember how President George W Bush—under the direction of Dick Cheney and Donald Rumsfeld—took us into a war with Iraq under false pretenses.
How much Jack shared with Mary about what he was up against in the early days of his presidency will probably never be known—unless perhaps Mary’s real diary during the last few years of her life becomes available.
Jack regarded Mary as completely trustworthy; increasingly, he sought out her counsel.
Having had a life with Cord, Mary was already well acquainted with CIA skulduggery.
Throughout his most critical moments during his presidency, Mary invariably found her way to his side, and always by invitation.
No moment, however, was more critical than what occurred during the month of October 1962.
Thirteen days would change everything, eventually inviting the highest of hopes, but not before a confrontation that portended nuclear annihilation.
Whether it was the fog of economic uncertainty, the fog of shady covert operations, or the fog of war itself, only a true nautical seafarer understood how quickly conditions at sea could change.
A ready, unentangled anchor might well save the day, or at least until it looked as if the fog might be lifting—the appearance of which sometimes turned out to be a mirage.
It is important to do this because it breaks down human self-delusion and isolation.
It is important to do this because in so doing we do justice to our own complexity.
It is important to do this because we can count on so few people to go that hard way with us. —Adrienne Rich All wars are civil wars, because all men are brothers.
It is all one. —Ram Dass You believe in redemption, don’t you? —President John F Kennedy May 1, 1962 Sometime ON Monpay, October 22, 1962, Mary Meyer was invited to the White House for a small, impromptu dinner party that had been hastily organized by Jackie.
The guest list included Jackie’s sister, Lee Radziwill, friends Benno and Nicole Graziani, and Jackie’s dress designer, Oleg Cassini.
Mary’s escort for the evening was to be her friend and fellow artist William Walton, a longtime friend of both Jack and Bobby Kennedy who had already functioned as Mary’s partner at previous White House social gatherings.
Why Mary had inexplicably canceled the engagement remained a mystery, but the fact that Jack had wanted her to be in close proximity that night was noteworthy.
Earlier that evening, before the dinner, Jack had addressed the nation on national television.
Six days earlier, on October 16, he had seen detailed photographs from a clandestine U-2 reconnaissance flight that showed a secret offensive buildup of Soviet missile sites under construction on the island of Cuba.
With no resolution in sight after six days, the president informed the public of the emerging crisis.
Behind closed doors, the president and his most senior advisers sought peaceful ways to resolve the impasse, but the Joint Chiefs of Staff resisted them.
Both wanted to exploit the crisis to invade Cuba to get rid of Fidel Castro, even going so far as to plan a preemptive nuclear strike on the Soviet Union.
Secretly, against the president’s orders, the American military and the CIA would engage in a number of activities to undermine and sabotage the possibility of a negotiated settlement.
President Kennedy and his advisers ordered a United States naval blockade of the entire island of Cuba.
Its purpose was to deter any further weapons and supplies from reaching the missile sites under construction.
The Cold War hard-liners, however, dismissed it as another “appeasement at Munich,” wanting still to ignite a major conflagration.
Finally, after nearly two weeks, masterful diplomatic pressure prevailed.
The eventual removal of the Soviet missiles took place without having to bomb or invade Cuba.
It wasn’t just another international political turf war between competing superpowers vying for control.
The entire future of humanity itself was hanging in the balance for thirteen days; nuclear holocaust was on the horizon.
It was, as author James Douglass rightly tagged it, “the most dangerous moment in human history,” as well as possibly the most dramatic event of the entire Cold War.
Had it not been for some ingenious, secret back-channel communications and negotiations, the entire planet might well have become uninhabitable.
That Jack had wanted Mary in his presence on the evening he alerted the nation to the accelerating calamity suggests a reliance on her counsel.
Mary’s longtime commitment to world peace, coupled with Jack’s broadening insight that peace, not armed conflict, was the right path forward, inevitably made her an important asset.
While the Joint Chiefs and CIA pursued a more bellicose strategy vis-a-vis Cuba and the Soviet Union, Kennedy and his Soviet counterpart, Nikita Khrushchev, had been engaged in a _ secret correspondence that had begun several months after their June 1961 Vienna summit.
The letter invited a deeper understanding between the two leaders and their countries.
At Vienna, Khrushchev had sounded a decidedly different note, touting nuclear war as an option to which he would turn if necessary.
In reality, the Soviet leader was exploiting Kennedy’s embarrassment and weakened position since the attempted Bay of Pigs failure.
Khrushchev later admitted that in the run-up to the Vienna summit, Soviet hardliners had pushed him to grandstand.
The whole world hopefully expected that our meeting and a frank exchange of views would have a soothing effect, would turn relations between our countries into the correct channel and promote the adoption of decisions which could give the peoples confidence that at last peace on earth will be secured.
The Soviet premier compared the state of Cold War tensions with “Noah’s Ark where both the ‘clean’ and the ‘unclean’ found sanctuary.
But regardless of who lists himself with the ‘clean’ and who is considered to be ‘unclean,’ they are all equally interested in one thing and that is that the Ark should successfully continue its cruise.
Both leaders were adamant about their commitment to peaceful coexistence.
Mutual goodwill and hopeful intentions, however, proved no match for the progression of realworld events for both men.
For his part, Khrushchev felt betrayed when he learned of the United States military’s aggressive planning and lobbying throughout the spring of 1962 for a second invasion of Cuba, this time by overwhelming United States forces.
At the Vienna summit in June 1961, Khrushchev had told the president that he was “very grieved by the fact” that an attack on Cuba at the Bay of Pigs had taken place.
The Pentagon, led by the bellicose United States Air Force Chief of Staff, General Curtis “Bombs Away” LeMay, had pushed aggressively during the first days of the crisis for an immediate surprise-bombing campaign against the Soviet missile sites in Cuba, during the period when the CIA estimated the medium-range nuclear-tipped missiles were not yet operational.
This was later followed, within a matter of days, by Pentagon recommendations that a full-scale United States invasion follow the air strikes.
What their intelligence had not revealed, however, was that the Russians had more than forty thousand troops in Cuba who were prepared to fight an American invasion.
Had we ... attacked Cuba and invaded Cuba at the time, we almost surely would have been involved in nuclear war.
And when I say “we,” I mean you—it would not have been the United States alone.
During the crisis, both the United States military and the CIA were secretly operating unilaterally, doing whatever they could to intensify tensions that would ignite a war.
On October 28, the Air Force launched an unarmed intercontinental ballistic missile from Vandenberg Air Force Base in California, destined for the Marshall Islands in the Pacific.
That the president had not ordered the test further aggravated tensions with his own military.
This open-threat display was intended to provoke the USR into responses that would justify a preemptive nuclear first strike by the United States.
Also in the midst of this, the CIA was operating independently, in contravention of the president’s order.
Under the command of the CIA’s William K Harvey, three commando teams of sixty men each were sent into Cuba to destabilize the country in preparation for an invasion.
The Agency continued these operations in spite of Kennedy’s order that such destabilization efforts immediately cease and desist.
Khrushchev agreed to remove the missiles from Cuba, and Kennedy agreed that the United States would not invade the island.
Secretly, Kennedy also promised the removal of United States missiles in Turkey.
The American military establishment was furious with the negotiated compromise, while Kennedy’s opinion of the American military establishment hit an all-time low.
She and Jack may also have spent some time alone, though it’s not known whether they would have done so at Joe Alsop’s house or Mary’s.
However, “the most dangerous moment in human history” had taken a huge toll on Jack’s health.
With increased infusions of cortisone to combat his stress during the crisis, many of his gastrointestinal symptoms reappeared and became more acute, as did his recurrent back pains.
Carrying the weight of the world and future of humanity for thirteen days would have easily crushed anyone.
Yet, terrible as it had been, an opportunity was lurking on the horizon, something that both he and his counterpart, Nikita Khrushchev, would soon realize.
But in the shadows, evil was very much alive, stalking not only the republic, but the president.
Not only were the Joint Chiefs of Staff enraged that Cuba had not been attacked, they were also indignant that Kennedy had made concessions to Khrushchev.
The Bay of Pigs fiasco in 1961 had already humiliated the military-intelligence establishment.
Before its end, 1963 would become a defining year for America, and would be forever remembered for one earthshaking moment whose repercussions would be felt throughout the world.
The year began with an unobtrusive tiny earthquake of sorts, not even noticeable except to a handful of insider journalists who at the time honored a “gentlemen’s agreement” not to reveal presidential indiscretions.
And so, in January of that year, what seemed at first an insignificant event turned out to foreshadow an invisible tsunami, slowly making its way toward destruction.
The augury would involve Washington Post publisher and owner Philip L Graham.
During World War II, Philip L Graham had trained as an Army intelligence officer.
His acumen quickly elevated him to a position close to General Douglas MacArthur in the Pacific theater.
There, Phil Graham made connections that would assist him for the rest of his life, including entrée with all of the CIA’s seminal, well-to-do operatives—people like Allen Dulles, Frank Wisner, Richard Helms, Cord Meyer, and Desmond FitzGerald.
Being of the same social class, Philip and his wife, Katharine, were accustomed to mingling with CIA heavyweights in Washington, often gathering on Sunday afternoons for an extended cocktail hour before a legendary potluck supper salon.
Eugene Meyer had nursed the floundering newspaper ever since he bought it at auction in 1933.
In 1946, he made his thirty-year-old son-in-law, Philip, its editor in chief and owner.
Having earned some of the highest grades ever given at Harvard, Phil was certifiably brilliant, but also certifiably manic-depressive.
During the 1950s, the CIA initiated Operation Mockingbird, a project designed, the reader will recall, to influence the American media to slant news stories favoring the CIA’s agenda or point of view, particularly those having to do with international events and foreign policy.
Wisner successfully “recruited” a number of prominent journalists to the CIA, including his friend Phil Graham, who soon helped run Mockingbird within mainstream media outlets.
In addition, by late 1962, President Kennedy had appointed Phil Graham head of COMSAT, the new organization that operated America’s communication satellites.
The position allowed Graham to access certain classified operations, including the CIA’s secret satellite surveillance system—the CORONA program —which provided aerial reconnaissance of the Soviet Union, China, most of Southeast Asia, and the Middle East.
By 1962, Philip and Katharine Graham’s marriage had come apart and was in freefall.
Estranged from Katharine, drinking heavily amid manic-depressive episodes, Phil and his new mistress, Newsweek reporter Robin Webb, were living together and hosting dinner parties for Washington’s social elite.
According to some accounts, they had been known to philander together as a team.
Eventually, both Phil and Katharine Graham became aware of President Kennedy’s affair with Mary Meyer.
In mid-January 1963, Phil and Robin Webb flew to Phoenix on the Post’s chartered jet.
During one intoxicated evening, Graham intruded on dinner at the midwinter meeting of the Associated Press board of directors at the Arizona Biltmore Hotel.
Phil proceeded to ask if he could address the audience, at which point he became unhinged.
But it was author Deborah Davis who, in 1979, based on her interviews with James Truitt, first claimed that Graham had told the crowd, many of whom knew him, that he was going to reveal exactly who was sleeping with whom in Washington, beginning with President Kennedy.
Davis then claimed that someone at the dinner who witnessed Graham’s outburst called President Kennedy at the White House to alert him.
This information allegedly came from James Truitt, who was at Katharine Graham’s house when a call came in for her, allegedly from President Kennedy himself.
Katharine at that very moment was meeting with Post executives at her home.
They began strategizing how to bring Phil back “forcibly” and commit him to a psychiatric hospital.
According to Truitt’s statements to Davis, he himself apparently got on the phone with Kennedy and asked him to send Phil’s doctor, Dr.
Over the years, there has been some controversy as to whether Phil Graham’s “meltdown” that January had actually included his blurting out the fact of Mary and Jack’s affair.
Paul Pioneer Press nor Los Angeles Times publisher Otis Chandler, both of whom were present that evening, remembered any such utterances about Mary Meyer by Graham.
Shover also remembered Phil had been on a tirade against many members of the press that evening, but could not recall him talking about President Kennedy or Mary Meyer.
Ben Bradlee, who was not present at the Phoenix episode, has always maintained he never heard anything about Phil Graham mentioning the affair between Mary and Jack during the incident, and was adamant that if it had occurred, he and Tony would have come to know about it.
Anne Truitt also went on record, saying, “James would have told me if Phil had mentioned Mary.
Unfortunately, Katharine Graham’s own secondhand account of the event in her 1998 book Personal History was superficial and misleading.
She and her “pit bull entourage” tried to stop the Felsenthal publication.
Felsenthal recalled “receiving pages of complaints from Kay’s lawyers,” hoping their intimidation might thwart her efforts to publish.
They knew she was going to fight it, and so they eventually just disappeared.
Not wanting to fall into the same pit as Deborah Davis, Carol Felsenthal made sure that her book was not only thoroughly and meticulously researched, but completely scrutinized as well.
In 1993, her book was also serialized in Vanity Fair, known for its rigorous fact checking.
What was never disputed, however, was the fact that Phil Graham had been forcibly sedated, taken by ambulance to the airport, and flown back to Washington from Phoenix on the day following his outburst.
Equally mysterious, the following day, January 18, Phil’s mistress, Robin Webb, called the White House at 6:18 pm.
Perhaps lucid enough to realize he might have been able to leave a university hospital more easily than a private psychiatric hospital, Phil may have become aware that Katharine had obtained a court order committing him to Chestnut Lodge.
The Agency needed psychiatric facilities to deal with “indiscreet” employees— operatives who possessed or had access to high-level classified information, who were either “cracking up” or otherwise not conforming to established security protocols.
Phil remained at Chestnut Lodge for approximately two weeks under the care of Dr.
All through the winter and spring of 1963, Katharine was both devastated and humiliated by the entire course of events, but determined to prevent the Post from falling into Phil’s control and ownership, even if it meant she had to have Phil declared insane.
Contemplation of such a diabolical deed as the overthrow of an American president would need the kind of trustworthy tentacles that could stretch deep into the grinding wheels of media establishments.
Eleven days after the incident in Phoenix on January 28, Mary Meyer signed into the White House residence using her own name.
Jackie, who was away at her rented hideaway, Glen Ora, decorating the family’s new Wexford estate, had become aware of the affair.
By 1963, Mary had become a fixture in the president’s life, as close a confidante as he was capable of having.
On March 8, 1963, the Kennedys hosted their sixth and, as fate would have it, last White House dinner dance.
Mary attended on the arm of Blair Clark, an old friend of Jack’s from Harvard.
She had been upstairs with Jack and then had gone walking out in the snow.
The bottom of Mary’s dress was muddy and wet, indicating that she had been walking outside.
She later told her friend Anne Truitt that she had become “unhappy” and taken a walk.
During the evening of the final dinner dance, Jackie told her dinner partner, Adlai Stevenson, “I don’t care how many girls as long as I know he knows it’s wrong, and I think he does now.
Then she told him, “I first loved you” when she had met Stevenson in Illinois shortly after she and Jack were married.
Whether their split that night was real or not, the separation didn’t last long, at least officially.
On May 29, Mary would attend the president’s forty-sixth birthday party on the presidential yacht Sequoia.
Th April 1963, President Kennedy’s future trip to Dallas, Texas, was discussed privately between himself, Vice President Johnson, and his chief aide, Kenny O’Donnell.
On April 23, Johnson announced plans for Kennedy’s trip to Dallas during a luncheon speech to Texas newspaper and radio station executives.
In 1963, he was assigned officially as a “Washington Police Inspector,” though he was also secretly working for the Justice Department and was a liaison to the CIA, having risen up through the ranks through the Metropolitan Police Department beginning in the early 1930s.
Shimon had established a reputation for discretion in service to various presidents.
He had won the confidence not only of President Franklin Roosevelt, but his successors as well.
The two were known to have taken numerous walks together on the White House grounds.
During the 1963 Easter weekend, Shimon and his daughter Toni were walking near Shimon’s North Stafford Street home in Arlington, Virginia, when he revealed something to his daughter that would come back to haunt her.
As they strolled together, Toni began to feel a sense of foreboding, suspecting she would soon be missing her father’s company once again.
There was something ominous in her father’s voice, she remembered feeling.
Her father responded, wanting to see if she understood and connected the dots.
Toni would remember that moment and the darkness that had come over her that day.
Without mentioning any names, she reportedly alluded to Phil Graham’s outburst in Arizona earlier that year.
They also discussed the state of world affairs, with Mary telling him, “America doesn’t have to be run by these cold-war guys.
Leary invited Mary to Mexico for further training in leading psychedelic sessions.
She no longer trusted the phones or the mail, she told him, but said she would find a way to stay in touch.
On the sixth of May, 1963, the Harvard Corporation voted to fire Timothy Leary, not for giving hallucinogens to students, but for failing to show up and teach some of his classes that spring.
I was never able to commit myself to the game of Harvard or even to the game of rehabilitation.
Nothing that doesn’t ring true to my ancient cell wisdom and to that central vibration beam within can hold my attention for very long.
From the date of this session it was inevitable that we would leave Harvard, that we would leave American society, and that we would spend the rest of our lives as mutants, faithfully following the instructions of our internal blueprints, and tenderly, gently disregarding the parochial social insanities.
According to author Leo Damore, it was corroborating evidence of a “mild LSD trip” that Mary and Jack had shared at Joe Alsop’s home in Georgetown in May 1963.
Sometime after Damore’s November 1990 interview with Timothy Leary, it appeared that Damore learned of this event.
Timothy Leary was well known to be an obsessive pack rat who never threw away anything.
According to his biographer, Robert Greenfield, Leary’s hoarding of his papers, letters, any kind of communication whatsoever, was legendary.
His newfound political trajectory would eventually distance him from Cold War ideology and move him closer to setting the stage for world peace.
For years, Kennedy had been quietly nurturing the notion of disarmament.
Twice burned by both the military and the CIA, Kennedy’s independence became clear.
He was determined to forge a path toward setting the world stage for peace.
Yet despite ongoing secret negotiations with Prime Minister Harold Macmillan of Great Britain and Khrushchev in the early part of 1963, President Kennedy seemed pessimistic about the possibility of a nuclear arms treaty.
We have tried to get an agreement on all the rest of it and then to the question of the number of inspections, but we were unable to get that.
Whatever transpired during the latter half of May remains unknown, but something somewhere seems to have made a significant impact.
Kennedy wanted the entire world to believe in the possibility of peace.
If some part of his transformation was catalyzed by a horizon-altering psychedelic excursion with Mary Meyer, then so be it.
He wouldn’t have been the first iconic figure in human history to partake, nor would he be the last.
Francis Crick, the Nobel laureate and progenitor of modern genetics, reportedly was under the influence of LSD when he first deciphered the doublehelix structure of DNA sixty years ago.
Before his death in 2004, he told a colleague that he had often used small doses of LSD to boost his powers of thought.
Bill Wilson, founder of Alcoholics Anonymous, was first introduced to LSD in 1956 by psychedelic pioneer Aldous Huxley, author of Brave New World and The Doors of Perception.
He emerged completely enthusiastic about the experience, believing that the drug was a kind of “miracle substance” that had the potential to facilitate a deeper spiritual connection with life—something he was convinced was missing for people who struggled with alcohol addiction.
No longer regarded as just a passing fad of the 1960s counterculture, the longawaited resurgence in psychedelic research has finally resumed.
Since 2008, at Johns Hopkins, Harvard, and UCLA, U.S.-government-sponsored studies with the hallucinogen psilocybin have repeatedly demonstrated that subjects who volunteered for this opportunity came to regard their experience as one of the most meaningful, spiritually significant events in their lives.
The experience of ordinary people in this kind of research has resembled those recorded in the annals of mystical traditions.
Roland Griffiths at Johns Hopkins now entertains the idea that the human brain may, in fact, be “hardwired” to undergo these kinds of “unitive” experiences.
In any case, even a minimal dose of a psychedelic like LSD or psilocybin could have chemically catalyzed the opening of Jack’s “hardwired” capacity for a “unitive” state of consciousness.
It would have further set into motion the insights already taking hold in the president for an entirely new political trajectory, away from the Cold War.
This, despite the fact that the speech was perhaps the most visionary, spiritual clarion call of awakening ever put forth across the divide of all nation-states, and mankind.
His emerging vision of peace for the planet was no less important than his vision of peace for his country, for in the “unitive” state of consciousness, we are all one.
Unwilling to let his own countrymen off the hook, the president then challenged the notion that if only the Soviets would “adopt a more enlightened attitude,” there would be peace.
It leads to the conclusion that war is inevitable—that mankind is doomed—that we are gripped by forces we cannot control.
Genuine peace must be the product of many nations, the sum of many acts.
Encouraging all Americans to “reexamine our attitude towards the Soviet Union,” this dramatic oration was as much for the Russian people as it was for America.
Today, should total war ever break out again—no matter how—our two countries would become the primary targets.
It is an ironic but accurate fact that the two strongest powers are the two in the most danger of devastation.
Among the many traits the peoples of our two countries have in common, none is stronger than our mutual abhorrence of war.
Almost unique, among the major world powers, we have never been at war with each other.
And no nation in the history of battle ever suffered more than the Soviet Union suffered in the course of the Second World War.
That had been, in 1945, the sanguine vision of Cord Meyer in a postwar world struggling for peace.
But it would be his archrival Jack Kennedy who would finally articulate the inspiration that would echo into eternity.
The president also announced his intention to establish a telephone hotline between the Soviet premier’s office and the White House.
Such a declaration is no substitute for a formal binding treaty, but I hope it will help us achieve one.
While we proceed to safeguard our national interests, let us also safeguard human interests.
Khrushchev immediately ordered that it be rebroadcast throughout every city in the Soviet Union, an unprecedented event.
PRESIDENT, On the occasion of the national holiday of the United States of America—Independence Day—we send to you and the American people our warm congratulations and best wishes for peace and prosperity.
In our times—the age of harnessing atomic energy and penetration into the depths of the universe—the preservation of peace has become in truth a vital necessity for all mankind.
Equally groundbreaking was the speed with which the treaty would be drafted and ratified.
Kennedy had asked W Averell Harriman to lead the American team, but it was the president himself who prepared them, making sure they understood the critical importance of what was about to occur.
Once Harriman arrived in Moscow on July 14, Kennedy would be in contact with him three and four times a day.
He well knew such a treaty would never occur had he worked through the national security channels of the CIA and the Pentagon.
But the achievement of this goal is not a victory for one side—it is a victory for mankind.
Just before 8:00 PM., “at the next to last minute,” with Jackie away at Camp David, Jack decided to stop by Joe Alsop’s house in Georgetown.
If, as Joe Alsop described it, Jack was “in a gay mood” that early June evening, Mary herself must have been ablaze, and not just because flowers everywhere were coaxing her smile.
Her mission had become illuminated into her mosaic—a subliminal “peace song” whose emerging, though still faint, melody had just premiered for all mankind earlier that day.
During cocktails in the Alsop garden, Mary sat with Jack on one side and Ambassador William Attwood, her former prep school and college beau, on the other.
In this address, Kennedy revealed the same compassion, warmth, and sensitivity that had been on display a day earlier.
He underscored and illuminated that there was a direct link between political equality and freedom and the attainment of world peace.
But just after midnight on the night of the president’s televised address, Medgar Evers, a prominent leader of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People , was shot and killed in his driveway in front of his family by white supremacist Byron De La Beckwith.
During the afternoon of June 12, Mary Meyer called Evelyn Lincoln, the president’s personal secretary, at the White House and was transferred to Jack.
Two nights later, with Jackie at Camp David, Mary returned unescorted to the White House residence.
On June 26, in the midst of Kennedy’s ten-day trip across Europe, more than a million and a half people in West Berlin’s Rudolph Wilde Platz, adjacent to the Brandenburg Gate, turned out to welcome the American president.
Kennedy spoke directly to what the people of a divided Germany wanted to hear.
Seven months pregnant, Jackie had retreated to Hyannis Port for the summer with her two children.
Sometime in late June, Mary had reportedly returned to Boston and met Timothy Leary at a downtown seafood restaurant.
According to Leary’s account, she chided him in a playful manner for having attracted too much publicity in Mexico.
Again, Mary wouldn’t reveal who these “important people” were; she was always tight-lipped and discreet.
Given the timeline, however, it appeared to be another reference to the fact that she and Jack had recently shared a psychedelic experience together.
In addition, there was an allusion to someone else, someone other than Jack, and part of the group of “important people,” which will be discussed shortly.
Years later, during their 1990 interview, both Leo Damore and Timothy Leary reached a similar conclusion about the identity of this person.
At the end of June, Washington Post owner-editor Philip Graham had finally broken off his affair with Robin Webb and returned to Chestnut Lodge Sanitarium.
By all accounts, he had been making solid progress when he left Chestnut Lodge on a weekend pass the morning of August 3 to visit Katharine at their Glen Welby estate in Warrenton, Virginia.
Within hours, Phil Graham was dead, a small-bore shotgun wound to the head, an apparent suicide.
There were conflicting accounts of Graham’s death, just as there had been about his alleged behavior in Phoenix.
According to author David Halberstam, everyone he talked to said Phil had been “getting better; everyone thought he was getting better,” and that was why he had been permitted to leave on the weekend.
In Deborah Davis’s 1979 account, Phil and Katharine “spent some time together, and then Katharine took a nap.
Only a few minutes later, there was the ear-splitting noise of a gun going off indoors.
Yet suicide would nullify the revisions to his will that he had made throughout 1963, cutting out Katharine.
Katharine, after Phil’s death, walked away with complete control of the Washington Post and everything else.
In the three different editions of Deborah Davis’s Katharine the Great, the author never wavered from the view that Phil’s death was a suicide.
But it coincided with another previously undisclosed piece of this puzzle.
When Leo Damore talked with Dovey Roundtree in 1991 about Katharine Graham, Roundtree told him that a young black woman attorney by the name of Barbara L Smith had been working in her office in 1963.
Barbara was the granddaughter of William Wadsworth Smith, the caretaker of the Graham’s Glen Welby estate at the time of Phil’s death Dovey and her young colleague Barbara had become quite close, she told Damore; when Barbara’s grandfather died, she asked Dovey to speak at his funeral.
Graham gave to him when he was a younger person,” recounted Roundtree to Damore.
Katharine Graham and one of her sons had attended William’s funeral, and Katharine had also spoken.
Not one to confuse important details, Dovey Roundtree confided to Damore that, according to Barbara, Mrs.
Graham had called on Barbara’s grandfather “to go upstairs and bring this man downstairs.
Although there was never a shred of physical evidence that anyone other than Phil had pulled the trigger, questions lingered.
Corson was never “officially” employed by the CIA, but he often worked closely with Jim Angleton and Robert Crowley, both of whom were deeply ensconced in the Agency’s covert action directorate.
By the early 1960s, the Technical Services Staff within the CIA, headed by the infamous Dr.
Sidney Gottlieb, had a huge arsenal of drugs and other substances that could be clandestinely administered to unwitting victims to create such states as suicidal depression, brain tumors, cancer, or death from natural causes, leaving no trace of any foreign toxin in the body.
Under congressional scrutiny in 1975, CIA director William Colby openly exhibited to Senator Frank Church and his committee a CIA-manufactured pistol equipped with undetectable poison darts that would, when silently fired “without perception” at its intended human target, induce a fatal heart attack, leaving no trace of any toxin.
Colby’s sham exhibition was just the tip of the iceberg of the CIA arsenal.
The Agency spent untold millions to find and develop drugs and other methods, both conventional and esoteric, to bring people under various states of control.
It’s no secret the CIA was interested in all the ramifications of “mind control”— altering, or erasing, or even remaking a subject’s mind in whatever direction the Agency wanted.
Mind “erasure” was of paramount importance for CIA personnel who were no longer mentally stable, and at risk of revealing classified information.
Another long-standing CIA obsession was to create a “Manchurian candidate”—a project involving the use of hypnosis, drugs, deprivation, or other means as a way to tur an individual into a programmable assassin, even to take his own life.
While Phil’s overall prognosis and recovery seemed to have improved by the summer of 1963, his long-term stability remained uncertain.
Sometime after the 1961 Bay of Pigs fiasco, Phil had reportedly had an “acute manic-depressive incident”—prior to his Phoenix, Arizona, outburst in January 1963—during which he had talked openly of “the CIA’s manipulation of journalists” and how they were being used to promote whatever slant the Agency wanted promoted.
Katharine reverted to the policies Phil had set in place before his 1961 disenchantment.
There are some things the general public does not need to know and shouldn’t.
In June, with Katharine’s support, he had voluntarily returned to Chestnut Lodge.
Well into July, those who visited Phil all spoke of his increasingly stable disposition, of his coming to terms with his illness and making a recovery.
Whether he recovered or not, the risk may well have been that the wealthy, powerful media mogul Phil Graham was no longer willing to toe the party line, that he could no longer be counted on to turn a blind eye if needed.
An excruciating, earthshattering moment in American history was about to explode in three months’ time.
Not only would there be a well-planned, well-executed conspiracy to take out a sitting American president, but an even more critical and insidious conspiracy—a cover-up—had to be successfully, and immediately, orchestrated in the aftermath.
That, of course, meant all the major sources of news—newspapers—had to be securely on board, willing to turn a blind eye to the government’s contrived, fictitious postassassination narrative, as well as Allen Dulles’s appointment to the Warren Commission.
In the approaching moments of a horrific calamity, Phil Graham, owner and editor of the Washington Post, had become a problem.
Increasingly regarded as a loose cannon, he could no longer be trusted; he had criticized the CIA’s infiltration of the media and its manipulation of news, as well as having ceremoniously told off some of the CIA’s own collaborators—publishers and senior editors of the mainstream media—in person, in Phoenix, in January 1963.
On August 9, Jack and Jackie lost their second child at birth, a boy they had named Patrick Bouvier.
Jackie had gone into premature labor two days earlier, and the infant succumbed to complications.
A month later, Jack and Jackie would celebrate their anniversary in Newport, Rhode Island.
She was apparently unmoved by his display; she would spend the first two weeks of October cruising the Aegean with Onassis on his yacht Christina, her sister, Lee, brother-in-law Stas Radziwill, and friends Sue and Franklin Roosevelt Jr. in tow.
The White House would spin the trip as a getaway for Jackie’s convalescence, but Bobby Kennedy was furious; he vehemently detested Onassis.
Franklin Roosevelt Jr., no stranger to the rogue Onassis, asked Bobby how he should position himself during the trip.
Peter Evans, author of Ari, the only authorized biography of Aristotle Onassis, later documented in his subsequent book Nemesis that it was on this October cruise that Jackie and Onassis first became lovers.
Sometime before September 24, Timothy Leary said, he received a lateafternoon telephone call from Mary Pinchot.
We had eight intelligent women turning on the most powerful men in Washington.
Initially, Leary thought her state might have been the result of a bad drug experience; he attempted to console her.
Leary had no idea what other woman in Washington could be causing her such alarm.
Both Leary and Damore had come to believe that the woman in question—the woman Mary believed had betrayed her —was, in fact, Katharine Graham.
Damore’s theory was that in her desperation to bring her husband under control, Katharine was frantic enough to try anything, including supporting Phil in undertaking a psychedelic exploration.
That meant, according to Damore, that Katharine Graham might have been one of the eight women in Mary’s group.
His conversation with Anne Chamberlin, a close friend of Katharine Graham’s, may have led him to this conclusion.
Katharine Graham’s biggest influence in this direction, however, likely came from her close friends Henry and Clare Booth Luce, who were, like Katharine and Phil Graham, media moguls.
Over the years, Katharine Graham and Clare Booth Luce would become very dear friends.
Sidney Cohen, Clare, at loose ends, further continued her exploration during a time of personal turmoil.
Again, like Mary Meyer and Peggy Mellon Hitchcock, Clare’s psychedelic voyages would turn her into an LSD proselytizer.
Starting in 1954 and through 1968, both Time and Life would publish a number of enthusiastic articles about hallucinogens.
Katharine Graham first caught sight of Henry and Clare Booth Luce in 1948.
Clare became aware of Phil Graham’s deterioration sometime in 1962,"" the same year that Mary Meyer first introduced herself to Timothy Leary and told him she wanted to bring together a group of women who were involved with politically powerful men in Washington.
With her husband unraveling, it was not only possible, but very likely, that the increasingly desperate Katharine turned to Clare Booth Luce for guidance and advice, her marriage having survived a similar crisis.
If Clare believed LSD had “saved” her marriage, she might well have counseled Katharine in that direction.
And given Clare’s endorsement of LSD as a cutting-edge therapeutic tool, Katharine may have sought out Mary Meyer for assistance—not only to help Phil, but herself as well.
By 1963, however, it appeared Phil was beyond Katharine’s reach, that he would continue to wrest control of the Post away from her.
According to Deborah Davis, “Katharine had pretty much given up on the marriage,” yet was desperate to retain control of her family’s newspaper.
Katharine Graham’s Faustian deal with the devil would give her complete control and ownership of the Washington Post, provided she maintained the same polices and agreements her husband had arranged before his “enlightenment,” post—Bay of Pigs.
The deal had to have included Katharine not squealing on anything the Agency wanted kept secret, as well as her revealing any matters the CIA wanted to know about—including Mary Meyer’s influence on the president.
Undoubtedly, Mary was aware of the kind of power the CIA wielded, as well as its treachery, and Katharine’s betrayal likely opened up an entirely new can of worms, even perhaps allowing Mary the realization that Phil’s demise might well become a harbinger of hers.
Only the chosen few knew they were going to go to the source to cut off the head of the snake.
On September 24, the president traveled with Mary and her sister to their family’s Grey Towers estate in Milford, Pennsylvania, to dedicate a gift from the Pinchot family to the United States Forest Service.
It consisted of a large parcel of Pinchot family land, as well as the Pinchot mansion, the former residence of Mary’s uncle Gifford Pinchot.
After the dedication ceremony, Jack and the two sisters went to their mother’s house to look at old family pictures.
The elderly Ruth Pinchot, once a spirited champion of women’s equality and liberation, was now supporting Barry Goldwater in his bid to unseat Kennedy in 1964.
Unexpectedly, that same day the United States Senate ratified the president’s Limited Nuclear Test Ban Treaty with the Soviet Union and the United Kingdom.
Much had been done to convince the American public of the treaty’s importance.
Under Jack’s supervision, Norman Cousins and the Citizens Committee for a Nuclear Test Ban Treaty had led a successful campaign for public approval.
The Soviet premier considered the treaty to be his country’s and America’s greatest mutual achievement.
In a letter that followed, Khrushchev outlined certain tasks for immediate consideration, including ratification of a nonaggression pact between the countries of NATO and member states of the Warsaw Pact; creation of nuclear-free zones in various regions of the world; and a ban on the future spread of all nuclear weapons.
In his letter, Khrushchev was signaling his readiness to work with Kennedy on a host of projects.
That he had learned the good news when he was with Mary, and that she, too, had long nurtured the goal of a world moving toward peace without war, had to have been a profound, defining moment between the two.
An extraordinary accomplishment had unfolded that day, finally taking place at Mary’s family home.
According to Kenny O’Donnell, present that day at the Pinchot estate, Mary and Jack were furtively smiling at one another, the news of the ratification having reached the presidential entourage.
With regard to the latter, that September, Kennedy sent Defense Secretary Robert McNamara and General Maxwell Taylor that September on a ten-day fact-finding expedition in Vietnam, the goal of which was to determine America’s exit strategy from the war.
Kennedy took the long view, reportedly confiding to his adviser Kenny O’Donnell, “In 1965, I’Il become one of the most unpopular Presidents in history. [’ll be damned everywhere as a Communist appeaser.
If I tried to pull out completely now from Vietnam, we would have another Joe McCarthy ‘red scare’ on our hands, but I can do it after I’m reelected.
In his 1987 book The Twilight Struggle, former ambassador William Attwood documented that he was a special adviser on African affairs at the United Nations in September 1963.
He then mentioned that he was talking to ABC news reporter Lisa Howard about Africa when she casually brought up the fact that she had recently interviewed Fidel Castro.
In an interview for this book, Bill Attwood’s wife, Simone, added something more.
Simone was adamant that both she and Bill knew of “Mary’s affair with Kennedy.
Already, as early as March 1963, President Kennedy had been instructing his staff to “start thinking along more flexible lines” vis-avis the island nation and its leader.
A secret Bill Attwood—Lisa Howard alliance with Cuba’s United Nations representative Carlos Lechuga developed.
The Attwood-Howard effort with Cuba on Kennedy’s behalf became a target of CIA surveillance.
According to David Talbot, “In one call to Havana, Howard was overheard excitedly describing Kennedy’s enthusiasm for rapprochement.
On October 3, Jean Daniel, editor of the French weekly L’Observateur, told Bill Attwood that he was on his way to Havana to see Castro.
Attwood arranged for Daniel to meet with Kennedy before he left for Cuba.
On the very day of President Kennedy’s assassination, November 22, Daniel was meeting with Fidel Castro.
It was during this meeting with Fidel Castro that both men first learned that President Kennedy had been assassinated.
The Pentagon and the CIA had been working clandestinely against the president’s efforts to change policies towards both Cuba and Vietnam.
During the fall of 1963, the Vietnam situation markedly deteriorated, with United States officials split over whether to back a military coup in Vietnam to oust the Diem regime.
He added, “If the United States ever experiences [an attempt at a coup to overthrow the government] it will come from the C.I.A. and not the Pentagon.
A month later, the Catholic president of Vietnam, Ngo Dinh Diem, and his brother were assassinated by a CIA-funded coup.
It appears this was Mary’s last documented trip to the White House, though it remains unknown whether it was the last time they saw one another.
Marys whereabouts when she first heard the fatal news from Dallas are also unknown.
Later, Mary asked Anne Truitt to spend the night with her at her house in Georgetown.
As Jack lay in the Capitol Rotunda over the weekend, Mary visited his casket.
On Monday, November 25, she attended the funeral and sat with Tony, who would years later recall that her sister “didn’t seem very upset.
At the burial at Arlington Cemetery later that day, Mary was seen by one of her former art students, Ariel Dougherty, who had been in Mary’s painting classes at Georgetown Day School in the late 1950s.
Alone, solemn, dressed in a long, gold-colored suede coat that belted around her waist, a scarf loosely wrapped around her neck, Mary stood adjacent to the gravesite throughout the entire ceremony.
The following March, Johnson penned NSAM 288, initiating the full escalation of the Vietnam War.
Before its end, in undoubtedly the worst and most costly blunder of American foreign policy, approximately 3. million people would lose their lives, including more than 58,000 American combat soldiers.
In October 1963, Cuban UN ambassador Carlos Lechuga had delivered an official message to President Kennedy that Fidel Castro desired a lasting peace with the United States.
In addition, he refused to sign the Limited Nuclear Test Ban Treaty with the Soviet Union, despite its passage by the United States Senate in September 1963.
A little more than a week after Dallas, Timothy Leary received a disturbing phone call from Mary Meyer.
Show this world that this is still a government of the people, for the people, and by the people.
It’s up to you. —Attorney Jim Garrison (during his summation to the jury in the film JFK) There’s something so mysterious about an orchid.
They look as though they had been grown in damp underground caves by demons.
They’re evil sickly flowers with no life of their own, living on borrowed strength. —NMary Pinchot (from her short story “Futility,” Vassar Review and Little Magazine, 1941) A SHOCKED AND traumatized nation attempted to fathom the death of its president.
The eye of the storm was centered in Washington, encased within a hurricane of concealed controversy.
Tippit, which had taken place at approximately 1:15 pM. several blocks away, Oswald was eventually charged with the assassination of the president several hours later.
Two days later, in one of the most bizarre, phantasmagorical events ever witnessed on national television, Oswald was fatally shot by a man identified as Jack Ruby, adding to the bewilderment of an already stunned audience of viewers.
The American media struggled to sustain a semblance of calm and order, still insistent Lee Harvey Oswald had been the lone crackpot assassin and had acted unilaterally.
But observers and journalists in other countries had already started speculating Oswald had been killed to keep him from talking.
One assassination attempt against the president was planned to take place in Chicago on November 2, 1963.
It would have involved multiple gunmen, as well as a designated “patsy,” a mentally handicapped ex-Marine named Thomas Arthur Vallee.
Curiously, like Lee Harvey Oswald, Thomas Vallee had also served at a U-2 base in Japan under the Joint Technical Advisory Group , the CIA’s code name for its U-2 spy plane surveillance unit.
Vallee then “found work” in the fall of November 1963 in a building overlooking a Chicago street immediately adjacent to an L-shaped turn that would be on the route for the upcoming presidential motorcade.
The plot finally had been foiled only because certain members of the Secret Service had acted quickly.
President Kennedy had also canceled the trip as a result of President Diem’s assassination in South Vietnam.
A second plot was set to unfold during President Kennedy’s trip to Miami on November 18, but the presidential motorcade was canceled.
Word of the plot had been forwarded to the Secret Service from police intelligence in Miami.
Consequently, the president flew by helicopter from the Miami airport to the Americana Hotel, where he delivered his scheduled speech.
While the magnitude of such threats would have been communicated to the president, it wasn’t clear how much detail was given to him.
Though Mary has been previously portrayed as not believing in any conspiracy to assassinate her lover the president, her biographer claiming that she “accepted the idea that Oswald was the lone assassin,”® the deeper evidence beneath the surface reveals a far different story.
Throughout the last year of her life, Mary Pinchot Meyer was deeply engaged in exploration; her suspicion had been aroused, and it grew stronger.
The lingering question was how far Mary had gone in her investigation, and what impact it might have had.
She wasn’t the kind of person to stand idly aside in the face of an event of this magnitude.
She was well aware of her ex-husband Cord’s work and his connection to Operation Mockingbird, the CIA’s infiltration of the media.
Her vigilance would have caused an awareness of whatever narrative the media was peddling, particularly if Jack had shared with her any information about what the Secret Service had uncovered earlier in November.
Mary was a “Washington insider” with many relationships and connections inside the Kennedy coterie and beyond.
As such, she was privy to information and individuals that few people could access.
Given the president’s regard for her, her presence within the intimate confines of the White House for two years had accorded her an unique status.
Kenny O’ Donnell certainly respected Mary as a special, trusted person in the president’s life.
In fact, Mary had sought out O’ Donnell several weeks after the assassination, inquiring about his recollection of events that horrific day in Dallas.
According to O’Donnell’s statements to author Leo Damore, he confided to Mary what both he and Dave Powers had witnessed from their vantage point in the car directly behind the president’s.
The smell of gunpowder, the sound of rifle shots, as well as other features of gunfire were well known to the two close Kennedy advisers, both seasoned World War II combat veterans.
Both remained adamant for the rest of their lives that at least two shots had come “from behind the fence ,” in front of the motorcade.
What O’ Donnell had told Mary, he reiterated to author Leo Damore, although O’ Donnell never spoke about it publicly.
His account was further confirmed twenty-five years later by Speaker of the House Tip O’Neill in his 1987 memoir Man of the House.
Before O’Neill published his memoir, he checked with Dave Powers to make sure his memory was not failing him, since O’Donnell had already died.
Not only did Dave Powers stand by his story, he went several steps further a few years later.
Whatever conversation Mary had with O’Donnell, her worst suspicions would have likely been confirmed.
Over the years, scores of other eyewitness accounts from people who were in Dealey Plaza at the time of the assassination have been gathered, analyzed, and published that corroborate the O’Donnell-Powers account.
Had they done so, they could have altered the course of history as we know it today.
Instead, they succumbed to the intimidation of J Edgar Hoover and the FBI; and the cancerous malignancy rapidly spread.
Immediately after Dallas, there were a number of suspicions swirling around Washington that Mary, given her position, would unquestionably have accessed.
According to some accounts, there were direct accusations leveled at the CIA almost immediately, and from within the Kennedy family itself.
Whether it was at the prompting of Bobby’s phone call, or on his own initiative, CIA director John McCone arrived at the Kennedy compound in McLean a short time later that afternoon.
For three hours on that November 22 day, the two walked together on the grounds of the Hickory Hill estate.
According to historian Arthur Schlesinger Jr., Bobby directly confronted McCone about whether the Agency had assassinated his brother.
Bobby Kennedy’s own monitoring of the Agency right after the Bay of Pigs had acquainted him with many of the CIA’s operational plans and methods; in fact, Bobby himself knew more about many of these things than McCone.
John McCone had replaced Allen Dulles, the infamous father of American intelligence whom Jack had fired.
But the elite of the Agency—people like Dick Helms, Jim Angleton, Cord Meyer, Tracy Barnes, Bill Harvey, even Bob Crowley—still “carried the flag” for Allen Dulles behind the scenes.
Their loyalty to Dulles kept McCone in the dark, ostensibly because his strict Catholic religious principles might have been offended by many of the CIA’s covert operations.
There would be more whispers—above and beyond the O’Donnell-Powers eyewitness account—from those accompanying the presidential entourage in Dallas that day, some of whom Mary Meyer knew well.
Four days after Dallas, Life magazine published its November 29 issue, which featured thirty-one selected poor-quality black-and-white frames from Abraham Zapruder’s famous home movie, the film that would become legendary for revealing to the world the “kill shot” that exploded President Kennedy’s head.
It wasn’t an accident that the “carefully edited” photos showed up so quickly.
Likely, Mary would have seen the issue of Life, though it’s not known whether it became part of her collection of “clippings of the JFK assassination” that she kept in “the bookcase in her bedroom” next to her diary.
For the first time, however, the public became aware that something called “the Zapruder film” was in existence, though it would be barred from the public until 1975.
But though many, including Mary, were suspicious, only a few people were directly aware that immediately following the events in Dallas, an elite group within the National Security apparatus were moving quickly to contain anything that might reveal a conspiracy.
Nowhere was this chicanery more evident than what took place with Abraham Zapruder’s infamous 8-millimeter home movie during the weekend following the assassination.
For years, controversy has surrounded the alleged chain of custody of the original Zapruder film, and the three copies that were processed later in the afternoon of November 22.
What remained unknown until 2009—not just to Mary, but to the rest of us—was that the original 8-millimeter home movie taken by Abraham Zapruder was, in fact, delivered to the CIA’s most secretive facility, the National Photographic Interpretation Center in Washington.
The film was delivered by two Secret Service agents at approximately ten o’clock on Saturday evening, November 23, the day after the assassination.
CIA director John McCone had called NPIC director Arthur Lundahl several hours earlier and told him to prepare for the delivery of a film—not yet known publicly as “the Zapruder film”’—that had captured the assassination.
McCone told Lundahl he wanted a full briefing on the film’s contents early the following morning—Sunday, November 24.
Lundahl immediately called his chief assistant, Dino Brugioni, to make preparations for the film’s Saturday evening arrival.
He told me it was going to involve pictures and that the Secret Service wanted support.
I called Ralph Pearce, our best photogrammatist, and then Bill Banfield.
In placing the Zapruder film in the hands of the NPIC, McCone was enlisting the help of the man who was arguably the world’s foremost photo analyst.
Known as the father of modern imagery analysis and imagery intelligence, Arthur C Lundahl had been recruited by the CIA in 1953 to head the agency’s Photographic Intelligence Division ; he would be designated the first director of NPIC when it was formally created in 1961.
Lundahl, in his capacity as NPIC’s first director, expanded the center into a national, multidepartmental component of the intelligence community, hiring over a thousand employees drawn from the CIA and the Department of Defense.
Starting with President Eisenhower, Art Lundahl’s presidential briefings became legendary during an era when aircraft such as the U-2, the SR-71 Blackbird, and satellite imagery reconnaissance programs were made operational.
A “Lundahl briefing” was considered the gold standard by which all other intelligence briefings to presidents were judged.
Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth II eventually named Lundahl a Knight of the British Empire.
Prior to entering the intelligence world, Dino Brugioni had distinguished himself as part of a World War II bomber crew that flew sixty-six successful missions.
Highly trained and thoroughly competent in all aspects of photographic imagery and analysis, Brugioni regularly accompanied his boss to the White House and all “seventhfloor” classified briefings at NPIC and CIA headquarters.
The world’s foremost photographic intelligence center, however, didn’t have an in-house, 8-millimeter film projector.
Despite the late hour, crew member Bill Banfield called the manager of Fuller & d’ Albert, a local photo supply store in downtown Washington at his home, and arranged to pick up a brand-new 8-millimeter projector that night.
While Banfield was procuring the projector, Dino Brugioni and Ralph Pearce examined the film with a microstereoscope.
We ran it first at the regular speed, then ran it at various different speeds.
Brugioni and his crew weren’t prepared for what they were about to see.
Under the vigilant eyes of the two Secret Service agents, the NPIC crew worked through the night, printing various frames on two identical sets of briefing boards.
When Director Lundahl arrived at NPIC early next morning, he reviewed the notes that Brugioni had prepared, and took the two sets of identical briefing boards to his meeting with Director John McCone at CIA headquarters in Langley.
The Secret Service also left early the next morning, taking with them the film, and a list of all the people who had been present for the night’s work, which included “at least seven support staff” in addition to Dino Brugioni, Ralph Pearce, and Bill Banfield.
Sometime between November 24 and December 9, McCone told Bobby Kennedy that he thought “there were two people involved in the shooting [of President Kennedy],” despite the FBI’s and the media’s attempt to maintain Lee Harvey Oswald as the only assassin.
McCone’s remark to Bobby Kennedy likely had been engendered by Lundahl’s NPIC early moming briefing on Sunday, November 24.
In the days ahead, Bobby Kennedy tured to a close group of trusted friends and advisers as he attempted to make sense of what had happened in Dallas.
If the head of the CIA had privately shared with him the fact that there were at least two shooters , that detail was likely shared by Bobby with people in his inner circle, as it had been with Arthur Schlesinger.
How close Mary Meyer was to anyone in Bobby’s entourage wasn’t definitively known, but she was very likely acquainted with some of them.
Given her relationship with Jack, she had to have known some of what was being revealed.
That Sunday night, a lone Secret Service agent showed up at the NPIC with a different Zapruder film.
McMahon years later said that the session that night was so sensitive and classified, even his own supervisor was not informed of the event.
Classified and designated top secret, known for its state-of-the-art “clean facility,” the CIA Hawkeye facility in Rochester required all technicians to wear full body suits of special fabric to avoid contamination.
That alteration plausibly could have taken place sometime after early Sunday morning, when the original 8-millimeter film left NPIC, and before Sunday night, when some version of the film returned to NPIC in a 16-millimeter format.
The CIA’s Hawkeye facility in Rochester was the ideal place, technically superior and capable of such an alteration.
As the NPIC on-call duty officer during the assassination weekend, Brugioni should have been notified.
Homer McMahon and Ben Hunter had assisted in the preparation of a set of briefing boards that were significantly different in size and composition (as well as, presumably, in image content) from those made on Saturday night by Brugioni and his colleagues.
It appeared that the skulduggery that had taken place was known only at the highest levels, part of a well-organized cover-up, to which even mid-to-upper level CIA officers like Brugioni weren’t privy.
In the spring of 2011, I visited Dino Brugioni at his home in Virginia to further discuss the Zapruder film.
I showed him a high-resolution image of the one and only frame in the extant Zapruder film that graphically depicts the fatal head shot, frame 313.
Dino was incredulous there was only one frame of the head explosion—then repeatedly rejected the possibility, based upon what he had personally witnessed when he had viewed the camera-original Zapruder film on Saturday evening, November 23, 1963.
It was way high off of his head ... and I can’t imagine that there would only be one frame.
The brain photographs in the National Archives today cannot be, and are not , photographs of President Kennedy’s brain.
The purpose for creating this false photographic record was to suppress evidence that President Kennedy was killed by a shot or shots from the front, and to insert into the record false “evidence” consistent with the official story that he was shot only from behind.
While eyewitness accounts in general are often vulnerable to misinterpretation, physical forensic evidence is much less so, and therefore poses a far greater challenge.
The most significant efforts were applied to the manipulation of physical evidence with respect to the gunshot wounds inflicted on President Kennedy’s body.
As Lifton explained in his bestselling and carefully documented forensic thriller, President Kennedy’s body left Dallas in an ornamental, bronze ceremonial casket, wrapped in cloth bedsheets—and yet it arrived at Bethesda Naval Hospital in a cheap, gray shipping casket, encased in a zippered, rubberized body bag.
As Lifton pointed out, there was a possibility that some—or all—of the president’s wounds had been tampered with prior to the arrival of his body at Bethesda.
Indeed, the entry wound in the throat had been enlarged—obliterated, actually—by the time the Bethesda autopsy began at 8:15 pM., and the posterior head wound had been dramatically enlarged to five times its original size, so that it encompassed not just the rear of the skull, as it had when first seen in Dallas, but the top and the right side as well, when examined at Bethesda.
Lifton also presented persuasive evidence that Kennedy’s shipping casket arrived at Bethesda close to fifteen minutes prior to the official motorcade from Andrews Air Force Base carrying the bronze Dallas casket.
This meant that the bronze Dallas casket seen by millions on television was empty when it was off-loaded from Air Force One at Andrews.
In 1997, the ARRB obtained an official military report that verified, beyond all reasonable doubt, the earlier arrival of President Kennedy’s body at Bethesda, thus proving there had been a break in the chain of custody of the body, prior to the autopsy.
But whereas Lifton speculated in his book that Kennedy’s head wounds were surgically altered prior to arrival at Bethesda, Horne has presented a compelling case that postmortem surgery—forensic tampering—was actually performed at Bethesda Naval Hospital prior to the start of the official autopsy.
All the facts point to the conclusion that evidence tampering of the most serious nature—the clandestine expansion of JFK’s head wound and the removal of evidence —was performed by Dr.
James J Humes, the lead Navy pathologist, as part of a Navy cover-up of the medical evidence, after President Kennedy’s body arrived at 6:35 pM., and before the start of the official autopsy at 8:15.
The autopsy photos and x-rays in the National Archives collection today, Horne has concluded, actually demonstrate the results of clandestine surgery performed by the Naval pathologist, not the damage caused by bullets in Dallas.
Horne and Lifton are also in agreement that the “best evidence”’—the body of the deceased president—was surgically altered to remove evidence prior to the autopsy, and to radically change the appearance and size of both the head wound and the entry wound in the throat, so that they were much more compatible with the myth of one lone shooter firing from behind the motorcade.
All evidence of frontal entry on President Kennedy’s body was surgically removed prior to the commencement of his autopsy.
Ana that is why one problem in the immediate aftermath of President Kennedy’s assassination wouldn’t go away—a piece of conspiracy evidence available to Mary Meyer and anyone else observing events unfolding in “real time” in the media.
After the president had been declared dead, the two attending physicians in Dallas, Dr.
Perry was asked by a reporter at the press conference immediately following the announcement of President Kennedy’s death, he confirmed this opinion—that President Kennedy’s throat wound was an entrance wound.
If the government was about to declare that all shots came from behind the president, Dr.
Perry was unknowingly, and indirectly, asserting there had been more than one shooter, again making the president’s assassination by definition a conspiracy.
In an interview by ARRB members Douglas P Horne and Jeremy Gunn on March 20, 1997, Audrey Bell confirmed her conversation with Dr.
Perry when, on the morning of November 23, she had learned about the pressure he was being subjected to.
Perry amounts to another “alteration” of evidence in an attempt to prove that the shooting came from behind the motorcade—that is, from Oswald—and not from sharpshooters positioned somewhere in front of the motorcade, likely behind the fence on the grassy knoll.
Nonetheless, long before the Warren Commission proceedings began, the theory of “throat wound as entrance wound” was gaining traction, as were some other anomalies.
Mary Meyer’s access to Kenny O’Donnell shortly after the events in Dallas likely provoked her suspicion as well as horror, and his perspective had to have aroused her curiosity.
O’Donnell had been a witness to the fact that the shots were fired from in front of the limousine, not from where Oswald was alleged to have been.
Before the end of the first month after the assassination, two articles appeared in national media outlets raising considerable doubt that there had been only one shooter.
Whether either of these articles were included among Mary’s “clippings of the JFK assassination” or not, it is quite likely that she would have come across them, as she would have been on the lookout for further validation of her growing suspicion concerning the treachery taking place in the cover-up.
A Lawyer’s Brief,” was published in the left-leaning National Guardian on December 19.
Lane had offered his feature gratis to any number of periodicals, including the New Republic Look, Life, the Saturday Evening Post, and the Progressive.
Lane’s article immediately ignited a firestorm of controversy, and its publication would become a defining moment in his career, setting the stage for an unrelenting pursuit that ultimately took him to a showdown at the doorsteps of the CIA in 1985.
So many additional press runs of Lane’s article were needed to keep newsstands supplied, the Guardian editors eventually reprinted it as a special pamphlet.
It was inconceivable that such an article— published within a month of events in Dallas—would have escaped Mary’s attention.
Wade had presented fifteen assertions concerning the sole guilt of Lee Harvey Oswald.
Lane scrutinized not only Wade’s assertions, but also the contrived narrative that was emerging.
He challenged the government’s narrative and exposed its many inconsistencies and half-truths.
Indeed, Wade’s remarks about Oswald were nothing but distorted half-truths that would not have stood up in any court proceeding.
Tippit before being arrested, Wade never reconciled the original statement of Dallas authorities that Tippit was shot in a movie theater, and their subsequent assertion that “he had been shot on a street,” only to then change it again by moving the murder to a different street.
A motion picture taken of the President just before, during and after the shooting, and demonstrated on television showed that the President was looking directly ahead when the first shot, which entered his throat, was fired.
A series of still pictures taken from the motion picture and published in Life magazine on Nov. show exactly the same situation.
The Life pictures also reveal that the car carrying the President was well past the turn from Houston St. and a considerable distance past the depository building.
The Life estimate in an accompanying caption states that the car with the President was 75 yards past the sixth-floor window when the first shot was fired.
McClelland, too, had been quoted as saying that he saw bullet wounds every day, “sometimes several a day.
Finally, lambasting the media for the uncritical reporting that had convicted Oswald before any defense could be assembled and before the evidence had been properly examined, the outspoken young attorney was unequivocal about the implications of the falsehoods that were being concocted to prove Oswald’s guilt.
Like Mark Lane’s article, this article in the liberal New Republic would articulate some of the bedrock questions about the assassination that would never be satisfactorily reconciled by the Warren Report and that persist to this day.
It was an entrance wound, indicating that at least one shot had been fired from in front of the motorcade.
Taken together, both articles articulated issues that ruled out the possibility that Oswald, or any one person alone, could have pulled off a feat of the magnitude that had occurred that day in Dallas.
Throughout his life, Mark Lane would valiantly continue to lead a crusade to obtain the truth about President Kennedy’s assassination.
Immediately after Dallas, he founded the Citizens’ Committee of Inquiry.
Speaking almost daily to the fact that there had been a conspiracy that was now being covered up, Lane even volunteered to defend the deceased Lee Harvey Oswald in front of the Warren Commission; however, the offer was rejected.
Oswald’s mother, Marguerite Oswald, would retain Lane to defend her son’s reputation anyway.
Lane’s books would eventually become international bestsellers—after Mary had been murdered.
Hunt had, in fact, been in Dallas on the day of the assassination, acting as one of the paymasters for the conspiracy.
In Washington, the Post, as well as the rest of the national media, avoided the story about the jury’s verdict—a case in which the unanimous jury, on the basis of the evidence presented during the trial, had found the CIA’s role in the president’s assassination to be conclusive.
On December 22, an unusually newsworthy editorial appeared in the Washington Post, followed by a somewhat ominous event.
President Harry Truman was the author of the editorial, “ United States Should Hold CIA to Intelligence,” published in the morning edition of the Post, one month, to the day, after the assassination.
Mary Meyer, who had a delivered-daily subscription to the Post, would have to have seen the Truman editorial that morning.
It contained an eerie warning, even a kind of coded message for the most discerning.
For some time I have been disturbed by the way CIA has been diverted from its original assignment.
It has become an operational and at times a policy-making arm of the Government.
This has led to trouble and may have compounded our difficulties in several explosive areas.
That Truman was making such a statement exactly one month to the day after Dallas was astounding in and of itself.
Like the slain president, who had intended to neuter the operational arm of the CIA after his reelection in 1964, President Truman had come to a similar conclusion about the Agency—and with good reason.
Moreover, the editorial was never picked up by any other media outlet, nor discussed by any other journalist, columnist, or broadcast commentator.
Marcus came into possession of a draft of the editorial from the Harry S Truman Library and Museum that was dated December 11, 1963.
At the very first executive session of the Warren Commission on December 5, 1964, Allen Dulles had wasted no time, not only in establishing himself as the socalled intelligence expert, but also in immediately attempting to control and narrow the parameters of the entire inquiry.
At that meeting, according to author Peter Dale Scott, the disgraced spymaster took it upon himself to give each member of the commission a copy of a book that argued that all American assassinations, unlike European ones, were the work of solitary, deranged, and disaffected gunmen, thereby using his influence to immediately discourage any real investigation into the possibility of conspiracy.
Again, according to Ray Marcus and based on his research of documents at the Truman Library, Dulles traveled to President Truman’s home in Independence, Missouri, on April 17, 1964, using as a pretext for his visit a scheduled talk he was to give in Kansas City, Missouri, that evening.
Four days later, on April 21, 1964, Dulles wrote a four-page memorandum to a former colleague, CIA general counsel Lawrence Houston, documenting his meeting with President Truman on April 17.
It was in this memorandum that Dulles fabricated Truman’s retraction of his December 22 Washington Post editorial; the memorandum would be placed in CIA files.
It first documented all the extraneous topics of Dulles’s conversation with Truman, as well as all the adulation he had bestowed upon his former boss during their meeting.
The Dulles memorandum then documented their discussion of Truman’s editorial in the Post.
Allegedly, Dulles had produced a copy of the editorial that he proceeded to review with Truman in person.
Dulles claimed in his memorandum to Houston that Truman had “studied attentively the Post story and seemed quite astounded by it.
But President Truman never wavered from the position he had stated in his December 22 Washington Post editorial, in which he had completely opposed the CIA’s covert operations arm.
While the Truman editorial had been cut off at the pass, Dulles had to be worried about the possibility the editorial might be resuscitated at some point, adding weight to suspicions of CIA involvement in the death of the president and its subsequent cover-up.
One person Mary was almost sure to have sought out after Dallas was her friend and fellow artist William Walton, the man who had been her escort to many of the White House social events she had attended.
According to Leo Damore, Mary had engaged Walton’s counsel sometime in 1964.
According to Damore, he discreetly divulged to Mary the fact that Bobby long suspected the worst of foul play in his brother’s demise, but that he had to keep a low profile for the time being.
Bobby would position himself to take back the presidency, but it would be years before he could do anything.
Bill Walton had met Jack Kennedy in Georgetown after World War II, and their friendship developed into something extraordinarily special.
And so did Jackie, who thoroughly enjoyed his company and came to rely upon him.
She also took a keen interest in Walton’s two children, Matthew and Frances, whom Bill was raising alone since his divorce.
I wrote a diary in those days, and she’s the only one of my father’s friends I mentioned.
But the other variable that made Walton “safe” was his sexual orientation.
Though Walton was not openly gay (which in that era and social strata would have been social suicide), it was clear where his proclivities lay.
Even so, he was “a man’s man,” yet “safe” to women like Jackie who came to revere his confidence.
Over the years, Walton had become the supreme Kennedy confidant and loyalist, not only to Jack and Jackie, but to Bobby as well.
Both Jack and Jackie shared intimate secrets with him, often using him to communicate with one another.
A bit older than both Jack and Bobby, Walton brought to the table an urbane sense of tasteful style and elegance that had its foundation in sincerity coupled with integrity.
The president appointed him chairman of the Fine Arts Commission in 1963.
Jackie and Bill Walton collaborated to safeguard various historic sections of the city, including the period architecture around Lafayette Square in downtown Washington.
Yet, unlike the other political animals who surrounded the Kennedys, Walton had no need to play favorites; he had no expectation or desire of any reward.
No doubt privy to any number of intimate secrets regarding Jack and Jackie, as well as Bobby, Walton never betrayed their confidences—not even to his children—or revealed the full extent of his access during his lifetime.
Having escorted Mary Meyer to the White House on many occasions, he obviously was aware of her romantic liaison with Jack, as were a number of other people—even if Ben and Tony Bradlee wanted to maintain they weren’t.
How much Jack actually confided in Billy Boy about his feelings for Mary (as he had done with Charlie Bartlett), no one knows, not even Walton’s own children.
Surprisingly, not even Walton’s children were aware of their father’s secret mission after Dallas, ostensibly for the support of the arts in Russia.
In fact, it was not until 1997, some thirty-four years after Dallas, and three years after Walton’s own death, that Yale historian Timothy Naftali and Russian historian Aleksandr Fursenko revealed the staggering account of the mission Bobby Kennedy had asked Walton to undertake immediately following President Kennedy’s burial.
Before Dallas, Walton had been scheduled to leave for Russia on November 22 on a goodwill mission to open a dialogue with Russian artists.
Walton was to be the president’s emissary to Leningrad and Moscow, where he would preside over the opening of an American graphic arts exhibit for the United States Information Agency.
But as he was preparing to leave for Russia that day, he received word of the president’s death and immediately canceled his trip.
A few days after the president’s burial at Arlington Cemetery, Bill Walton and his children, Matthew and Frances, visited Bobby Kennedy’s Hickory Hill estate.
She also recalled seeing her father walking with Bobby alone outside later that afternoon.
In fact, the pieces of that puzzle would not be fully revealed to her until 2007, when her brother showed her David Talbot’s book Brothers.
The loyal Kennedy ally had proven his integrity on innumerable occasions and to a degree rarely seen in the political snake pit of Washington.
That day, during the Waltons’ visit to Hickory Hill, within days of the assassination, Bobby and Jackie asked their close friend to quickly reschedule his artistic mission to Russia.
They wanted him to deliver a special, secret message to Georgi Bolshakov, formerly a KGB agent under journalistic cover in Washington, who the Kennedys had come to rely upon when they needed to communicate with Khrushchev directly during critical moments.
Indeed, Bolshakov had once been referred to by Newsweek as the “Russian New Frontiersman” because he had become so close to Bobby.
Official Washington was, of course, averse to using a known KGB agent for diplomatic missions, but that didn’t stop Bobby from developing a substantial relationship that had proven its reliability over time.
He had explicit instructions from Bobby to bypass the American Embassy upon arrival in Moscow and to meet with Bolshakov at some unofficial location, so Walton sat down with Bolshakov at the Sovietskaya restaurant.
Bolshakov, who had been deeply upset by the assassination, listened intently as Walton explained that the Kennedys now believed there had been a large domestic political conspiracy at work.
Lyndon Johnson’s ties to big Texas oil and military defense companies would, in their own way, sabotage John Kennedy’s unfinished plans for world peace and détente with the Soviet Union.
Bobby did have a plan, Walton told Bolshakov, to eventually retake the White House where he would then continue his brother’s vision for world peace, but that wasn’t going to be possible before 1968.
He did recall a strange outburst from his father one evening at dinner shortly after his Moscow return.
Bill Walton, the usually calm, even-tempered, urbane gentleman, exploded.
Ten months later—the day Mary Pinchot Meyer was murdered—Bill Walton received the upsetting telephone call.
Further recalling that his father was never given to emotional outbursts, Matthew said the elder Walton did something very uncharacteristic.
Nonetheless, as Bobby’s presidential bid started to take form in 1968, Bill Walton once again embraced the Kennedy dream, excitedly planning to do whatever he could for Bobby’s campaign.
And once again—this time forever—the Kennedy dream would die with Bobby’s assassination.
Bill Walton retreated into seclusion, even stopped painting for an extended period.
Mary had to have known of both Jack’s and Bobby’s animosity toward him, and she likely knew they intended to dump him prior to the 1964 election.
His involvement in scandals with his aide Bobby Baker and business tycoon Billie Sol Estes were about to make headlines.
By 1963, Billie Sol Estes had been convicted on more than fifty counts of fraud.
Leaks from prison suggested he had paid off the vice president on any number of occasions.
Evelyn Lincoln, President Kennedy’s personal secretary, noting the implications, asked the president three days before Dallas who his choice for a running mate might be.
During the summer of 1963, Life magazine had been developing a major feature story concerning Vice President Lyndon Johnson and his scandalous dealings with Bobby Baker.
The in-depth story was scheduled for publication in late November, right after the president’s trip to Dallas.
The story, according to James Wagenvoord, at the time the chief assistant to Life’s Publishing Projects Director, Phil Wootton, had been researched and written by members of the senior staff at Life who had a direct line to Bobby Kennedy.
In fact, on the very day of Kennedy’s assassination in Dallas, the Senate Rules Committee on Capitol Hill was meeting, presided over by Senator B Everett Jordan of North Carolina.
During the proceedings, Senator John Williams of Delaware—who in October had already begun investigating the activities of Lyndon Johnson’s close aide Bobby Baker—was being given documented testimony from a panicked Don Reynolds, a close associate of Bobby Baker’s, who had been asked by Baker to arrange Lyndon Johnson’s life insurance policy.
The Reynolds bombshell was that he had seen Bobby Baker with a suitcase containing what Baker alleged was a $100,000 payoff to Lyndon Johnson for his role in securing the Tactical Fighter Experimental contract for General Dynamics in Fort Worth, Texas.
Reynolds also stated that he had refused several attempts by Johnson to buy his silence.
However, Reynolds’s testimony abruptly ended when news reached the committee that President Kennedy had been assassinated.
What was clear was Reynolds’s information would not only have ended Lyndon Johnson’s political career, it also would have resulted in a criminal indictment.
It had been prepared in relative secrecy by a small special editorial team.
On Kennedy’s death, research files and all numbered copies of the nearly print-ready draft were gathered up by my boss and shredded.
A lot of the high-level executives in publishing companies had been involved with the OS during the war.
Edward K Thompson, a senior editor at Life during 1963, was, according to Wagenvoord, a close friend of Allen Dulles’s.
Wagenvoord remembered being introduced to Dulles in Thompson’s office, having been called to the office to deliver a $10,000 check made out to the former CIA director.
But that event paled alongside what Wagenvoord witnessed at Life’s offices on Sunday morning, November 24—before Oswald was gunned down on national television.
As James Wagenvoord stood outside his boss’s office, a man in a gray suit pushed through the glass door that opened from the elevator bank.
Wagenvoord remembered opening the envelope and taking out a small, blue plastic reel that appeared to be a short 16-millimeter film, which he viewed later that day.
The unsolicited footage, which had been shot months earlier by a New Orleans television news cameraman, was of Oswald handing out pro-Castro flyers on Canal Street near the World Trade Center in New Orleans, an event that had been staged to falsely portray Oswald as a Communist sympathizer, which, of course, he wasn’t.
In January, the Joint Chiefs sent their new president a memo urging him to formally increase the United States commitment to Southeast Asia, as well as to consider a bombing campaign against North Vietnam, ostensibly as a strategy to win the war more quickly.
By year’s end, there would be more than twenty-three thousand troops in the region, well more than the sixteen thousand advisers present when Kennedy was assassinated.
The socalled Gulf of Tonkin Incident became the pretext to do just that—a contrived event during a stormy night in August in the Gulf of Tonkin off the coast of North Vietnam.
On August 2, the destroyer USS Maddox, then operating within the framework of a program of joint U.S.—South Vietnamese covert operations against North Vietnam—the kind of covert actions encouraged and justified by NSAM 273—was attacked by North Vietnamese PT boats that were reacting to these covert operations by defending the territorial integrity of North Vietnam.
This first of two reported events in the Gulf of Tonkin off the coast of North Vietnam was a light and inconclusive skirmish that inflicted no serious damage on the USS Maddox.
Two days later, the USS Maddox and USS Turner Joy reported a second socalled torpedo boat attack in the Gulf of Tonkin.
President Lyndon Johnson and Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara exaggerated the nature of the second “attack,” and falsely claimed United States Navy vessels, innocently operating on the high seas, had been attacked by Communist forces.
This nefarious plan worked like a charm, to their everlasting discredit, and ultimately to America’s misfortune.
A manipulated Congress, once again led to view the reported incident as an escalation in the global Cold War between East and West, responded with the Gulf of Tonkin Resolution—a blank check for President Johnson’s unlimited proliferation of a hot war in Vietnam.
Sadly, a nonevent had been used as a casus belli to justify the escalation of United States involvement in Vietnam from a socalled technical advisory effort into a U.S.-led shooting war.
With the Tonkin Gulf Resolution, President Kennedy’s 1963 policy of disengagement and withdrawal from Vietnam had irrevocably been overturned, just eight months after his assassination.
Until its repeal in May 1970, the Tonkin Gulf Resolution provided the “legal” basis for all subsequent escalation and continuation of the Vietnam War by both President Johnson and his successor, Richard Nixon.
McNamara, even in later life, when he realized it had all been so very wrong, would never answer that question.
Despite a superficial public “mea culpa,” Robert McNamara would forever avoid any real accountability or responsibility.
His answer to Talbot—”’Oh, I don’t want to talk about that’*—revealed once again his patronizing chief executive arrogance, as if the deaths of 3. million Vietnamese,” as well as the deaths of more than 58,000 American combat soldiers (and an estimated 200,000 subsequent suicides of Vietnam veterans’) had no meaning in his equation.
That year, Mary could not have helped but witness McNamara’s betrayal of Kennedy’s peace agenda—a betrayal that permitted Lyndon Johnson’s reckless, destructive escalation to occur.
It must have left her utterly demoralized to observe the White House, now inhabited by a ruthless, criminal cowboy, who, after a few years of being hammered by joumalists—”’Why were we in Vietnam?”—finally gave them his answer.
Whatever her suspicions before the release of the Warren Report, Mary’s views had apparently made her a person of interest to someone.
Author Nina Burleigh documented the fact that Mary’s “maid found the doors to the garden open on a January morning while Mary and her sons were upstairs asleep” in their house on Thirty-Fourth Street in Georgetown.
When she returned from being away the following summer, wrote Burleigh, Mary was sure someone had been in her house.
Even more revealing was Burleigh’s interview with CIA wife Joanne Bross.
With a Harvard blue-blooded pedigree, John Bross eventually rose to become deputy director of the Agency in 1963, a position he would hold until his retirement in 1971.
The Brosses were close to all the upper-level CIA honchos, including the Angletons and the Meyers.
Joan Bross and Mary were close enough that Mary, who dreaded CIA social functions and parties, would call Joan for information.
Joan Bross also indicated that Jim Angleton had boasted to her that he had bugged not only Mary Meyer’s telephone, but her bedroom as well.
How long this had been going on, or when it had started, was never revealed, perhaps never known.
Without question, Angleton, and every other high-level CIA official, had been aware of Mary’s undisguised contempt for the Agency.
From the very beginning of Cord’s CIA tenure, she had increasingly made no secret of her loathing of Allen Dulles; after her divorce, she would have been regarded as even more dangerous.
That spymaster Jim Angleton had the means to accomplish whatever he wanted was never in question.
If Mary was using her telephone to discuss any of her suspicions or research into Jack’s downfall, as well as what she had come to discover and was recording in her diary, Jim Angleton knew about it.
According to Leo Damore, Angleton’s “Mary spying” escalated into a fullblown surveillance operation at the time the Warren Report was released in late September 1964.
She had bought the paperback version, said Damore, and read it carefully, becoming further enraged at the cover-up taking place.
Damore, in fact, never mentioned Morrow, nor was there any reference to him in Damore’s notes.
Morrow also claimed he became part of the plot to assassinate Kennedy, though some of Morrow’s claims have also been questioned, even discredited.
In First Hand Knowledge, Robert Morrow provides a chilling account of an event that took place prior to Mary Meyer’s murder.
Diggs went on to say the woman’s talking might open up a lot of trouble for the CIA’s anti-Cuban counterfeit money operation, an effort that Morrow himself had been running, and which Bobby Kennedy had shut down before his brother’s assassination.
Not understanding the significance of Diggs’s comment, Morrow reminded his boss that the Warren Commission hadn’t found out about the counterfeiting operation, and he therefore thought himself safe.
As I said, there’s a certain lady in town who has an inside track to Langley, and most importantly, to Bobby.
Morrow’s counterfeit money operation had been run by an anti-Castro Cuban by the name of Mario Kohly, the son of the former Cuban ambassador to Spain under the Batista regime before Castro took power in 1959.
At that time, Kohly came to the United States to set up an organization known as the Cuban Liberators.
He was introduced to Marshall Diggs, who eventually recruited Morrow in 1960 as a CIA contract agent.
Shortly after his recruitment, Morrow met with high-level CIA covert operative Tracy Barnes, who asked Morrow to become Mario Kohly’s CIA contact.
According to one account, if the Bay of Pigs operation had been successful, the CIA was going to replace Fidel Castro as the president of Cuba with Mario Kohly.
Morrow exclaimed to Diggs, realizing that his old boss was intimating that Mary Meyer should be eliminated immediately.
Robert Morrow immediately came to suspect his meeting with Kohly had triggered Mary Meyer’s death, and that Mario Kohly had set it all up.
While author Nina Burleigh chose to dismiss Morrow’s account as “rife with holes”—never identifying what exactly those “holes” were*—further inquiry suggests his account of Mary Meyer’s death may well have been reliable.
According to John Williams, in an interview for this book, he was with Morrow at his house when Nina Burleigh called to interview him for her A Very Private Woman.
His visit with Mario Kohly right before Mary’s death had become the catalyst for her murder.
At one point, Williams told Morrow’s wife, Jeanne, that he thought Bob was more upset over Mary Meyer’s death than he was with the entire conspiracy to assassinate the president; his wife concurred.
If the Warren Commission ever got beyond Oswald, it would only be a short time before Morrow himself would be implicated, even though he wasn’t in Dallas that day.
John Williams had spent four years interviewing Morrow, combing everything Morrow had written and researched.
The two talked intimately about all of Morrow’s undercover assignments.
Morrow was not only a CIA contract agent, but for more than two years he had also been the right-hand man of Tracy Barnes, one of the CIA’s most senior covert action specialists.
They had started working together early in 1961, right after Marshall Diggs had recruited Morrow into the Agency.
Whether it was his guilt or just an obsessive need to know, Morrow continued to investigate Mary Meyer’s death.
Shortly before his death, Bob Morrow’s ongoing research, as well as what Williams called “Morrow’s wonderful, intuitive sense” had changed his mind about who had murdered Mary Meyer.
INQ When first developed by Kodak in Dallas the day of the assassination, the film was still in its unslit, 16mm wide “double 8” home movie film format, as received from the factory and as loaded into the camera.
After three contact prints were struck at another lab in Dallas, the Kodak lab then slit the original and all three copies, as was normal practice, and joined the two halves of each of them together, thereby marrying the A and B sides, with a splice so that each film could then be played on a home 8-mm projector.
He vividly and independently recalled during his first ARRB interview that this 16-mm wide film (from which he made enlargements of individual frames for briefing boards) contained opposing 8-mm wide image strips going in opposite directions, the precise characteristics of an original film right out of the camera before the A and B sides had been slit to 8-mm width and spliced together.
That is, what had been a slit, 8-mm wide original film on Saturday night when it had been delivered to Dino Brugioni, had been magically transformed back into an unslit, 16-mm wide double 8 “original” film 24 hours later, when it was delivered to Homer McMahon.
The clear implication here is that the courier from the Hawkeye facility delivered to McMahon an altered film, masquerading as a camera original.
Since the film had been altered, it had to be handled by a different group of NPIC employees; therefore at the second NPIC event on Sunday night , Dino Brugioni, who was the NPIC duty officer in charge that weekend, and his crew were never notified of this event.
Instead, Homer McMahon and his assistant Ben Hunter were brought in to handle the altered film, and help create a second set of briefing boards.
The reason the official suicide statistics were so much lower was that in many cases the suicides were documented as accidents, primarily single-car drunk driving accidents and selfinflicted gunshot wounds that were not accompanied by a suicide note or statement.
According to this doctor, the underreporting of suicides was primarily an act of kindness to the surviving relatives.
He who accepts evil without protesting against it is really cooperating with it. —Martin Luther King Jr.
Wir NEW ENGLAND blanketed by a winter blizzard in early 2004, I found myself stranded in Santa Monica, California, when my return flight to Boston was canceled.
Rescheduling at a local travel agency, I ran into Hollywood actor Peter Graves.
Graves, readers may recall, was one of the stars of the 1966 television series Mission Impossible.
The show was a fictionalized chronicle of an ultrasecret team of American government agents known as the Impossible Missions Force.
Peter Graves played the part of Jim Phelps, the team leader who began each episode selecting a cadre of skilled contract agents to accomplish the assigned clandestine mission.
Each week a new episode followed the exploits of the elite Impossible Missions Force as it employed the latest technological gadgets and state-of-the-art disguises in an effort to sabotage unfriendly governments, dictators, crime syndicates—any enemy of American hegemony.
So successful was Mission Impossible, it has currently spawned four blockbuster Hollywood action films starring Tom Cruise.
As Peter Graves and I waited in line, I introduced myself, then started regaling him with how I had watched the show with my father, who had been instantly enamored, never wanting to miss an episode.
Mentioning my father’s CIA career, and how he’d been such a fan of Graves’s character, Jim Phelps, I shared with him the memory of one particularly exciting episode, filled with intricate disguises, duplicity, and intrigue.
For years during my research, the “Rubik’s Cube” of the murder of Mary Meyer had remained impenetrable—until a mysterious linchpin was uncovered and _ further corroborated.
It was only then that I began to understand the ingenious design that had been employed—one that created the illusion of something very different from what had actually occurred.
Throughout the three years Leo Damore spent interviewing attorney Dovey Roundtree, the two were unequivocally convinced that Ray Crump Jr. could never have murdered Mary Pinchot Meyer.
The seasoned defense attorney, imbued with an instinctive, gut-level feeling for who people really were—saints and murderers alike—never forgot her impressions upon first meeting Crump.
Yet tow truck driver Henry Wiggins Jr. had, in fact, seen somebody standing over Mary’s corpse within fifteen seconds or so right after the second, final shot rang out.
Indeed, the most intriguing aspect of Wiggins’s testimony during the trial concerned the appearance, clothes, and demeanor of the man he saw standing over the body.
Wiggins had described the color and style of the clothes in some detail—dark trousers, black shoes, a beige-colored, waist-length, zippered jacket, and a dark-plaid brimmed golf cap—all of which matched what Crump had been wearing that day.
In fact, Wiggins never indicated anything about the man’s appearance being in any way disheveled, given the murder that had just taken place.
Neither his demeanor nor his clothes had ever, according to Wiggins’s testimony, indicated the man had been in any struggle just seconds before.
Upon looking up and seeing Wiggins staring at him, he was composed and unconcerned—certainly not at all agitated or anxious that Wiggins had spotted him.
I ducked down behind the wall at that time, not too long, and I come back up from behind the wall to see him turning around and shoving something in his pocket.
It was as if he wanted Wiggins to see him before he, according to Wiggins, calmly walked away over the embankment.
His unflustered demeanor appeared to contrast sharply with that of a trembling, petrified Ray Crump, only because they weren’t the same person.
Nearly thirty years later, in 1992, Leo Damore interviewed Henry Wiggins.
The government’s star witness still vividly remembered, Damore said, the man standing over the woman’s body.
He confided to Damore that he felt “strung along” by the prosecution and had been “used” to present their case.
As the interview came to an end, Henry Wiggins proffered one last reflection about what had happened that day.
It was the kind of remark that wouldn’t have been lost on a crime sleuth—someone like Sherlock Holmes, or Leo Damore.
Atmost from the moment Lieutenant William L Mitchell, USA, had appeared at D.C Metropolitan Police headquarters the day after Mary’s murder, attorney Dovey Roundtree’s suspicions had been aroused.
Mitchell told police he not only believed he had passed the murder victim as he ran eastward toward Key Bridge from Fletcher’s Boat House that day, but also that he was sure he had passed a “Negro male” following her.
In an effort to convict Crump, neither the police nor the prosecution team had bothered to investigate William L Mitchell’s story.
All of this took place, he testified, before he stopped at the westward end of the narrow footbridge to allow the westwardheaded Mary Meyer to cross.
Nobody, however, had corroborated Mitchell’s story, or ever testified to seeing Mitchell on the canal towpath the day Mary Meyer was murdered.
The reader will recall that police officer Roderick Sylvis, having raced to Fletcher’s Boat House to close off the exit within minutes after the murder, had himself encountered a white couple, “a young man and woman ... in their thirties” walking westward about “fifty feet” from Fletcher’s Boat House approximately ten to fifteen minutes after he and his partner, Frank Bignotti, arrived.
However, the officers, in a peculiar lapse of procedure, had neglected to get the couple’s names.
Moreover, no matter in which direction the “bermuda shorts” runner was headed, at some point he, too, would have run into the murder scene, either before or after the police had arrived.
But his identity, like that of the young white couple, would remain unknown.
Roundtree had tried in vain to speak with Mitchell before the trial, she told Damore, but he would never return her phone calls.
His signature tenacity took him on a journey that began with Mitchell’s listing in the Department of Defense Telephone Directory in the fall of 1964.
Upon giving his account to police the day after the murder, William Mitchell said he was stationed at the Pentagon.
Mitchell also gave his address as 1500 Arlington Boulevard, Arlington, Virginia—a building known as the Virginian.
During Damore’s extensive search, William L Mitchell was nowhere to be found.
Neither the directories of the United States Military Academy at West Point nor of the Army itself produced any identification or record of any William Mitchell stationed at the Pentagon in 1964.
Sometime in 1992, Damore interviewed former CIA contract analyst David MacMichael, who still lived in the Washington area.
On one occasion, MacMichael recalled, he and Damore drove out to Mitchell’s former address, the apartment building at 1500 Arlington Boulevard in Arlington, Virginia.
Any trail of Mitchell’s identity or subsequent whereabouts, however, appeared to have vaporized.
Still searching for Mitchell in early 2005, I was introduced to military researcher and investigative journalist Roger Charles.
The story exposed the Pentagon’s attempted cover-up of the United States Vincennes’s downing of an Iranian civilian airliner in 1988.
He and his colleagues provided the viewing public with a picture of the horrors inflicted by American soldiers on Iraqi prisoners.
Roger Charles had learned his craft under the tutelage of former marine colonel William R Corson, author of the controversial book The Betrayal.
Courageously exposing President Lyndon Johnson’s corrupt, deliberate deception during the Vietnam War in 1968, Corson created a huge crisis that nearly brought him a court-martial.
However, had Corson not done what he did, the Vietnam War would undoubtedly have been even further prolonged.
Engine of Soviet Power, which he coauthored with Robert T Crowley, an elite operative in the CIA’s covert action directorate and a close colleague and friend of Jim Angleton’s.
Not only did Roger Charles become Corson’s protégé and chief research assistant, but a trusted confidant, and eventually the executor of the Corson estate.
With regard to William Mitchell, Roger Charles was asked to review Mitchell’s office listing in the 1964 DoD telephone directory.
Through his own channels, he sent an inquiry to the United States Army military database in St.
Louis for any “William Mitchell” who was stationed at the Pentagon in 1964.
Further examining other Pentagon directories, Charles discovered that Mitchell’s name no longer appeared after the fall 1964 edition.
He next investigated the military personnel who were located physically adjacent to Mitchell’s alleged office , creating a list of approximately twenty individuals.
Fifteen of those individuals could be verified through their military records, but none of the other five servicemen—NMiitchell and four others in adjacent offices—had any military record in any service database.
They’re taught how to evade all the conventional bureaucracies and channels.
Given what I see here—the fact that he’s got no matching military record I can locate—it’s almost a certainty this guy Mitchell, whoever he was or is, had some kind of covert intelligence connection.
Albarelli’s magnum opus took me by the hand and held me hostage for several days.
Extensively researched, the book not only provided the most convincing account of how the CIA “terminated” one of its own, but possibly the best history ever written of the Agency’s infamous MKULTRA program.
I mumbled something about the trail having ended at “1500 Arlington Boulevard” in Arlington, Virginia.
I then mentioned my phantom—William L Mitchell—and some of the dead-end information I had amassed.
He said he would get back to me later; he thought he had come across the name before.
An important Albarelli source—someone whom the author had known for many years and whose information had been corroborated by other sources—had revealed in September 2001 something more about the identity of William Mitchell.
Stunned by this sudden revelation, I asked Albarelli if he would telephone the source and confirm several of the statements he’d made during his 2001 interview.
In his first attempt at this follow-up, the source wasn’t home, but his wife, whom Albarelli also knew well, was.
Mitchell and her husband, she told Albarelli, always drank too much when they were together; “they were drunk and crazy for days,” she said.
When Albarelli called back later that day, he reported he did finally reach the source, but he wasn’t amenable to talking about Mitchell, or even acknowledging whether Mitchell was still alive.
Bluntly, Albarelli then asked whether he remembered telling him in 2001 that Mitchell had killed Mary Meyer.
By the end of 1992, “playing his cards close to his vest,” Leo Damore had learned something else.
In the course of his interview with Timothy Leary in 1990, Damore told Leary that Mary’s real diary still existed and that he believed he had discovered its whereabouts.
Leo had sometimes cryptically referred to Mary’s diary as “the Hope Diamond” of the Kennedy assassination, and perhaps for this reason, he faithfully guarded not only the fact that he had eventually come into possession of it, but its contents as well.
He finally revealed both to his attorney Jimmy Smith on March 31, 1993, in a conversation that will shortly be discussed in more detail.
The person to whom Angleton had shown Mary’s diary in 1980 was a man named Bernie Yoh.
It claimed to do for print media what the Fox News Network now purports to do for TV news— providing “fair and balanced” reporting.
When David Martin’s Wilderness of Mirrors was published in 1980, Newsweek carried a positive review of the book that had infuriated former CIA counterintelligence chief Jim Angleton, only because of Martin’s unflattering portrayal of him.
The book details the cause of Angleton’s termination in disgrace from the Agency in late 1974.
His paranoia had, for years, paralyzed crucial intelligence gathering by the Agency.
He had also violated innumerable laws, as had the Agency as a whole, through mail tampering and privacy invasions of hundreds of individual citizens.
He sought out Bernie Yoh at AIM, asking him to “counter-spin” the recent Newsweek story in a way that was favorable to him.
Yoh willingly obliged by publishing “An AIM Report” in defense of Angleton.
In his 1990 interview with Leo Damore, Bernie Yoh revealed more about Angleton’s astonishing behavior in 1980—a time when the battered, bruised reputation of the CIA’s most elite Cold Warrior had taken a huge tumble.
One day, according to Yoh, Angleton had “flashed his credentials,” mentioning JFK and the towpath murder of his mistress Mary Pinchot Meyer, also mentioning her tell-all diary.
That conversation, Yoh remembered, had taken place in light of some prior discussion about the Kennedy administration and related matters.
At the time, Yoh himself had not fully grasped what Angleton was actually referring to.
This was how Leo Damore had finally come into possession of Mary’s true diary.
Prouty, the reader will recall, knew all about the inner workings of America’s intelligence apparatus, having been summoned to countless classified briefings with Allen Dulles and his brother, Secretary of State John Foster Dulles, even at their homes when necessary.
Prouty had also attended many of the CIA’s MKULTRA meetings and was considered part of “the nerve center” of the “military—industrial complex” during its establishment in the late 1950s.
But after facilitating many CIA coups d’état around the globe, including military support for these operations, he became deeply disturbed when he discovered the CIA’s involvement in the assassination of President Kennedy.
The CIA, Vietnam, and the Plot to Assassinate John F Kennedy , have remained two of the most authoritative works of that era.
At the end of 1992, unable to locate Mitchell or any forwarding address, Leo Damore had reached an impasse.
His last resort was sending a letter to Mitchell to his last known address—the CIA “safe house” at 1500 Arlington Boulevard in Arlington, Virginia.
While the actual contents of Damore’s letter were never known, it had to have contained something that would motivate Mitchell to reply; and that could have only been what Damore had learned from Fletcher Prouty.
But sometime between the evening of March 30, 1993, and early morning of March 31, Leo Damore’s telephone rang.
He had received Leo’s letter, he said, and had also read Leo’s book Senatorial Privilege.
He agreed to talk with Damore, but made it clear he didn’t want to be labeled the fall guy in history.
At approximately 8:30 on the moming of March 31, 1993, the telephone of James H Smith, Esq., in Falmouth, Massachusetts, began to ring.
Jimmy was also Damore’s attorney, and Leo had dedicated his 1988 book Senatorial Privilege to him, for it had been Jimmy who years earlier introduced Leo to Senator Ted Kennedy’s cousin Joe Gargan—the man who ultimately would reveal to Damore what had been taking place behind the scenes while Mary Joe Kopechne’s drowned body lay trapped underwater in Ted Kennedy’s car at Chappaquiddick.
Jimmy Smith had returned to his private law practice after a stint as a United States magistrate and federal trial judge.
A longtime Kennedy insider, and a member of the elite Kennedy “Irish Mafia,” Smith had been one of Robert Kennedy’s chief advance men for his presidential campaign in 1968.
Having endured Jack’s assassination five years earlier, Smith was so traumatized by Bobby’s death, he momentarily lost his struggle with alcoholism.
Scarred again by the second Kennedy assassination, Kenny O’Donnell lost his own battle and died in 1977.
Determined to save himself, Smith had returned to his law practice on Cape Cod and recommitted to a life of sobriety.
Reaching for the yellow legal pad he unfailingly kept on his desk next to his phone, attorney James H Smith began writing what would turn out to be six pages of notes, all of which he meticulously saved.
The following account is reconstructed from Smith’s original notes , interpreted and explained by Smith over many hours of reviewing their meaning and context.
Smith quickly began writing, trying to keep up with Leo’s exhilaration.
The murder of Mary Meyer had been “a CIA operation” in which Mitchell had been the assassin.
He said his position at the Pentagon in 1964 had been just “a light bulb job,” a cover for covert intelligence work.
He had done stints in the Air Force, the Army, and the Navy, he told Damore, all of which were also part of his cover, and he had also been “an FBI man” when circumstances required it.
His listed residence at 1500 Arlington Boulevard in Arlington, Virginia, Mitchell told Damore, was in fact a CIA safe house.
He had been “assigned” in September 1964 to be part of a “surveillance team” that was monitoring Mary Meyer.
It was the “Angleton connection w/CIA ” and the CIA’s orchestration of the events in Dallas that put her in harm’s way.
Her indignation at the cover-up in the Warren Report pushed her to confront her ex-husband, Cord, and possibly Jim Angleton as well.
Smith’s notes, however, indicated that it had to have been Cord who conveyed to Jim Angleton how infuriated Mary had become.
Whether Mary subsequently had a separate confrontation with Jim Angleton alone, or with Cord present, wasn’t clear.
It then appeared that Fletcher Prouty had assisted Damore in understanding more clearly how Mary Meyer’s murder had itself been a microcosmic copy of what had taken place in Dallas.
And, as in Dallas, Mary’s murder had all been planned in advance, designed to take place in an open setting, away from home territory—creating the illusion of an arbitrary, indiscriminate randomness to explain the event.
It was followed by the speedy apprehension of a plausible suspect, a patsy who happened to have been in the wrong place, at the wrong time.
The police would also unknowingly feed the details to the media that would, in turn, be used to publicly imply the suspect’s guilt, complete with mug shots of suspect Ray Crump in handcuffs at the murder scene and the police station.
It had all been “standard CIA procedure,” Mitchell said to Damore, as recorded in Smith’s notes.
The couple on the towpath that morning—and seen by police officer Roderick Sylvis—had been spotters for the operation, Mitchell disclosed, as was “the bermuda shorts” runner that no one had seen except Mitchell.
Yet despite the Mitchell bombshell revelations Damore possessed, all of which he recorded, he never turned in a manuscript for “Burden of Guilt” to his new agent.
Damore’s former wife, June Davison, kindly gave me as much assistance as she could in my attempt to locate Damore’s tapes.
At my request in 2004, she made searches of their home in Old Saybrook, Connecticut, but could find nothing.
I even went to Damore’s last residence in Centerbrook, Connecticut, where he had received the phone call from Mitchell and then placed the call to Jimmy Smith on the morning of March 31, 1993.
Fruitlessly, I scoured the area around the building, thinking he might have buried the tapes somewhere near, but to no avail.
In April 1993, shortly after the Mitchell call, Leo Damore returned to Washington and met with his research assistant, Mark O’Blazney, for lunch at the Henley Park Hotel.
He, too, had come to the conclusion that whoever William Mitchell was, he had to have been involved in Mary’s murder.
O’Blazney’s wife, though not present at the luncheon, corroborated what Mark had told her later on that after his meeting with Damore.
But I also remember Leo saying Mitchell told him that witnesses were placed at the murder scene.
At some point—the precise date is unknown—the order was given to “terminate” her.
It was to be done in a public place, then made to look like something it wasn’t.
From their surveillance, the team knew Mary’s routine of taking walks around noon on the C & O Canal towpath, that she would typically walk out to Fletcher’s Boat House and then return, a distance of about four miles in total.
Within that venue, a designated kill zone had to be selected where Mary would be accessible.
By choosing an outside location, rather than her home, the planners wanted to create the impression of a wanton, random act of violence, unrelated to Mary’s identity or political connections.
It had to be skillfully executed with Mission Impossible precision beyond the intersection of where Canal Road intersected the busier Foxhall Road.
The ideal time for such an operation was determined to be a weekday, when the towpath was less frequented.
The operation’s planners very likely were prepared to carry out their mission on any number of days, depending on certain variables—including the availability of an appropriate patsy.
These were the kind of painstaking calculations and details that were involved in the extensive planning of professional assassinations.
There were any number of challenging factors to control and overcome; any significant mistake or oversight could be disastrous.
As little as possible could be left to chance—including the whereabouts that day of Mary’s ex-husband, Cord Meyer.
The team put into place to conduct this operation likely consisted of at least six to eight operatives, not including the actual architects of the plan itself, or the ancillary adjacent personnel dispatched to monitor and control other important operational details.
In addition, in order to execute an operation of this nature, there had to be some kind of command center in the C & O Canal area to coordinate logistics; it would have to include radio communication to and from Mitchell, and his team, on the towpath itself.
The operational plan of “standard CIA procedure,” similar in design to what had taken place in Dallas, albeit on a much smaller scale and within a shorter time sequence, called for a patsy—someone who could be unknowingly and immediately easily framed.
Such an operation required the use of disguises and/or costumes, an absolute necessity.
No other entity on earth had resources like the CIA’s Technical Services Division under the direction of Dr.
Ray Crump Jr. had been picked up by his girlfriend, Vivian, in her car “very early that moming,” shortly after eight.
That morning, Crump and Vivian didn’t have enough money for a motel room.
Crump had likely been spotted by the CIA team early that morning, as he and Vivian began walking out from the Georgetown entry point of the towpath to some predetermined area he was familiar with from earlier fishing trips to the area.
It was still probably two to three hours before the murder would take place.
There may have been more than one candidate for patsy the team was monitoring that morning before a decision was made.
Eventually, someone was assigned—with a radio—to keep tabs on Crump and his whereabouts.
Whoever the designated patsy, the operation would have immediately had to procure clothing similar to what he was wearing.
In Crump’s case, that meant generic dark shoes, dark pants, a light-beige-colored Windbreaker and a dark-plaid golf cap—easily and quickly obtainable from the CIA’s TSD personnel, who were likely standing by as support personnel.
A specialized team from the CIA’s TSD had the capability of transforming almost anyone into whatever was called for, including changing someone’s race from white to black if necessary.
So they had to make do with what was available—the man they used for the standin, the Ray Crump look-alike, was larger than Crump.
Until Mary exited her studio that morning and started walking toward the canal, Mitchell’s team would not have been greenlighted and alerted to begin positioning themselves.
Another member of the surveillance team—again, someone with a radio—had to be assigned to monitor her whereabouts from the moment she left her house and arrived at her studio earlier that morning.
When it was Clear shortly after noon that she was headed for her daily walk on the canal towpath, all operational parameters would have been initiated.
The mysterious, stalled Nash Rambler had likely already been placed adjacent to the designated kill zone on the canal.
The Rambler could have been set up earlier that morning—or several mornings in a row—before the operation was finally given greenlighted-to-go status.
At some point the key to the stalled vehicle would be delivered to the Key Bridge Esso station with a request for someone to fix the vehicle.
The team already would have had a good idea how fast she walked, and approximately how long it would take her to reach the wooden footbridge, a place where the vegetation around the towpath area became denser.
Her assassination would eventually take place exactly 637. feet west of the footbridge.
There were two sets of spotters, Mitchell admitted to Damore, “a couple walking together” and another runner wearing Bermuda shorts, who were clearly tracking Mary’s whereabouts on the towpath and likely communicating by radio to some unknown command center in the area.
Immediately prior to the murder, Mitchell could not have been running on the towpath; he and the dressed-up Ray Crump look-alike were positioning themselves on standby status.
The entire operational was crystallizing—waiting for whoever was going to be servicing the stalled Nash Rambler to show up (and unknowingly play the role of “witnesses”), and waiting for Mary Meyer to approach the designated kill zone.
Meanwhile, another member of the operational team had to be monitoring the whereabouts of the real Ray Crump and reporting his activity to the command center.
The team had to know where Crump was situated and when he and Vivian reached the spot on the Potomac where their tryst would take place.
Even if Crump and Vivian had arrived at the towpath entrance in Georgetown as late as 10:30M., that still gave the team close to two hours to set up, orchestrate, and carry out the assassination of Mary Meyer.
The story Ray Crump told attorney Dovey Roundtree was that he and Vivian had gone to a particular spot on the bank of the Potomac that he was familiar with, having fished there before.
They did some drinking, he said, then “fooled around a little,’ at which point Ray passed out on some rocks at the water’s edge.
He couldn’t swim; he panicked and struggled to climb out, likely tearing his trousers and cutting his hand in the process.
Vivian had disappeared, however, while Ray was passed out from intoxication.
If Ray was being monitored and set up as a patsy, then Vivian’s mere presence—an alibi for Ray—was an obstacle the operation had to surmount.
The terrified Vivian would never testify, even with Ray’s life hanging in the balance.
She told Roundtree she feared “being killed by her husband,” should he discover her affair.
As soon as Henry Wiggins and Bill Branch arrived at approximately 12:20 P.M., the operation to terminate Mary Meyer would have been fully greenlighted by radio communication.
Mitchell would have been signaled by radio that the “witnesses”—Wiggins and Branch—were in place.
Mary’s screams from the canal lasted “about twenty seconds,” Wiggins said, before the first gunshot rang out.
In a full embrace, pinning Mary’s arms at her side, Mitchell now needed Mary to scream in order to attract the attention of whoever was servicing the Rambler.
As a highly trained, skilled assassin, he could have easily, quickly shot Mary before she was even aware of what was occurring.
Or he could have picked her off with a high-powered rifle from behind an adjacent tree as she walked by.
Because Mary’s screaming, her cries for help, were essential to drawing in the witnesses to the ostensibly random, senseless murder taking place—to motivate whoever was attending the stalled vehicle to run across Canal Road and witness the Ray Crump look-alike standing over her body.
Whether Mitchell underestimated Mary’s strength and lost his grip, or whether he let go of her because he expected she would fall to the ground, fatally wounded, after his first shot, isn’t known.
But Mary appeared to have broken away and tried to escape over the embankment, finally grabbing a birch tree limb with her saturated, blood-soaked glove in order to steady herself.
That wouldn’t do for Mitchell, or the operational intent of the mission.
Mary had to be positioned close, or right next to, the canal itself where the murder scene would be clearly visible to someone looking across from the Canal Road wall.
So Mitchell quickly grabbed Mary again and dragged her some twenty-five feet from the embankment to the canal’s edge, where, with a perfectly placed shot under her right shoulder blade angled slightly to the left, he killed her instantly.
Also executed with extreme precision was Mitchell’s escape, quickly accomplished by slipping into the woods, as the Ray Crump look-alike rapidly assumed his position, standing over the now slain body of Mary Pinchot Meyer.
Almost immediately after hearing the first gunshot, Wiggins started moving toward the wall of the canal across the street from the stalled vehicle that he and his partner had come to fix.
After Mitchell twice shot and killed Mary, the upper part of his body and/or clothes would have almost certainly been spattered in Mary’s blood.
The red sweatshirt would have to some degree camouflaged the bloodstains.
His likely escape was through the Foundry Underpass, the nearest exit out of the area.
As a highly trained assassin from the “Army Special Forces kill teams,” according to Albarelli’s longtime source, Mitchell would have had little difficulty evading detection by police.
While Mitchell had no trouble eluding police, the reader will recall that a man thought to be a “Negro male,” very possibly the Ray Crump look-alike, had been momentarily spotted by officer Roderick Sylvis west of the murder scene more than an hour after the murder had occurred.
This “Negro male,” as Sylvis described him during the trial, would also elude capture, disappearing and staying hidden, as he had no doubt been trained to do.
Yet when he was first spotted by Detective Warner at least ten to fifteen minutes—approximately 1:00mM.—before his actual arrest by Detective Crooke, Crump wasn’t wearing a light-colored beige jacket or any cap.
The answer, of course, was that the CIA operation was in control of everything.
Once Crump had become the designated patsy, the team knew where he was and what he was doing at all times, and especially what he was wearing.
They had gone to great lengths to duplicate his clothing for the man standing over the body, who was to be seen by Wiggins.
They also knew, from their surveillance of Crump, that he had jettisoned his jacket and cap, or perhaps lost them when he had inadvertently slipped into the Potomac.
It had taken Byers less than forty-five minutes to locate Crump’s jacket.
Likely because he was given enough direction by the CIA’s operating team.
Ultimately, without these two critical pieces of Crump’s clothing—the jacket and the cap—there would be no circumstantial evidence against Ray Crump.
But with their recovery, there was enough to begin framing Crump for the murder.
By 2:00 that afternoon, Deputy Coroner Linwood Rayford had arrived at the murder scene, and he pronounced Mary Meyer dead at 2:05 pm.
He didn’t leave the scene immediately after he was arrested because too many police cars were blocking the exit at the Foundry Underpass.
Crump was finally escorted away from the area sometime between 2:00 and 2:15 pM. and taken to police headquarters.
In handcuffs, wearing a white T-shirt, Ray would be photographed and paraded around police headquarters.
Before the end of the day, the media would begin drilling Crump’s guilt into the public psyche.
The only thing left to do was to establish Mary’s identity for police, but in a controlled manner.
Here, I must interject an episode that took place in the course of my own exploration of this mystery.
By 2006, after several years of painstaking research, I had not yet fully grasped how comprehensive an “operation” Mary’s murder had been.
There were still too many unanswered questions, too many lingering details I wasn’t able to resolve, and I had nowhere to go for answers.
Early one morning, hours before dawn in February 2006, I awoke disoriented, soaking wet as if sick with a fever in a night sweat.
With darkness all around, I struggled to make sense of my current disposition.
I felt as if I'd been talking to someone in another dimension, almost sensing some lingering presence in my bedroom with me.
Like a waterfall, rainbows of cascading images and thoughts from months of intensive study and research tumbled through my awareness.
A horrid insight suddenly gripped me, though not yet fully comprehended or understood.
A veiled form of the clue had actually been in public view for years, since 1980 in fact, but I hadn’t noticed it then, or even when it appeared more dramatically in 1995.
The reader may recall in an earlier chapter the mention of the telephone call that Ben Bradlee received “just after lunch” from his CIA friend.
The truth was, Bradlee never revealed that his “friend” Wistar Janney was a high-level career CIA officer in this passage.
This had been the very first moment, Bradlee claimed, when he had learned that something might have happened to his sisterin-law, Mary Meyer.
My father, the reader will also recall, had been a career officer of the CIA since 1949, almost from the Agency’s inception.
Ray Crump, it will be remembered, was just leaving the murder scene in handcuffs on his way to police homicide headquarters.
How uncannily convenient that Wistar Janney just happened to be “listening to the radio” in his CIA office, where he allegedly heard a “radio description” about a murder that had just taken place on the canal.
And of course the very first thought that popped into his mind was that it had to be Mary Meyer.
Furthermore, Mary’s outspoken, disapproving comments against the CIA not only drew resentment and outright hostility from other CIA wives, it also infuriated men like my father, whose blood boiled at the slightest criticism of his beloved CIA from anyone.
A conveniently placed eyewitness had identified Crump, standing over the victim just seconds after the fatal second gunshot.
At the Janney family home during the evening of Mary’s murder, a bit of veiled intrigue was occurring.
However, my younger brother, Christopher, fourteen at the time, was living at home.
During the course of my research, I asked him to recollect what happened that evening.
Christopher recalled that during dinner there had been absolutely no mention of Mary Meyer’s murder.
Christopher was in his bedroom nearby with his door open doing homework.
Our mother, he remembered, was in the master bedroom, most likely either reading or working at her desk.
During the seven-year period I worked on this book, my mother volunteered on two separate occasions—and with no prompting from me—her own recollections of that evening.
I made a point of not leading her in any direction; I just listened and let her talk.
On both occasions, she distinctly remembered the phone call that evening.
As gently as he could, he broke the news that Mary had been found dead on the tow path along the canal that borders the Potomac, apparently murdered that afternoon by an unknown assailant.
To my incredulous questions, he assured me that there could be no mistake.
Wistar Janney had known, during the afternoon of the murder, the identity of the ‘unidentified’ murder victim.
Yet he had played ignorant when he arrived home to his family, and said nothing until the mystery phone call took place.
Cord Meyer, like Bradlee fifteen years later, would conveniently omit the fact in the previous description that his “old friend, Wistar Janney,” was, like himself, a high-level CIA official.
Recall that Mary’s identity hadn’t been established officially until Ben Bradlee identified her in the D.C. morgue, “sometime after six o’clock in the evening,” in the company of Sergeant Sam Wallace of the Metropolitan Police Department.
Given the facts established, the only logical explanation was that Wistar Janney was part of the CIA operation to “terminate” Mary Pinchot Meyer, as was Cord Meyer himself, although peripherally and indirectly.
The same question might be asked of Ben Bradlee, especially considering the incriminating time frame of the Janney phone call in Bradlee’s account.
First, neither Cord Meyer nor Ben Bradlee wanted to be accused of withholding critical information in their respective memoirs as to how they had first learned of Mary’s death.
Since Cord had, it seemed, safely revealed this fact in 1980 with no repercussions, Bradlee may have thought in 1995 that it was safe for him to do so, given the longer span of time that had elapsed.
Yet Bradlee’s 1995 revelation of the phone call from Wistar Janney was, and still is, potentially more damaging because his entire memoir account contradicts his 1965 trial testimony.
Furthermore, had it been revealed at the trial that CIA official Wistar Janney had called Bradlee to inform him of Mary’s death “just after lunch”—in other words, less than two hours after the murder took place, with Mary’s identity still unknown to police—attorney Dovey Roundtree might have nailed Bradlee as a possible accessory to murder.
Still another lingering question was whether the prosecution at any time knew about either of Wistar Janney’s calls—to Cord Meyer or to Ben Bradlee.
If prosecuting attorney Alfred Hantman knew and withheld that information, he could have been disbarred for suborning perjury.
The courtroom proceedings would have been exposed as nothing but a sham (as some believed they had been all along), engineered to convict Ray Crump as part of a greater cover-up, not only of Mary Meyer’s assassination, but of President Kennedy’s as well.
By 1980, Wistar Janney was dead; he died suddenly in January 1979 of a heart attack while playing squash with his friend Jack Oliver, just after lunch at the Metropolitan Club in Washington.
And so, on the evening of Mary’s murder, Wistar Janney feigned his entire reaction to his wife and youngest son.
Six weeks later, home from boarding school for Thanksgiving, I would sit at our family dinner table and listen to my mother reveal the murder of Mary Meyer earlier that fall.
During her explanation, some part of me would also observe my father vacantly staring off into space.
It would take more than forty years to finally realize that it had been his ghostly, eerie silence that evening that had so deeply haunted my psyche.
Ih the post-Watergate era of the late 1970s, the CIA had experienced a slow walk through hell.
To make matters worse for Wistar Janney, investigative reporting was fast becoming a career choice for talented young journalists.
Bob Woodward and Carl Bernstein, under the ironic tutelage of Ben Bradlee and Washington Post owner Katharine Graham, had raised the bar.
The Post’s Watergate exposés had made the prospect of journalism glamorous again.
Revealing “deep politics” and “secret history” was becoming a national obsession.
Cord Meyer’s 1980 memoir, Facing Reality, would reveal Wistar’s knowledge of Mary’s identity long before the police knew.
Perhaps Wistar thought a graceful, grand exit from the play of life would spare everyone—never realizing that eventually, one way or another, the sins of the father would be visited upon the son.
During the last two years of his life, Wistar Janney was living his own private version of hell.
His beloved Agency had fallen into disrepute, and with it the reputation of many of those who had been there at the beginning.
Retirement at age sixty loomed ominously on the horizon, and he wasn’t at all happy about it, nor did he have any substantive plans as to how he might occupy himself.
Even a doctoral graduate student in clinical psychology such as myself could see he was intermittently agitated, still drinking heavily, sneaking cigarettes whenever he could.
His depression, coupled with an ongoing heart condition and no regular exercise, created an ideal prescription for an acute, made-toorder coronary event.
After eating his typical high-caloric, saturated-fat lunch, accompanied by a generous side order of martinis, Wistar went upstairs and played his predictably aggressive game of squash.
It was, as the Beatles song lyric echoed, “a ticket to ride,” but one with no return.
Opening people’s mail—that was his program, collecting their pictures and diaries—this is what James Jesus Angleton did.
When I put on my conspiracy cap and muse about who were the powerful men that are ultimately responsible for JFK’s assassination, be they Mafia bosses or corporate bosses or whoever they were, I cannot envision a plan that did not have designed into its very fabric a failsafe mechanism to neutralize the intelligence and security apparatus and insure that there would be no real investigation.
Whoever they were, their reach extended into this apparatus to someone who knew its workings so well that he could design a plot that could do this.
Comrorrep BY HIS CIA colleague Richard Helms and his close friend Jim Angleton, Cord Meyer had wept openly at Mary’s funeral.
His former wife, the love of his life and the mother of his three children, had again departed, this time forever.
Cord’s defense of the official story was nothing less than a ploy—a deflection away from the stubborn facts that have forever haunted this case and remained unexplained until now.
His absence had to have been part of the operation, designed to create an appearance of innocence for Cord.
Removing him physically from Washington had diverted any suspicion of his involvement.
If Mary confronted Cord with her accusations of CIA involvement in Kennedy’s assassination after she had read through the Warren Report—as Leo Damore maintained from having read her diary—Cord’s complicity would have been inevitable.
Indeed, E Howard Hunt’s deathbed confession—that Cord was part of the ‘mastermind’ behind Dallas—might have contained some kernel of truth.
Yet there would never be proof, at best only scant evidence—except possibly for the contents of Mary’s diary.
To my knowledge, after the release of his book Facing Reality in 1980, he never said anything further publicly regarding the death of his former wife.
The statement was breathtaking, particularly coming from someone so close to Cord.
Provocative as it was, the statement was never confirmed by Carol Delaney on the record.
Yet in the last seven years, I’ve seen nothing indicating that she ever repudiated it.
Instead, she immediately called Cord’s widow, Starke Meyer, informing her of the book project I was undertaking.
Starke then took it upon herself to “sound the alarm,” calling Mary Meyer’s sons, Quentin and Mark, as well as other members of the Pinchot-Meyer clan, even calling my mother, not only to complain , but to urge everyone to remain silent.
The attempted stonewalling replicated author Nina Burleigh’s experience when she first began her own research for A Very Private Woman in the mid-1990s.
The CIA’s community of former operatives, their wives and families, secretaries and research assistants, adhered to a Mafia-like code of silence.
To challenge their version of events was to call into question the entire edifice of the secretive house of cards within which they lived.
Delaney, I called her again in 2010, asking her a second time to confirm or deny her account of Cord Meyer’s statements, attributed in Heymann’s book.
The other Cord Meyer tidbit in Heymann’s undocumented book was what the author alleged Cord himself had said to him shortly before his death.
Several days later he left me a voice mail, saying, “I’m beginning to think you’re working for the CIA ...” hi is perhaps inevitable, given Jim Angleton’s ubiquitous CIA presence, that my journey should reach some finality with him.
So overpowering was his influence that after his unceremonious dismissal by CIA director William Colby in 1974, two of Angleton’s closest comrades conspired to preserve his reputation and reign by gathering up his files and cultivating sympathetic writers to rehabilitate his tattered legacy.
In so doing, they set in motion a complex chain of events that shone the bright light in unexpected ways upon some of the most significant questions surrounding Mary Meyer’s murder.
That chain of events bears the most careful scrutiny, not because it is conclusive in and of itself, but because, in the aggregate, and viewed in context of other statements and documented facts, it moves us ever closer to the horrifying truth.
The chief architect of the mission to burnish Angleton’s controversial career was one of the Agency’s most formidable covert action specialists, Robert T Crowley.
A Chicago-born West Pointer who’d served in Army intelligence during World War II in the Pacific, Crowley joined the Agency at its inception and rose quickly through the ranks despite the fact that he lacked the Ivy League pedigree of most of his associates.
As assistant deputy director for operations, he was second in command in the clandestine services directorate until his retirement in the mid-1980s.
Nicknamed “the Crow,” he was one of the tallest men to ever to work at the Agency, and his career was legendary.
Crowley was the chief go-to guy in the CIA’s liaison with multinational corporations—the largest of which was International Telephone and Telegraph —which the Agency often used as fronts for moving large amounts of money to fund international covert operations.
Intimately involved with the CIA’s overthrow of the democratically elected Allende government in Chile in 1973, Crowley had earned the highest regard from his colleagues.
Within the Agency, and particularly within covert operations and counterintelligence activities, mutual loyalty and trust among operatives were always the gold standard of conduct.
Two Crowley colleagues who most definitely wanted “the Crow” on their “air hose” were William R Corson and the already well-known, mercurial James Jesus Angleton, the CIA’s notorious counterintelligence chief.
While Bill Corson was never officially titled in the Agency, his close ties to both Crowley and Angleton, as well as his many covert operations for United States intelligence, were well known.
Corson was a brilliant Strategist, an intellectual powerhouse in his own right, and a man who didn’t want to be ultimately tied to anybody or anything.
As Cold War intelligence historian Fletcher Prouty once quipped to author Joseph Trento, “For Bill Corson, the CIA was support staff.
When William Colby finally sacked Angleton in 1974, it was Corson and Crowley who devised a plan to secretly squirrel away Angleton’s most highly classified, top secret files out of Langley.
Toward the end of their careers, the Three Musketeers appeared to have decided it was time for the world to know their true history, or at least some of it.
Forcing Trento to jump through any number of hoops to prove his trust, Corson one day told him it was time he met Jim Angleton.
Sometime after Bob Crowley’s CIA retirement, it would be Angleton who closed the circle and introduced Trento to Crowley.
Once a lone pyramid protecting America’s most dastardly deeds, the Musketeers had chosen a scribe, or so it appeared.
Somewhat reluctantly, Bob Crowley went along with the plan, at least for a while.
The deal was that nothing could be published until 1997, ten years after Angleton’s death.
At least six years before his death and well before the onset of his final health crisis, Crowley had become a bit disenchanted with Trento.
According to this account, Crowley had decided he wanted the truth to come out about the CIA’s role in the Kennedy assassination.
Whether this had Angleton’s and Corson’s blessing wasn’t entirely known.
For years, Corson had met regularly and held court with a group of his former students from the Naval Academy.
The group enjoyed long lunch discussions together, coupled with a generous intake of alcohol.
One favorite topic was the Kennedy assassination, and the flap that Oliver Stone’s film JFK had been creating since its release in 1991.
Within two months after Corson’s death, Kelly contacted Corson’s executor, Roger Charles, whom he knew well from their days together at Annapolis.
They discussed the matter and agreed the next step was to approach Corson’s attorney, Plato Cacheris, whose office was in the same building as Joseph Trento.
Cacheris had been a well-known figure in Washington power circles for years, first defending Nixon attorney general John Mitchell of Watergate fame, then representing Fawn Hall, who worked with Oliver North during the Iran-Contra scandal.
His clients included the infamous CIA spy Aldrich Ames, as well as the FBI’s Robert Hanssen, both of whom were able to avoid the death penalty, thanks to Cacheris’s legal prowess.
Of course, in exchange, both had to reveal everything they had given the Soviets, before Cacheris brokered the deal.
So Kelly got together with Cacheris over lunch at a restaurant called Morton’s on a Thursday.
Cacheris seemed to play along with the request at the time, said Kelly, and was actually enthusiastic about it.
He told Kelly he would get back to him on the Monday of the following week.
Kelly has since always suspected that after his lunch with Cacheris, the lawyer had contacted Joe Trento.
However, Roger Charles, Corson’s executor, was adamant that “Plato was Bill’s attorney during the The Betrayal flap.
Furthermore, Bill Corson’s son, Chris, was sure “he was dad’s attorney” during his parents’ divorce.
Chris then conferred with his mother and asked her what she recalled about Plato Cacheris.
Th the end, it was not Joe Trento who precipitated Bob Crowley’s most critical revelations of Agency secrets, but a relatively obscure, unknown writer calling himself Gregory Douglas.
They were smuggled into the United States under new identities to join America’s Cold War against the Soviets.
Douglas claims that he met Miiller in California and the two became instant friends, with Miiller eventually giving Douglas some of his personal diaries.
For some reason, both Corson and Crowley were immediately smitten with the Douglas book; they believed the Douglas account was accurate, and they thought the author had been courageous for stepping forward to write such an account.
In fact, they were so enamored that they contacted him and began a collegial relationship.
Two years later, in 1997, Corson and Crowley, the two biggest intelligence titans of the Cold War, each contributed a short, highly favorable foreword to Douglas’s second volume of what would become a trilogy about Miiller and his life in the United States.
In early 1996, Bob Crowley and Gregory Douglas began an intense telephone relationship that lasted nearly three years.
Intrigued by what he was hearing, Douglas allegedly began, apparently unbeknownst to Crowley, tape-recording and transcribing many of the calls.
Crowley’s plan, according to Douglas, was that he and Douglas were first going to meet alone before noon.
This document, reprinted in Douglas’s 2002 book, Regicide, was Crowley’s “personal insurance policy, should someone start to point the finger at him,” said Gregory Douglas in 2007 in an interview for this book.
Crowley’s wife Emily recalled, “Bob was so looking forward to meeting this guy, but he never did.
The Crowley-Douglas telephone relationship resumed in earnest shortly thereafter, and Douglas allegedly continued to record their conversations, transcribing each of them.
This, among other things—including Douglas’s history of shady dealings and trouble with the law —has led to skepticism regarding the journalistic credibility of “Gregory Douglas,” now considered a pariah within the JFK assassination research community.
Throughout the mid-to late 1990s, Crowley’s evolving admiration of Douglas continued to baffle Tom Kimmel, the senior FBI man.
Peter Stahl] was obviously enormously bright,” Kimmel recalled in 2007.
I just couldn’t understand it because Corson and Crowley were introspective, very accomplished intelligence officers, especially Crowley—not one to go off half-cocked at all.
They didn’t raise any objections or doubts, and that was not the way they approached anything.
Pressured by his family in late 1997, Bob Crowley would again be admitted to the hospital for exploratory surgery for lung cancer.
Again, as legend had it, fearing he wouldn’t come out alive, he packed up two footlockers of documents and sent it all by mail to Gregory Douglas before going to the hospital.
The deal was that they were not to be opened until after Crowley’s death.
Crowley, unfortunately, came back from the hospital with severe dementia, remained mostly bedridden, and died in October 2000.
Shortly after receiving the cache of Crowley documents, Douglas mentioned the transaction to Tom Kimmel.
Increasingly concerned by the national security implications, and knowing something of the enormity of Crowley’s involvement in CIA covert operations, Kimmel started pressuring Douglas to reveal what Crowley had given him.
I asked “That’s why he gave it all to Stahl as opposed to Trento or someone else,” replied Kimmel.
At the time, so alarmed had Kimmel finally become, he ordered an FBI team to investigate the matter, even dispatching a female agent to Crowley’s house.
It’s not clear whether anyone has ever seen, or verified, the documents Crowley allegedly sent to Douglas, other than what Douglas included in his 2002 book Regicide, which highlighted Crowley’s Operation Zipper record.
Nor has anyone ever been able to listen to any of the Crowley-Douglas conversations that Douglas allegedly recorded.
When I asked Douglas to produce the tapes, he said he had destroyed them, but later contradicted himself.
I reviewed many of them in detail, traveling to Chicago to meet with Douglas on several occasions.
Some of the transcripts remain not only intriguing, but also fascinating in terms of certain pieces of information—including specific details about Mary and Cord Meyer that Douglas, in my opinion, could never have fabricated.
In January 1996, Douglas began asking Crowley for specifics about the Kennedy assassination.
Crowley then mentioned what a “first class bitch” Oswald’s wife, Marina, had been to deal with when she finally realized the impasse she was in.
The two men then chauvinistically ruminated about “the mystery of women,” with Crowley finally blurting out, “Most company wives are a pack of nuts.
Douglas vaguely remembered the name Cord Meyer from somewhere, but he wasn’t sure.
Crowley then described Cord’s wife as a “very attractive woman but her sister was even better.
Cord’s wife was what they call a free spirit, liked modern art, ran around naked in people’s gardens and so on.
They broke up and Cord was so angry at being dumped, he hated her from then on.
She had become the steady girlfriend and he was very serious about her.
Mary had money and far more class and she knew how to get along with Jack.
She didn’t approve of the mass orgies and introduced him to pot and other things.
After she assumed room temperature, he and Jim went over to Mary’s art studio to see if she had any compromising papers, and ran off with her diary.
Douglas was curious to know how Cord felt about the CIA “terminating” his wife.
When Jim talked to Cord about this, Cord didn’t let him finish his fishing expedition.
She hated Cord, loved Kennedy, and saw things in the Dallas business that were obvious to insiders or former insiders, but she made the mistake of running her mouth.
In this instance, Crowley talked about how the sale of Newsweek to the Washington Post had been engineered by the CIA’s Richard Helms.
Cord’s exwife was one of Kennedy’s women and everyone felt she had too much influence with him, not to mention her hippifying him with LSD and marijuana.
Without access to Douglas’s tape-recorded phone calls with Bob Crowley, it is impossible to confirm whether the voice speaking was Crowley’s, and therefore impossible to verify the authenticity of the statements.
Moreover, the unsavory character of “Gregory Douglas” leaves a great deal to be desired.
And yet there remain details included here that are confirmed by other, more credible sources already presented.
First of all, Crowley’s allegation that Cord Meyer was devastated after Mary left their marriage was true.
It was well known to Cord’s CIA colleagues and closest friends that he had been furious.
Indeed, Mary’s departure from the marriage had turned Cord upside down.
Cord, the reader will recall, had once lunged for Ben Bradlee’s throat during a Washington dinner party conversation subsequent to his divorce from Mary.
Cord’s Yale classmate, United States attorney David Acheson, recalled Cord physically threatening to fight another guest “at a dinner party at my house.
Second, Crowley mentions twice the fact that both Angleton and Bradlee together were in Mary’s studio sometime after her murder that evening.
According to Crowley’s account, it appears that Jim Angleton had, in fact, accompanied Ben Bradlee to Mary’s studio on the night of the murder, and that this was when Mary’s real diary had been stolen.
Bradlee himself appeared to have lost track of his various versions of the story, as he completely contradicted his own sworn testimony thirty years later in his memoir.
Leo Damore told his attorney Jimmy Smith that he had recovered Mary’s diary , and that it, or a copy of it, had apparently come from Bernie Yoh in 1990, to whom Jim Angleton himself had given it in 1980.
That likely meant that Angleton had made at least one copy of the diary, before giving what he had to Yoh.
Meyer claimed to my friend that she positively knew that Agency-affiliated Cuban exiles and the Mafia were responsible for killing John Kennedy.
Kenny O’Donnell had expressed a similar fear regarding Mary’s influence.
There is one last linchpin to the Crowley-Douglas caper that gives it further credibility.
After the publication of Joseph Trento’s The Secret History of the CIA in 2001, Gregory Douglas sent Trento a congratulatory email in November 2001.
I enjoyed reading your book on the CIA and was gratified to see your comments on the CIA’s employment of Heinrich Miller on page 29.
Also gratified to note your citation of Crowley’s CIA files as a source.
I have written six books on the subject of Miller and his CIA connections and authoritative support is certainly helpful.
Unbeknownst to Joe Trento, Douglas was referring to his own book, Regicide.
It would be another year —November 2002 — before Trento read Regicide; and when he did, he began to see red.
I want you to know, as I told Walter earlier, that I am the literary executor of Bob Crowley and that I have the legal right to all of his documents.
I notice that you are using documents from him in your book and this has to be stopped right now.
This is a gross slander on the reputation of a fine American and, I want you to know, these papers are all classified documents under Federal law and you may not keep or use them.
I intend to write to your publisher and inform him that if he does not cease and desist selling this book, I will sue him and you.
Also, I have strongly suggested to both Emily and Greg [Bob Crowley’s son] that they sue you for defaming Bob’s good name.
Now you can stop all of this legal action by sending me a full list of all the papers you got from Bob and then sending me the actual papers.
This copy was retrieved by myself after Bill’s death and returned to the proper agency but apparently, Bob had sent out the original to you.
As you know, Bob was badly failing in his last years and I and others, including Tom Kimmel, think it was a low blow for you to trick a trusting Bob into giving you sensitive papers.
If you want to avoid future problems, I suggest you do as I say, make a list of all your documents you got from Bob, send it to me and then return all of these documents to me immediately.
Tom Kimmel has told me all about you and I want you to know I won’t hold still for any monkey business from you and if you don’t want the FBI knocking your door down, do as I say.
Nowhere in Trento’s book The Secret History of the CIA does he even mention or allude to Crowley’s “Operation Zipper” document (although Trento was well aware it existed); nor had Trento discussed the CIA’s involvement in the Kennedy assassination.
He pimped Angleton’s ridiculous, longtime public assertion that the Kennedy assassination was the work of the Soviet KGB using Lee Harvey Oswald as a tool.
Joe Trento Subject: RE: Mr Trento: The documents I received from Bob Crowley, mailed by his son Greg, in 1996, were freely given to me as an author.
Bob had been assisting me with important material for several years previously.
His only caveat was that I not make use of these before he died and I have not done so.
What I have are the originals and also the originals of many other fascinating subjects.
Please be advised that Bob sent these to me prior to his death and that they therefore do not fall under any literary property over which you now claim to have rights.
In answer to your specific demands, be advised that I have no intention of sending you any list of this material in question and neither do I have any intention of sending you anything else.
In the event that you dare to address me again, I will personally post some of the more sensitive documents on the Internet and personally thank you for having sent me these from your own holdings of Crowley’s papers.
Bob told me you were a light weight hack and it is also obvious that you have no knowledge of the law.
Peter Stahl/Walter Storch) may have been somewhat truthful regarding what had transpired between himself and Bob Crowley.
Yet despite the remaining ambiguity surrounding the Crowley-Douglas affair, the details purportedly revealed by Crowley—about Mary Meyer, her diary, and her murder—are solidly supported and substantiated by other events and accounts covered in this book.
Ben Bradlee never took kindly to anyone who accused him of having CIA connections.
During the 1950s and 1960s, working for, or with, the CIA, directly or indirectly, didn’t necessarily mean being on the CIA payroll as an employee.
In the Cold War era, many journalists considered cooperation with the CIA a kind of patriotic duty.
After Watergate, however, it was considered deeply suspicious, if not downright duplicitous, because so much CIA chicanery had been exposed.
Deborah Davis and her book Katharine the Great paid the ultimate price in 1980 when, under great pressure from both Ben Bradlee and Katharine Graham, her publisher, William Jovanovich, recalled and shredded her book—some twenty thousand copies—just two months after the book’s release.
It was Davis’s assertion in her book that Bradlee’s job as press attaché at the American Embassy in Paris in 1952— 1953 functioned as a CIA front at the time.
Bradlee was writing propaganda aimed at “persuading” Europeans that Julius and Ethel Rosenberg were spies and deserved to be executed.
Of course, Bradlee was purposely not on any CIA payroll as an employee; that would have made it too obvious.
In later editions of Katharine the Great, Davis included documents that corroborated Bradlee’s CIA connections.
Despite the first edition of the Davis book being recalled in early 1980, damage to Bradlee’s reputation had already been done.
It upset Bradlee profoundly—and shook the pedestal onto which the Washington Post had been elevated since Watergate.
And he attacked me viciously and he said that I had falsely accused him of being a CIA agent.
In this particular case— breaking into Mary Meyer’s studio to find her diary—they were collaborating.
Bradlee never once publicly mentioned he had been inside Mary’s studio on the night of the murder.
The only revelation of that fact was contained in the 1965 Crump murder trial transcript; it was never again mentioned by Bradlee himself, or anyone else , including journalist-author Ron Rosenbaum or Nina Burleigh.
It was at this time, said Crowley—who mentioned it twice —that the real diary was discovered and given to Angleton for safekeeping.
Ultimately, the exact account of what actually took place may never be fully known.
But more than likely, as Crowley maintained, the diary was taken on the night of her murder—either from Mary’s studio, or from the bookcase in her bedroom.
Mary’s bedroom, according to the Statements Jim Truitt made to Ron Rosenbaum in 1976, was where she usually kept it.
On the one hand, concerning Mary’s murder, the memoir was so rife with factual errors, omissions, and contradictions that it cried out for careful scrutiny.
Ben Bradlee was even more circumspect in 2010 when being interviewed for David Baldacci’s Hardcover Mysteries television documentary about Mary Meyer’s murder.
Nine months earlier, he and others had conspired to erase his sister-in-law’s private life.
At the time of the trial in July 1965, Bradlee’s career was already being transformed.
Several months earlier, in March, he had been wooed back to the Washington Post after a fourteen-year hiatus by none other than Katharine Graham herself.
In 1976, after the first revelation of Mary’s relationship with President Kennedy appeared in the National Enquirer, Bradlee told journalist Ron 3” Rosenbaum in an interview that there had been no “CIA angle,” no Agency “shadow” in Mary’s demise.
By all police, witness, and forensic accounts, she struggled mightily, screaming for twenty seconds or more, before the first gunshot ripped through her skull.
Whatever Mary’s thoughts or feelings during the final conscious seconds of her life, she had to be aware her death was fast approaching, yet she would not succumb without a fight, before the second fatal shot ended her life.
Perhaps Ben Bradlee wanted to assuage his guilt by publicly spinning yet another yarn that his sister-in-law hadn’t really suffered, or that she hadn’t faced head-on the terrifying realization that her life was about to end violently.
Whatever his motivation, Ben Bradlee played as fast and loose with the facts in this instance as he had with nearly every other aspect of Mary’s death.
We watched the full flowering of Mary as the kind of woman that Mom might have become.
Instead, Mom lived off the idea that JFK had a crush on her for years—before she disappeared up the asshole of spirituality.
Asked in a letter by Leo Damore in 1991 whether she would be willing to be interviewed about the events surrounding her sister’s death, Tony avoided any possibility of an encounter, replying, “I feel as I have always felt—that the case is closed, that Crump was indeed guilty.
Up until the very end of 2011 when she died just shy of her ninety-first birthday, Anne Chamberlin, a former Vassar classmate and close friend of Mary Meyer’s, had remained the only person left who could have perhaps unraveled some of the impenetrable, unanswered questions surrounding the last years of Mary Meyer’s life, and death.
A known friend to Katharine Graham, regarded as an intrepid, charmingly sharp-witted commentator, who had a “distinguished and eclectic career” as a freelance journalist, Anne also maintained throughout her life an extraordinary level of physical health and vitality through a daily, grueling exercise regime.
Her phone interviews with Leo Damore in the early 1990’s indicated she’d been a part of Mary’s Washington “LSD group” that took shape in 1962, yet she became indignant when I asked to talk with her about this.
According to Damore, Chamberlin fled Washington for Maine out of fear, shortly after Mary’s murder, side-stepping being named in any of the accounts surrounding Mary’s death.
J ames Jesus Angleton had what might be called a “second career” sending newspaper reporters and journalists on never-ending wild-goose chases.
Sailing on the edge, always well-oiled and three sheets to the wind, Angleton relished seeing how far he could push their limits of gullibility; and, like a Shakespearean actor, he did so convincingly, often leaving many of them awestruck, as if they had just been given the actual location of Noah’s Ark or the whereabouts of Jimmy Hoffa’s body.
What took place in 1976 after the National Enquirer exposé involving Mary’s relationship with Kennedy supported historian Newman’s point of view.
It would take a masterful performance from the master Angler himself, along with supporting actors like Ben Bradlee, to neutralize its implications.
The elite circle of Mary’s acquaintances—the people who had taken an “omerta oath” of allegiance never to reveal the facts surrounding either her diary or her murder—had to figure out how to hoodwink journalists Rosenbaum and Nobile, who were intent on writing the whole story.
The two most high-profile players among them—Jim Angleton and Ben Bradlee—were forced to make a showing.
For whatever reason, Cord Meyer and Anne Chamberlin would remain hidden, as would Anne Truitt, and to a large extent Tony Bradlee.
Like his misleading trial testimony in 1965, Bradlee’s 1976 selective recollections carefully excluded the most critical events.
Dare it be said that had Rosenbaum and Nobile become aware of these linchpin events, the Angleton-CIA house of cards would have collapsed immediately.
Within the hallowed halls of the Agency, the ruling leaders of America’s premier intelligence establishment had learned how to manage almost any crisis, particularly when it came to accountability to the public, or even to Congress.
With their backs to the wall, the Agency gives up a few classified, titillating tidbits, making everyone feel as though they’ve actually come clean, when in fact they’ve done nothing of the sort, continuing to withhold what is most critical.
No greater master ever demonstrated this technique more skillfully than James Jesus Angleton, the “Delphic Oracle” of counterintelligence, the chief himself.
He completely dazzled Ron Rosenbaum and coauthor Phillip Nobile into thinking that they had closed the door on the case, solving everything.
Alas, the authors declared, Mary’s murder, like Jack’s before her, was a random, indiscriminate, violent murder committed by a deranged, lone gunman.
So powerfully beguiling and enchanting was Angleton’s influence on Rosenbaum in 1976, it likely ignited his fascination with Angleton’s mentor, Soviet double agent Kim Philby.
Philby and Angleton had met during Angleton’s stint in the OS during World War II, while Philby was ostensibly working for the British Secret Intelligence Service.
Under the masterful Philby tutelage, Angleton learned all the fundamentals of the craft of intelligence, including masterminding the world of counterintelligence.
Angleton came to revere his mentor just the way Philby wanted him to; it was part of Philby’s strategy.
The eager-beaver Angleton consulted Philby on almost everything, sharing with him all that was going on at the highest levels of American intelligence.
Therein lay Angleton’s tragic fatal flaw—trusting anybody, and particularly Kim Philby.
That mistake would eventually eviscerate Angleton, and he would never recover, only deteriorate.
So deeply had the entire arena of American intelligence been penetrated that Angleton sank even deeper into paranoia, his daily alcohol-nicotine intake dismembering his overall capacity and grasp on reality, cell by cell.
Everything, and everybody, viewed through the Angleton prism, was vermin—moles, to be exact—digging relentlessly and eternally, no matter how circuitous the route, toward Langley, Virginia, their final destination CIA headquarters.
That was the footprint that “Mother” Angleton would create and leave behind.
The mole, the penetration agent in particular, does not merely betray; he stays.
He doesn’t just commit a single treacherous act and run; his entire being, every smile, every word he exchanges, is an ultimate violation (an almost sexual penetration) of all those around him.
All his friendships, his relationships, his marriages become elaborate lies requiring unceasing vigilance to maintain, lies in a play-within-a-play only he can follow.
If, as le Carré once wrote, “Espionage is the secret theater of our society,” Kim Philby is its Olivier.
Angleton had successfully modeled his entire being on how Philby had shaped his own.
It was no accident that the obsessive mission of “Angleton the mole hunter,” forever protecting his beloved Agency no matter what the cost, resulted in paralyzing entire sections of the CIA’s operational directorates, and eventually gave rise to the biggest crisis the American intelligence establishment ever faced.
By the 1960s, it was well known within the highest levels that the CIA had been penetrated.
During that time, Edward Clare Petty, a protégé of Angleton’s and a member of the Special Investigations Group within Counterintelligence , was ordered to begin an extended study to identify who the mole was, and how he was able to operate.
Angleton, of course, thought his clout would allow him to contain the study, and slant it in any direction he wanted.
Before his retirement in 1975, Petty turned in his report, revealing to his superiors, including CIA director William Colby, that the mole Angleton had been hunting for twenty-five years was, in fact, Angleton himself.
One source confirmed that the so-called Petty Report was so explosive that it had been kept under armed guard when it was first completed.
While all true, Angleton’s real reign of terror had been far more nefarious.
So in 1976, when authors Rosenbaum and Nobile relied on Jim Angleton as a primary source for their seminal article “The Curious Aftermath of JFK’s Best and Brightest Affair,” their efforts to solve the mystery were immediately contaminated—they allowed themselves to be seduced by one of the greatest tricksters of the twentieth century.
In addition, Rosenbaum’s own certainty about his rightness further precluded any real penetration and exposure of the evil that had been perpetrated.
In 1964, Angleton’s reputation was legendary, in and out of the Agency.
Together with Allen Dulles, with the completion of the Warren Report in 1964, Angleton had not only just masterminded the greatest cover-up in all of American history, but had duped the entire national security apparatus, including the CIA, into believing that Oswald had been collaborating with both Cubans and the Soviet KGB during his trip to Mexico in the fall of 1963, setting up his plan to assassinate President Kennedy later that fall.
President Lyndon Johnson then used “the Mexico City trump card” of a World War III nuclear confrontation that would kill 40 million Americans in the first hour to persuade people like Supreme Court justice Earl Warren to make sure the Warren Commission would establish Oswald as a lone nut assassin acting on his own.
Every detail, however minute, had to be taken into account in an “operation” of such magnitude as Mary’s “termination,” so as to arouse as little suspicion as possible.
Jim Angleton was Cord Meyer’s closest and dearest friend, and the godfather to his children.
Any overt involvement by “Mother” Angleton would have forever raised dangerous suspicion.
The infamous Angleton had given himself another role to play—that of procuring Mary’s diary and any other artifacts, personal papers, letters, and the like that might incriminate the CIA in her murder, or President Kennedy’s assassination.
With aplomb, he had completely erased the most important phase of Mary’s life.
With the information that Jim Truitt provided to the National Enquirer, the master fly-fisherman Angler himself, known for designing his own special fishing lures, cast his bait into just the right pool, then hooked one of his biggest catches of all time, journalist Ron Rosenbaum, intricately steering and anchoring him to the lone gunman/Ray Crump theory.
Unaware, Rosenbaum had been delicately reeled into Angleton’s nexus of deception, while the master himself then drove away in his signature black Mercedes.
Finally invaded by the mole of cancer, the “Delphic Oracle” Angleton at last confronted the final curtain on the stage of life.
Even the mercurial spymaster, stricken with lung cancer and facing imminent death, earnestly, and finally, acknowledged to his scribe, Joe Trento, that Jack Kennedy and Mary Meyer “were in love.
His marriage to Cicely ruptured, and his two children estranged from him, Jim Angleton’s last paternal effort was to seek out his daughter, Truffy, who had joined Yogi Bhajan’s effort to bring Kundalini yoga to the West.
Eventually her mother, Cicely, before her death in 2011, and her sister Lucy would find a second home there, too.
According to one source who knew the family well, Jim Angleton regularly consulted with Yogi Bhajan as his “spiritual adviser” in the final years of his life.
Whether it was because he wanted to understand what had driven his daughters to renounce their former existence, or whether he wanted “spiritual absolution” as death drew near, his family had mostly abandoned him.
During one of Angleton’s final meetings with author Joseph Trento, the frail, emaciated, cancer-ridden “Ichabod Crane” surrendered more secrets.
The man whose all-encompassing power “had struck fear into most of his colleagues, the man who had been able to end a CIA career with a nod or a phone call,” Trento wrote, was finally crumbling.
They were afraid that their own business dealings with Hitler’s pals would come out.
Later in the same conversation, Angleton added, “There was no accountability.
Fundamentally, the founding fathers of United States intelligence were liars.
The better you lied and the more you betrayed, the more likely you would be promoted.
Outside of their duplicity, the only thing they had in common was a desire for absolute power.
Allen Dulles, Richard Helms, Carmel Offie, and Frank Wisner were the grand masters.
If you were in a room with them, you were in a room full of people that you had to believe would deservedly end up in hell.
There, he described an encounter one night in the late 1980s in the Hollywood Hills of California with “a well-known West Coast figure,” an obvious attempt for some reason to camouflage the identity of Timothy Leary.
Nina Burleigh, in particular, knew exactly who Wistar Janney was, having spent many hours interviewing me, starting in 1996, two years before her book was published.
Simply put, both Cord Meyer and Ben Bradlee had, however inadvertently, revealed “the master key” that proved conspiracy—a fact that neither Rosenbaum nor Burleigh had even bothered, or possibly dared, to consider.
In the sacrosanct halls of the CIA, where such kingpins as Jim Angleton, Richard Helms, Cord Meyer, Wistar Janney, and others lied professionally and with impunity, a decision had been made.
If she talked and told what she had come to understand about what really had taken place in Dallas, what had been done to her beloved ally, the president, and the country, and by whom, people with influence would have listened to her, people such as Philip L Graham of the Washington Post, had he still been alive.
These imperious CIA men lived in a world that answered to no authority; they knew exactly what they were doing, and how it had to be done.
But it was nothing more than window-dressing, camouflage for “the ends justify the means”—the CIA’s true, unwritten code for dealing with anything, or anyone, that happened to inconveniently get in its way.
And yet their fatal flaw, no matter how much water would pass under the proverbial bridge, was to underestimate something much more forceful and compelling than their corrupted, villainous power.
It was, in its purest form, the supreme force of truth itself, and the human need to pursue and know it, no matter what the cost.
Both Joe Trento’s and Gregory Douglas’s email address have been purposely withheld.
Having received email from both in previous years, I can verify that the email addresses above were valid and still in use.
His excesses will demand the return of the republic and you, my son, will return to restore it.
Not going all the way, and not starting. —The Buddha The American people live in a country where they can have almost anything they want.
And my regret is that it seems that they don’t want much of anything at all. —Eugene Debs Dauainc THE JOURNEY of writing this book, many people asked me whether Leo Damore really committed suicide.
He shot himself in the presence of a nurse and a police officer in October 1995.
There was no conspiracy here, I maintained; the facts spoke for themselves.
But I soon reckoned those weren’t the only “facts” that surrounded Leo’s demise.
For two years, Leo’s former wife, June Davison, graciously allowed me to read all of Leo’s private diaries.
I wanted to know anything that might further offer clues, particularly about the last few years of his life.
While Leo purposely never mentioned any of his most secretive research in his journals, he did recount some of his battles with panic attacks, anxiety, and depression—all of which started to emerge several months after his telephone conversation with William L Mitchell at the end of March 1993.
Yet in my own dealings with Leo during 1993, he appeared to be generally optimistic after our visit in April of that year and the subsequent phone contact we shared during that summer.
Leo made no secret of the fact that he had met with the person who, he believed, was Mary’s assassin, the same man who had testified at the trial, but I didn’t press him for further details, as I was preoccupied with grief over a broken marital engagement.
That fall, however, he was still working on the manuscript for “Burden of Guilt,” though he was increasingly agitated and upset.
Another of Leo’s closest friends, who asked to remain anonymous, agreed to be interviewed for this book.
She and Leo had talked many times after his 1993 telephone interview with Mitchell, as well as after Leo’s subsequent in-person interview with Mitchell.
That meeting, the friend said, was even more definitive because Leo had learned, she said, about some of the other people who had assisted in the operation.
Some weeks later, however, Leo told his friend he was sure he was being followed, “watched,” and he was growing increasingly alarmed.
He wasn’t sure how, or when it happened, but he knew something was wrong.
Leo was becoming more frantic, more anxious, agitated, and unable to focus.
Increasingly paranoid, under financial pressure, he apparently consulted not one but two different psychiatrists, both of whom were giving him different psychotropic medications.
About a month before he shot himself in October 1995, Leo called me, desperately pleading for a place to live, and threatening suicide.
Not having heard from him for months, I realized at that point how serious his deterioration had become.
I pleaded with him to immediately check into a hospital, even offered to accompany him, should he need assistance.
Later on, I would discover his friend Jimmy Smith had received a similar plea, again shortly before Leo took his life.
Following his death, Leo’s former wife told me his autopsy had revealed an undiagnosed brain tumor.
Sidney Gottlieb, the Agency’s MKULTRA program had developed an arsenal of undetectable elixirs for getting rid of people when it became necessary.
For the CIA, murder became ‘standard operating procedure,’ as demonstrated by CIA Director William Colby in his testimony before the Church Committee in 1975.
In April 1953, James Speyer Kronthal, a brilliant, young Allen Dulles protégé and deputy, who was in line for a high-level job at the Agency, was found dead in his Georgetown home in what police said was a suicide.
The night before, Kronthal had been confronted by his boss Dulles for his sexual orientation.
Then, while working for the CIA in Switzerland, Kronthal had been secretly filmed with young boys by the Soviets before blackmailing him into becoming a spy.
Sidney Gottlieb and the medical people produced all kinds of poisons that a normal postmortem could not detect.
Leo Damore’s “suicide” had become all the more disturbing, not only to me, but to his dear friend Jimmy Smith as well.
It took me by surprise, when I met a kindred soul whose father, too, had been a CIA officer.
There’s a kind of unwritten, sometimes unacknowledged, bond among those of us whose fathers were involved with the fledgling CIA during the Cold War era.
Author Nina Burleigh’s interview with Jane Barnes, daughter of the elite CIA covert operative Tracy Barnes—who Robert Morrow believed was part of Jim Angleton’s inner circle that decided Mary’s fate—underscored not only the experience of living within the “shadowy” world of never really knowing what our fathers were doing, but the fantasy life we as children invented to compensate for this emptiness.
Like Jane’s father, my own had also revered Ian Fleming’s mythic character.
But we as children, the Cold War’s “CIA brats,” were not allowed to know the real life our fathers had chosen.
Such was the double life our fathers led; and eventually, one way or another, it exacted a karmic retribution on us children.
Quentin Meyer, Mary and Cord Meyer’s oldest son, would no longer talk to me after he became aware of this book project, nor would his brother, Mark.
Intermittently, and over time since the early 1970s, Quentin’s mental illness had overtaken him with one debilitating episode after another.
In the fall of 2009, author Katie McCabe shared with me her experience after a book-signing event for her Dovey Roundtree biography, Justice Older Than the Law, at a Georgetown senior center.
There, in the circle of attendees, sat a slumped-over, seemingly elderly man who listened quietly, his head down on his chest.
The sponsor of the event later told McCabe that the man was Quentin Meyer, son of Cord and Mary Meyer.
His mere presence at the event spoke volumes; somewhere within, a part of Quenty still yearned to know the elusive, essential truth that had robbed him of his selfhood, the demons too horrifying to confront.
And so, it was by serendipity again, that someone I had contacted asked Toni Shimon, the daughter of the late Joseph W Shimon, whether she would be willing to talk with me.
When I met Toni in 2005, our chemistry was almost instantaneous, only because we shared a certain bond of somewhat similar circumstances growing up in Washington.
Like most of us, Toni, during her formative years, hadn’t known the true nature of her father’s work.
As a young adult, however, she persuaded her father, little by little, to confide pieces of information he probably shouldn’t have.
He was determined to remain a faithful, honest father to his only daughter while being called to duty to “take care of” some of the most “sensitive” problems in the hidden cesspools of Washington.
He quickly distinguished himself, rising through the ranks to become a detective.
By the time of President Franklin D Roosevelt’s inauguration in 1933, Shimon had already established a reputation for being able “to get the job done” with the utmost discretion.
He would gain the confidence not only of President Roosevelt, but each of his successors—Truman, Eisenhower, Kennedy, Johnson, and Nixon—all of whom revered his many talents.
While officially assigned to the White House as a “Washington Police Inspector,” Shimon was also secretly working for the Justice Department through the United States Attorney’s Office.
In the late 1940s, though still stationed at the White House, he was part of a secret, organized crime task force.
The work was dangerous—so dangerous, in fact, that his wife, Elizabeth, feared for her safety and that of their only child, Toni.
The couple finally divorced in the late 1940s, when Toni was just two years old.
Elizabeth had pleaded for years for Joe to find a different line of work.
She was terrified her husband would be killed, their only child orphaned.
Moreover, she abhorred the work hours he kept, the secrecy, people showing up at all hours of the day and night, and the impromptu meetings that took place in her kitchen, when she would have to leave.
It became no secret to Toni that her father carried a gun wherever he went.
She had thought her dad was part of the Metropolitan Police Department in Washington, D.C., though not a uniformed officer.
Told her father was stationed at the White House during the Roosevelt administration, then a chief inspector for the United States Attorney’s Office, all the while maintaining police department status, she began to wonder.
He adored her; she adored him, and the way he always looked after her, even after the divorce.
The two missed each other terribly when Toni went back to her mother’s home on Long Island after periodic visits.
The divorce had been a huge adjustment for everyone, but Joe Shimon, a true patriot who believed he was working for the betterment of his country, had made his choice.
During one of her visits to Washington in the late 1950s, Toni found herself sitting in the kitchen with her father before he left for work.
Her father’s work habits and dress code didn’t escape his growing daughter’s inquisitiveness.
Her father looked at her quizzically, she remembered, as though he was wondering if now might be the time he might dare to answer.
Isolation, secrecy, deception—all of the required masks—had exacted a toll.
Unbearable loneliness and disconnection were often the initial symptoms.
With the dissolution of his marriage and family, Joe Shimon had lost the opportunity to share each day of his daughter’s life and childhood.
In spite of the divorce and my living on Long Island with my mother, I would visit him often.
Though Shimon did eventually remarry, he never told his new wife the truth about what he really did in the world, fearing it might endanger her life as well.
Perhaps the prospect of a deepening father-daughter relationship with his thirteen-year-old daughter that morning overpowered his usual, sometimes necessary reticence.
At that moment, without any further deliberation, father Joe took a calculated risk.
Reaching into his coat pocket, Joe Shimon pulled out five or six different identification badges, said Toni, and dropped them all on the kitchen table for inspection.
Police Department, United States Secret Service, United States Department of Justice, White House identification badge, and finally, Central Intelligence Agency.
The father and daughter would continue to deepen their newfound relationship, despite the divorce and the dissolution of the family.
He had already confided to Toni how corrupt and evil he thought Hoover was; he then told her the truth about Hoover’s sexual orientation, his secret affair with his colleague Clyde Tolson, and how he, Shimon, was always inevitably called in to clean up any number of messes that easily could have embarrassed all of Washington, especially J Edgar himself.
The uneasy memory of “the Easter good-bye walk” would be eclipsed soon enough by her telephone call to her father’s White House office on November 22, 1963.
Toni was in college in North Carolina in the fall of 1964 when Mary Meyer was murdered.
The news of her death came to Toni’s attention the following spring, as the trial of Ray Crump began to take center stage in the Washington media.
After the Kennedy assassination, Toni was already witnessing a seismic shift in her father’s disposition.
Their relationship had grown exceptionally close, but by 1964 Joe Shimon had become withdrawn, more cautious.
During her spring vacation in 1965, Toni and her father began talking one day.
She was eager to ask her father’s opinion about what had actually happened to Mary Meyer.
She was already aware of several suspicious deaths that appeared to have some link to the Kennedy assassination.
Toni had learned how to probe her father as much as she could, but there were limits.
Lost in thought, continuing to comprehend the sea of change she had witnessed in her father since Dallas, Toni started retreating, emotionally withdrawing.
Just as he had in the late 1950s morning breakfast encounter, the father again risked something further.
Honey, you don’t know how many people are just eliminated, just on the operating table alone.
That day and its memory wasn’t lost on Toni Shimon, nor on me when she revealed it.
Author Jim Marrs, in his 1989 book Crossfire, had established a chronological list, based on the dates of their death, of more than a hundred individuals—all of whom were shown to have possessed some important detail of the conspiracy to assassinate President Kennedy.
Their deaths during the twenty years following the events in Dallas were suspicious.
More than thirty people on this list had been killed in violent gun-related circumstances.
It wasn’t just Mary’s murder anymore, but all the suspicious “suicides,” “heart attacks,” “cancers,” or “accidents”—Phil Graham, Frank Wisner, Jim Truitt, Leo Damore.
Even author John H Davis, who refused to complete Leo Damore’s research about what had really happened to Mary , could be included.
During the 1970s, America’s Bicentennial came and went, its underbelly not lost on Toni Shimon or her father.
Chipping away little by little, Toni continued her attempts to bore into her father’s mysterious treasure trove of knowledge.
In 1973, the film Executive Action was released into movie theaters across the country.
Directed by David Miller, the screenplay was co-written by Dalton Trumbo, Donald Freed, and attorney Mark Lane.
Starring Burt Lancaster, the film depicts the assassination of President Kennedy as engendered by a cabal of wealthy industrialists and powerful rulers who had been angered by Kennedy’s policies—everything from his reduction of the oil depletion allowance, to his approach to the Russians with overtures of world peace and, of course, the possibility of a pullout from Vietnam.
For these power brokers, the most frightening prospect of all, however, was the specter of an unbeatable “Kennedy dynasty” lasting decades.
The cabal therefore enlisted a group of CIA-backed Cubans embittered over the Bay of Pigs fiasco, along with several high-level, disgruntled American intelligence agents whose best efforts to destroy Castro’s Cuba had been needlessly sacrificed and betrayed.
Some would later credit the film with reopening the entire debate about Kennedy’s assassination.
Time and time again, the film kept coming up in their discussions, and the inquisitive daughter would want to delve more deeply into the assassination.
Like many of his generation, Joe Shimon was a drinker, but a careful drinker, not given to excess.
As the years wore on, he would talk a little more openly while having drinks with his daughter.
In early 1975, in the wake of Watergate, alarmed by allegations of CIA misdeeds, the United States Senate—through its investigative body known as the Church Committee—attempted to tread on the CIA’s sacred ground.
Joe Shimon would be called to testify, but he told his daughter he considered the committee’s inquest a joke and treated it as such; they weren’t really serious enough to get to the bottom of anything, he told her.
Those disclosures started, recalled Toni, when she brought up the fact that there had seemed to be a lot of strange people coming to her father’s house when she would be visiting during the early 1960s.
Shimon confided he was the principal liaison to the Mafia, a connection that was part of his CIA credentials.
When they had started working on Castro’s assassination, the meetings were held at Shimon’s house.
People like Johnny Roselli, Sam Giancana, Santo Trafficante, and the CIA’s William K Harvey were regulars at these meetings, along with some sporadic attendance by Jim Angleton.
William K Harvey, a pear-shaped, bulging-eyed alcoholic endomorph who had once been paraded before President Kennedy as the CIA’s exemplar of Ian Fleming’s James Bond, had the career track of a bona fide sociopath.
He had originally joined the FBI in 1940, only to then challenge one of Hoover’s protocols.
The squabble that ensued led Harvey to resign; he joined the CIA instead.
Harvey was eventually assigned by Richard Helms to head the Agency’s “Executive Action” program created to develop assassination operations on foreign leaders.
When Bobby Kennedy finally found out about what Harvey had done, he was furious.
The plot to kill Fidel Castro, code-named Operation Mongoose, began to take shape in November 1961.
Shimon’s revelations to Washington Post columnist Jack Anderson included the fact that the covert operation had the blessings of America’s most notorious underworld figures.
Santo Trafficante, who had controlled much of Cuba’s underworld before Castro took power in 1959— particularly the lucrative Cuban casinos—had told Shimon explicitly, “Pll get you the contacts , give you lots of names.
Harvey and Johnny Roselli then recruited the hit men recommended by Trafficante.
Joe Shimon realized, as did Bill Harvey and Johnny Roselli, that Castro must have found out he was being targeted.
They would not have all have failed repeatedly unless Castro had been waiting for them.
Furthermore, during this time, there were only six individuals who were involved in the CIA’s plot to use organized crime to eliminate Castro.
According to Shimon, there had been no paper trail of the effort; nothing had been written down.
He suspected that Trafficante had tipped off Castro about the CIA’s plans to assassinate him.
Post columnist Jack Anderson noted correctly that although Trafficante had been initially jailed by Castro when he first took power, losing all his assets including the casinos, he somehow, “for some inexplicable reason,” escaped from jail and Cuba unscathed, then returned to the United States with all his treasure intact.
Trafficante quickly expanded his hegemony in the crime underworld in the South, almost overnight.
The CIA had come to the same conclusion, eventually calling off their friends in organized crime, and looked for other ways to dispose of Cuba’s leader.
Trafficante was furious with Shimon for having questioned his allegiances.
So furious, in fact, that in 1964, he took out a contract on Shimon’s life as well on his daughter and on his wife.
I vividly remember him telling me, ‘Look, honey, if anything happens to me, watch the movie Executive Action.
For Toni, additional pieces of the puzzle about her father began to take shape.
She told him she would consider it, only later telling her mother about her father’s request.
Her mother became furious at her former husband, knowing full well the danger her daughter might fall into.
She would finally learn that even as late as 1989, after the Reagan administration, her father was maintaining regular contact with a group of people who had inside knowledge at all times.
In the early 1990s, Toni had the kind of conversation with her father that she never would have anticipated.
The former “Washington Police Inspector” would finally spill to his daughter what he had never revealed to anyone else, other than the people he was working for.
Probed even further, father Joe continued talking, perhaps knowing that the end of his life was approaching.
The conversation progressed, Toni recalled, with her father stating that his former Washington-based company, Allied Investigators, whose offices were located on Dupont Circle in Washington, was just a CIA front that had been used for most of his undercover work.
She wasn’t prepared for the next round of her father’s fireworks, however.
It was the kind of dreaded moment that one hopes is only a nightmare, a bad dream from which to finally awaken unscathed.
She wasn’t expecting a definitive response, but just curious as to what she might come to know or understand.
She had wanted to know her father, never imagining what this might actually reveal.
Toni exclaimed softly, as the echo of her father’s last words penetrated like nails, one after another, into her heart.
Perhaps Toni hoped, like any number of us during the Cold War, that the truth about what our fathers were actually doing in the world might finally offer some consolation.
As to her father’s admission, “it really turned me off,” Toni said during our final interview.
Whatever Bill Harvey was up to, it always came out of Jim Angleton’s office.
I thanked Toni once again and gathered my materials, making my way to the car.
The trip back to Massachusetts, across Long Island Sound on the New London ferry, would be a relief, I kept telling myself.
Toni had further confirmed all my suspicions, authenticating an even darker shadow. [stood on the bow of the New London ferry as it made its way across Long Island Sound.
The boat rocked through the oncoming swells, inching toward the Connecticut shoreline.
If Paul Revere had been the “midnight messenger” to warn his fellow countrymen in Lexington and Concord of the British military approach, Mary Pinchot Meyer had planned to make her own “midnight bareback ride” to warn the citizens of a country that its government had been demonically stolen from each and every one of them.
They had killed Jack because he and his ally-in-peace Nikita Khrushchev were steering the world away from the Cold War toward peace, thereby eliminating the military-industrial-intelligence complex’s most treasured weapons—the fear of war, the fear of “Communist takeover,” and the manipulative use of Fear itself.
The Cold War was about to end, and with it the covert action arm of the Central Intelligence Agency.
The Agency would have been all but neutered, its funding and resources cut, its menacing grip on public opinion exposed and eliminated.
It also meant the eventual curtailment of many of the defense industries, including the proliferation of nuclear arms.
There would have been no war in Southeast Asia or Vietnam; that, too, was about to end.
Little attention had been paid to the parting words of a previous president.
Indeed, it had; so much so that in less than three years, anyone who tried to stop it—including the elected president of the United States—would be eliminated.
Simply put, peace—particularly world peace—wasn’t good for business, nor for American military and economic hegemony.
Whatever enlightenment Mary and Jack may have finally engendered together, it had evolved into a part of Jack’s newfound trajectory of where he wanted to take not only his presidency in 1963, but the entire world.
It was the pursuit of peace that was about to take center stage; and that voyage would no longer include any obsequious bow to the insanity of America’s war machine driven by the legacy of Allen Dulles and his ass-kissing cronies.
After Dallas, amid utter horror and shock, Mary had taken it upon herself to discover and make sense of the truth of the conspiracy that had taken place— only to realize the magnitude of the second conspiracy, a cover-up taking place right before her eyes.
It was her own mosaic of people, events, circumstances, and exploration that informed her understanding—not only of the evil that had taken place in Dallas, but of the villainous darkness that was now enveloping all of America.
She had furiously confronted her ex-husband, Cord Meyer, possibly Jim Angleton as well, with what she had discovered, not fully realizing the extent of their own diabolical ruthlessness.
The Warren Report was ultimately nothing more than a house of cards; once ignited with the right matchstick, it would be engulfed in flames.
If Mary courageously went public with who she was, and what she knew, making clear her position in the final years of Jack’s life, people with influence would take notice; the fire of suspicion around Dallas would erupt into a conflagration.
The concluding line of Roman Polanski’s film wafted through my mind, tempting me away from the task that now clearly lay ahead.
Nausea was overtaking me, but it wasn’t the ferry pitching through the oncoming swells, veteran ocean sailor that I was.
It was Mary’s revulsion for the CIA, now mine as well, that gripped me in its vise.
Alone on the deck, hands outstretched toward the last bit of light on a short winter’s day, I unleashed my screams toward the sky, only to then collapse at the rail, sobbing one more time.
In a certain way, my torment had come to an end, yet behind it there was an unbearable sadness, and not just my own.
The shining beacon of America—a promise unlike any other for humanity—was being extinguished, as it had been in Rome.
Ignorance dipped in fear-mongering and dazzled by fabricated myths had become the breeding ground for official stupidity, darkness, and senseless wars.
Mary Pinchot Meyer had been struck down before she could speak publicly.
Leo Damore had fallen, very likely poisoned into uncontrollable despair.
John Davis, having picked up Leo’s mantle, finally opted out, his life threatened.
The familiar taste of salt water on my lips called me back inside my body.
The wind and ocean spray danced all around, the cold of winter now an accustomed companion.
Somber, yet still resolute, I knew right then and there I would do whatever it took, pay whatever price was required, to allow this story—this small but essential piece of history —to see the light of day.
RAY CROWD, JR., SUSPECT; Jone eet Direcie aint P MEYER, VICTIM; a Bey > ; ,, ~ sews 7.
No fibers wore found on the es elothing, @pecinons Q13 and Qi4, that could be associated with the Victin's clothing, specizons QS through Q?, rote and Z be af a reuored fron the Q12 Jacke int Pase 3 PC-62326 KH aire have been mounted om glass slides for ble future comparisons with & Dead hair sozple the ee Ko scenseriog ee or oF Pinaser ny markings The O15 button fe ptafter wt ths venstaieg buttoos on the + sreater in color, ores construction and button eon be one of those missing fron the Q5 svoster.
The following pages are copies of the notes attorney James Smith took on the morning of March 31, 1993, when author Leo Damore called him.
The six pages of notes document the telephone call and what was said during the course of the conversation.
After Smith shared these notes with me in 2004, we spent hours together over a three-year period going over each line, thereby further stimulating Smith’s recall and accuracy.
Each page of the notes has been transcribed so that the reader can make sense of what took place during their conversation.
There is also a discussion of the information that is given on each page for better understanding.
Mary made connection w/ it + CIA involved James Angleton © Inadvertent.
Damore’s tapes of his phone conversation with “William L Mitchell” were not found among Damore’s belongings after his death, nor was a transcript of the call ever located.
However, Jimmy Smith has aided the author in the reconstruction and interpretation of his notes from Damore’s account of his conversation with Mitchell.
The time of Damore’s call, according to Smith, was between 8:00 and 8:30.
Page 1 Discussion Excitedly, Damore announces that he believes he has finally solved the murder of Mary Meyer.
He tells Smith that “Mitchell” was a former FBI liaison, and that he, Damore, has been up most of the night talking to him.
Damore also indicates that he has examined Mary’s diary—in which Mary made a connection with “it”’—JFK’s assassination and the CIA’s involvement, where “James Angleton” figures prominently.
Also in Mary’s diary, according to Damore, was Mary’s knowledge that Bobby Kennedy was going to “fire” FBI director J Edgar Hoover after President Kennedy was reelected in 1964.
The inference here is that Hoover may have also wanted Mary Meyer dead for fear of what she knew, perhaps about Hoover himself or about the FBI’s involvement in the assassination and its coverup, or both.
Notes of attorney James Smith’s telephone call with Leo Damore on March 31, 1993 He ber tiedlin cuetln Unue ma Ue RB MA ia Lhd os Murr ch,’ ashe Storr: reml feu Cer A ar Gt hn.
The Angleton connection w/ CIA Page 2 Discussion According to Smith, Damore revealed that “William L Mitchell” currently lived under a different alias in Virginia.
Damore then referenced the subject “The” “Angleton connection w/CIA,” which continues on the next page.
It’s not clear whether Damore, in talking about Hoover , is taking the following revelation from Mary’s diary.
Damore makes reference to William Colby at the time of the Watergate hearings and the House Select Committee on Intelligence, in which the CIA was under intense scrutiny.
Damore then says that “William L Mitchell” does “not want to become the fall guy in history” for the murder of Mary Meyer.
It appears that before “Mitchell” called Damore, he had read Damore’s book, Senatorial Privilege, about Ted Kennedy’s saga at Chappaquiddick.
Damore specifically states that he already knows who “Mitchell” really is, which was likely revealed to him by L Fletcher Prouty.
She went to husb + husb to Angleton + he Si tect his ass + FBI It was NOT the love affair * ButThe murder of JFK Ben Bradlee w/ Newsweek Bureau then f mass Mgr.
Damore tells Smith that the murder of Mary Meyer was “an operation,” where “Mitchell” and others had first been assigned to a surveillance team in September 1964 around the time the Warren Report was released.
This may have occurred before the Warren Report was released, in anticipation of it.
When the Warren Report was released to the public on September 24, Mary had purchased a paperback copy.
Her Diary makes clear that she first confronted Cord, Damore told Smith, and then Cord informed his close friend Jim Angleton about how upset Mary was.
The inference was that Mary confronted Cord that she wasn’t going to stand-by and let the coverup proceed without speaking out.
Damore then expressed his suspicions about Ben Bradlee’s meteoric rise at The Washington Post, telling Smith that Bradlee had become Executive Editor within six months after he had become the Managing Editor.
Damore also told Smith that he believed Philip Graham’s death was suspicious; he didn’t believe it was a suicide.
AAce Guy’ al Case tow a Buse F tl +s w/ PoF Fuse Ly Maen popes / We Yohrs 6.
Prouty resigned his Air Force commission in 1964 and began to study and prepare for publication his account of the secret history of the Cold War.
The CIA, Vietnam, and the Plot to Assassinate John F Kennedy, have since become classics in understanding America’s Cold War era.
Damore recounts to Jimmy Smith that Prouty had been in New Zealand at the time of Kennedy’s assassination.
Damore says that Prouty concluded, “ prepared in advance,” meaning the assassination.
It was Prouty who finally assisted Damore in putting certain pieces of the murder of Mary Meyer into focus, as well as identifying “William L Mitchell” as an assassin.
The setup for the murder, Mitchell told Damore, was “standard CIA procedure”—implicitly confirming that there were a number of people involved in the operation.
This very likely meant that the operation was radio-controlled with a command center somewhere in the vicinity of the murder.
They were keeping tabs on where Mary Meyer was in the course of her walk along the towpath.
Leo told Smith that he “thinks this guy had 1 or 2” spotters working directly with him.
The call ends with Damore telling Smith that he believes he has finally come to “my moment of truth” after finally locating “Mitchell” and having this conversation.
Rosenberg case On December 13, 1952 a Mr, Benjamin Bradlee called and informed mee that he was Press Attache with the American embassy in Paris, that le had left Paris Last night and arrived here this morning.
He advised me that it was an urgeot matter and that he had to renam to Paris Monday night.
He further advised that he was sent bere by Robert Thayer, who is the head of the C.1.
He stated that he was supposed to have been met by a representative of the C.LA. at the aisport but missed connections, He bas been trying to get in touch with Allen Dulles but has been unable to do so. | advised him to call the State Department in Washington. and to have them get the Department of Justice in Washington to get clearance for us to allow him to look at the Rosenberg file.
Erik Hedegaard, “The Last Confessions of E Howard Hunt,” Rolling Stone, April 5, 2007.
This entire section was based on a collection of notes over a period of nearly twenty years that I began writing in the early 1970s.
As a training clinical psychologist, it was part of my orientation to begin an intensive period of personal psychotherapy that lasted a number of years.
All of the vivid recollections in this chapter were based on memories that had been elicited, and noted, in various psychotherapeutic encounters. a In the fall of 1966, New Orleans district attorney Jim Garrison reopened his investigation into the Kennedy assassination, after having made the mistake of turning over his earlier investigation to the FBI, which did nothing.
Within days after Dallas, Garrison had arrested David Ferrie as a possible associate of Lee Harvey Oswald’s.
Further convinced that Oswald could never have acted alone, Garrison soon widened his net to include Guy Banister and Clay Shaw.
In March 1967, Garrison arrested Clay Shaw for conspiring to assassinate President Kennedy.
Shaw’s trial would not begin until January 1969, but in the spring of 1968, after having been undermined by Life magazine, Garrison visited with Look magazine’s managing editor, William Attwood, who had been a Princeton classmate of my father’s.
Look was prepared to do a major feature story on the Garrison investigation, but Attwood unexpectedly suffered a significant heart attack, and the article never materialized.
Mellen further discussed and confirmed this event in an interview by this author on November 19, 2006.
Thunder’s Mouth Press, 1993), 31; Gaeton Fonzi, interview by the author, February 24, 2010.
That Lee Harvey Oswald was part of a 1959 false defection program administered through the Office of Naval Intelligence in Nags Head, North Carolina, was first discussed in an interview that Summers conducted with former CIA officer Victor Marchetti, who later confirmed this account in an interview by this author on October 4, 2007.
According to author Joan Mellen, the ONI program was overseen by the CIA’s counterintelligence chief, James Jesus Angleton.
Upon Oswald’s return to the United States in 1962, he was, in fact, “debriefed” by a CIA officer named Aldrin Anderson.
Kennedy’s Big Mess; Savitch’s Sad Life,” Wall Street Journal, August 16, 1988, 26.
Francis I Broadhurst, “A Refreshing View of Kennedy,” Cape Cod Times, November 18, 1993.
Smith recounted verbatim the conversation with his friend John H Davis.
The poem was a tribute to her half-sister Rosamond Pinchot, who committed suicide in 1938.
The nature of Mary Meyer’s involvement with President Kennedy and their mutual concern with world peace initiatives, away from the Cold War, is the focus of this book and will be demonstrated throughout.
Significant support for this perspective came from former presidential adviser Kenneth P O’Donnell’s extensive interviews with the late author Leo Damore, shortly before O’Donnell’s death, as well as other sources and interviews with Damore.
James McConnell Truitt, letter to author Deborah Davis, dated May 11, 1979.
The letter was part of the files of the late author Leo Damore, and was confirmed by author Deborah Davis in 2005.
Mary Meyer’s intention to go public with her revelations about the CIA’s involvement in the Kennedy assassination has been documented in a number of sources.
The mutually reinforcing effect of these sources, and the way in which they aggregate, establish Mary Meyer’s intention to go public (after the Warren Report’s release in September) with all that she had discovered throughout the year of 1964, are discussed in greater detail in chapters 11, 12, and 13 and the Epilogue.
Leslie Judd Ahlander, “Frederick Drawings Exhibited,” Washington Post, November 24, 1963, G10.
Leo Damore, interview by the author, Centerbrook, Conn., February 1992.
Between 1992 and 1994, there were at least five face-to-face meetings between Damore and this author, in addition to numerous followup telephone conversations regarding the life of Mary Meyer, her death, and Damore’s research.
Damore stated that Mary Meyer had sought out Bill Walton’s counsel in early 1964.
Leo Damore, who had acquired a copy of Mary Meyer’s real diary, told his attorney, James E Smith, on March 31, 1993, that Mary had made a decision to go public with what she had discovered, sometime after the Warren Report had been released.
Ron Rosenbaum and Phillip Nobile, “The Curious Aftermath of JFK’s Best and Brightest Affair,’ New Times, July 9, 1976, 29.
In 1976, the authors interviewed some of the people closest to Mary Meyer who had intimate knowledge of her habits during the last year of her life.
In addition, according to Leo Damore, Mary also talked with presidential adviser Kenneth P O’Donnell shortly after the Kennedy assassination.
The Life and Unsolved Murder of Presidential Mistress Mary Meyer , 304.
Anne and James Truitt had moved to Tokyo shortly after Anne’s sculpture exhibit Black, White, and Grey opened in January 1964 at the Wadsworth Atheneum in Hartford, Connecticut.
As noted in note 4 above, this event was also mentioned by former CIA official Robert T Crowley in a conversation to author Gregory Douglas in January 1996.
See Chapter 13 for further discussion of the way in which these sources are mutually corroborating.
Leo Damore revealed Mary Meyer’s altercation with Cord Meyer to his attorney, James H Smith, Esq., during the above-referenced telephone call of March 31, 1993.
Smith took six pages of notes on this call, which are reproduced in Appendix 3.
Confidential source who asked to remain anonymous, interview with the author, Washington, D.C., March 10, 2006.
Iam indebted to award-winning Boston fine artist Shelah Horvitz for her insightful analysis of some of the last paintings of Mary Pinchot Meyer, as well as Horvitz’s overall knowledge of the Washington Color School artists.
According to Damore, Kenny O’Donnell had shared with him that Mary Meyer had pushed hard for President Kennedy to protect the Chesapeake and Ohio Canal towpath area.
In addition, Leo Damore said he had interviewed Mr Parmet, who gave him a number of other details about what he had learned about Jack’s relationship with Mary Meyer.
Bernie Ward and Granville Toogood, “Former Vice President of Washington Post Reveals JFK 2-Year White House Romance,” National Enquirer, March 2, 1976, 4.
In addition, Leo Damore had interviewed an anonymous source who was a close friend of Mary Meyer’s who gave him more details about this encounter, which he discussed with me in 1992.
All five volumes address John Kennedy’s emotional maternal deprivation and the toll it took on him.
Mary Meyer’s initial foray into psychedelics, according to James Truitt, appears to have taken place in the San Francisco Bay area during a late-1950s visit with Jim Truitt and his wife, Anne.
Deborah Davis, interview by Leo Damore, February 23, 1991; Deborah Davis, interview by the author, March 17, 2009.
During Davis’s research for her book Katharine the Great in 1976, she traveled to Mexico to interview Jim Truitt for more than ten hours over a three-day period.
During his never-before-published two-hour interview by Leo Damore on November 7, 1990, Timothy Leary commented extensively on Mary Meyer’s experience with psychedelics and the impact it had on her worldview and in her life.
Timothy Leary, interview by Leo Damore, Washington, D.C., November 7, 1990.
Also, during his 1990 interview with Leo Damore, Leary spoke at some length about how Mary Meyer defined her mission with psychedelics.
Damore repeatedly stressed that Mary Meyer had been in large measure “a healer” in Kennedy’s tortured emotional life.
Some of Damore’s insight had been based on his talks with Kenny O’Donnell regarding Mary Meyer’s influence on the president.
In addition, since the first edition of Deborah Davis’s Katharine the Great (which was recalled and shredded due to pressure from Ben Bradlee and Katharine Graham), there has been controversy over whether Phil Graham actually mentioned during his infamous “meltdown” in Phoenix at a newspaper convention in January 1963 the fact that Mary Meyer was having an affair with President Kennedy.
Carol Felsenthal, whose 1993 book Power, Privilege and the Post was thoroughly checked and vetted, maintains that Phil Graham did, in fact, reveal the affair during his drunken tirade.
In an interview Nina Burleigh conducted with CIA wife Joanne Bross, Ms.
Bross stated that James Angleton bragged on more than one occasion that he had wiretapped Mary Meyer’s telephone and bugged her bedroom.
In addition, during Leo Damore’s above-mentioned telephone call to his attorney, James H Smith, Esq., on March 31, 1993, Damore said that he had just talked for several hours with “William L Mitchell,” who confessed to being part of a surveillance team assigned to Mary Meyer around the time of the Warren Report’s release to the public in September 1964.
The description of the final seconds of Mary Meyer’s life and what occurred at the scene of her death was outlined in detail in prosecuting attorney Alfred Hantman’s fifteen-page opening statement at the trial of Ray Crump, Jr. in July 1965.
Linwood L Rayford, interview by Leo Damore, Washington, D.C., February 19, 1991.
Henry Wiggins Jr., interview by Leo Damore, Washington, D.C., April 2, 1992.
Ibid., 352; Roderick Sylvis, interview by the author, Wake Forest, North Carolina, July 23, 2008.
Rosenbaum, Ron and Phillip Nobile, “The Curious Aftermath of JFK’s Best and Brightest Affair,” New Times, July 9, 1976, 24.
Henry Wiggins reiterated his account several times throughout the trial.
Under cross-examination by defense attorney Dovey Roundtree, he reiterated that it was “approximately 1:00 o’clock” when he received his instructions to look for the jacket (p.
Unnamed colleague of Detective Bernard Crooke, interview by Leo Damore, Washington, D.C., October 28, 1990. ae ad.
George Peter Lamb, interview by Leo Damore, Washington, D.C., December 20, 1990.
Although Detective Edwin Coppage testified at the trial that the gloves were removed at the murder scene by Detective Bernie Crooke, Dr.
Rayford testified that he remembered the victim had been wearing the gloves at the murder scene.
Crooke had already left the murder scene with Ray Crump before Rayford arrived at approximately 2:00 pm.
Rayford specifically remembered that the gloves were removed at the autopsy and given to Crooke after 3:45 pm on the day of the murder.
During these interviews, Dovey Roundtree shared numerous documents relating to her defense of Ray Crump, including the account given to her by Robert Woolright the morning he came to pick up Crump for work.
In a discussion with Leo Damore regarding the testimony of Elsie Perkins, Dovey Roundtree mentioned that Crump’s jacket had been a Father’s Day present given to him by his wife, Helena, and their children the preceding June.
Also, Dovey Roundtree told Leo Damore during several interviews that no one in Ray Crump’s family, church community, or anyone she interviewed ever recalled Ray Crump with a firearm of any kind.
Ray’s brother, Jimmy Crump, had at one time years earlier owned 22-caliber rifle, but that was the extent of any firearm noted in Crump’s immediate and extended family.
Alfred E Lewis and Richard Corrigan, “Suspect Seized in Canal Slaying; Woman Dies in Robbery on Towpath,” Washington Post, October 13, 1964, A-1.
During this interview, Damore revealed many of the details that Kenneth O’Donnell had shared with him about what had taken place between Mary Meyer and President Kennedy during the dedication of the Pinchot Institute for Conservation at Grey Towers on September 24, 1963.
A Journal of the History of Falmouth and Vicinity (Woods Hole, Mass.: Woods Hole Historical Collection) 19, no. : 31.
Bradlee, Good Life, 266; Ben Bradlee, interview by the author, Washington, D.C., January 31, 2007.
This was further confirmed by the account that Tony Bradlee gave to author Sally Bedell Smith.
All three of these sources attest to the fact that Angleton kept a voluminous set of files in a number of different safes at CIA headquarters in Langley, Virginia.
Adam Bernstein, “Antoinette Pinchot Bradlee, Former Wife of Prominent Washington Post Executive Editor Benjamin C Bradlee, Dies at 87,” Washington Post, November 14, 2011.
Letter to the editor, “The Angleton Children Tell Their Side,” Washington Post, December 2, 2011.
Also, in an email to this author on July 27, 2010, author Sally Bedell Smith said she had conducted an extensive interview with Tony Bradlee in January 2001 and a follow-up in September 2001.
According to author Sally Bedell Smith, “After James Truitt’s interviews with the National Enquirer, Tony decided to destroy the diary.
Pinchot, a niece of Mary Meyer’s, this diary still exists somewhere in Milford, Pennsylvania.
It contained an account of Mary’s struggle with her father Amos’s deteriorating mental condition, subsequent to his daughter Rosamund’s suicide, as well as at least one other relationship with a man Mary Meyer was involved with at the time, in addition to William Attwood.
Because of the nature of my book, the MeyerPinchot family denied me access to this earlier diary of Mary Meyer’s.
Russell also interviewed Winston Scott’s son, Michael, who told Russell that an ex-CIA colleague of his father’s had confided that “certain people” had come by to see Win when he was bedridden after his backyard fall, which everyone believed had precipitated his death.
Michael Scott then added, “I was told that James Angleton was on a plane to Mexico within an hour of my dad’s death, so quickly that he carried no visa or passport and was held for a while at customs.
Dovey Roundtree, interview by Leo Damore, Washington, D.C., November 4, 1990.
The fact that Ray Crump had been with a girlfriend named Vivian on the towpath at the time of Mary Meyer’s murder was revealed to attorney Dovey Roundtree by both Ray Crump himself and by his mother, Martha Crump.
Dovey Roundtree, interview by Leo Damore, Washington, D.C., April 4, 1992.
The distances were measured again by the author on February 6, 2008, using GPS portable technology and found to be accurate within ten feet.
United States Park Police officer Ray Pollan, interview by Leo Damore, Washington, D.C., December 19, 1990.
Circuit Judge George Thomas Washington pointed this out in his dissent during Crump’s appeal for a writ of habeas corpus, which was denied.
George Peter Lamb and the Legal Aid Association withdrew from the Crump case on November 3, 1964.
In each of the interviews, Roundtree made it clear that her client, Ray Crump, was deteriorating mentally soon after entering his plea.
She continued to believe that he was being abused by prison guards, in spite of daily visits from her and his family.
United States Ray Crump, Jr., United States District Court For The District of Columbia.
The motion also supports Detective Bernie Crooke’s statement to Dovey Roundtree that he had smelled beer when he arrested Crump at approximately 1:15m. on October 12, 1964.
Superintendent Dale C Cameron, MD, Department of Health, Education, and Welfare, St.
Elizabeth’s Hospital, Washington, D.C., to Clerk of the Criminal Division for the United States District Court for the District of Columbia, January 13, 1965.
The transcript of the coroner’s inquest on October 19, 1964, is no longer available.
Jerry Hunter, Esq., interview by Leo Damore, Washington, D.C., November 6, 1990. pw 42.
River Patrolman police officer Frederick Q Byers of the Harbor Patrol testified on three different occasions that he retrieved a jacket alleged to have belonged to Crump at 1:46 pm on the afternoon of the murder.
The distance computed to Three Sisters Island was from a GPS navigation instrument and Google Earth maps.
Both Wiggins and Branch would testify at the murder trial that they had no knowledge of the ownership, the work ticket, or the ultimate disposition of the stalled Nash Rambler sedan or who owned the vehicle.
David Acheson, interview by the author, Washington, D.C., December 10, 2008.
Dovey Roundtree, interview by Leo Damore, Washington, D.C., May 25, 1991.
Charles Duncan, Esq., interview by Leo Damore, Washington, D.C., December 20, 1990.
United States Department of Justice, confidential memo addressed to na ‘Mr Conrad,” February 24, 1965.
Dovey Roundtree, interview by Leo Damore, Washington, D.C., February 23, 1991.
Alfred Hantman, Esq., interview by Leo Damore, Washington, D.C., May 21, 1991.
Upon his return to Washington on the evening of Mary Meyer’s murder, Cord Meyer was met at the airport by his former brother-in-law and Washington attorney Steuart Pittman and career CIA official Wistar Janney.
Robert S Bennett, Esq., interview by the author, Washington, D.C., November 11, 2009.
The distance from the 4300 block of Canal Road at the point that was directly across from the murder scene on the towpath to Fletcher’s Boat House was measured by both an automobile odometer and a GPS instrument and was found to be exactly 1.63 miles.
Roderick Sylvis, interview by the author, Wake Forest, N.C., July 23, 2008.
Sylvis, interview, July 23, 2008; Roderick Sylvis, telephone interview by the author, July 30, 2008.
From Damore’s notes, this appears to have occurred during the winter of 1989, though it is not completely clear.
Also, in two of author Leo Damore’s interviews with Dovey Roundtree , she expressed her belief that Ray had been repeatedly beaten, abused, and “probably raped” during his eight months in jail before trial.
In this account, Gifford noted that his grandfather Cyrille was forced to leave France for participating in a plan to free Napoléon from the island of St.
One Man’s Evolution Toward Conservation in the Nineteenth Century,” Yale F&ES Centennial News : 4. a Char Miller, “All in the Family: The Pinchots of Milford,” Pennsylvania History : 126.
The Attwood family graciously allowed me access to Bill Attwood’s private diaries, which were extensive, right up until his death in 1989.
The letter documents William Attwood’s date for Winter Festivities Weekend, February 1936, and the fact that John F Kennedy was in attendance.
A former 1942 Vassar classmate of Mary Meyer’s who asked to remain anonymous, interview by the author, November 27, 2009.
Cord Meyer Jr., “Waves of Darkness,” Atlantic Monthly, January 1946, De.. a Ibid, 80.
Charles Bartlett, interview by the author, Washington, D.C., December 10, 2008.
United States Senate Select Committee on Intelligence , Restricted, top secret testimony given by Joseph W Shimon, September 12, 1975.
The document was provided to the author from Joseph Shimon’s daughter, Toni Shimon.
Cord Meyer Jr., “A Serviceman Looks at the Peace,” Atlantic Monthly, September 1945.
The Success of the American World Federalism in the 1940s,” Peace & Change 24, no.
There were also letters between journalist Walter Lippman and Cord during 1951 that might have suggested Lippman’s assistance to Cord in procuring some kind of job as a journalist, but nothing specific. pS 42.
Victor Marchetti, interview by the author, Ashburn, Va., October 4, 2007. pS 45.
Here, Cord wrote several pages on what had occurred on the afternoon of August 31.
The letter was part of the files of the late author Leo Damore and was subsequently verified by author Deborah Davis.
Victor, Marchetti, interviews by the author, Ashburn, Va., November 18, 2005, and October 4, 2007.
See also Carl Bernstein, “The CIA and the Media,” Rolling Stone, October 20, 1977.
Scottie Lanahan, “Are You Playing the Games by the Rules in Washington?,” NEWS to Me ..., Washington Post, April 2, 1967, H2.
Because a woman who wished to avoid the embarrassment of getting a divorce in her hometown could be incognito in sparsely populated Nevada, this choice was popular with many women from prominent families.
Kenneth Noland, telephone interview by Nina Burleigh, September 13, 1996.
During Deborah Davis’s research for her book Katharine the Great in 1976, she traveled to Mexico and interviewed Jim Truitt for more than ten hours over a three-day period.
Laura Bergquist, “The Curious Story Behind the New Cary Grant,” Look, September 1, 1959.
Torture’s Ugly Echoes,” Truthout, Sunday, May 23, 2010. www.truthout.org.
This is, by far, the most thorough account of Frank Olson’s death and the history of the CIA’s MKULTRA program.
Despite my own association with Kenneth Noland when he and Mary Meyer taught art at Georgetown Day School in the 1950s, he declined to speak with me.
I am indebted to Nina Burleigh, who graciously shared a copy of her notes taken during these interviews.
Ben Bradlee, interview by the author, Washington, D.C., January 31, 2007.
During an interview with this author in Cambridge, Massachusetts, on July 8, 2009, Priscilla J McMillan claimed to have no recollection of making the quoted statements, or of the interviews she had given to David Horowitz and Robert Dallek.
Both authors, however, confirmed with me that they had, in fact, interviewed Priscilla J McMillan, and that she gave the statements as quoted in their respective books.
David Horowitz confirmed this with me by telephone on July 13, 2009, and Robert Dallek confirmed it via email on July 14, 2009.
A Timothy Leary, interview by Leo Damore, Washington, D.C., November 7, 1990. in Leary, Flashbacks, 129.
Burleigh’s interview with White House counsel Myer Feldman provides the most specific, thorough documentation of how closely President Kennedy relied on the counsel of Mary Meyer.
Bradshaw confirmed that she and her late husband, Jon, were very close friends of Timothy and Barbara Leary and that they spent a great deal of time together.
In Leo Damore’s possession were two letters/reports from investigator William Triplett.
The first was dated “14 December 1983” and was eight single-spaced typewritten pages in length.
The second letter/report was dated “5 January 1984” and was six pages in length.
Sometime in early 1991, Damore communicated with Triplett, who responded to Damore in a letter dated March 7, 1991, in which he verified his previous work with Timothy Leary.
Damore followed up with Leary in several telephone calls over the next two-plus years into March 1993, as his notes indicate, with regard to specific questions that arose from the initial interview in 1990.
Timothy Leary’s relationship with Cord Meyer was also documented by Leary biographer Robert Greenfield, who told me that Leary’s secretary in Berkeley verified this when he interviewed her.
Greenfield, interview. 2 ia Peggy Mellon Hitchcock, interview by the author, March 16, 2009.
In his notes for Chapter 22, Heymann stated that he had interviewed “James Angleton,” but provided no citation as to the date or location of such interview.
Recently, much of Heymann’s so-called research has met with increasing criticism, questioning its veracity.
A Love Story at Citizens for Truth about the Kennedy Assassination, www.ctka.net/reviews/heymann.html.
Deborah Davis, interview by the author, Washington, D.C., March 17, 2009.
Davis about Timothy Leary, whom she came to know well, in addition to Jim Truitt.
January 1962 was the date first disclosed by James Truitt in the March 1976 issue of the National Enquirer.
White House Secret Service logs at John F Kennedy Presidential Library and Museum, Boston, Mass.
This is the latest and most thoroughly researched book documenting these facts.
Brugioni knew personally some of the agents in Kennedy’s Secret Service detail; they told him that they took the president on a number of occasions to Mary Meyer’s house in Georgetown.
Damore mentioned this incident the very first time we met in February 1992 and repeated it several times subsequent to that.
Damore also shared O’Donnell’s comments with his close friend and attorney Jimmy Smith, as well as with Timothy Leary during their interview in November 1990.
Wolfe’s account was meticulously researched and substantiated by several different sources.
Bryan Bender, “A Dark Corner of Camelot,” Boston Globe, January 23, 2011.
John Foster Dulles and the law firm Sullivan & Cromwell had been the legal counsel for the United Fruit Company for decades.
John Foster and Allen Dulles were both major shareholders in the company, with Allen serving as a member of United Fruit’s board of trustees.
Donald E Deneselya, interview by the author, Washington, D.C., April 10, 2007.
Daniel Schorr, commentary on Noah Adams’s NPR program All Things Considered, March 26, 2001.
Master of Spies , 547, Dulles did not learn that he would be fired from the CIA until the last week of August 1961.
President Kennedy then announced on September 27 that John A McCone would replace him.
Sally Bedell Smith, Grace and Power: The Private World of the Kennedy White House , 315.
They can also be accessed online; see “Kennedy-Khrushchev Exchanges,’ United States Department of State, www.state.gov/www/about_state/history/volume_vi/exchanges.html.
All quotations from that correspondence appearing in this chapter were obtained at that web page.
Damore shared a number of incidents that Kenny O’Donnell had told him about concerning Mary and Jack, specifically mentioning Mary confronting Jack on the dangers of the resumption of nuclear testing in April 1962.
The wing commander’s SAC alert bombers “deliberately flew past their turn around points toward Soviet airspace, an unambiguous threat which Soviet radar operators would certainly have recognized and reported.
There is extensive documentation of the existence of the CIA’s Operation Mockingbird, as noted in previous chapters.
I am particularly indebted to the former CIA operative and author Victor Marchetti for the information he provided me during my interview with him on November 18, 2005, and October 4, 2007, in Ashburm, Virginia.
White House telephone logs, calls to Evelyn Lincoln on January 18, 1963, John F Kennedy Presidential Library and Museum, Boston, Massachusetts.
The Murder of Frank Olson and the CIA’s Secret Cold War Experiments (Walterville, Ore.: Trine Day, 2009), 115.
Damore and I discussed the postcard Mary Meyer had allegedly sent Leary , which, according to Damore, was _ further confirmation of what his confidential source had told him.
I suspected that the source of this information was Mary Meyer’s close friend Anne Chamberlin, whom I also knew, but who refused to be interviewed by me.
Alun Rees, “Nobel Prize Genius Crick Was High on LSD when He Discovered the Secret of Life,” Associated Newspapers, 2004.
This article originally appeared in the Mail on Sunday , August 8, 2004.
The Strange Life and Times of Bill Wilson, Founder of A.A.,,” Modern Drunkard Magazine, www.moderndrunkardmagazine.com/issues/01-05/0105-dry-piper.htm.
The source text is a Department of State translation of a commercial telegram from Moscow.
Meyers ” called at 2:14 pM. and was transferred to the president by Evelyn Lincoln.
White House Secret Service logs show “Mary Meyers” signed in at 7:30 PM. on July 3, 1963, and was escorted to the White House residence.
Katharine Graham documented “William Smith” as their “caretaker” at Glen Welby at the time of Phil Graham’s death.
Bill Corson made this remark to Roger Charles at the time of the Senate subcommittee hearings led by Senator Frank Church in 1977 when Charles commented on the number of alleged “suicides” that had taken place in connection with the Kennedy assassination.
Speech given in 1988 by Washington Post editor-owner Katharine Graham at CIA headquarters in Langley, Virginia, to senior CIA employees.
Stephen L Vaughn, Encyclopedia of American Journalism , 201. _ a 0 Smith, Grace and Power, 395.
Simone Attwood, interview by the author, Ithaca, N.Y., November 3, 2009.
President Kennedy and I had tremendous problems with Diem, but my God, he was the authority, he was the head of state.
Dougherty was a student at Georgetown Day School in Washington, D.C., when Mary Meyer and Ken Noland taught art studio classes in the late 1950s, as was the author.
Timothy Leary also reiterated this event to Leo Damore during his interview of November 7, 1990.
According to author Marrs, and assassination researcher John Armstrong, Butch Burroughs was an employee at the Texas Theater.
He heard someone enter the theater shortly after 1:00 pm. and go to the balcony.
It was Lee Harvey Oswald who had apparently entered the theater and gone to the balcony without being initially seen by Burroughs.
At approximately 1:15 PM., Oswald came down from the balcony and bought popcorn from Burroughs.
Burroughs then watched him walk down the aisle and take a seat on the main floor.
Matthew Walton, interview by the author, Woods Hole, Mass., August 28, 2007.
Matthew recalled Agnes Meyer making the remark to his father, William Walton.
Secret Service agent Bolden documented the initial evidence for this assassination attempt in Chicago.
David Duffy and Bennett Bolton, “JFK’s Secret Mistress Assassinated Because She Knew Too Much,” National Enquirer, July 9, 1996, 17.
Interviewing only Mary Fischer on the topic of Kennedy’s assassination, Burleigh never pursued any of Mary Meyer’s concerns about what had really happened in Dallas, leaving the reader to believe that she ultimately was convinced that Lee Harvey Oswald was responsible for the death of the president.
Damore spoke often to me about what Kenny O’Donnell had told him regarding Mary Meyer’s influence on President Kennedy.
This was confirmed in my interview on July 15, 2009, with an individual who wanted to remain anonymous, and who knew well the person who had been in the presidential entourage in Dallas on November 22, 1963.
The person in the president’s entourage also knew Mary Meyer very well.
It was during that initial interview I first learned that he had worked closely with my father, Wistar Janney, on several operations.
When I made a passing reference to the Zapruder film, Brugioni corrected my reference and told me that the CIA had been in possession of the film the day after the assassination.
This revelation prompted a subsequent series of interviews between Brugioni and myself that took place on February 12, 13, 14, March 6, 10, and April 30, 2009.
I later visited Dino Brugioni at his home in Hartwood, Virginia, on June 27, 2009, for additional clarification and input.
Clark at the Parkland Memorial Hospital’s press conference, which convened at 3:16 P.M on November 22, 1963.
Malcolm Perry, March 25 and March 30, 1964, Warren Commission Proceedings.
Harry S Truman, editorial, “ United States Should Hold CIA to Intelligence Role,” Washington Post, December 22, 1963, A11.
Ibid., 553n62; John Kelin, interview by the author, September 16, 2010.
John Kelin also told me he discussed this incident with Ray Marcus at some length in an interview with me on September 16, 2010, as did the disaffected former CIA analyst Raymond McGovern on February 26, 2011.
Ray McGovern, “Are Presidents Afraid of the CIA?,” December 29, 2009, Common Dreams ; Ray McGovern, interview by the author, February 26, 2011.
Leo Damore stated that he had talked with William Walton and that Walton confirmed Mary had come to him grief-stricken after President Kennedy’s assassination, though there was no tape of any recorded interview or notes in any of Damore’s research.
The discreet Walton may have insisted that their interview not be recorded.
Buehler, Frances, interview by the author, Woods Hole, Mass., June 5, 2006; Walton, interview.
James Wagenvoord profile, Spartacus Educational, November 3, 2009. www.spartacus.schoolnet.co.uk/JFKwagenvoord.htm.
In addition, James Wagenvoord, interview by the author, January 9, 2011.
Karnow has always been convinced of this quote’s accuracy, having heard it from General Harold K Johnson, then the Army chief of staff, who was in attendance at the White House Christmas Eve meeting with President Johnson.
Toni Shimon, interview by the author, Long Island, N.Y., February 15, 2007.
Leo Damore, interviews by the author, Centerbrook, Conn., February 1992 and April 1993.
Henry Wiggins, interview by Leo Damore, Washington, D.C., April 2, 1992.
This particular directory was part of Leo Damore’s material and research.
All past Defense Department directories can located at the Library of Congress. i, Roberta Hornig, “Teacher Says He Passed by Mrs.
Donald E Deneselya, interview by the author, Washington, D.C., May 29, 2007; Victor Marchetti, interview by the author, Leesburg, Va., October 4, 2007.
Albarelli Jr. dated September 2001 and faxed to the author on February 11, 2010.
Albarelli Jr., communications by email and telephone with the author, February 12, 2010.
Albarelli Jr. and his confidential source on February 12 and 13, 2010, as reported to the author via Albarelli’s emails and follow-up telephone conversations.
Du Berrier documents that Bernie Yoh did “public relations” work for the president of South Vietnam, writing that “Bernie Yoh was the stooge to fly back and forth between Washington and Saigon; to Saigon so he could say he had been there, then back to America to tell editors, women’s clubs and congressmen, ‘Don’t believe what you hear.
I have been in the jungles with the guerillas, killing Communists, and we are winning.
See David Martin, “Spook Journalist Goulden,” August 11, 1998, DC Dave’s, www.dcdave.com/article1/081198.html.
Bernie Yoh, telephone interview by Leo Damore, Washington, D.C., October 30, 1990.
Leo Damore, to his attorney, James H Smith, on the moming of March 31, 1993.
The CIA and Its Allies in Control of the United States and the World (Costa Mesa, Calif.: Institute for Historical Review, 1973), Passim.
Prouty’s duties at the Pentagon were to provide the CIA with the military resources needed to carry out its clandestine operations.
He created a secret, well-trained network of agents throughout the military service sectors and United States government agencies, including the FBI and the FAA, and inside various foreign governments.
Leo Damore stated to this author on several occasions starting in 1992 that Mary Meyer had bought a paperback copy of the Warren Commission’s report when it first went on sale in September 1964.
Richard Pine, interview by the author, October 21, 2004. in oa Mark O’Blazney, interview by the author, Washington, D.C., November 27, 2008.
In passing, Bradlee did reference Wistar Janney earlier in his memoir , but the page reference was not part of Wistar Janney’s heading in the index of the Bradlee memoir.
The most recent criticism of author C David Heymann’s journalistic credibility has come from researcher Lisa Pease.
C David Heymann, voice mail left on the author’s home telephone, March 9, 2007.
J Michael Kelly, interviews by the author, March 9, 2004, and April 12, 2007.
Roger Charles, who became the executor of Bill Corson’s estate, was in the class behind them.
All three were mentored by Bill Corson when he taught at the United States Naval Academy.
Both Roger Charles and Tom Kimmel recalled and confirmed the accuracy of this event.
Roger Charles, interview by the author, April 13, 2007; Thomas K Kimmel, interview by the author, May 14, 2007.
Plato Cacheris, Esq., interview by the author, Washington, D.C., April 27, 2007.
Emily Crowley, interview by the author, March 24, 2007; Thomas K Kimmel, interview by the author, March 13, 2007.
James H Smith, Esq., interview by the author, April 7, 2004, quoting from pages 1, 3, 4, 5, and 6 of his notes on his March 31, 1993, conversation with Leo Damore.
John Williams, interviews by the author, May 18, 2007, and November 16, 2009; Jeanne Morrow, personal communication with the author, January 28, 2004.
During the author’s three-year association with Leo Damore starting in 1992, Damore mentioned O’Donnell’s comments on this matter repeatedly.
Damore’s former wife, June Davison, also remembered Leo discussing O’Donnell’s statement with her, as did Damore’s attorney, James H Smith, Esq.
Email communication from Gregory Douglas to Joseph Trento,, November 19, 2001, given to the author by Gregory Douglas.
Email communication from Joseph Trento to Gregory Douglas, November 3, 2002, given to the author by Gregory Douglas.
The Official Assassination of John F Kennedy (Huntsville, Ala.: Monte Sano Media, 2002.
In my view, whoever Oswald’s direct handler or handlers were, we must now seriously consider the possibility that Angleton was probably their general manager.
No one else in the Agency had the access, the authority, and the diabolically ingenious mind to manage this sophisticated plot.
No one had the means necessary to plant the WWIII virus in Oswald’s files and keep it dormant for six weeks until the president’s assassination.
Whoever those who were ultimately responsible for the decision to kill Kennedy were, their reach extended into the national intelligence apparatus to such a degree that they could call upon a person who knew its inner secrets and workings so well that he could design a failsafe mechanism into the fabric of the plot.
Gabe Torres, interview by the author, Washington, D.C., April 22, 2010.
As a chief consultant for this production, I had purposely not been present during the filming of Bradlee’s segment, but conferred with Torres afterward.
John Newman, personal communication with the author, Harrisonburg, Va., April 29, 2004.
During the Church Committee’s Senate investigations in 1975, CIA director William Colby presented to committee chairman Frank Church a pistol resembling45caliber automatic equipped with a telescopic sight.
Toni Shimon, interviews by the author, June 17, 2004, February 15, 2007, and January 7, 2008.
Jack Anderson and Joseph Spear, “Witness Tells of CIA Plot to Kill Castro,” Washington Post, November 1, 1988.
Probe Magazine on JFK, MLK, RFK, and Malcolm X Los Angeles: Feral House, 2003.
Ordway, Samuel H Dedication of the Pinchot Institute for Conservation Studies.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS Tue COMPLETION of this project represents the culmination of more than thirtyfive years of contemplation and inquiry that began in 1976.
Nearly fifty years after the mysterious murder of Mary Pinchot Meyer on the Chesapeake and Ohio Canal towpath in Washington, D.C., there is still a dearth of information and evidence as to exactly what occurred.
We may never discover all the answers, but we now know nearly all of the questions.
When I first considered this project in 2003, my initial endeavor was to collaborate with Christopher Keane, a Hollywood screenwriter.
During this collaboration, along with Garby Leon’s guidance, and additional support from Linda Lichter, Esq., the film script Lost Light was conceived.
But I soon realized that much of the story still remained unresolved and unknown.
In 1992, I had the good fortune to meet and befriend the late author Leo Damore.
Our friendship progressed rapidly before his untimely “suicide” in October 1995.
Leo shared many of his insights into not only what he believed had occurred between Mary Meyer and Jack Kennedy, but how and why her murder had been orchestrated, as he had also done with his dear friend and attorney James H Smith.
To his credit, Mark had guarded most of the Damore “treasure trove” in hopes that someday, someone might come along and pick up where Leo had left off.
Author John H Davis had, in fact, attempted such a feat in 1996, but he, too, had faltered.
It was the Damore family who finally made it possible for me to undertake in depth this project, allowing me to access additional material in their possession.
I am particularly indebted to Leo’s former wife, June Davison, who graciously shared with me a number of the insights Leo had previously shared with her.
As well, Leo’s children—Chuck, Leslie, and Nicholas—all put their faith in me.
Were it not, however, for Leo’s attorney, Jimmy Smith, it’s doubtful I would ever been able to unravel the crucial pieces of Leo’s most important discoveries.
Having saved a set of historically important notes from a telephone conversation with Leo in 1993, Jimmy will always be one of the unsung heroes in the quest for the truth regarding the murder of Mary Pinchot Meyer.
During my five years of intensive writing, a number of new people—many of whom were women—found their way into my life and offered their insights and guidance.
Barbra Dillenger, who I had known many years before, went way beyond the call of duty to keep me focused.
Katie McCabe, coauthor with Dovey Roundtree, Esq., of Roundtree’s biography, Justice Older Than the Law, never allowed me to lose sight of some of the most important revelations in this book.
Her steadfast support throughout this experience was an inspiration to be remembered.
During the Cold War, it might have been “a man’s world,” but the power of women and their emerging sisterhood was demanding to be heard and taken seriously.
As many of my women friends pointed out, an acolyte for world peace had been engendered in Mary Pinchot Meyer.
Antonia Kabakov never allowed me to lose sight of this, and very patiently lent me her support and love, amidst a number of my challenges.
Renowned author and astrologer Tracy Marks wouldn’t allow me to forsake certain principles.
Amid “bumps in the road,” my dear friend Janet Clark always showed up at critical moments.
Former childhood Georgetown Day School chum Ariel Dougherty, who had been an art student of Mary Meyer’s in the 1950s, reminded me of small but important details.
And during some of my most difficult moments, Joanna Duda took me by the hand and walked with me to the edge—only then to suggest that I just jump into the abyss.
I am indebted to author James W Douglass for his valuable and indispensable work JFK and the Unspeakable.
Mr Douglass’s journey into the real vortex of the presidency and assassination of President John F Kennedy is unparalleled.
His willingness to take the time to explain certain minutiae has been invaluable.
As a researcher, author, and friend, Doug Horne is a true patriot and a great American.
There is a special collection of people who provided me with additional, invaluable assistance.
I wish especially to thank Dick Russell for his stellar work The Man Who Knew Too Much.
Dick’s seventeen-year odyssey writing his book, as well as the personal insights he shared, have been a guiding light.
Toni Shimon, daughter of the late Joseph W Shimon, took a huge risk in opening up to me about what had transpired between her and her father.
Victor Marchetti, Hank Albarelli, Donald Deneselya, Tom Kimmel, J Michael Kelly, Deborah Davis, Carol Felsenthal, Dino Brugioni, John Williams, Shelah Horvitz, Donald H Wolfe, Bob Schwartz, Joan Mellon, Garby Leon, Joel Kabakov, Tiffany Graham, Shannon Mow, Sandy Forman, Esq., Adina Gewirtz, William Pepper, and journalist Charles Bartlett.
Timothy Leary’s biographer, Robert Greenfield, shared many observations from his years of research, as did Tim Leary’s wife, Barbara, and his former colleagues Ralph Metzner and Peggy Mellon Hitchcock.
In addition, my gratitude to the family of the late William Attwood cannot go unmentioned.
Attwood’s wife, Simone, and his daughter, Susan, graciously allowed me to examine and reference Bill’s extensive diaries.
Bill Mueller of Cambridge Health Associates has intuitively known for more than twenty-five years where the acupuncture needles belong on my sometimes exhausted body.
Ian Boehm, always made himself available to me, sometimes on a moment’s notice.
Physical therapist Connie Sardelis kept my back and shoulders from becoming frozen.
When nothing else seemed to work, homeopath Begabati Lennihan found me a remedy that forged a will of steel.
Last, I wish to prostrate myself before several editors, Kelly Horan and Margot White among them.
To all of you, and all my “ethereal friends,” I bow in gratitude and give you my deepest, heartfelt thanks.
ABOUT THE AUTHOR Peter JANNEY GREW up in Washington, D.C. during the Cold War era of the 1950s and 1960s.
The Janney family was intimately involved with many of Washington’s social and political elite that included the family of Mary and Cord Meyer as well as other high-ranking CIA officials and dignitaries such as Richard Helms, Jim Angleton, Tracy Barnes, Desmond FitzGerald, Bill Colby, and John Bross.
