He served in the SA Navy, and disappeared in full uniform in Cape Town after VE Day in 1945.
It was a time to think the unthinkable, in lecture halls and even at the movies.
The young Henry Kissinger, one of my professors, taught us a popular course in nuclear realpolitik.
Based on his book, Nuclear Weapons and Foreign Policy, his lectures assessed the feasibility of a ""limited"" nuclear war.
In Kahn's view, Mutually Assured Destruction was not inevitable; there could be a winner, of sorts.
Compared with the hawkish Kahn, Kissinger was a dove in the world of nuclear politics.Advertisement HPGam.cmd.push{ return HPGam.render; }); Our favourite movie was On The Beach, based on the Nevil Shute best-seller, starring Gregory Peck, Ava Gardner and Fred Astaire in his only non song-and-dance role.
In the fadeout, surely one of the greatest film endings, a sign above a lifeless street in Melbourne proclaims that ""There is still time ... brother,"" to the haunting theme of Waltzing Matilda.Fifty years ago this month, reality caught up with academic theory and fiction.
The crisis ended when Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev made a secret deal with JFK to remove his missiles from Cuba if Kennedy removed America's missiles from Turkey at a later date.
We went eyeball to eyeball with Russia -and they blinked,"" was the false boast of an unidentified Kennedy aide.
These were JFK's finest hours.If Kennedy's hawkish successor, Lyndon Johnson, who took office just over a year later, had been President in 1962, a more dangerous form of nuclear brinkmanship likely would have taken place.
LBJ was soon led into the Vietnam quagmire by the same advisers -Robert McNamara and Dean Rusk, among them -who had insisted on the hard-line military response to the Soviet threat in Cuba.Advertisement HPGam.cmd.push{ return HPGam.render; }); I remember that period in late October well.
In their living rooms, families clustered around black-and-white TV sets for news about whether they might live or perish.
One of my best friends simply repaired to bed for the duration of the crisis with the new-found love of his life.
My future father-in-law quickly converted his basement into a bomb shelter.
People with deep basements or jerry-built nuclear shelters like him were suddenly popular.
Some wondered whether it would be morally defensible to shoot a neighbour if he tried to break into their basement shelter.
And this was a great story, perhaps the last great story.Adult fear can be infectious to children.
My wife remembers being terrified when told by her teacher that nuclear fallout was invisible and odourless.
As a 25-year-old Montreal Star reporter, I had watched a class of 10-year-olds in the Town of Mount Royal being taught how to seek cover under their desks.
Some kids told me they were watching the sky for Russian bombers or missiles.
In a Catholic school, children were told to recite the rosary under their desks.
To children, the necessary tests of air raid sirens seemed to be the real thing.
I figured the safest place would be Washington, because, if the nukes were fired, the capital cities would be spared so there was someone left to negotiate with.Looking back 50 years later, my most vivid memory is of ""the circles"" -circles drawn on maps to depict how far north missiles of different sizes could travel from communist Cuba.
Montreal seemed to be out of ""the circles"" -for missiles, that is, but not for radiation, as we all knew from On the Beach.Advertisement HPGam.cmd.push{ return HPGam.render; }); In 1962, the prescient novel Seven Days in May, co-written by Charles Bailey, one of my mentors when I covered the LBJ White House, told the story of how rogue generals had plotted a coup to seize the presidency during a Cold War crisis.
If you have questions or concerns, please check our FAQ or contact support@huffpost.com.
