How John F Kennedy Used History to Prevent Armageddon Jordan L Cerbone Senior Honors Thesis: History Major Fall 2016 Cerbone 1 Kennedy’s Crisis: How John F Kennedy Used History to Prevent Armageddon The year was 1962.
United States President John F Kennedy prepared to address his country; the citizens of the United States, Russia and the rest of the world listened intently to his words, for the challenge he now faced affected everyone everywhere.
What might have culminated in a nuclear war with the Soviet Union instead resulted in a peaceful agreement between the leaders of both countries to remove key nuclear weapons.
Pressured by his advisors to engage the Soviet Union in conflict due to their placement of missiles on the island of Cuba, Kennedy nonetheless doggedly sought, and found, a diplomatic solution to the threat.
This thesis will examine how the youngest elected president in our country’s history had the perception to understand what could result from an uncompromising and forceful response to its most powerful adversary.
Kennedy had a profound sense of both political history and international relations; he was also famously interested in decisions made by previous negotiators.
The answer to Kennedy’s unique level gumption and discretion may lie in his past; the role of his father during his youth, certain authors and politicians whom he admired, as well as his own experience in the United States Navy as a relatively young man.
This nurturing created a man who could rise to the challenge of guiding stubborn nations away from destroying one another.
Cerbone 2 The crisis at hand was as suspenseful as the resolution was spectacular, beginning when the island of Cuba was drawn into the Cold War between the United States and the Soviet Union.
In 1959, the guerilla leader Fidel Castro ousted military dictator Fulgencio Batista.
However, once Castro consolidated power, he ruled Cuba as a dictator for many decades.
When Castro assumed power, however, it became apparent during the United States presidential elections that our country, which allowed Castro to establish power, could no longer tolerate his continued rule.
Ultimately, outgoing President Dwight D Eisenhower severed ties with Cuba, while Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev embraced a potential ally in the Caribbean and sought to establish a diplomatic relationship with his country.
Incoming President John F Kennedy inherited from the Eisenhower administration a proposal which would later result in the failed Bay of Pigs invasion.
Cerbone 3 invading the Cuban Bay of Pigs with secret training and support from United States forces.
Castro responded to this attack by establishing even closer ties to Russia, instructing his band to play the worldwide communist anthem during a visit from a Russian diplomat and announcing publicly that he adhered to the Communist ideology.
Khrushchev, in two letters to Kennedy, declared that Russia would defend Cuba from all future invasions but promised not to place missiles on the island.
Ultimately, this assurance would not be sufficient, for Khrushchev did not intend to keep his promise.
On Tuesday, October 16th, 1962, at 11:50a.m., Kennedy’s advisors in the CIA brought to his attention a series of “secret” missile sites on Cuba, bearing weapons shipped from the Soviet Union, which were in early stages of assembly.
Although Kennedy was enraged, he maintained a calm demeanor as the photo interpreter, Arthur Lundahl, explained that the missiles were medium-range ballistic weapons that, if launched, could destroy Washington, D.C. in thirteen minutes.
However, the deadly warheads (tips of the nuclear weapons) were not visible in the photographs, indicating that the missiles would not be immediately ready to fire.
Cerbone 4 been made aware of their scheme, there was still time for the president to determine his next move.
Stern praises Kennedy’s “cautious and thoughtful leadership” as well as his understanding that “history is not a game.
Had Kennedy responded differently, the result might have been disastrous for the entire world.
His brilliance in handling this most dangerous task was occasioned by his ability to think independently, understand the risks from all sides and assert his final decision over the hawkish members of his cabinet.
First, John F Kennedy’s father, Joseph Kennedy, Sr. influenced the future president during his formative years, and his relationship with his son would contribute substantially to the latter’s decisions in the face of stress and confrontation.
He not only oversaw and encouraged the development of his son’s personality but also his political ambition.
In 1957, Joe said of the future president, then a Senator, “‘I got Jack into politics…I was the one told him…it was his responsibility to run for Congress.
Joe Kennedy was a controversial figure who famously cared little for military service.
This sense of ambition began when, in place of the military, he took a position at a bank and later at Bethlehem Steel’s Fore River Company, a Massachusetts-based shipbuilding plant.
Cerbone 8 Kennedy as, “The person who now monopolizes conversation in the studios and on locations is not an actor, but one of the executives of this important new industry.
Additionally, Joe Kennedy indirectly encouraged his children to think independently.
John F Kennedy’s famous propensity for making independent decisions and defending his viewpoints in the face of adversity no doubt originated in Joe Kennedy’s willingness to respect and engender independent ideas in his sons.
Lasky relates an interview between Kennedy and Drew Pearson in which Pearson questioned whether Kennedy was influenced by his father’s political views.
Kennedy replied, “‘Father wants me to be President all right…But as far as influencing me, I think my voting record in the Senate speaks for itself.
Brandon asked the pointed question of whether seeing Kennedy become President was more important to his father than having his son agree with his ideas and views.
His responsibility is not to impose his political views on his children.
When encouraging John F Kennedy to apply himself as his elder brother Joe did, his father would say, “‘I don’t want to give the impression that I’m a nagger, for goodness knows I think that is the worst thing any parent can be…I definitely know you can go a long way.
He understood that the best way to help his son to succeed was to encourage him to succeed and let him develop his own viewpoint.
Since this proved difficult, Kennedy learned from an early age to struggle and use his abilities to the utmost.
Joe Kennedy, Jr. provided John F Kennedy with one of his deepest, most personal memories from World War II, which eventually served as a connection to the lost soldiers and sailors of war and strengthened Kennedy’s resolve to avoid needless tragedy.
By August of 1944, Joe, Jr. had served enough time in the armed forces to return home but instead “volunteered for a mission so dangerous that some members of his ground crew pleaded with him not to go,” according to Ted Kennedy.
Joe, Jr. and an assistant were to pilot an “experimental drone” deployed to bomb Germany.
Due to a possible technical error, the drone exploded before Joe, Jr. and his copilots were due to eject themselves.
Although Joe, Jr. would be posthumously awarded the Navy Cross by the United States Navy, neither Joe Kennedy, Sr. nor John F Kennedy would forget that his brother’s life was lost due to war.
As president, John F Kennedy understood that young men like his brother and brother-in-law would die and that even a glorious death would not return them to their families.
John F Kennedy’s position as the son of one of the richest and most ambitious men in America granted him a sense of independence that at first proved difficult for him to apply.
Although it would later prove useful to the President, John F Kennedy, the student, found himself on occasion to be at odds with his environment.
As the son of a rich and powerful man, the stigma of being over-privileged as well caused him to venture from his father’s shadow.
Ultimately, however, Kennedy’s competitive and ambitious spirit would allow him to harness his independent nature and drive to become one of the most respected presidents in our country’s history.
More importantly, as the son of an ambassador, John F Kennedy had opportunities to witness the diplomacy and negotiations that were involved with foreign policy.
On one hand, Kennedy opposed appeasement because it was clear that Adolf Hitler was reaping an advantage from Neville Chamberlain’s government.
One of Kennedy’s idols was Sir Winston Churchill, who inspired his nation to unite against the Nazi threat.
It was at this early age that he came to the conclusion that presidents had an “obligation” to utilize every possible strategy to negotiate peace before turning to war.
Nevertheless, Kennedy never advocated for caving in to the demands of enemy nations, nor did he believe leaders should lose track of the seriousness of any given confrontation.
The outcome of the present war [World War II] will throw more light on the subject but what can be learned from a study of the events 43 Dallek, An Unfinished Life, 58.
They ranged from well-known John Quincy Adams to lesser-known Robert A Taft.
The overriding attributes of this collection of statesmen was their ability to make unpopular decisions which agreed with their own consciences.
With his experiences in the Navy and his overall aptitude for foreign policy, President Kennedy felt that he was better qualified to determine the reaction to Soviet placement of missiles on Cuba.
Although many members of his cabinet did not approve, he was able to courageously stand by his principles.
Some of these principles Kennedy had concerning compromise can be traced to the figures he admired in Profiles in Courage.
Daniel Webster, a famous Senator and Secretary of State, and Sam Houston, a politician from Texas, both spoke in favor of compromise during our country’s history.
Kennedy admired Daniel Webster for speaking in favor of the Compromise of 1850, which was opposed by pro-slavery Democrats in the South.
Kennedy especially respected Webster for his willingness to stand for his ideals, despite adversity.
Cerbone 16 for the Union,” and concluded his assessment by asserting that, even at the point of death, Webster proclaimed his loyalty to his country and his indifference to the drop in his popularity, for his convictions were more important.
Additionally, Kennedy admired the courage of Senator Sam Houston of Texas.
He was a southern Democrat who nonetheless spoke in favor of the Compromise of 1850, which limited the power of the southern, slave-holding states, and spoke against leaving the Union.
In his introduction, Kennedy wrote, “We should not be too hasty in condemning all compromise as bad morals.
Compromise was underrated and at times tended to be the best possible course of action, though it was often scorned by the masses.
As President, Kennedy would remain courageous and reach a compromise with the Soviets at the disapproval of some members of his cabinet.
He sought to emulate the leaders he 54 John F Kennedy, Profiles in Courage, 74.
Cerbone 17 felt served the best, most patriotic interests of their country, even if they did not always receive praise from others.
Not only did he understand the consequences of failing to take action but also the consequences of an impulsive and hasty action.
For one, his elder brother Joe, an officer in the military who was killed in an accidental detonation of explosives, possibly due to a design defect that was not properly addressed by the Navy’s board of review.
Additionally, John F Kennedy’s friend Andrew Kirksey, whom he poignantly called “the boy in my boat,” was killed in the famous PT109 boat commanded by Kennedy.
Kennedy had always looked at history to learn what 59 Stern, The Week the World Stood Still, 24.
Cerbone 18 could result from a poor decision but his personal history added reality to the consequences of inaction or misguided action.
He was unwilling to give ground to Castro and Khrushchev but he knew his soldiers as people who depended on his leadership.
These experiences gave Kennedy a lifelong desire to avoid armed conflict if diplomacy could avert it, and strengthened his idealistic viewpoint that leaders are obligated to avoid such conflict if possible.
While he was “as passionately anti-communist as any of his advisors,” he recognized the dangers of any form of warfare, especially one which involved nuclear weapons.
Witnessing firsthand the horrors of war allowed Kennedy to understand the human cost of hawkish foreign policy.
Although he was firm in his anti-communist ideals, he was equally firm in his resolve not to enter a potentially disastrous conflict if it could be avoided.
As President, he displayed the aforementioned ideals not only to his adversaries, but to his cabinet and military advisors as well.
This was manifested in his distribution of an emerging bestseller among his assistants.
As a soldier, Kennedy likely pondered this question while on his PT-109 patrol boat, or whilst reading They Were Expendable.
Tuchman’s book perhaps reminded Kennedy of these days as a young officer pondering the inevitability of World War II, which resulted in the deaths of his brother and friends and his own narrow escape.
However, it seems safe to assume that Kennedy’s past sense of history did not conflict with the views presented in the book.
Cerbone 20 William White’s fictional but realistic bestseller They Were Expendable had arguably the greatest impact on Kennedy as a young serviceman.
That is to say, their lives perceived as of little worth by senior soldiers and politicians who have little, if any, frontline experience and whose agendas do not illuminate to them the reality of war.
They Were Expendable introduces the concept of expendability with an analogy from one of the young naval officers.
He calls to the author’s mind a sergeant machine-gunner who is ordered to hold a position indefinitely.
In such a situation, the serviceman claims, “You know you’re expendable.
As in The Guns of August, the soldiers are left to ponder the greater context of their misfortune.
They find themselves questioning why they were sent to fight in the first place and why they don’t receive adequate supplies and aid.
In the words of the officer, “Because we little guys never get to see the broad picture of the war, never find out the reasons back of the moves or failures to move.
An American Torpedo Boat Squadron in the United States Retreat From the Philippines , 3.
Therefore, Kennedy was a president who understood from experience what it meant to be expendable; he served as captain of a patrol, in company of common sailors.
In They Were Expendable, a measure of direct criticism was aimed at senior officers, such as General MacArthur.
The decision to promote MacArthur to Commander-in-Chief of forces in the Pacific, resulting in MacArthur being ordered to leave his position, meant that the remaining forces were left to fend for themselves.
To the servicemen, “our last hope of seeing America and escaping a Japanese prison – was gone forever.
When they advocated bombing Cuba and potentially starting a nuclear war, Kennedy felt that he better understood what it was like to be “expendable,” and didn’t want the people who would have fought in a nuclear war with the Soviets to become as such.
Additionally, John F Kennedy was influenced by The Forty Days of Musa Dagh, Franz Werfel’s tale of Armenian life during the Turkish genocide during World War I A central point Werfel makes is that evil must be resisted.
According to his biographer Walter Donovan, Kennedy read it enthusiastically.
Werfel’s arguments are useful against the philosophy of appeasement but also against losing faith in one’s ability to overcome adversity.
The other character replies, “‘Every man and every nation at one time or other becomes the weak.
Cerbone 23 Kennedy would say in a speech, “Too many of us think is impossible.
Kennedy continued to refute that notion, saying, “We need not accept that view.
The idea that humans must step aside and allow atrocities or war to occur when it could be prevented, simply based on the fact that they believe that historical forces are “beyond human control” did not resonate with Kennedy.
As president, he understood that it was both his right and his duty to take control of the situation and resolve it to the best of his ability.
Therefore, writings and occurrences during the World War I era implemented the idea that problems need not be repeated on account of past mindsets that they must repeat and allowed him to demonstrate that he indeed learned from history.
Cerbone 24 Way, alternatively titled Memory-Hold-The-Door, an autobiographical set of memoirs by John Buchan, later known as Baron Tweedsmuir.
Tweedsmuir reminisced about his early life, experiences during World War I, and provides ample advice and critiques of political and social life in the British Empire.
The Kennedy Library lists Pilgrim’s Way as among Kennedy’s personal favorites, while Senator Ted Kennedy dedicated some remarks to the memoir during the Kennedy Library and Museum’s Rededication Ceremony of 1993.
An Essay in Recollection (Cambridge and Massachusetts: Houghton Mifflin Press, 1940), 296.
Cerbone 25 to provide these answers; he was able to seek and find solutions to both the everyday challenges of the United States and one of historical proportions.
Had Kennedy been the embodiment of this “tragedy,” the result could have been tragic for humanity as well.
One figure Buchan admired was Prime Minister Arthur Balfour, in part because he “revered the fortitude of human nature, the courage with which men stumbled up the steep ascent of life.
Like Kennedy himself, Buchan believed that humanity had both the ability and the responsibility to create a better, freer world.
Interestingly, Buchan’s relevance in Kennedy’s life was not only as an admired author – Kennedy and Buchan shared several key experiences and arrived at similar conclusions as a result of these experiences.
Just as Kennedy’s family acquired great wealth and had the opportunity to travel and learn, so too did Buchan experience a period of wealth 83 Buchan, Pilgrim’s Way, 158.
Cerbone 26 shortly before World War I Like the Kennedys, he enjoyed travelling, reading and yachting.
Furthermore, Buchan was acquainted with Kennedy’s father during the latter’s ambassadorial visit to Britain in 1938.
In Pilgrim’s Way, John Buchan dedicates a portion of his memoirs to the generation of young men lost during World War I He lost friends, classmates, his wife’s cousin, and his youngest brother to the war.
Cerbone 27 Richard D Mahoney writes that Kennedy “jotted down” quotations from Pilgrim’s Way in a notepad he kept with him during World War II, as a tribute to the lives lost as a result of war.
Geraldine Hawkins, quoting biographer Geoffrey Perret, writes that Kennedy was especially touched at the death of Buchan’s thirty-five-year-old friend, Raymond Asquith.
Therefore, he associated himself with the courageous and young who ran the risk of losing their lives for a cause.
Kennedy, while willing to serve his country, did not want his sacrifice to be for no reason.
The writings of Tuchman, White and Buchan, coupled with his own experience in the Navy, left a profound impression on him during his political life.
He did not want future generations questioning whether he could have done anything to prevent a nuclear war.
The Days of Jack and Bobby Kennedy” (Arcade Publishing, 1999), article.
Cerbone 28 with the beliefs that he could overcome any challenge with sufficient determination and that he had the responsibility as a leader to attempt to do so.
Perhaps no author received more public praise from Kennedy than Basil Liddell Hart, a military theorist and historian.
In 1960, both Kennedy and his opponent Richard Nixon were invited to review Hart’s latest work, Deterrent or Defense.
He “fully understood the danger represented by Nazi Germany, was an archfoe of appeasement,” and opposed it when Hitler demanded the Sudetenland territory of Czechoslovakia in 1938, a feeling which was ignored by “hidebound” British generals.
In 1981, the Congressional Military Reform Caucus’s principle spokesman said in part, “ British…ignored prophets like Liddell Hart.
This version of Hart also appears in some of Kennedy’s interpretations as well.
For example, Hart’s advice against appeasement corresponded to Kennedy’s in his dissertation, Why England Slept, in which he quoted Hart several times.
Alternatively, Hart is criticized for lack of evidence to suggest that he opposed appeasement, with some postulating that there is evidence to the contrary.
In 1940, he quoted Hart in his thesis, Why England Slept, admiring Hart’s view, “I do not criticize persons, but only a state of affairs.
From Hart, Kennedy honed his ability to question the system itself, an ability which would be further shaped during his time in the Navy, and when reading They Were Expendable.
That Basil Hart’s advice was not highly regarded by the afore-mentioned “hidebound” generals convinced Kennedy that senior military officers and policy-makers do not always make their decisions in the best interests of their men or even with regard to fighting a war efficiently.
More importantly, Kennedy praised Hart’s Deterrent or Defense, in which Hart argued that, while nuclear weapons provide a useful deterrent to any attack by the Soviet Union against the West, they should not be considered an adequate defense against Soviet forces in general.
Cerbone 31 kept “high up the sleeve” and used only in the event of a last resort.
Therefore, it is not enough for the West to possess nuclear weapons; they should also develop conventional forces to use in smallscale conflicts, such as defending Europe.
Cerbone 33 being forced to relay a message in a coconut shell demanding rescue.
Kennedy would refuse to be hailed as a hero, instead bestowing the title upon his deceased comrades.
He would recall this incident for the rest of his life, keeping memorabilia from the PT-109 episode in the Oval Office during his tenure as president.
Kennedy made certain never to allow the perceived experience of military officers to overrule his brand of logic.
He considered his own wartime experiences to be deeper than those of even his closest military aides.
He had found himself involved in the war and forced to face the gruesome aspects of combat, but he did not feel that his superior officers understood from experience how their decisions affected their inferiors.
His refusal to adhere to his hawkish generals as President is reflected in his writings as a young soldier.
When given the chance to avoid a nuclear war with the exchange of the removal of missiles from Turkey, and an American promise not to invade Cuba, for the removal of missiles from Cuba, he responded to opposition, “ two or three days we may have a military strike which would bring perhaps the seizure of Berlin or a strike on Turkey.
We should take ”121 He used his own judgment over objections from his generals because he felt he had a better understanding of what was at risk.
He felt that their decisions might result in miscommunications or the inept response he had always criticized.
Finally, John F Kennedy was shaped by his understanding that negotiating with an enemy involved showing respect, something influenced by the military theorist Basil Hart.
Hart’s words provided one of the strongest influences on Kennedy’s foreign policy during his presidential career.
Additionally, Kennedy “appreciated how difficult it must have been for Khrushchev to back down,” as the removal of missiles from Turkey was kept secret for several decades to avoid public outcry.
John F Kennedy’s experiences as a diplomat’s son and as a junior officer during the World War II era ingrained in him the desire to favor good judgment over potentially disastrous warfare.
From his father he learned to have and defend his own opinions and had the chance to see the strengths and weaknesses involved with different forms of foreign policies, and began to question the infallibility of superior officers.
From the military he saw firsthand the repercussions of decisions on the part of superior officers or politicians who never served in the frontlines, and came to believe that he as President had the obligation to exhaust all possible courses for peace before finally turning to aggression.
From the military he also came to the conclusion that a decorated officer does not always understand the effects of his decisions on countless soldiers in the frontlines.
This caused Kennedy to always question the judgment of his advisors urging him to bomb Cuba.
He had a profound knowledge of history and an incredible ability to weigh in on his options, as well as a feeling of obligation to do what was best.
He would not stand aside and allow Cuba a chance to launch a nuclear attack on his country, nor would he begin an armed conflict if he had the chance to avoid it, understanding the weight of his choices.
Kennedy was influenced by each of the factors discussed but his sense of history shaped his perception of these experiences and caused him to examine policies he had witnessed during his lifetime in the context of history.
This made him the man who led his country from the brink of nuclear conflict with Russia to a peaceful settlement that benefited everyone.
Kennedy’s presidency was eventful for the decisions he made during a two-week period, but these decisions were the result of a lifetime of experience.
Online by Gerhard Peters and John T Woolley, The American Presidency Project, online.
