Havana, Cuba Washington, DC, United States Moscow, Russia Leaders: Fidel Castro John F Kennedy Nikita Khrushchev Date: October 16 October 28, 1962 Death Toll: 1 Above is an aerial photo taken by a United States U-2 jet on an information-gathering mission.
In fact, this crisis is the closest the world has ever come to this unthinkable catastrophe.
With Nazi Germany defeated, and peace temporarily restored, the United States and the Soviet Union almost instantly vied for world dominance; this was the beginning of the Cold War.
The Cold War was a war over ideologies the United States promoting business-friendly capitalism and the Soviet Union promoting worker-led communism.
No direct war was ever fought between the United States and the Soviet Union, but proxy wars (a conflict between two nations in which neither country directly engages the other) dotted the next two decades with both countries hoping to extend their ideology around the globe.
In this investigation, you will navigate through the events of the late-1950s and early-1960s to understand just how close the world came to nuclear war.
October 28, 1958 ● The United States seeks a way to stabilize the region and keep the Soviet Union in check.
February 4 13, 1960 ● Russian Premier Nikita Khrushchev sends his first deputy, Anastas Mikoyan, to Cuba in order to discuss a potential economic and trade agreement.
May 7, 1960 ● The Soviet Union and Cuba officially establish diplomatic relations.
July 5, 1960 ● Fidel Castro orders the seizure of all United States companies and properties.
September 1960 ● The first weapons shipment from the Soviet Union arrives in Cuba without U.S. knowledge of the transaction.
October 19, 1960 ● All United States citizens and companies are banned from exporting any goods to Cuba, except for food and medicine.
April 16, 1961 ● A CIA-backed plan to overthrow the Castro regime is launched.
September 8-15, 1962 ● First on September 8, and then again on September 15, Soviet cargo ships arrive in Cuba carrying nuclear missiles and mid-range ballistic missiles.
October 15, 1962 ● The day before, on October 14, a United States aircraft was deployed to take several photographs of Cuba.
October 22, 1962 ● At 7pm EST, Kennedy addresses the United States public via a nationwide emergency broadcast.
October 25, 1962 ● Publicly the Soviets call the blockade an “act of aggression” and claim their ships will not be intimidated.
October 27, 1962 ● At 11:03am EST, the State Department receives a letter from Russian Premier Nikita Khrushchev that offers a solution.
Use your understanding of the crisis, the events that you have analyzed, and your judgement to answer the overarching questions below.
The Russian Premier Nikita Khrushchev for sending his first deputy to capitalize Cuba’s resentment toward the U.S., or President Eisenhower for refusing to talk with the Prime Minister because of his radical policies.
I think this because if the Soviets didn’t capitalize the resentment, there may have not been so much tension, or if the US president talked to the Cuban Prime Minister, maybe they could have found a way to be peaceful with one another.
On one hand the United States must remove their missiles from Italy and Turkey, and to never invade Cuba.
On the other hand, the Soviets promised to remove their missiles from Cuba.
Today, most historians believe that the result of the crisis severely weakened Khrushchev's power in the Soviet Union and ultimately led to his removal just two years later.
I think that it was viewed as a failure because he was the one who first wrote the letter saying that the USSR would remove all missiles from Cuba if the United States removed their missiles from Italy, Turkey, and promised to never invade Cuba.
Other countries may perceive the United States as weak without missiles in other countries, so those countries may try to damage the United States in some way.
Many within President Kennedy’s inner circle did not agree with his decision to strike a deal with Khrushchev, instead wanting to invade Cuba to rid the island of both the missiles and the Communists.
He was not willing to sacrifice the lives of every person in his country only to seem very powerful and for other selfish reasons, instead President Kennedy agreed, and saved his country from possible danger because it probably would have caused the Soviets to release those missiles and kill many, many people.
