I think Mr Merchant's conclusions are a hit more depressing than they need be.
In the first place, as Mr Brown points out, Soviet willingness to pour more money and effort into Cuba is open to a good deal of doubt.
The Russians must surely have come to realise that the bigger their stake in Cuba, the more vulnerable they become to counter-measures if they try anything in Berlin; and it is perfectly on the cards that a reduction rather than an increase in the Soviet stake is being seriously considered by the Kremlin.
In the second place, thanks to Castro's stubbornness in not' allowing inspection, the Cubans are not going to get a formal guarantee against invasion.
The Americans no doubt will make a statement disclaiming any intention of invading Cuba .but this will be subject to good behaviour on the 'part of Castro behaviour of which the Americans themselves will presumably be the judges.
It follows that, though an American invasion of Cuba is highly unlikely, there will remain an element of uncertainty about American intentions which will at least serve to keep up counter revolutionary morale.
My Lord, Any record of the story of these first two weeks of the Cuban crisis must necessarily read more like a wildly improvable sequel to ""Our Man in Havana"" than a Foreign Office despatch.
Indeed I doubt whether a month ago any reputable publisher would have given a moment's consideration to a story in -which Soviet Russia was to be. credited with shipping some four dozen assorted giant missiles, each one longer than cricket pitch, across the Atlantic to Cuba, where, Russia^'' military technicians disguised as agricultural advisers would set them up in secret on launching sites some of them just off the main road less than 50 miles from Havana.
As observers, we in Havana have been curiously isolated in the tense, unnatural calm of the eye of the cyclone which has so shaken the world.
But I am nevertheless taking this first opportunity of available safe hand to submit for Your Lordhip's consideration some early ""impressions which may perhaps serve as marginal comment to the Cuban crisis.
Whilst we in Cuba were as unprepared for the breaking of the storm as was the rest of the world it would The Right Honourable The Earl of Home, etc. , etc. , etc . / not CONFIDENTIAL W 'i:y CONFIDENTIAL 2 . .not be -true,. to say, that.it came out of a clear sky. ' |$ost """"Cubans have-:..now been waiting some hopefully some fearfully for at least 2 years for, ""something to happen"".All this time we have lived in an atmosphere of the wildest rumours ninety per cent of them totally without foundation and many of them specifically about gigantic nuclear missiles.
What, we did not see anything of until too late was the vital equipment and the larger missiles which were almost certainly moved only by night.
In fact, we saw no rockets of any kind in or around Havana until the 25th of October when a convoy of several ground to air missiles appeared in the city itself in daylight and larger ones, presumably ground to ground missiles, after dark.
This was perhaps significant of a relaxation of security precautions in ' a frantic last minute rush before the machine went into reverse' with Khrushev ' s order for withdrawal on the 28th of October.
After several days .delay, when dismantling, was presumably going on at the sites, activity on the road began again and there has been no. lack of evidence of a hurried evacuation to the ports.
Loaded ships have been seen leaving and on the 5th of November a Russian passenger ship left Havana crowded with technicians.
It is of course still too early to say whether evacuation is partial or .complete.
It was consequently our opinion, and we thought it was also Castro's opinion,, that the installation, of ..offensive missiles in.
American .governments^ ■ ■■ 'It -seemed'to-us/ axiomatic at that time that with offensive -rockets, baser """" in Cuba he"" could, not survive as ""maximum leader"" and' this country could not survive as a Soviet satellite.
We ' therefore believed that neither Castro nor Khrushchev would consider such a move.
The results of photographic reconnaissance of mid-October showed just how wro#g we had been.
Although we still do not know exactly wh)re,,our reasoning went astray it seems probable tha^ thefault lay in not realisinghow high the stakes were tiat Khrushchev was. prepared to play for.
States decision to impose quarantine on Cuba, this country was declared by Commander-inChief Fidel Castro to be on a war footing.
Strangely enough a record of subsequent significant happenings inside this island would scarcely fill a short paragraph.
Organisation of American States and even Lord Russell filling • ih/minor parts that Fidel Castro managed to climb back into ""tiie-act.
He did so with the announcement of his so-called ""Five points"", five conditions of which one is the .. evacuation of G-uantanamo which he demanded should be met within the framework of the Kennedy/Khrushchev agreement.
These live points were subsequently nailed to the mast to the accompaniment of a massive propaganda exercise with meetings, resolutions, pamphlets, posters and full orchestration by press and radio, They are still there nailed to the mast, drooping a little for lack of interest, with apparently nobody but Castro taking them very seriously.
I, myself, shall* not be surprised if they give us all and ""particularly Mr ""Mfkoyan, a lot of trouble, However unrealistic they may s-eem to most people, it is not in Castro's nature to allo.v them, to be pushed on one side.
No account of these obviously Immensely important discussions with Fidel Castro has yet been made' public as we enter the third week of the crisis.
This can also partly be explained by the government's efforts to keep the temperature down and to encourage business as usual in industry and agriculture, both of which have been hard hit , y the mobilisation of the militia.
But I think equally important ingredients in ,hat Castro proudly refers to as ""discipline and dignified calm'arc the stunned confusion and anxiety of the general public, which has shown itself remarkably unenthusiastic about dying for the cause. -Added to which two weeks of windy, wet weather have done nothxng to helT, maintain revolutionary -ardour amongst militia on guard duties and in flooded fox. holes on the beaches.
The same calm has, I am glad to say, prevailed amongst the British oolony both white and eoloured.
There hss so Jar been'no signs' of, and indeed no reason for abomination against ourselves or the natieh^s of any other country.
An early interest in the possibility of evaeuetaen has subsided us it beeame evident that if it was a nueiear „er we were heading for, Cuba was perhaps a better plaoe to be in than Britain.
It may seem strange to those outside Cuba that nowhere in the whole country was there an attempt to rise in protest against the government when it was learnt that the revolution had been betrayed and the Cuban fatherland ruthlessly cast in the role of a convenient launching pad for the exclusive use of the Soviet Union.
The short answer to this is that in spite of a much improved service by the Voice of America many people, perhaps the majority of people, in this country do not even now kno.v what the main issue has been.
They also learnt at this juncture that the weapons in question were owned and manned by.Russian military technicians, that the.
Soviet Union had decided to withdraw them, and that there had been differences of opinion between the Cuban and Soviet (overnments.
Mth hi8 ba0]t ,„ ^ wail he shewed himself desperate but determined, often mart convincing „hen Ms argent was most dishonest.
Bloody hrt head certainly was but it was unbowed and I could not help deling that if the counter revolution could throw up B leaaer of half his weigM pre ferahly wlthoat Ms ^^ ^^ _ victory might well be theirs.
To discover in the early stages of an 18 round contest that you are not even one of ""the contestants but only the prize money is not an easily forgotten experience for a sensitive young nation.
But better to be humiliated than wiped out and I do not think it impossible that with the help of an extensive propaganda campaign showing how Khrushchev has saved the peace of the world both Castro and the Cuban nation will very soon regain confidence in their international sponsor the U.S.S.R. and he able to convince themselves that all has been for the best.
Indeed I find it depressingly easy to imagine a sequence of events developing from the present situation which could be highly satisfactory to the present regime.
A United States guarantee not to invade seems certain; a Soviet promise to increase aid seems likely; a Soviet plan to underwrite Cuba economically and build it into a Caribbean show-piece instead of a military base is a possibility.
In these circumstances it is difficult to foresee what forces would unseat the present regime.
Castro himself , whom I still believe must be ' the key figure for some time to come, viill have to work through an agonising period of readjustment.
But this is not beyond a man who. has already on several occasions shown' a remarkable talent for survival.
I am copying this despatch to Her Majesty's Representatives at Washington, Moscow and all Latin American posts and to the United Kingdom High Commissioner, Jamaica.
