True or False Where the statement is true, mark T Where it is false, mark F, and correct it in the space immediately below.
Kennedy’s attempt to control rising steel prices met strong opposition from big business.
The Kennedy doctrine of “flexible response” was applied primarily to conflicts with Soviet communism in Europe.
The United States supported coup against the corrupt Diem regime brought South Vietnam greater democracy and political stability.
Kennedy financed and trained the Cuban rebels involved in the Bay of Pigs invasion but refused to intervene directly with American troops or planes.
The Cuban missile crisis ended in a humiliating defeat for Khrushchev and the Soviet Union.
Kennedy encouraged the civil rights movement to become more outspoken in its opposition to segregation and discrimination.
Johnson’s landslide victory came in every part of the country except the traditionally Republican Midwest.
The Gulf of Tonkin Resolution authorized the president to defend American forces against immediate attack but kept the power to make war in Vietnam firmly in the hands of Congress.
Johnson’s Great Society programs attempted to balance the federal budget and return power to the states.
The nonviolent civil rights movement, led by Martin Luther King, Jr., achieved great victories in integration and voting rights for blacks in 1964 and 1965.
The urban riots of the late 1960’s demonstrated that the South was having little success in dealing with its racial problems.
Despite sending half a million troops to Vietnam and conducting massive bombing raids, Johnson was unable to defeat the Vietcong and the North Vietnamese.
Domestic critics of the Vietnam War argued that the Johnson had used faulty military tactics to fight the enemy.
The campaigns of Senators McCarthy and Kennedy forced Johnson to withdraw as a presidential candidate and promoted de-escalation the Vietnam War.
One major American institution largely unaffected by the cultural upheaval of the 1960s was the Roman Catholic Church.
The “sexual revolution” of the 1960s included the introduction of the birth control pill and the increasing visibility of gays and lesbians.
Multiple Choice Select the best answer and write the proper letter in the space provided.
President Kennedy’s proposals for increased educational aid and medical assistance to the elderly succeed because of his skill in legislative bargaining. were traded away in exchange for passage of the bill establishing the Peace Corps. were stalled by strong opposition in Congress were strongly opposed by business interests.
The industry that provoked a bitter conflict with President Kennedy over price increases was the aircraft industry the meat industry the steel industry the oil industry ___ 3.
The fundamental military doctrine of the Kennedy administration was to develop a “flexible response” to “brushfire wars” in the Third World. threaten massive nuclear retaliation against communist advances. build up heavy conventional armed forces in Western Europe against the threat of Soviet invasion provide military assistance to client states in the Third World so that they could fight proxy wars without the need of American forces.
The first major foreign-policy disaster of the Kennedy administration came when Middle East governments sharply raised the price of imported oil.
American-backed Cuban rebels were defeated by Castro’s Cuban army at the Bay of Pigs.
American Green Beret guerilla forces began suffering heavy casualties in the jungles of Vietnam ___ 5.
The Cuban missile crisis ended when the American-backed Cuban invaders were defeated at the Bay of Pigs. the United States agreed to allow Soviet missiles in Cuba as long as they were not armed with nuclear weapons. the Soviets agreed to pull all missiles out of Cuba and the United States agreed not to invade Cuba. the United States and the Soviet Union agreed that Cuba should become neutral in the Cold War.
The Kennedy administration was pushed into a stronger stand on civil rights by the civil rights movement led by the Freedom riders and Martin Luther King Jr. the political advantages of backing civil rights. the pressure from foreign governments and the United Nations. the threat of violence in northern cities.
Lyndon Johnson won an overwhelming landslide victory in the 1964 election partly because he repudiated many of the policies of the unpopular Kennedy administration. he promised to take a tough stand in opposing communist aggression in Vietnam.
Republican candidate Senator Barry Goldwater was seen by many Americans as a “triggerhappy” extremist.
Johnson had achieved considerable personal popularity with the electorate.
President Johnson was more successful in pushing economic and civil rights measures through Congress than President Kennedy because he was better at explaining the purposes of the laws in his speeches. the Democrats gained overwhelming control of Congress in the landslide of 1964.
Republicans were more willing to cooperate with Johnson than with Kennedy.
Johnson was better able to swing southern Democrats behind his proposals.
The Civil Rights Act of 1964 was primarily designed to guarantee desegregation in interstate transportation. job opportunities for African Americans desegregation of high schools and colleges. voting rights for African-Americans.
Most of the racial riots of the 1960’s occurred in northern inner-city areas. southern inner-city areas. white neighborhoods where black families attempted to move in. college campuses.
Escalation of the aerial bombardment in Vietnam bolstered the stability of the South Vietnamese government. forced the Viet Cong and North Vietnamese to turn to conventional warfare. strengthened the Viet Cong and North Vietnamese will to resist. enabled the United States to limit the use of ground forces in Vietnam.
The primary political problem that the United States faced in waging the Vietnam War was the opposition of America’s European allies. the danger that the North and South Vietnamese would strike a deal and ask the United States to leave. the repeated collapse of weak and corrupt South Vietnamese governments the growing political alliance between North Vietnam and Communist China.
Opposition to the Vietnam War in Congress centered in the House Foreign Affairs Committee the Senate Armed Services Committee the Republican leadership of the House & Senate the Senate Foreign Relations Cmte Kennedy Ch.
The two antiwar presidential candidates whose political showing forced Johnson to withdraw from the race were Nelson Rockefeller and Ronald Reagan.
One dominant theme of the 1960s “youth culture” that had deep roots in American history was conflict between the generations. distrust and hostility toward authority. the widespread use of mind-altering drugs. a positive view of sexual experimentation.
The cultural upheavals of the 1960s could largely be attributed to the “three P’s” of pot, promiscuity and publicity presidential failure, political rebellion, and personal authenticity. poverty, protest, and the “pill.” population bulge, protest against racism, and prosperity.
Identification Supply the correct identification for each numbered description.
Kennedy administration program that sent youthful American volunteers to work in underdeveloped countries.
High barrier between East and West erected during the 1961 Berlin crisis.
Site where anti-Castro guerilla forces failed in their U.S.-sponsored invasion ________ 6.
Tense confrontation between Kennedy and Khrushchev that nearly led to nuclear war in October 1962.
New civil rights technique developed in the 1960’s to desegregate lunch counters and other public facilities in the South __________ 8.
LBJ’s broad program of welfare legislation and social reform that swept through congress in 1965.
The hastily passed 1964 congressional authorization that became a “blank check” for the Vietnam War.
Law, spurred by Martin Luther King, Jr.’s march from Selma to Montgomery, that guaranteed rights originally given blacks under the fifteen Amendment _________ 11.
Racial slogan that signaled a growing challenge to King’s nonviolent civil rights movement by militant younger blacks.
United States campaign of heavy bombing of North Vietnam, begun in February and March of 1965.
The communist guerrillas in South Vietnam who, along with the North Vietnamese successfully matched the American escalation in Vietnam.
The Vietnamese New Year celebration, during which the communist launched a heavy offensive against the United States in 1968.
Student organization that moved from nonviolent protest to underground terrorism within a few years.
Site of the bitterly divided 1968 Democratic convention, where police clashed with antiwar demonstrators.
Site of an off-duty police raid in 1969 that spurred gay and lesbian activism.
Matching People, Places, and Events Match the person, place, or event in the left column with the proper description in the right column by inserting the correct letter on the blank line.
Robert S McNamara B Cabinet officer who promoted “flexible response” but came to doubt the wisdom of the Vietnam War he had presided over ___ 3.
D Former vice president who staged a remarkable political comeback to win the presidential election in 1968 ___ 5.
Lyndon B Johnson E Charismatic Black Muslim leader who promoted separatism in the early 1960s ___ 6.
Barry M Goldwater F Minnesota senator whose antiwar “Children’s Crusade” helped force Johnson to alter his Vietnam policies ___ 7.
Malcolm X H Nonviolent black leader whose advocacy of peaceful change came under attack from militants after 1965 ___ 9.
Mario Savio I Vice president whose loyalty to LBJ’s Vietnam policies sent him down to defeat in the 1968 presidential election ___ 10.
Eugene McCarthy J Charismatic president whose brief administration experienced domestic confrontations with communism ___ 11.
Robert F Kennedy K Third-party candidate whose conservative, hawkish 1968 campaign won 9 million votes and carried five states ___ 12.
Richard M Nixon L Aggressive Soviet leader whose failed gamble of putting missiles in Cuba cost him his job ___ 13.
George C Wallace M Conservative Republican whose crushing defeat opened the way for the liberal Great Society programs ___ 14.
Matching Cause and Effect Match the historical cause in the left column with the proper effect in the right column by writing the correct letter on the blank line.
Kennedy’s unhappiness with the corrupt A Pushed Johnson into withdrawing as a Diem Regime presidential candidate in 1968 ___ 2.
Khrushchev’s placement of missiles in B Brought ever-rising American casualties and a Cuba strengthened will to resist on the part of the Communist Vietnamese ___ 3.
Johnson’s landslide victory over C Led to a U.S.-encouraged coup and greater Goldwater in 1964 political instability in South Vietnam ___ 4.
The Gulf of Tonkin Resolution D Helped push through historic civil rights legislation in 1964 and 1965 ___ 5.
Martin Luther King, Jr.’s civil rights E Brought along huge Democratic congressional marches majorities that passed a fistful of Great Society laws ___ 6.
Angry discontent in northern black F Helped Nixon win a minority over his divided ghettos opposition ___ 7.
American escalation of the Vietnam War G Became the questionable legal basis for all of Johnson’s further escalation of the Vietnam War ___ 8.
The Communist Vietnamese Tet H Led to a humiliating defeat when Kennedy Offensive in 1968 forced the Soviet Union to back down ___ 9.
Senator Eugene McCarthy’s strong I Sparked urban riots and the growth of the antiwar campaign militant “Black Power” movement ___ 10.
