The world had never been closer to a thermonuclear war than during that tense thirteen-day standoff between United States President John F Kennedy and Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev.
Over the last two decades however, scholars have globalized and decentralized the crisis, showing that countries and societies of all parts of the world were not only strongly impacted by it, but also influenced, in multiple and sometimes key ways, how the superpowers’ standoff played out.
As the geographic theater of the story, Latin America stood out as one of the main regions where the U.S.-Soviet stalemate produced major social and political impacts.
Scholars have explored how President Kennedy’s 23 October public announcement about the existence of Soviet nuclear missiles in Cuba sent shockwaves across the continent, prompting different reactions from state and non-state actors, including government crackdowns against local Communists and leftist groups, as well as a multilateral initiative for the establishment of a nuclear free zone in the hemisphere, which culminated years later with the signing of the Treaty of Tlatelolco in 1967.
Washington’s overture towards Cuba, which was secretly made through Brazil and presented to Castro as a Brazilian proposal, in which Cuba would cut off all military ties to the Soviet Union, including, of course, the withdrawal of Soviet weapons from the island.
Brazil’s so-called “independent” foreign policy of the early 1960s, and the fact that Brasília had been constantly presenting Page | 2 itself as a mediator between Cuba, the United States, and other anti-Castro Latin American governments, made Brazil an ideal candidate for the United States plan.
Even though U.S.-Brazilian relations were far from warm at the time, especially because of President João Goulart’s close links with left-wing labor groups, including Communist trade union leaders, the Kennedy administration had not reached the conclusion yet that Goulart needed to go.
It is true that since mid-1962 Washington had been providing economic aid through the Alliance for Progress to anti-Goulart state governors—a policy named “islands of administrative sanity” by the United States Ambassador Lincoln Gordon.
But by that time, Washington’s goal was only to limit Goulart’s political moves by strengthening proUnited States politicians in Brazil and not to overthrow him, as it would be the case later.
Hershberg’s 2004 two-part article had already pointed out that Kennedy officials, especially Ambassador Gordon, became exasperated by the way Brazil behaved during the missile crisis.
Not only did Brazil abstain at the Organization of American States on the use of force against Cuba if needed (even if Brasília voted in favor of the United States naval quarantine), but also top officials of the Goulart administration delivered public remarks in support of Havana’s right to self-determination, in response to domestic criticism from Brazilian left-wing groups.
The situation grew worse in the following weeks, including two tense standoffs between President Goulart and United States officials.
We still knew almost nothing about President Goulart’s interactions with Moscow and the Communist bloc during his administration.
While Goulart praised United States efforts against Havana and Moscow in his private conversations with Ambassador Gordon, congratulated Washington for what he called the “American victory” against Khrushchev, and agreed to carry out a secret mission to mediate between Cuba and the United States—following Washington’s request, but presenting it as a purely Brazilian initiative—Goulart portrayed a completely different picture to acting Soviet Ambassador to Brazil, Andrei Fomin.
Goulart also justified Brazil’s position at the OAS claiming that the country’s representatives did not follow his instructions, and that his government was being subjected to constant U.S. blackmail and pressures, particularly from Ambassador Gordon, about whom Goulart talked about with profound disdain.
One could reasonably claim that the lack of Brazilian accounts of the meetings weakens Hershberg’s conclusion regarding Goulart’s ‘double game’ strategy.
In reality, besides the fact that many pieces of information that Goulart passed on to the Soviet official are backed by what happened—particularly when it comes to the Brazilian mission to Havana on behalf of the United States, which was unknown until Hershberg’s 2004 two-part article came out—Hershberg brings in other pieces of evidence that support his conclusions.
For example, using Chinese and Czech diplomatic sources, Hershberg shows that Goulart applied a similar antiUnited States rhetoric when talking with other Communist leaders, from Mao Zedong’s China to Antonín Novotný’s Czechoslovakia.
Similarly, Hershberg’s sequel to this amazing story sheds light not only on Brazil’s links with the Communist bloc during a critical juncture of the Global Cold War, but also contributes to our understanding of the deterioration in U.S.-Brazilian relations and the conditions that led to Goulart’s overthrow, the emergence of a 21-year military regime in South America’s largest country, and the advent and strengthening of military regimes in Latin America.
He is the author of A Aliança para o Progresso e o governo João Goulart and he is currently working on the history of the New Right in the United States and its impact on United States and Brazilian politics.
