The Space Needle an observation tower in Seattle, Washington is completed Marvel's Spider-Man superhero makes his first appearance in a comic.
The Cold War continued to worsen when the Russians placed Ballistic Missiles on Cuban land just 90 miles away from the coast of Florida in and JFK called the bluff by threatening war unless they were removed which they were but for a short time the world was on the brink of nuclear war and self destruction.
The president then set a goal of landing a man on the moon before the end of the decade and became more involved in politics in Southeast Asia by training South Vietnamese pilots.
Space --First Men In Space John Glenn becomes the first American to orbit the Earth in February of 1962 More Information and Timeline For The Early Space Race 1.
February 7th A United States embargo ordered by President Kennedy goes into effect on all imports from Cuba including tobacco, seafood, fruits and vegetables 2.
April to October Cuban and Soviet governments secretly began to build 9 missile bases in Cuba for launching medium-range and intermediate-range ballistic missiles, Missiles capable of reaching 2,800 miles covering most of the United States 3. on August 6 United States begins to suspect Soviets building Missile Bases in Cuba 4.
August 7 United States Protests to Soviet Union who refute the allegations 5.
October 14th United States Air Force U-2 plane on a photo reconnaissance mission captured photographic proof of Soviet missile bases under construction in Cuba 6.
October 16th President Kennedy is informed proof of Cuban Missile Installations 7.
October 17th U-2 flight discovers intermediate range SS-5 nuclear missiles installed in Southern Cuba.
October 18th at a Personal meeting between Soviet Minister of Foreign Affairs, Andrei Gromyko and President John F Kennedy, Gromyko assures Kennedy that installations are purely defensive.
October 21st U-2 flight discovers further missile bases in Northern Cuba.
October 21st U-2 flight reveals Soviet bombers and Migs numbers increasing.
October 22nd President Kennedy addresses the nation in a televised speech, announcing the presence of offensive missile sites in Cuba.
October 24th Most Soviet Shipping slows down or turns round except 1 ship 16.
October 25th Discussions focus over withdraw of United States missiles from Turkey in exchange for the withdrawal of Soviet missiles in Cuba 18.
October 26th Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev proposes removing soviet missiles if President Kennedy publicly announces United States would never invade Cuba.
October 27th Khrushchev proposes in letter public trade of Soviet missiles in Cuba for United States missile in Turkey.
October 27th American U-2 is shot down over Cuba while on reconnaissance killing the pilot, Major Rudolf Anderson.
October 27th Kennedy writes Khrushchev a letter stating that he will make a statement that the United States will not invade Cuba if Khrushchev removes the missiles from Cuba.
October 28th Khrushchev announces over Radio Moscow that he has agreed to remove the missiles from Cuba.
I have included this to show how close full scale nuclear war was between the world's two superpowers, we can only guess that the Soviet Union was at similar alert status and had similar plans in place.
The spacecraft was launched from Cape Canaveral with the mission to study the Moon, return data back to Earth, and transmit images.
Unfortunately, the mission was a failure as it failed to relay any useful information back to NASA due to a computer and battery issue.
Ranger 4 stopped operating after 10 hours of flight and later crashed into the surface of the Moon.
The mission was notable in that it was the first Ranger mission to have a successful launch and was the first United States spacecraft to land on the Moon.
The Mercury capsule carried astronaut John Glenn who conducted the first orbit around the Earth by an American.
Glenn orbited the Earth three times in a flight that lasted just under five hours.
Glenn splashed down in the Atlantic Ocean successfully but faced a moment when the automatic control system failed and he had to manually control the capsule.
The Soviet Union had already made the first human orbit during April of the previous year with cosmonaut Yuri Gagarin.
United States --Marilyn Monroe sings Happy Birthday To President Kennedy Marilyn Monroe serenades President Kennedy on his birthday.
Marilyn Monroe made one of her last public appearances on May 19th at a birthday celebration for United States President John F Kennedy before her death.
The event became an iconic moment in pop culture when the actress sang an intimate, sultry, and memorable rendition of ""Happy Birthday"" to the world leader.
Monroe wore an intricately designed skin-tight beaded dress that was considered a little scandalous at the time.
The performance added to rumors that the two were having an affair and only three months later Monroe died of a drug overdose, ruled a probable suicide, under suspicious circumstances.
Meredith, an army veteran had made several attempts to enroll at the university but was forced away by Mississippi's governor and denied entry.
He was finally able to enter the school after being escorted by United States Marshals at the insistence of President Kennedy.
Meredith actively tested the new integration mandate and became a fearless pioneer of the Civil Rights Movement.
NASA Launches Ranger 3 Mission NASA’s Ranger 3 spacecraft launches on January 26th.
It was the United States’ first attempt at landing a spacecraft on the surface of the Moon.
If successful, the spacecraft was designed to transmit photos of the lunar surface before making a rough landing.
Unfortunately due to malfunctions with the guidance system, Ranger 3 never made it to the Moon.
It missed entering the lunar orbit by about 22,000 miles and instead entered a heliocentric orbit.
While NASA was never able to transmit photos of the surface from the mission, they did gain some engineering data related to the mission.
His speech outlined four basic rights intended to protect consumers from misleading advertising, defective products, and monopolistic practices.
The rights that were mentioned included the right to safety, the right to be informed, the right to choose, and the right to be heard.
Kennedy also proposed certain measures to enforce and implement the rights.
Once we receive your order we create your personalized print using the information that you include with your order.
The CIA began to recruit anti-Castro Cuban exiles training took place at United States Bases in Florida, Panama and Guatemala 3.
March 1960, the CIA put forward their plan for the overthrow of Castro's administration to the United States National Security Council , where it was given the support of United States President Dwight D Eisenhower 4.
January 1961 President Kennedy is briefed, together with all the major departments, on the latest plan for the invasion of Cuba to overthrow Castro.
President Kennedy authorized the active departments to continue, and to report progress.
April President Kennedy approved the invasion of beaches bordering the Bahia de Cochinos 7.
Due to their secret intelligence network, anticipating the invasion, Che Guevara stressed the importance of an armed civilian populace, stating ""all the Cuban people must become a guerrilla army, each and every Cuban must learn to handle and if necessary use firearms in defense of the nation.
April 15th eight Douglas B-26B Invader bombers in three groups simultaneously attacked three Cuban airfields at San Antonio de los Banos and at Ciudad Libertad , both near Havana.
April 16th CIA/Brigade 2506 invasion fleet sailed from Puerto Cabezas in Nicaragua to 'Rendezvous Point Zulu', about south of Cuba.
April 19th Due to the well organised and well informed Cuban forces Brigade 2506 ground forces retreat to the beaches in the face of considerable onslaught from Cuban government artillery, tanks and infantry and hoped for rescue by United States ships but due to heavy fire by Cuban tanks they were forced to withdraw 13.
December 1962 1,113 prisoners taken during the attempted invasion are exchanged for $53 million in food and medicine United States --The Space Needle The Space Needle an observation tower in Seattle, Washington is completed in time for the 1962 World's Fair More Information and Timeline for The Space Needle 1.
It was completed in less than 1 year just in time for the opening of the 1962 World's Fair 3.
The last elevator car was installed the day before the Fair opened on April 21st 5.
During the Worlds Fair the Space Needle drew over 2. million visitors, when nearly 20,000 people a day used its elevators. this was nearly 1/4 of all the visitors to the Worlds Fair The Space Needle is considered an icon of Seattle and still one of the most popular places to visit and photograph over fifty years later United States --Spider-Man Marvel's Spider-Man superhero makes his first appearance in a comic.
In June the iconic Marvel superhero Spider-Man made his first appearance in the Amazing Fantasy #15 comic.
The issue was dated for August but had actually hit the shelves in June.
Created by Stan Lee and Steve Ditko, Spider-Man was a teenage superhero whose nerdy alter-ego Peter Parker represented adolescent concerns and teenage tribulations in a way that no other comic book superhero had been able to previously.
Many teen readers connected to the character making him one of the most popular and enduring comic series characters in history.
More News and Key Events From 1962 Brazil World Cup Brazil beat Czechoslovakia 3-1 to win the 1962 World Cup United States Marilyn Monroe Marilyn Monroe is found dead on August 5 after apparently overdosing on sleeping pills United States Navy SEALS The United States Navy SEALS are created on January 1st as the United States Navy's principal special operations force, the special force was in existance prior dating back to World War II when the Navy ""Scouts and Raiders"" was formed.
Space -Ranger IV The first United States rocket Ranger IV lands on the moon on April 26th United States -Flavored Crisps / Chips First Ever Flavored Crisps / Chips sold Salt and Vinegar United States -First Wal-Mart The First Wal-Mart discount store is opened by by Sam Walton in Bentonville Arkansas United States -First Motel 6 Motel 6 opened it's 1st location in Santa Barbara, CA on June 25th, 1962.
