The end of the Cold War has led to a dramatic upsurge of interest in and writing about the Cuban missile crisis.
Now that we no longer live under the threat of nuclear holocaust, there is a natural fascination with the one brief moment when the world had to confront the possibility of total destruction.
The United State journalists, has released a fl estimated 80 percent of the Equally helpful, Soviet officials in the late 1980s, have been information about Soviet action this new body of information h also led to confusion, contra scholarly community. n The new literature can be d declassified documents, grou scholarly commentary.
The tw scholars a glimpse of the much has released since the mid-19 the two, because it is confine rather than containing acco highlight the prescience of D believe that the Russians were August 1962.
The documents selected by much better insight into the d much larger body of materials government to release throu documents enable scholars to e in detail.
As the editors make helpful annotated chronology, most important decisions outsid dark.
For that reason, the group co and David A Welch with bot important supplement to the av what the authors call ""critical 'Laurence Chang, ""The View from Missile Crisis Historiography and the Crisis Revisited, 134.
The first, at Hawk' consisted of Americans who took part in the ExComm and scholars who had studied the documentary record. to keep the conversation focused on key points, the pa ramble in their comments, to ignore the scholars whe contradictions between the participants' conference remarks in the ExComm transcripts, and to agree with when in fact they had disagreed at the time.
Massachusetts, in October 1987, this gathering brough American policymakers and scholars with three Sov nately, none of the Russians had been senior enough i part in the Kremlin's counterpart of the ExComm—Fy been one of Khrushchev's speechwriters, Sergo Mikoya what his father, First Deputy Premier Anastas I Mikoy Georgi Shaknazarov, a personal aide to then General Gorbachev, offered insights based on his conversa Dobrynin, the Soviet ambassador to the United States i officials offered two primary revelations.
The first was assertion that Khrushchev felt that the American Jupit justified his placing SS-4s and SS-5s in Cuba.
In addition to American and Soviet participants, the last three c delegation.
Mark Kramer argues that Gribkov has since retracted his statement that the Soviet commander had the authority to use tactical nuclear weapons and that Dobrynin has also withdrawn his claim to have met with Robert Kennedy on the evening of 26 October 1962.
It seems fair to conclude that historians should avoid relying on tantalizing statements by Soviet participants that cannot be checked against the documentary record.
On the American side, Dino Brugioni offers a fascinating glimpse into the crucial role played by photo interpreters at the obscure National Photographic Interpretation Center in Washington.
He explains the technical expertise required to take the faint images of military equipment in Cuba on the U-2 photographs and discern the telltale ""signatures"" of Soviet SS-4 and SS-5 missiles.
Blight and his coauthors rebut Kramer's assertion, pointing out that he accepts Gribkov's later statements at face value while refusing to credit his earlier assertion.
As Brugioni m these years of painstaking preparation, not just good luck photo interpreters to spot the Soviet missiles in Cuba.
Brugioni also emphasizes the importance of the low-lev conducted by the navy and air force during the cruci President Kennedy's 22 October speech.
Under constant ri Soviet SA-2 surface-to-air missiles and Castro's own antia these pilots, primarily navy and Marine Corps aviators, mo of missile deployment at the sites located by the U-2 fligh targeting information for either a surgical air strike or ta American invasion of Cuba.
Only on Saturday, 27 Octo aircraft guns fire at an American reconnaissance plane, h Had the American plane not been able to return safely to Brenner, this loss, added to the U-2 shot down earlie ""likely"" have led President Kennedy to launch a retaliatory m The recent accounts of the crisis use both the newly available documents and the spate of reminiscences to offer some interesting variations on a familiar story.
In an effort to reach a broad audience, Robert Smith Thompson writes a breezy and irreverent narrative that ranges from the bizarre to the shrewd in its interpretation.
Thus he seizes on McCone's warnings of Soviet offensive missiles in Cuba to argue that Kennedy knew all along about the SS-4s and SS-5s and simply set Khrushchev up for a confrontation in which the American nuclear advantage would force him into a humiliating surrender.
Thompson is on somewhat more solid footing in using the recent Dobrynin disclosures to argue that it was Robert Kennedy's signal of American willingness to trade the Jupiters in Turkey that led Khrushchev to make this part of his public proposal on Saturday, 27 October.
The early satellites were programmed to focus on the Soviet Union and China; in addition, it took several weeks before their film capsules were ejected and processed.
U-2 photographs were also much sharper and clearer than the early satellite pictures.
Brugioni points out, however, that the satellite pictures of the Soviet Union had proved very helpful in establishing the normal ""signature"" of Russian missile sites—they gave the photo interpreters a guide to the size of launchers, the arrangement of missile storage buildings and other features typical of a missile installation.
Michael Beschloss presents the interaction between the Although Beschloss praises JF it to a peaceful resolution, Kennedy could have avoided th spring of 1962, that the Unit Cuba.
Beschloss provides a more substantial argument by using new informa tion to indict Kennedy for making a secret deal to swap the Jupiters in Turkey for the SS-4s and SS-5s in Cuba.
Citing recent disclosures by McGeorge Bundy and Dean Rusk, Beschloss accuses Kennedy of playing politics with the crisis by doing covertly what he refused to do publicly.
He realized that he could not convince the world that obsolete nuclear missiles in Turkey were worth the risk of nuclear war, yet in light of Republican warnings on Cuba, he felt it would be impossible politically to back down in public.
His solution was to negotiate a private deal through his brother and Dobrynin if possible, through U Thant and the United Nations if necessary.
When Khrushchev gave in without demanding a public quid pro quo, Kennedy won a great political and personal victory.
The contributors to James Nathan's important collection of essays are much harder on Kennedy.
He is most devastating in his comments on Ted Sorensen, pointing out that as editor of Robert Kennedy's memoir, Sorensen has admitted deliberately omitting passages from the attorney general's diary that confirmed that the United States was giving a secret pledge to remove the Jupiters as part of its offer to Khrushchev.
Both Bernstein and Ned Lebow conclude that contrary to the argument of Thomas Paterson and William Brophy, Kennedy was indeed playing politics with the Cuban missile crisis.
It was not a simple case of using the crisis to win votes, Lebow argues.
Sorensen, when asked by Bernstein, had no knowledge of their whereabouts.
Laurence Chang relies heavil disclosures, particularly those of Burlatsky, to argue t advisers misread Khrushchev's intentions.
Rather than offensive in the Cold War, including a possible move a argues that the Soviet initiative was a defensiv Khrushchev saw as ""provocative"" American policie nuclear buildup, placing Jupiters in Turkey, and plann Cuba.
James Hershberg, in an updated version of History article, stresses this last point, arguing tha intention, it is quite understandable that the Soviets wo Mongoose could only culminate in an American in lending credence to Khrushchev's claim that the mi defensive in character.
Overall, the Nathan volu support to revisionist arguments and to sustain T Khrushchev, not Kennedy, was the real victor.
IV Two themes stand out clearly amid the continuing d Soviets term the Caribbean crisis of 1962.
The crisis, while inherently dangerous, did not bring the world to the brink of nuclear war.
And the principal players behaved quite differently than contemporaries believed.
Recent information on both American and Soviet behavior during the crisis suggests that the danger of nuclear war was not as great as once thought.
Dean Rusk's revelation about Kennedy's willingness to seek a swap of the Jupiters in Turkey for the Soviet missiles in Cuba through the United Nations reinforces the arguments made by McGeorge Bundy and Robert McNamara at the Hawk's Cay conference.
They speculated that if Khrushchev had not given in on Sunday, 28 October, Kennedy would have intensified the blockade of Cuba rather than authorizing an invasion of the island.
Despite the skepticism of the scholars at this conference, McNamara asserted that he thought the chances of a nuclear war were only one in fifty.
The one exception would be Lebow, who argues that the new evidence both confirms and refutes various of the traditional and revisionist arguments and thus requires a new synthesis.
An American invasion of Cuba, in light of the new information, could only have ended in ""utter disaster ""t® It seems unwise, however, to rely on the recollection of a single Soviet official to conclude that Khrushchev would have risked nuclear war over Cuba.
Raymond Garthoff points out that American intelligence could find no indication that the Soviets placed their nuclear forces on alert during the crisis.
Garthoff has expressed skepticism of General Gribkov's later claim to the contrary, noting that Gribkov seemed puzzled that his disclosure at the Havana conference caused such consternation.
Unless documentary evidence can be found to substantiate Gribkov's assertion, there seems to be little reason to accept it as proof of the likelihood of nuclear war in 1962.
More revealing of Khrushchev's state of mind is the recent disclosure of his reaction to Castro's urgent plea for the Soviet Union to launch a preemptive nuclear strike against the United States to thwart the expected invasion of Cuba.
As Philip Brenner points out, either this plea, or a similar warning from the Soviet ambassador in Cuba, may well have caused Khrushchev to give in so quickly and accept the American no-invasion offer on Sunday, 28 October.
Barton Bernstein notes that in his memoir published in 1990, Dean Rusk claimed that he had suggested the UN approach to Kennedy, who then told him to go ahead.
Rusk's initial, 1987, statement read at the Hawk's Cay conference asserted that Kennedy had instructed him to make the approach to U Thant by way of Andrew Cordier.
Unfortunately, there is no documentary evidence to support Rusk's statements or to clarify who in fact first suggested this approach.
Presumably, Cordier wrote down the precise words Rusk gave to him over the telephone; a search of his papers might yet tum up this missing evidence.
As our knowledge of the crisis continues to expand, o behavior of the leaders changes as well.
While it has be deride Arthur Schlesinger's description of Kenned toughness and restraint, of will, nerve, and wisdom, so so matchlessly calibrated that dazzled the world, equally damaging to the revisionist claim that the Ameri pursue a diplomatic approach and needlessly risked nuc both Beschloss and Thompson make clear, Kennedy opinion would never comprehend why Soviet missiles i from American missiles in Turkey.
He knew he had to than risk war over the obsolete Jupiters, but he appar that he would keep this move as his trump card, to be rather than the beginning of the negotiations.
It seems c have given up the Jupiters through some form of U bluffing so well that he even fooled most of his own a force Khrushchev to accept his terms without disclosing regarding the missiles in Turkey.
As Kennedy's rec shown, his conduct was always more prudent and cautiou the Cuban missile crisis, he proved successful in running nuclear war to achieve a stunning political victory.
The usual stereotype of Nikita Khrushchev as a dang nearly brought about a nuclear war with his reckless b gradually changing.
One need not go as far as Thompso the Soviet leader as the true hero of the crisis, but the Soviet side, as Chang and Lebow point out, suggests that to use the missiles to launch a new diplomatic offen Khrushchev was acting defensively, both to protect Ca attempts to topple him from power and to redress the e that Kennedy had opened up over the Soviet Union.
His Beschloss convincingly, was his inability to anticipate K Not only did he underestimate the ability of American i the missiles, but he failed to realize that Kennedy woul risk both political defeat at home and humiliation befor did not make the same mistake, being careful to giv saving way out with the pledge not to invade Cuba. whatever miscalculations led the Soviet leader to place t decision to remove the missiles.
Three of the contributors to Nathan's volume c Nathan even leaves out the reference to ""restraint"" in his version.
