The utility of models like this one for addressing counterfactual and policy questions is discussed, and substantive conclusions based on the model are reached.
The most noteworthy of these is that a shorter perceived crisis time might well have led to the selection by the United States of more severe military options.
Other conclusions deal with the implications of changes in Kennedy's beliefs for option choices, with Kennedy's low ranking of most nonmilitary options, and with the minimal chance of a passive U.S. response.
President John F Kennedy assigned a team of advisers (later known as the ""Executive Committee of the National Security 1.
The use of the adjective ""offensive"" reflects the way the purpose of the missile base was described to Kennedy.
We found no strong evidence to suggest that this description was not widely shared within the ExCom discussions.
All this is, of course, independent of what the ""actual"" purpose of the base may have been.
As best we could determine, the Soviets never granted that the purpose of either the base or the missiles was offensive.
Indeed, they agreed only to remove those missiles you ""call"" offensive.
Those considered ranged from doing nothing to launching a surprise air strike on the installations.
A United States naval quarantine of Cuba coupled with negotiations with Soviet Politburo Chairman Khrushchev led to assurances that the United States would not invade Cuba and a Soviet promise to remove certain missiles from Cuba.
This incident is of considerable historical importance as one of the few known nuclear crises in world history.
There are, however, some more subtle reasons for the event's importance.
First among these is the growing evidence that decision makers use significant ""precedents"" in developing ways of dealing with new problems.
United States decision making during the missile crisis is widely regarded as being of high quality.
To a large extent, this positive evaluation may be related to the apparently benign ending of the crisis.
If, however, the outcome could plausibly have been less desirable, then the status of the crisis as a positive precedent must be questioned.
Many of the ""revisionist"" accounts of the U.S. handling of the missile crisis have raised serious objections to treating the case as a positive precedent.
Such counterfactual assertions are of importance both to the ""science"" of foreign policy decision making and to the policy relevance of that science.
The initial programming was done by Paul Anderson with help from Jim Ludwig.
We have benefited from the comments of Hayward Alker, Kristi Andersen, Paul Anderson, James Bennett, Janet Martin, and Howard Tamashiro.
A discussion of both the overall utility of asking counterfactual questions and the role of such questions in policy analysis will appear later in this article.
Addressing Counterfactuals Understanding how decisions are made involves knowing something about the rationale used in reaching the decision.
Decision making is a contextual activity; how one evaluates and selects possible courses of action will depend in part on how one interprets the environment.
If Kennedy viewed the presence of missiles in Cuba as only a domestic political issue, his decision making might well have been different than if he had interpreted it as primarily a United States national security issue.
The point is not merely that Kennedy would have considered different alternatives under different interpretations , but that he would have interpreted the ""same"" alternatives in different ways.
As an example, under either the domestic or national security interpretations just mentioned, Kennedy would have had the option of doing nothing.
Yet the meaning of doing nothing would have been linked to his interpretation of the problem.
In other words, decision makers deal with problems under some description.
To understand their actions, we must know something of the description actually used.
An adequate understanding of how a decision was reached should be capable of addressing counterfactuals.
It is in providing guidelines for answering questions of what might have happened had events unfolded in a different, though not implausible, 4.
Brandon provides a description of the importance of issue interpretation in Kennedy's decision making with respect to the Skybolt Agreement.
Unfortunately, the issue of historical counterfactuals is especially muddled within the social sciences.
To talk of counterfactuals one must essentially be willing to assume that, given some theory of social phenomena, it makes sense to talk about ""possible worlds"" that are different from, though similar to, the world in which we live.
A possible world might be viewed as a set-theoretic structure that can serve as a model for a version of the theory at hand.
The model-theoretic perspective has the advantage of making it clear that a possible world could contain different objects than does the actual world.
In the missile crisis, for example, we can ask what would have happened had Robert McNamara dropped out of ExCom after he had asserted ""a missile is a missile"" and been ignored.
The point is that counterfactual assertions express propositions about possible worlds and, as such, can be assigned truth values.
Among the criteria viewed here as central to ""designing"" policies,6 are the ability to identify and evaluate options, consideration of goals, clarity of assumptions, and judgments of context similarity.
We will then examine how exploring conterfactuals affects each of these.
This view of counterfactuals does not, of course, obviate the need to have a ""good"" understanding of relevant causal and intentional interactions.
The simulation model we describe below is intended to provide such an understanding; that is, it will serve as our theory.
With respect to the missile crisis, for instance, documents from the Kennedy Library indicate that options such as a blockade and an air strike were identified and researched well in advance of the crisis.
Since the very nature of asking counterfactual questions involves posing alternatives, analysis that uses counterfactuals necessarily fulfills the spirit of the option identification criterion.
Option evaluation, on the other hand, involves tracing through the consequences of alternatives and explicitly comparing those consequences to each other in order to facilitate the choice process.
Asking counterfactual questions makes the baseline of comparison clear, thereby aiding considerably in option evaluation.
Many scholars who have observed policy processes have disagreed concerning the degree to which goals are and should be considered.
However, it seems apparent that to select policies, some sense of direction must guide choices.
The use of conterfactuals allows one to ask questions concerning how various alternatives might have achieved a desired outcome.
In other words, a better understanding of paths to goal achievement can be facilitated through an appropriate use of counterfactuals.
Carefully constructed theory will support answers to various counterfactual questions that link past alternatives to goal achievement.
When this happens, better goal achievement in future foreign policy situations is possible.
In making foreign policy decisions, human nature seems to dictate that judgments about similarity of context are often used as guides.
Which previous situation is seen as being most analogous leads to assuming that certain lessons should apply in a given situation.
See the memorandum from Abram Chayes to McGeorge Bundy in early September 1962, and that from Norbert Schleir to Robert Kennedy on August 30, 1962.
Given the crucial role that judgment can play, making such a judgment and its implications clear are important features of effective foreign (or domestic) policymaking.
The way in which we use counterfactuals in our simulation involves stating which conditions lead to which actions.
When an argument is constructed in such a way that a particular statement linking a condition with an action applies to both a past and a present circumstance, a judgment of context similarity has been incorporated.
In short, one of the reasons why we chose to ask counterfactual questions is that, with respect to the criteria offered here for designing effective policies (option identification and evaluation, goal consideration, clarity of assumptions, and explicitness of a context similarity judgment), counterfactuals are useful.
The Computer Program The approach we have taken in analyzing Kennedy's decision making during the missile crisis has its roots in work done in artificial intelligence.
More familiar computer modeling efforts such as Forrester or Crecine have been designed to capture the dynamic behavior of parts of the political system.
The model equations are intended to capture the behavior of the system being simulated.
The approach presented in this article is a first attempt to go one step deeper to develop a theory of how the system behayes.
Therefore, while we are initially concerned with descriptive adequacy, we are primarily interested in plausibly capturing how Kennedy reached his decisions.
The United States is willing to negotiate privately with the Soviet Union concerning missiles in Cuba.
The United States will not negotiate privately with the Soviet Union concerning missiles in Cuba.
While each of these three sentences is ""about"" negotiations between the United States and the USSR, the meanings are different.
The semantic kernel is designed to take advantage of common characteristics of sentences, while letting such things as ""actor,"" ""subject,"" and ""logical connective"" vary.
In the instance of negotiation, the basic kernel structure contains a symbol indicating negotiation, together with variables for the initiating actor, the target actor, the ""channel"" , and the subject of negotiation.
Thus, NEGOTIATE (ACTOR 1, ACTOR 2, CHANNEL, SUBJECT) is the basic kernel scheme for a negotiation.
The meanings of S I, S2, and S3 depend in part on whether the statement is positive (S I and S2) or negative , whether the statement is declarative (S I and S3) or interrogative , and whether the source of the statement is the United States or the USSR 10.
While semantic kernels have a strong structural similarity to the conceptual dependency theory developed by Schank , no claim is being made here of having identified ""basic"" political verb forms.
In addition, there are four other verbs (WARN, OFFER, CONDEMN, ACCEPT) that share this basic kernel structure.
The semantic kernels ""solve "" the combinatorial explosion that would result if JFK/CBA were to have a separate procedure for recognizing every distinct sentence.
Our ability to ""understand"" the sentence depends on our ability to create a context in which to interpret it.
Similarly, in decision making, the meaning of an alternative or offer is in 11.
These kernels are compatible with an infinite number of natural language sentences.
The point of the parser and the grammar is to do the work of ""creating"" the semantic kernels.
Bransford and Johnson present a fascinating experiment that forcefully illustrates this point.
When we say the meaning of an alternative is context dependent, we are saying its meaning depends in part on the decision makers' current knowledge of the state of the decision environment andtheir beliefs about the causal and intentional workings of that environment.
Within JFK/CBA, the interpretation of semantic kernels is modified by both a data structure containing tokens representing knowledge of the current state of the crisis and a set of rules that describes Kennedy's beliefs about such things as the USSR, diplomacy, and the military.
This data structure is referred to as an ambient information structure , and the tokens it contains are called state knowledge elements.
The rules describing Kennedy's beliefs are in the form of CONDITION ACTION statements or production rules.
These rules can be interpreted as saying that if certain conditions are satisfied, then certain actions are to be taken.
If, as an example, the AIS contains tokens indicating that ""missiles in Cuba will be operational in five days"" and that ""Khrushchev is a high risk taker,"" and if a semantic kernel is received indicating that advisers recommend a surgical air strike against Cuba and that they believe the USSR will offer to negotiate after such a strike, then JFK/CBA takes the action of telling his advisers that he finds their advice implausible and that they should rethink it.
However, if the AIS has a token indicating ""Khrushchev is a low risk taker,"" then JFK/CBA will interpret the ""same"" advice as being plausible.
In this way, context interacts with new information to produce an interpretation.
Yet, as Newell observed, each of these languages carries with it a precise control structure.
For many purposes, it is perfectly appropriate to let the programming language determine in large part the control structure.
If, however, as in the present case, one wishes to make a theoretical statement using the structure of the program itself, it is important to pay attention to the control structure since any control structure will have imbedded within it theoretical claims about the mechanism being simulated.
At the same time, production rules are fairly simple to write and do not require that relations be specified in an algebraic manner.
Moreover, the form of production rules is flexible enough to permit stating relations in a fairly ""natural"" way.
The ACTIONs consist of modifications in the AIS, behaviors, or other forms of symbolic activities.
The term ""control structure"" refers to the conditional sequencing of the flow of information provided by the compiler.
The JFK/CBA program is written in SPITBOL (an interactive version of SNOBOL) to run on an AMDAHL V6 machine.
If a condition is not satisfied, the next production rule in the ordered list of production rules is considered.
If a condition is satisfied, the actions to the right of the arrow are taken.
The AIS is a stack in which a new element appears at the top pushing all else in the stack down one position.
It, too, is structured as a linear list, and the tokens it contains represent Kennedy's current knowledge about the crisis.
In this way, JFK/CBA is capable of modeling limitations of human beings in processing ""new"" information.
Thus, a new token might represent a combination of the information in several old ones.
Indeed, the interpretation of a semantic kernel is itself a modification of the contents of the AIS.20 In this manner, JFK/CBA models how Kennedy's past ""experience"" modifies behavior.
The examples that follow illustrate how critical this feature is to the analysis of counterfactuals.
Thorson and Miller discuss the logical relations between production systems and mathematical systems theory.
Formally, within JFK/CBA, ""interpretation"" is a function that has the crossproduct of production rules and AIS tokens as its domain and AIS tokens as its range.
Kennedy is modeled as a decision maker who requests and evaluates advice about possible courses of action for the United States and probable USSR responses.
JFK/CBA will either await further information or select some course of action.
The user of the simulation presents information to JFK/ CBA in the form of semantic kernels.
Attached to each new kernel must be a parameter indicating the ""timeliness"" of the information.
When attached to kernels representing ACTIONS taken by JFK/ CBA or Khrushchev, they are used to decrement the ""clock"" showing the estimated time remaining before the missiles become operational.
When the time parameter is attached to possible United States or U.S.S.R. actions, JFK/CBA uses it to determine how many half-days it will take to complete the action.
JFK/ CBA is started by informing it that there is evidence that the USSR is constructing an ""offensive"" missile base in Cuba.
This information goes into the AIS and JFK/CBA responds with a request for options.
Following this JFK/CBA asks for probable Soviet responses to each option provided.
JFK/ CBA then evaluates the plausibility of the suggested possible Soviet responses.
This plausibility evaluation is a result of both current knowledge and beliefs , and the production rules.
JFK/ CBA will then ask the advisers what the United States should do in light of each possible Soviet response.
The result of all this is a decision tree with United States actions forming the initial nodes and possible Soviet responses, and 21.
These rules are intended to reflect Kennedy's beliefs about future states of the world given particular U.S. actions.
X This function takes the form of 63 production rules, which constitute the theorized basis of Kennedy's beliefs about relevant causal and international relations.
The substantive content of the production rules is based on both the published literature and an analysis of available documents at the Kennedy Library.
While it now appears that at least some of the ExCom meetings were taped, these tapes have not been made available for study.
Nonetheless, the Library documents were especially useful in helping to establish a detailed time line for the crisis.
The crisis period22 was divided into half-day periods and, to the extent possible, all meetings were charted together with the names of participants.
This, coupled with the minutes of many ExCom meetings, made it possible to get fairly good estimates of the kind and time of information President Kennedy had available to him during the most acute period of the crisis.
At this point, JFK/CBA is not detailed enough to take into account all of the information that has been collected.
If an acceptable alternative is identified, then JFK/CBA adopts that action and the AIS is updated.
JFK/CBA then waits for new semantic kernels indicating actions by the USSR or new advice.
This process continues until the simulation enters one of four terminal states.
THE CURRENT SITUATION IS BEYOND THE CAPABILITIES OF THE SIMULATION is printed.
Any alternative whose completion would extend beyond the missiles' expected operational date is rejected.
If two alternatives are both acceptable, JFK/ CBA will select the first acceptable alternative considered.
Space limitations prohibit a complete listing of the program, though copies are available on request from the first author.
Examples of several of the production systems within JFK/ CBA are provide in Appendices C and D These production rules (plus those not provided) serve as our theory of Kennedy's decision process.
The easiest is to provide JFK/ CBA with either different information or the ""same"" kernels in a different order.
For example, the size of the AIS might be modified or new production rules might be written.
In this way, a simulation capable of distinguishing a greater number of ""macro"" states might be constructed.
One of the nice, albeit frustrating, aspects of these sorts of simulations is that seemingly everything must be specified.
The ""BEYOND THE CAPABILITIES OF THE SIMULATION"" message appeared frequently in the initial development of the simulation.
This reflected our having left relevant detail out of the code, indicating the importance of the order in which alternatives are considered.
It also became clear that JFK/ CBA had to be able to distinguish between the United States or the USSR deliberately initiating a war , and war simply ""breaking"" out 23.
This reflects an attempt to model Kennedy as a satisficing decision maker.
Given the importance of the crisis and the relatively small number of alternatives under active consideration, this is a debatable design decision.
In any event, there are a number of ways in which the user can explore alternative situations within JFK/CBA; however, these changes do not involve simply changing a numerical equation or modifying a parameter value.
Question Surrounding the Model's Validity As was mentioned earlier, the accuracy of answers to counterfactual questions is dependent in large part on the quality of the theory used to suggest those answers.
We will show that our base-run model accounts rather well for the events of the missile crisis by first outlining the documentary evidence that was used in constructing the model, and then discussing in some detail a base-case run of the simulation.
In reviewing options considered by the United States in the missile crisis, Allison lists doing nothing, diplomatic pressure , secret approach to Castro, invasion, surgical air strike, and blockade.
We supplemented such option summaries as Allison's and Kennedy's with a search of United States government documents.
Research on this project relied heavily on recently declassified documents obtained through the John F Kennedy Library.
One important point to note here is that the base-case run reported here does not trace the crisis all the way to its conclusion.
Depending on which ""branch"" is followed, between 11 and 26 half-days are traced in this base run.
In other words, we failed to find documentation to convince us of the exact identity of the set of U.S. responses to each of the posited Soviet responses, or about how long each United States response was expected to take.
First, the option considered most favorable through the base run reported here is a blockade of Cuba.
Our documentation supports the assertion that a blockade was the favored option at this stage of the crisis.
More generally, the simulation seems to generate accurately both the actual events and the timing of these events with the base-run input.
This run was initialized by indicating that the simulated Kennedy views the USSR as a high risk taker.
The user next provides a semantic kernel that JFK/ CBA interprets to mean that evidence of 25.
JFK/CBA has the capability of tracing the crisis through to its finish.
This article's substantive conclusions summarize patterns drawn from counterfactual runs that continued to the end of the crisis.
When all these options have been entered, JFK/CBA prompts the user to find out what advisers believe the USSR will do in response to each of the United States options.
S options, although some were rejected by JFK/ CBA as being implausible Soviet responses.
An example of one such response is advice that the Soviets might respond to a medium intensity United States attack on Cuba by negotiating through private channels with the U.S. concerning the possibility of the Soviets attacking Berlin.
JFK/ CBA judged this not to be a plausible response for the high-risk Soviets, for whom actual attack would be more likely than private negotiations.
They were rejected because they were inconsistent with the assumption that Kennedy viewed the Soviets as high risk takers.
As the crisis unfolds and new information becomes available, JFK/CBA may select new options and reevaluate old ones.
In order to arrive at an overall choice, each suggested United States option together with one plausible Soviet response is ranked before JFK/CBA selects a policy.
These descriptions are intended to provide an illustration of how JFK/CBA can be used to address counterfactual questions about the missile crisis.
Unlike the first run, which was intended to reproduce the actual early stages of the crisis, subsequent runs were designed to introduce various counterfactuals and to examine their impact on Kennedy's decision making.
The purpose of this counterfactual run is to evaluate what impact a change in Kennedy's perception of his adversary might have had on the crisis.
One resultant difference was that, of the offered Soviet responses, none was rejected as being implausible.
The simulation has the capacity to follow through to the end of the crisis, although that path was not traveled in this particular run.
It was chosen with the reasoning that one of the Soviet responses to that United States option-blockading Berlin-resulted in a state of the world that was tied for most desirable.
It should be noted that the order in which alternatives are considered is a part of the simulation itself; that is, order will result from the order in which ""advice"" is given andthe sequencing of the production rules themselves.
One difference is that the scenario of ""the United States intercepting Soviet ships"" followed by ""the USSR publicly warning the United States that they might launch a nuclear attack against the United States"" is now seen as plausible.
While the high-risk simulation rejected this scenario as implausible,28 this low-risk -run accepts i and ranks it tied for the most favorable ranking.
Thus in the second run of the simulation, the rankings of world states are changed due to the changed view of the Soviet Union's attitude toward risk.
For example, different Soviet responses to a United States blockade of Cuba were posited, We (as simulated advisers) did not suggest the possibility of the USSR responding with a Berlin blockade.
Rather, it was suggested that the Soviets might either invade Berlin or move troops to Berlin.
All other changes in run 3 involved changes in the posited intensity of specific actions.
Two United States air strikes of Cuba were moved from medium to low intensity, as was one United States attack on Cuba.
In the first of those cases, the Soviet air strike response was changed from medium to high intensity.
In all five of these cases, Kennedy's perceptions of relative rankings are not altered by changes in his intensity estimates.
The results of the various runs illustrate how JFK / CBA can be used to address counterfactual questions.
Based on them, it is clear that the image JFK/CBA has of the Soviet Union's willingness to take risks is of considerable importance in determining which responses will be considered.
However, any study of historical counterfactuals can be no better than the model it uses.
Since counterfactuals have not occurred (at least in this world), actual outcome is not a very helpful measuring device for evaluating such models.
This raises some difficult issues to which we can offer only very tentative and incomplete responses.
First, an analysis of the production rules themselves can be of help in assessing the quality of the model.
In the former case, questions concerning whether a particular condition empirically seems to lead to the posited ""resultant"" action can be used in evaluating the rules.
In the case of plausibility, one essentially asks whether it makes sense that a particular condition is posited as leading to a particular action.
In both of these ways, the explicitness of assumptions helps provide a basis for assessment.
Nevertheless, the reader should keep in mind the difficulty of assessing the quality of any model based on counterfactuals.
With these caveats in mind, we will examine how (under the JFK/CBA model) Kennedy's assessment of options and consequent actions would have changed had his ordering of states of the world been different.
A representation of Kennedy that placed a higher value on immediate tranquillity would presumably reverse the ordering of these two states of the world.
This new representation of Kennedy would result in a different set of option choices.
They then enter into negotiations on the subject with the United States, and simultaneously continue to construct the missile base.
The second scenario finds the United States challenge to the Soviet actions followed by inaction on the part of the United States.
This in turn triggers a statement by the Soviet Union that it will remove missiles from Cuba.
The original ordering in which Kennedy prefers a U.S. challenge to a Soviet nonchallenge leads to a choice of options that he feels will contribute to scenario 1 over those that he sees as likely to promote scenario 2.
In substantive terms, a representation of Kennedy's beliefs and preferences that prefers a U.S. challenge would be likely to enter into negotiations under the circumstances that have been indicated.
On the other hand, a representation of Kennedy as preferring a Soviet nonchallenge would be more likely to choose a path of United States inaction under these circumstances.
Thus changes in the state of the world ordering can lead to significant differences in option choices.
A second finding relates to the amount of time Kennedy perceived that he had during the crisis.
If he had judged that the missiles would become operational in seven rather than thirteen days, several changes would have resulted.
Fewer iterations of United States and Soviet responses to each other could have been carried out.
This means that Kennedy would have had no choice but to construct less elaborate scenarios.
Consequently, options that included periods of inaction and merely verbal behavior would either be impossible or ranked quite low.
In short, our simulation shows that a shorter crisis time might well have lead to relatively severe military option choices.
One illustration of this conclusion can be found in the simulated Kennedy response to a Soviet offer to negotiate regarding their missiles in Cuba.
With the exact same U.S. options and projected Soviet responses, Kennedy chooses to negotiate when the time horizon for missile completion is long, but to launch an air strike or a blockade when that time horizon is short.
A blockade is the least aggressive of the options that Kennedy would rank highly, according to JFK/CBA.29 This is a noteworthy conclusion, given that some of the literature on the Cuban missile crisis has viewed the choice of a blockade option as indicative of a Kennedy propensity to act in a restrained manner.
This conclusion argues that Kennedy ranked most nonmilitary options quite low.
For all practical purposes, Kennedy will reject ""no action"" in the face of any option that involves action.
Rather than considering a blockade in combination with negotiations, he prefers to consider either a blockade or negotiations.
These two features taken together mean that passive United States responses have very little chance of serious consideration.
It should be remembered that this simulation deals only with the missile crisis.
Our purpose was to investigate counterfactual questions by constructing a mechanism that could be asked to behave in ""worlds"" other than the one that actually existed.
Important questions that were not discussed in this article are those dealing in a more rigorous fashion with standards for evaluating the empirical adequacy of constructivist forms of explanation.
Clearly, many of the standard approaches to testing are of only marginal use here.
One additional conclusion, relating to the policy utility of JFK/CBA, needs to be discussed here.
Even if the reader is convinced by our earlier arguments that asking counterfactual questions can be quite useful in policymaking, it does not necessarily follow that a simulation like JFK/CBA is or can be 29.
This conclusion is corroborated by the declassified documents discussed earlier.
Let us now, then, address the issue of the utility of JFK/CBA for policymakers.
We must acknowledge at this point that simulating the Cuban missile crisis is presently of greater interest to academics than to policymakers.
The issue might better be generalized to the utility of similar simulations of individuals and situations that are deemed current or relevant by a particular policymaker.
The basic task of policymakers leads them to ask questions concerning what they can do in a given situation.
Such statistically oriented approaches as Bayesian decision analysis have often been advanced as useful tools for policymakers.
A possible advantage of JFK/CBA over such approaches would obtain if policymakers are uncomfortable having to estimate the probabilities of large numbers of events.
Building a comparatively small number of ""if-then scenarios"" would probably seem more natural to policymakers than putting numbers on each option.
However, enough careful historical work supports it so that it would certainly be useful as one input into a decision process.
We hope with this effort to have illustrated how computer simulations using artificial intelligence techniques can help to provide leverage in understanding a complex political phenomenon such as crisis decision making.
Nevertheless, for reasons discussed above, it does do a farily good job of reproducing a number of important aspects of the crisis, supporting its use as a basis for both substantive and methodological investigation.
C,US/' , 'S7') A '0,'UC<S7>','OLD','S11') :S EPD1O C/POS,DEC,US//','S7') * A ',BVTC<S7>',' LO','S10') :S EPD10.
