During the Cuban crisis he opposed the idea of a surprise air strike, like many others offering the analogy to Pearl Harbor, and favored instead the blockade option, which would give time to the Soviets to reflect and consider backing down.
Ball later advised against United States involvement in the Vietnam War.
In 1953, at the age of 34, Bundy became the youngest ever dean of Harvard’s Faculty of Arts and Sciences, before serving as National Security Adviser from 1961 to 1966.
For example, Bundy made the case for doing nothing about the Soviet missiles in Cuba.
The next day he changed his mind and favored decisive action – a surprise air strike, as the blockade would not be enough to remove the missiles from Cuba.
Initially he favored a military strike but later, along with Thompson, Dillon proposed to begin with the blockade, refuse negotiations, demand removal of the missiles, and threaten further military action.
Dillon argued that the President had to show his firm intentions to the Russians and not look as if he were backing down.
He first suggested the idea of using the blockade as a way to present the Soviets with an ultimatum to remove the missiles or face military action.
A graduate of Yale, with a background in law, Gilpatric served as Deputy Secretary of Defense from 1961 to 1964.
During the missile crisis, Gilpatric opposed the military strike option and supported the blockade.
Alexis Johnson had served in various diplomatic roles in Asia before becoming Deputy Under Secretary for Political Affairs from 1961 to 1964.
He thought the blockade could be a valuable first step, combined with other political and military actions, and helped prepare plans to implement it.
On October 16 he sided with those in favor of a strike and advised the president unsuccessfully against conferring with congressmen and United States allies on ways to resolve the crisis, as Johnson believed they would provide little help.
At the height of the crisis, Robert Kennedy met with Soviet ambassador Anatoly Dobrynin and made explicit the threat of an imminent United States attack, while also delivering the President’s secret promise to withdraw United States Jupiter missiles from Turkey in four to five months.
From 1962 to 1964 Edwin Martin served as Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs, guiding the Kennedy administration’s policies toward Latin America.
During the missile crisis, he favored the blockade option and helped to brief members of the Organization of American States to obtain their backing for it.
After the Bay of Pigs, John McCone replaced Allen Dulles as CIA Director.
McCone foresaw the Soviet deployment of missiles in Cuba and ordered the U-2 flights on October 14 that discovered them.
Therefore, he argued that before an air strike, Castro and Khrushchev should be given warning and 24 hours to begin dismantling and removing the missiles.
A business executive and former president of Ford Motor Co., Robert McNamara served as Secretary of Defense from 1961 to 1968, before becoming president of the World Bank.
He first raised for consideration the option of a blockade on October 16.
A persuasive advocate for the blockade, McNamara believed it was important to keep all options on the table and leave the door open to negotiations, rather than issue an ultimatum that the United States would order an air attack on Cuba if the missiles were not removed.
He feared that any sudden military move could provoke a response from the Soviets that could trigger a nuclear war.
Paul Nitze had famously drafted National Security Council memo NSC-68 in 1950, which helped shape United States policy during the Cold War, by calling for a substantial increase in military spending and “a rapid build-up of the political, economic, and military strength in the free world” to contain the Soviet threat.
In 1961 he became McGeorge Bundy’s deputy, and later in the year he was appointed Chairman of the Policy Planning Council at the State Department.
During the missile crisis, Rostow recommended putting on more pressure by instituting a POL blockade, but the idea was rejected as others doubted its effectiveness.
In 1966 Rostow succeeded Bundy as national security adviser and became a strong supporter of United States involvement in Vietnam.
The idea was ruled out as it would give advance warning about the U.S.’ intentions, and there was only a slight chance that Castro would accept it.
Rusk rejected the sudden air strike option, because of the risk of escalating actions leading to general war, as well as on moral grounds.
He advised the President to consult with United States allies and institute a blockade, with the objective of freezing the situation and sending UN monitoring teams to Cuba, rather than issuing an ultimatum.
The President’s chief speechwriter and close confidant, Sorensen advocated a naval blockade as the best first response to the Soviet missiles in Cuba.
Along with McNamara, he believed the blockade could only freeze the status quo and open the door to negotiations.
While it would put a halt to further shipments of missiles, the blockade would not force the Soviets to remove the missiles already in place in Cuba.
Army Chief of Staff under President Eisenhower and Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff during the Kennedy Administration, General Maxwell Taylor joined with other hardliners in advocating a surprise military air strike.
However, he had his doubts about getting “our feet in that deep mud of Cuba” and believed a costly invasion should be a last resort.
He supported the blockade and urged the President to accompany it with a demand that Khrushchev dismantle the weapons in Cuba.
Thompson believed that in the end the blockade-ultimatum approach would probably still lead to a strike.
Thompson also influenced the President’s decision to respond to Khrushchev’s first, private, more conciliatory letter of October 26, ignoring the second, public, more aggressive statement, which raised the issue of a Turkey-Cuba trade.
Thompson argued strongly against accepting such a bargain, which he believed would involve trading not just missiles for missiles, but everything from planes to technicians, leading to the effective abandonment of the United States base in Turkey.
He suggested that the first letter Khrushchev had written himself and sent out without clearance, while the second, public statement was likely dictated by Politburo hardliners.
