While I've tried to ensure it's accurate, I recommend checking any quotes you'd like to use against the scanned version of the original document above.
FOREWORD This staff study of the Office of the Deputy Director was prepared by the Office of Research and Reports.
The conclusions drawn in the study regarding the implications of the manner in which the Cuban missile base venture was carried out cannot be proved absolutely.
It was judged, however, that the major features of the Cuban venture were the result of deliberate, rational Soviet decisions that took into account the detailed knowledge of United States reconnaissance o capabilities acquired by the USSR in May 1960.
The time period covered begins in early 1960.and ends in November 1962 with the withdrawal of Soviet offensive weapons from Cuba.
Valuable assistance was provided in the preparation of the study by the Office of Scientific Intelligence, the Office of Current Intelligence, and the National Photographic Interpretation Center., The reader is directed to a complementary paper prepared by the DD/I Research Staff entitled The Soviet Missile Base Venture in Cuba.
Arrivals of Soviet Ships in Cuba with Holds Capable of Carrying Medium-Range Ballistic Missiles, July-October 1962 2.
Estimated Time Phasing of Construction at IRBM Sites, August-December 1962 3.
The concept and execution of the venture clearly indicate that the Soviet authorities made no appreciable effort to prevent or delay United States detection by aerial reconnaissance of the offensive weapons during the deployment phase.
It is believed that the most likely explanation is that they judged the risk of a United States military reaction to be very slight.
The chain of events that culminated in the Cuban crisis of October 1962 can be traced back to the visit of Soviet First Deputy Premier Mikoyan to Cuba in February 1960.
This visit constituted the first public endorsement of the Cuban revolution, after a year of Soviet reserve following Castro's seizure of power and Soviet diplomatic recognition of the regime.
It was followed by a series of economic assistance agreements and, in the third quarter of 1960, the first Soviet deliveries of land armaments.
Deliveries of fighter aircraft to Cuba, probably planned before the Bay of Pigs invasion, were not made until about June 1961.
Following the Bay of Pigs episode, there was a period of assimilation and assessment, after which arms shipments, including the first naval vessels, were resumed.
Although there is now available some evidence of a limited influx of Soviet personnel and increased activity in Cuba in the first half of 1962, probably foreshadowing subsequent manifestations of the drastic change in Soviet policy toward Cuba, the actual deployment of Soviet military forces to the Caribbean did not begin until the end of July.
As it was unfolded over the next 3 months, the Soviet program for the establishment of a military base in Cuba was characterized by a high degree of concurrency in deploying and bringing to operational status both the major offensive and the major defensive systems.
The Soviet concept of the venture obviously did not envision the initial establishment of an island defense in order to test United States reaction and screen the subsequent introduction of strategic missile forces.
Although increasingly advanced Soviet radars were added to those existing in Cuba before the buildup, although more than 60 early model MIG fighters and adequate communications facilities were already available, and although SA-2 surface-to-air missile units were emplaced in western Cuba during August and in eastern Cuba during September, an integrated, centrally directed air defense system was not brought into operation in Cuba until 27 October, the day before the Soviet decision to withdraw offensive missiles was announced.
Moreover, the fact that this system expanded steadily for some time thereafter indicates that its activation at that time probably was earlier than planned.
Command and control communications links between the USSR and Cuba had been activated only a few days earlier, also prematurely and in apparent response to United States actions following detection of the strategic missile sites.
Meanwhile, however, construction and preparation of the MRBM and intermediate-range ballistic missile sites had been underway since early September, and the missiles and unique system equipment were delivered to MRBM sites from about mid-September through mid-October.
Thus the SAM units and other air defense elements were not planned to become operational as a system for at least a month anti a half after the presence of MRBM1s in Cuba rendered Soviet intentions subject to detection.
The principal uncertainty concerns the presence or absence of nuclear warheads; the evidence on this aspect of the buildup is so ambiguous and inconclusive that it is not possible to reach a judgment based on factual information.
This work was not completed at any of the sites by the time dismantling began but probably would have been completed by about mid-November.
If nuclear warheads were available, these shortcomings probably would not have prevented the launching of some missiles from all six sites during the critical week in October but might have affected significantly the time required to launch a salvo, as well as its effectiveness.
On balance it remains uncertain whether the Soviet leaders could have considered the Cuban MRBM units sufficiently combat-ready to participate in a coordinated nuclear attack on the United States at any time during the crisis.
With respect to the IRBM sites, which required far more extensive preparation, there is conclusive evidence that construction had not been completed by the end of October, nor had the missiles and most system equipment arrived at the sites.
The missiles were almost certainly en route to Cuba when the United States quarantine was imposed.
Although proceeding at a rapid pace, construction of all three IRBM sites that were under way in October would not have been completed until about mid-December; if a fourth IRBM site was planned, as seems possible, it could not have been operational before some time in January 1963.
Moreover, at the rate at which they were being assembled after their delivery, they would not have been fully operational until at least March 1963, thus being distinctly out of phase with the timing of the offensive missile systems.
Although the Soviet authorities were fully aware of United States photoreconnaissance capabilities by May 1960 and may have been aware of United States overflights of Cuba by mid-1962, they made no effort in planning and executing the Cuban venture to reduce the risks of detection by United States reconnaissance.
Moreover, in spite of some signs of Soviet concern, the deployment of strategic missiles proceeded unscreened by an activated SAM system even after President Kennedy's statements of 4 and 13 September implied that the United States possessed photographic evidence of the buildup to that time and explicitly warned the USSR of the grave consequences if the United States detected offensive weapons in Cuba.
Although it is not possible to trace the evolution of the Cuban plan or the specific decisions involved, the venture may have been conceived late in 1961 or at the beginning of 1962, when Khrushchev apparently was seeking some military means of rapidly and significantly improving the USSR's bargaining position in the German negotiations.
There is some evidence that planning and initial preparations occurred in the USSR and Cuba during the first quarter of 1962.
It is unlikely, however, that the final commitment was made until April or May, probably after Moscow had assessed and acquiesced in Castro's assertion of authority over the Cuban Communist movement in late March and early April.
One element in the Soviet miscalculation of the risks may have been the Soviet view of the role and significance of foreign military bases.
Having lived restively under the shadow of United States strategic bases for more than a decade, the Soviet leaders probably have come to regard them, particularly in the age of the ICBM, as a disquieting but not major phenomenon of great power relations.
Castro's Cuba presented Khrushchev with his first opportunity to establish an overseas military base.
He may have felt confident that the United States would understand the rules as he did -that military bases on the opponent's periphery are facts of great power life which fall far short of a provocation to war.
Although such a view may have been a factor in the miscalculation of the Soviet leaders, their over-all judgment of the risks in Cuba must have been based on a much broader assessment of Soviet-US relations.
Khrushchev probably had a greater objective in sight than simply the establishment of a military base in the Western Hemisphere.
In deciding to deploy offensive missiles in Cuba, the Soviet leaders probably were seeking primarily to reduce the strategic imbalance against the USSR, calculating that the success of the venture would improve sharply the Soviet bargaining position in world affairs and also be advantageous in a host of other ways.
While the Cuban missile bases would have increased Soviet missile strike capabilities against the United States by more than 50 percent at the end of 1962, the Soviet leaders must have realized that their relative power gain would have been highly transitory in view of United States ICBM and Polaris programs.
As it turned out, Khrushchev was faced with a direct military confrontation at a point where the United States was able to concentrate overwhelming conventional military force, backed up by a clear strategic nuclear superiority.
It was particularly valuable in establishing the validity of information from other sources.
Although information obtained from agents, refugees, and diplomats appeared initially to constitute a major source of evidence , it was frequently proved to be unreliable.
Even in retrospect the military assistance provided by the USSR and other members of the Bloc from mid-1960 to early 1962 does not contain indications of any objective beyond improving the ability of the Castro regime to defend itself from an invasion or internal uprising.
Soviet military assistance to Castro, when compared with that provided to other revolutionary governments , indicates that the Soviet leaders initially were somewhat reluctant to extend similar aid to Cuba.
The first Soviet-Cuban military assistance agreement was reached some time between Mikoyan's visit to Cuba in February 1960 and Raul Castro's return visit to the USSR in the summer of 1960, or some 12 to 18 months after Castro had seized power.
By contrast the Soviet agreement on aid to Iraq was concluded 4 months after the revolution that put Qasim in power.
Whereas MIG aircraft and frequently naval vessels had been among the first items delivered to other recipients, Castro did not receive aircraft until the second quarter of 1961, and the first naval vessels did not arrive until January 1962.
Military Aid As Cuba's efforts to purchase military goods in the West became increasingly difficult in 1959 and early 1960, the Cubans began to make military contacts with Bloc countries, mainly Czechoslovakia.
Mikoyan's visit to Cuba in February 1960, when the USSR finally abandoned its reserved attitude toward the Cuban revolution and publicly endorsed the Castro regime, appears to have been an important milestone in the developing relationship.
When Raul Castro visited the USSR in the summer of 1960, the first shipments of Soviet arms probably were being readied.
Although photography of Cuban militia carrying Czechoslovak rifles suggests that a shipment of small arms may have arrived in July or August 1960, the first major shipment of Bloc arms to Cuba arrived on 8 September 1960 aboard the Soviet freighter Ilya Mechnikov.
The cargo reportedly included T-34 tanks, antiaircraft artillery, machineguns, ammunition, electronic equipment, and other military material.
Some Mi1 and/or Mi-4 helicopters were delivered later in September 1960, and collateral sources reported the delivery of more than 8,000 metric tons of equipment by three Soviet ships in October 1960.
By mid-April 1961, at least 14 Soviet ships had delivered to Cuba equipment and supplies, almost exclusively land armaments, estimated at 40,000 metric tons.
Although it is possible that delivery of these aircraft was expedited in response to urgent Cuban appeals engendered by the invasion, they probably had already been scheduled for delivery in 1961, inasmuch as Cuban pilots apparently were training in Czechoslovakia in the third quarter of 1960.
Two shiploads arrived at the end of 1961, and an average of two shiploads per month was noted from January through June 1962.
Throughout the period of arms delivery, Cuban personnel were being trained in the Bloc and by a military training mission sent to Cuba.
Collateral sources reported that Cubans were sent for military training in the Bloc as early as the summer of 1960.
Collateral sources indicate that a hundred or more Bloc military technicians probably arrived in Cuba during the second half of 1960 as the first arms shipments were being received, and there are continuing reports of Bloc military personnel and technicians arriving during 1961.
Soviet Bloc military aid had turned the Cuban military establishment into one of the strongest in Latin America.
The Cuban air force was still a very limited organization, but even its small number of older Soviet jet fighters represented a vast improvement over previous capabilities.
As in the case of Bloc aid to other countries, the bulk of the credits were intended for basic industrial facilities and overhead investments, such as transportation.
By the time the Soviet military buildup began in mid-1962, the Bloc had come to account for about 80 percent of Cuban foreign trade.
Bloc countries generally paid a premium price for Cuban sugar, and Cuba was permitted to TLUI substantial trade deficits.
The t e r m s of trade as reflected by the balance between known prices set on Cuban exports to the Bloc versus prices set on Cuban imports of fuel, food, and raw and semi-finished materials indicate a alight advantage for Cuba compared with world market prices for comparable items.
The Chinese Communists provided an unknown number of machineguns, including 12.7-mm antiaircraft machineguns, as a gift.
Soviet-supplied equipment probably did not involve payment in hard currencies.
Based on known Soviet practice and some collateral information, it is surmised that the initial agreements may have allowed a substantial discount on the equipment with a repayment time of 10 years or more.
The arms agreement, or agreements, with Czechoslovakia required payment partially in pounds sterling, and at least $30 million has been paid by Cuba to the Czechoslovak State Bank.
However, most if not all of Cuba’s outstanding obligations for Bloc military aid may have been canceled subsequently, inasmuch as Castro stated publicly early in November 1962 that the USSR had canceled all of Cuba's military debts.
Early Activity Collateral reporting contains many references to the sighting, during the first half of 1962, of construction equipment, assorted vehicles, and Soviet personnel in the general locations where various Soviet military units were later identified.
There is a strong possibility, however, that this reporting reflected an influx into Cuba, beginning in early 1962, of Soviet personnel who were somehow associated with the military buildup that began physically in late July.
Soviet personnel first began to appear in unusual numbers during February-March 1962 and that by March-April 1962 1962 groups of Soviet personnel were present all over the island. a plant manufactured refabricated concrete beams and columns that were delivered to the Torrens reformatory, believed to be the Soviet military headquarters in Cuba, in late February or early March.
Other reporting generally supports this The Torrens area may have become a sensitive zone in June, and numerous reports, which substantiate one another, reflect a visit by Raul Castro to the reformatory and the evacuation of its inmates about the middle of July, followed by an influx of Soviet personnel in late July.
As in the case of Soviet economic aid programs to other underdeveloped countries, the Soviet aid program in Cuba included an intensive resource exploration survey.
In addition, during 1956-57 a system of horizontal and vertical control points for topographical mapping purposes had been established and a complete aerial photographic study of the island accomplished by a highly competent, private United States contractor. collateral sources have identified a Soviet geophysical team in Cuba under the direction of one Bogatyryev.
In addition, some members of this team appear to have been geodesists whose function probably was to extend triangulation control points as required for their intensified survey program.
Although no reports are available of surveying in specific areas that later became missile sites, members of this Soviet group may well have been active in such areas.
Because the Soviet geophysical team had been in Cuba at least 9 months before missile deployment and a wealth of data had been immediately available to them, it must be assumed that virtually all of basic data required to locate the missile sites geodetically had been acquired before the missiles were deployed.
Pages 16 through 21 and 3 pages of 4-page map located between pages 20 and 21 were sanitized in their entirety.
Soviet Merchant Shipping The pattern of Soviet merchant shipping to Cuba provides a measure of the magnitude and intensity of the Soviet military buildup and shows the abruptness with which it began.
An examination of the pattern of Soviet shipping to Cuba from January through July 1962 indicates that dry cargo ship arrivals averaged 15 per month.
Although the Cuban buildup required a large relative increase in Soviet shipping allocated to the Cuban trade, the diversion of this shipping probably was not a serious problem in view of the size of the Soviet merchant fleet and the availability of shipping in the world charter market.
With one exception, all of these large-hatch ships were built outside the USSR, in Japan or Finland.
The Japanese contract, for example, was negotiated from September to December 1960, and the lead-ship was completed in December 1961.
The Finnish contract is part of a 5-year trade agreement with specific deliveries negotiated annually.
This section reviews the evidence relating to the individual elements of the integrated Soviet air defense system that eventually emerged in Cuba.
Although some may have been delivered as early as September 1960, when soviet military shipments to Cuba began, the first firm evidence of Soviet radars in operation in Cuba was acquired in June and July 1961, It is probable that early warning radars were included, along with the first jet fighters, in shipments of military supplies which reached Cuba in late May and early June 1961.
It is estimated that by late July 1962, before the arrival of additional equipment during the buildup period, there were between 20 and 30 early warning radars and about 20 antiaircraft artillery fire control radars deployed in Cuba. a majority of the early warning equipment was located in the western and central portion of the island.
The fire control radars generally were sited with antiaircraft artillery units along the northern coast of Cuba between Mariel and Caibarien, with the heaviest concentration around Havana.
In spite of this increase in radar capability, there was no indication that a fully developed and integrated air defense system was present in Cuba that could have assembled, collated, and transmitted to appropriate control points the data necessary for passing surveillance of an intruding aircraft from one responsible group to another.
However, there were isolated instances that suggested progress toward such a system. ground-controlled intercept exercises were occurring routinely by July 1962, and on two occasions MIG fighters intercepted unidentified foreign aircraft.
During and After the Buildup As part of the Soviet military buildup beginning in late July 1962, more modern and advanced radar equipment of greater range and effectiveness was deployed in Cuba in sizable quantities.
Photography of late August and early September revealed the presence of SAM system target tracking and control radars at the SA-2 sites emplaced in the western half of Cuba and the presence of possible target acquisition radars at two of the sites.
Starting in late October, photography permitted the identification of other modern Soviet radars, including a long-range warning radar and a height-finding radar that, in combination, represent one of the most advanced Soviet radar capabilities against aerodynamic vehicles.
Much of this equipment particularly that associated with the SAM system is known to have been available to Soviet personnel when the United States resumed reconnaissance over-flights of Cuba on 14 October 1962.
The remainder probably also was available at that time or immediately thereafter, for little additional equipment is believed to have arrived in Cuba at any time since the announcement of the United States quarantine on 22 October.
Although SAM sites and associated radars were deployed in increasing numbers beginning in late August, this radar equipment apparently was not generally activated by the Soviets until late October.
Evidence on the Detection and Tracking of United States Reconnaissance Overflights During 1962 It cannot be determined when the Cuban government first became aware of these missions and their purpose.
However, there were numerous opportunities for identification of these flights before mid-1962, and the Cubans may well have been aware that their territory was being overflown by July 1962, if not considerably earlier.
Surface-to-Air Missile System The geographical placement of SA-2 sites and support facilities in Cuba through the time when the strategic missiles were withdrawn strongly suggests that the intention of Soviet planners was to establish an area defense for the island as a whole and that maximum protection of key military targets was not the governing objective.
There was, nevertheless, no apparent reason why SAM sites could not have been individually activated or the group on the western half of the island activated by mid-September to screen the developing MRBM/IRBM sites from aerial reconnaissance.
Almost all the SA-2 sites were emplaced and equipped and could have been integrated into a partial or fully developed SAM defense system by 14 October, when the first reconnaissance aircraft photographed an MRBM site under development.
Interspersed among the sites were seven support facilities that provided the logistic support for the whole complex of sites.
This integration greatly increased the effectiveness of the system by providing additional warning time, greater target tracking capability, and centralized control of the entire system.
Observations made in East Germany indicate that an SA-2 unit can be moved out of a fully developed site location, transported a distance of 25 miles, and set up again in an open field in a single day, presumably in an operational condition.
SA-2 Surface-to-Air Missiles on Display in the Havana Parade of 2 January 1963 As demonstrated in Cuba, the revetting of operational sites is not a n essential element of SA-2 deployment; as of 27 October 1962, when an air defense system capability was first demonstrated, only eight, or one-third, of the SA-2 sites had been revetted or were being revetted.
Capability of an Individual Site to Take Action An individual site, whether minimally or fully deployed, that is not tied into an over-all command and control system has a limited capability for independent action.
Although its radars can acquire and track the target independently, and identify it as friend or foe, the probability of a successful target intercept would depend heavily on the skill and training of the troop unit, for the SA-2 system appears to be designed to operate within the context of a fully developed air defense system.
Independent acquisition of the target would be difficult without additional azimuth and elevation data provided from both early warning radar and from other SA-2 sites.
In addition, the reaction time of an individual site probably is too slow to enable it to launch its missiles effectively against high-speed targets initially acquired by its own radar.
The SAM control system radar perform13 both a tracking and a missile guidance function against a single target.
Each launch position contains a single launcher and missile, and each hold position contains two missile transporters, each carrying a single missile.
Two photos, Pages 31 and 32, One Photo, Pages 33 and 34, One Chart, and Page 35. crisis, there was a continuous string of sites along the northern coast providing island-wide coverage from the western end of Cuba as far as the port of Banes in the east.
Farther east the area of the two MRBM sites at Sagua la Crande and the area of the IRBM site at Remedios were each covered by only a single SAM site.
In the Santa Clara area, where initially all the MIC-21's were deployed, no specific missile defense was provided.
The same is true for the important transport junction and the Eastern Military Headquarters site at Carnaguey.
Although this type of point defense leaves open several areas, at least would have been provided for all important Soviet military installations, including triple overlaps of some, in addition to a limited interdefense of the individual SAM sites themselves.
Four of these represented adjustments of the original concept in order to provide better point defense for Soviet military installations and personnel.
The significance of the fifth relocation, the movement of the Cabanas site about 10 miles inland to the northwest to Maldonado, is not entirely clear.
This shift may have been occasioned by the earlier proximity of the site to Guantanamo or may have been intended to provide better coverage of the eastern approach to Cuba.
Development of an SA-2 System Capability The foregoing evidence on the timing of SAM site and support facility emplacement indicates that most of the SA-2 units in western Cuba were emplaced by the first week of September 1962 and that if they were not already in operational status, they could have been made so shortly thereafter.
The SAM units and support facilities in the east probably were emplaced during September or the beginning of October and reached operational status before mid-October.
Nevertheless, there is no evidence that these sites were activated individually or integrated into a partial or fully developed air defense system until a day or two before the Soviet decision to remove the strategic missiles from Cuba was made public.
Moreover, each of the SAM sites has its own communications equipment, and a variety of Cuban communications facilities, particularly the ROCMI network, presumably would have been available to the Soviet authorities at any time before their own facilities became operational or as an alternative to establishing their own facilities.
Nevertheless, despite the initiation of extensive United States reconnaissance overflight activity following 14 October, the first general SAM-associated radar activity did not occur until 26 October, and an integrated air defense command communications system did not appear until 27 October.
It appears, therefore, that the Soviet leaders had no intention of employing the SAM system in Cuba against United States reconnaissance aircraft to prevent detection of the MRBMIIRBM sites under construction and had not even provided for such an eventuality.
Thus the general west-to-east phasing of SAM site emplacement probably was not directly related to MRBM/IRBM site construction in western Cuba.
Moreover, the fact that the air defense system was not activated by the time the MRBM sites had achieved some degree of combat readiness provides a further indication that defense of these sites was not the primary purpose of SAM deployment in Cuba.
Initial Redeployment of SAM Units in Early 1963 – Emergence of a Point Defense MIG-21 aircraft were introduced concurrently with the other advanced weapons intended to form a complete Soviet military establishment in Cuba.
The MIG-21's were the only supersonic fighters in Cuba during the buildup period and apparently were the only ones equipped with missiles.
These aircraft were all based at a single airfield throughout the buildup and crisis.
In early November, at about the time that the Soviet authorities originally planned to activate a fully operational air defense system, some of the MIG-21's were deployed to two additional airfields. comprises almost the entire body of evidence pertaining to the introduction and deployment of Soviet fighter aircraft in Cuba.
Suck evidence indicates that early-generation MIG fighters photography had confirmed the presence of 32 to 36 MIG-15/17 aircraft and 9 MIG-19 aircraft at Cuban airfields.
The deck cargo of two Soviet ships approaching Cuba on 29 August and 4 September included at least 22 MIG-21 aircraft crates.
Offloading of MIG-21 crates to be taking place at the port of La Isabella on 5 September, and at that time a third Soviet ship carrying MIG-21 crates was known to be nearing Cuba.
MIG-15/ 17, 56; MIG-19, 12; and MIG-21, 42.] also indicates that all the MIG-21's were offloaded at the port of La Isabella and shipped directly to the Santa Clara Airfield, where they were assembled and where all, or virtually all, of them remained through the end of October.
Deployment of these aircraft was initially observed of 4 and 5 November disclosed that about half of them had been dispersed to Camaguey and San Antonio de los Banos Airfields, thus supplementing the earlier generation MIG aircraft deployed at those airfields and better balancing the distribution of fighter strength on the island.
The first indication that MIG-21 aircraft were operating was obtained on 9 October 1962, when a nonmilitary radio station in the vicinity of Santa Clara made an announcement that supersonic aircraft flying in the area that day had been breaking the sound barrier over Santa Clara Province.
Confirmation of MIG-21 flights was obtained on 18 October, when a MIG-21 aircraft was photographed taking off from Santa Clara Airfield. 10 and 12 November disclosed that at least 11 MIG-21’s were armed with infrared, air-to-air missiles , Because of air-to-air missiles are believed to be part of the standard equipment for these aircraft, all 42 MIG-21’s in Cuba probably are so equipped, but there is no direct evidence to indicate the number of such weapon actually introduced into Cuba.
Coastal Defense Missile Systems Four Soviet cruise missile units were debarked in Cuba as part of the first wave of the Soviet military buildup.
The early deployment of the three permanently sited units and the temporary deployment of the fourth provided coverage of the seaward approaches to many of the Cuban beaches most suitable for large amphibious landings. the cruise missile site at Siguanea shows the typical layout of all the Cuban sites.
The configuration of the site remained unchanged regardless of the degree of site refinement.
Based on an assessment of the radar capability of the system, a probable range of 30 to 35 nm has been using its organic radar is a function of the range to which the sites in Cuba can fire effectively is estimated to be from 23 to 32 nm.
Offloading of Coastal Defense Units and Equipment There is no direct evidence concerning the arrival of the first cruise missile units in Cuba. of 5 August 1962, however, disclosed the presence of unidentified equipment at the Santa Cruz del Norte site and of unidentifiable objects in the area of the Banes site.
August, which revealed the presence of operational cruise missile sites at both locations, leads to the conclusion that the equipment and objects noted earlier were associated with cruise missiles.
It is believed, because of the shallowness of the coastline around the Isle of Pines, that the missiles and equipment for the Siguanea cruise missile site probably also were unloaded in the Havana area, shipped across Cuba, and transported by ferry to the Isle of Pines.
Supporting this contention, an informant reported that from 27 August to 5 September; the date on which reported that from 27 August to 5 September; the date on which reported that from 27 August to 5 September; the date on which equipment.
Although the equipment emplaced at Campo Florido was deployed in an operational mode and apparently interconnected by cabling, the inland location of this unit and the trees surrounding the area make it most unlikely that the unit was in a position to fire.
In this regard it was noted that an adjacent ""institutional"" facility composed of 15 main buildings appeared adequate to serve the several purposes of troop housing, administration, and training.
Because of the dissimilarities noted between the unit situated at Campo Florido and the sites at other locations, the following discussion of the time required to deploy an individual unit and develop a site is limited to concerning the three permanently located operational sites that was temporarily located at La Sierra.
As previously mentioned, equipment was in the area of Santa Cruz del Norte and Banes sites on 5 August.
Both sites were next observed and apparently were operational on 29 August, with all equipment present and properly emplaced.
Further development and refinement of these sites, consisting primarily of completely revetting the major pieces of equipment, continues for some time thereafter.
The Siguanea site on the Isle of Pines was operational when first observed on 29 September.
Refinement of this site continued slowly through 9 November, when all major elements of the system had been revetted and extensively camouflaged with netting and canvas.
At that time this site had its equipment in place and its cabling connected, but site refinements were limited to revetments for electronic equipment.
The revetting of other positions at the site was later observed to be underway, but by 28 November all the equipment, with the exception of one possible missile transporter/loader and three arch-roofed vehicles, had been moved from the site.
Therefore, the Banes and Santa Cruz del Norte sites probably were operational by mid-August, and the Siguanea site probably was operational by late August or early September.
The evidence clearly indicates that this weapons system is transportable and capable of relatively rapid deployment.
In addition, it seems evident that the Soviet authorities, in fact, did place their three permanently situated sites in an operational condition quickly, although subsequent site refinements proceeded at a much slower pace.
It should be noted, however, that once a site has been placed in an operational condition, subsequent refinements do not improve the operational capability and so may be effected at any pace desired.
The bulk of these crates probably were delivered by four ships that were between 26 September and 10 October carrying a total of 62 cruise missile crates to Cuba.
By that time the deployed units already had missile crates on hand, and there is no evidence that they have received additional crated missiles subsequently.
Because missile transporters also were at Mayari Arriba and Guerra and because later disclosed the presence of two launchers at Mayari Arriba, it is probable that at least part of the cruise missiles at these locations were intended to equip additional units.
Even in retrospect, however, it is impossible to determine whether Soviet or Cuban personnel were intended originally to receive this equipment.
There have been some indications since the crisis that control of the coastal defense missile system will eventually be turned over to the Cubans and this transfer may have been the Soviet intention from the outset, with Soviet units being deployed initially to provide an interim capability against amphibious operations while Cuban units were being trained.
An informant has reported that in December 1962 he was offered a naval post as commander of Cuban coastal defense forces, including the cruise missiles.
In addition, during the Havana parade of 2 January 1963 the Cuban television announcer indicated that the cruise missiles passing by were associated with Cuban military units, demonstrating Soviet willingness at the time to have the weapons publicly associated with Cuban forces.
Komar-Class Patrol Boat Missile System Komar-class patrol boats were first while being offloaded in Cuba during the second week of August 1962, about 2 weeks after SAM and cruise missile equipment began arriving in Cuba.
Chart: Number of Komar Class Boats All of the boats were based initially at the port of Mariel.
The first sighting of a Komar-class boat at sea was reported by the Navy in the vicinity of Mariel on 29 August.
Subsequently they were seldom out of their port areas, and none was observed with uncovered missile launchers.
Support facilities for these boats have not been identified in It is believed, however, that the Soviet authorities made use of existing support facilities for the Soviet-built motor torpedo boats that have been operating in Cuban waters since early 1962, inasmuch as the Komar-class boats are essentially a modified version of that type of boat.
There is no direct evidence as to the number of P-15 missiles delivered to Cuba for the Komar -class boats.
However, an agreement between Indonesia and the USSR calls for 96 such missiles and 12 Komar-class boats.
Since the same number of Komar-class boats are in Cuba, 96 P-15 missiles also may have been delivered.
Such an arrangement would provide for eight missiles per boat, two on launchers aboard each vessel; the remaining six would be held in reserve at the port facility because the Komar-class boats are not equipped to stow additional missiles.
Submarines The establishment of Soviet submarine bases in Cuba was the subject of many clandestine reports received before the October crisis.
It is possible that the installation of the cruise-missile facilities in the vicinity of Banes and on the Isle of Pines and the basing of the Komar-class boats at Banes and Mariel may have given rise to some of these reports.
On the other hand, it is estimated that four F-class long-range torpedo-attack submarines were deployed about the beginning of October from northern fleet waters to the Western Atlantic This date of deployment correlates with the general Soviet military buildup in Cuba and indicates that it was not specifically related to the United States quarantine imposed on 24 October.
There is no known instance of any of these submarines entering Cuban ports.
Three pages located between pages 46 and 47 sanitized in their entirety.
Based on this evidence, it seems probable that the Soviet authorities were using facilities in Cuba in limited support of submarine operations in the Western Atlantic.
However, there is no conclusive evidence that the Soviet authorities intended to use Cuban ports as bases for either submarines or tenders.
Soviet Ground Units Four highly mobile, Soviet armored combat groups were deployed in Cuba during the buildup period.
The number and types of equipment deployed at each of these encampments were basically similar and among the most modern of Soviet ground combat weapons.
Some of this equipment also was known to be deployed with the other three armored groups, but because of canvas coverings, dispersal of equipment, and foliage cover in the area, the exact quantities could not be ascertained from Collateral sources reported the offloading of Soviet personnel and ground equipment at the ports of Mariel and Bahia Honda as early as the last week in July.
A similar report indicated that Soviet trucks, tanks, and artillery pieces continued to move into this same general area until at least 26 September.
In the Guasimal area, which is near the Sancti Spiritus SAM site but more than 50 miles from the nearest armored group at Remedios, a convoy consisting of ""antiaircraft guns, self-propelled guns of various lengths, canvas-covered t rucks, and motorcycles” was seen moving down the highway away from Remedios.
In sum, because collateral sources continually reported of Soviet equipment and personnel moving throughout Cuba after the end of July, it is not possible to determine the point in time or the ports at which personnel and equipment associated with the four armored groups arrived in Cuba.
For the same reason, it is impossible to determine from collateral reporting even the approximate dates on which they were deployed at their encampments. does make it possible, however, to determine dates prior to which the encampments did not exist.
When those dates are combined with dates of first observation in photography, a time span is established during which the armored groups must have been deployed.
Three were deployed from 12 to 36 miles from the sites of long-range missile bases.
One of these groups also was located 9 miles from the Soviet military headquarters at Torrens.
The fourth was approximately 6 miles from the airfield at Holguin, where nine I1-28’s were to have been deployed.
This deployment, therefore, would not have been inconsistent with a Soviet desire to defend certain of their installations against United States attack and also may have been intended to provide some measure of security against “counterrevolutionary” activity.
However, the relatively small size of each encampment, the distance from the missile sites, and the absence of major military installations near the Holguin encampment suggest that these groups may have been located for the more general purpose of supporting the entire Soviet military presence on the island.
In this regard the deployment of a group at Holguin is particularly interesting because its location there would afford control over the network of major roads in the eastern end of the island.
Offensive Systems At the time of President Kennedy's speech on 22 October, there were six Soviet MRBM sites established in Cuba, four near San Cristobal and two near Sagua la Grande , containing a total of 24 launch positions.
The missiles and other unit equipment then at the sites had been delivered to Cuba aboard five or six large-hatch ships that arrived between approximately mid-September and mid-October.
Although work was still in progress at the sites, and the Soviet timetable apparently did not call for their completion until some time during the first half of November, some if not all of them probably were capable of launching their full initial round of four missiles.
The principal uncertainty regarding their operational status concerns nuclear warheads for the missiles, and the evidence remains inclusive as to whether MRBM warheads had arrived in Cuba prior to the United States quarantine.
On the other hand, the three IRBM sites, two near Guanajay and one near Remedios, were in the mid-to-late stages of construction, and none was operational.
No missiles were present on the sites, nor were most major items of system equipment.
The first shipment of missiles and equipment almost certainly was en route to Cuba when the United States quarantine was imposed.
The few pieces of indirect evidence regarding this problem are derived from the movement of large-hatch ships.
The movement of Soviet large-hatch ships from the USSR to Cuba indicates that MRBM units came from an area fairly near the Black Sea.
An examination of these ship arrivals in Cuba reveals that all but one of those which docked in Cuba during the time period when MRBM’s probably were delivered began their journey from a Black Sea port.
The continued presence of these Soviet personnel in Cuba after the withdrawal of offensive weapons cannot be explained precisely.
Preparation of Sites and Delivery of Missiles Before mid-October, when the sites were first identified in the evidence consists almost entirely of fragmentary collateral reporting on activity in the site areas and information on shipping activity, after mid-October, virtually continuous photographic coverage is available.
Although it is not possible to determine from this information the precise time phasing of the MRBM sites, the evidence is sufficient to identify the approximate dates of significant stages of MRBM deployment.
The firmest information bearing on the beginning of activity at the MRBM sites is provided by of 29 August covering the area of all our sites near San Cristobal and of 5 September covering the two Sagua la Grande site areas.
This coverage established that no activity had occurred in any of the site areas by those dates which is identifiable, even in retrospect, as being associated with preparation of the MRBM sites.
The indicates conclusively, for example, that improvements on the access roads to the Sagua la Grande sites, which are clearly visible in photography of mid-October, had not been started by 5 September.
On the other hand, a variety of collateral reports and other evidence indicates that the site areas either had already come under.
Soviet control, or were about to, by these dates and that the reconnaissance missions probably preceded by only a few days the actual beginning of site preparation activities.
During the last half of August, farmers reportedly were being evicted from the area where San Cristobal Site 3 was later located.
Evictions, also were reported to have occurred in the vicinity of San Cristobal Sites 1 and 2 during the first week in September.
No reports were received concerning evictions in the area of the Sagua la Grande sites, but collateral information indicates that some construction, or preparation for construction, was being carried out by Soviet personnel in the area no later than the second week in September.
The most plausible information available convening the first delivery of MRBM’s or system indicates that at least eight missiles a r r i v e d in the San Cristobal area about 18 September and that they probably were delivered directly from Mariel, the port of entry.
It is known *A single informant reported the movement on 12 September of 20 missiles 70 to 75 feet long from a Havana that the Poltava, a large-hatch ship of the type used to transport the MRBM’s on their transporters as hold cargo, was docked in Mariel on approximately 16 September.
The only other case in which a ship arrival can be associated directly with the delivery of missiles to a site concerns the arrival of the Ornsk, another large-hatch ship, in Mariel about 16 October and the identification of seven missiles in photography of 19 October of San Cristobal Site 4, where no missiles were visible the previous day.
Tending to confirm this timing of missile deliveries was the construction of the secure missile oxidizer transshipment point at Punta Gerardo between the coverage of 29 August and that of 25 September.
Although it is not possible to trace the shipment from ports to sites of the additional 27 missiles withdrawn from Cuba in early November, it is possible to establish with a fair degree of assurance the ships on which they must have arrived.
As the table indicates, the six large-hatch ships that arrived dock to a Cuban military air base in the western part of the city.
Soviet Large-Hatch Ship Poltava Returning to the USSR on 31 October 1962 After Imposition of the United States Quarantine.
MRBM's were transported to the San Cristobal missile sites within 2 to 4 days after the Poltava and the Omsk docked at Mariel.
Because the San Cristobal site area was unoccupied on 29 August and the Sagua la Grande site area was unoccupied on 5 September, ships arriving more than 5 days before these dates probably did not carry missiles.
Give the number of missiles departing Cuba, the number of large-hatch ships that docked at Cuban ports during September and October, and probable missile loading arrangements, all suck ships which arrived after mid-September carrying unknown cargoes probably were carrying missiles. b.
Unless information indicates otherwise, it is presumed that all these ships carried military equipment to Cuba during the buildup period. c.
The Krasnograde, Kasimov, Kimovsk and Poltava could have loaded six missiles on trailers on the decks of their large holds, and four more could have been double-loaded.
The Omsk and the Orenburg could have carried seven MRBM’s on trailers on the decks of their large holds and four more by double loading.
As noted above, the Poltava probably carried eight MRBM’s and the Omsk seven. in Cuba with unknown cargoes ,after the dates on which the sites were found unoccupied were so few that most of them must have carried missiles.
The irregular placement of the four launch positions at each of the sites and the varying arrangements and type of support facilities probably reflect variations in local conditions and do not appear to be significant.
Nevertheless, after reaching the pre-surveyed and minimally prepared site areas, the units could have achieved an operational capability as soon as the system equipment was emplaced and checked out and the units were familiarized with operating in their new environment.
Delivery of Oxidizer and Fuel to Sites There is conclusive evidence that supplies of the oxidizer used in the MRBM system -red fuming nitric acid – were present in Cuba at the time of the crisis, but apparently not all MRBM units had been fully supplied with the oxidizer by 27 October.
Photography of a secure port facility at Punta Gerardo on 17 October first confirmed the presence of about 24 cylindrical storage tanks connected to the quay by pipeline, several buildings under construction, and varying numbers of the same type of oxidizer trailer observed at the MRBM sites, some of which were in the process of being loaded.
Ten pages located between pages 58 and 59 sanitized in their entirety. of 29 August shows no indication that this facility, then being used for the storage of sugar products was to be converted into a secure RFNA transshipment point.
Because RFNA is storable over relatively long periods of time without significant losses, supplies of this oxidizer do not require frequent replenishment as in the case of cryogenic liquids, such as liquid oxygen.
The presence of 10 of these vehicles at Punta Gerardo on 2'7 October thus indicates that the Cuban MRBM sites had not been fully supplied with oxidizer by that time.
If these vehicles were from a single MRBM site, they represented more than 60 percent of the RFNA storage capacity of that unit, based on the complement of 16 such vehicles per site, and the unit might not have had sufficient oxidizer on site for its initial round of four missiles.
That site apparently did not receive missiles until 18 October, and only a few oxidizer trailers were discernible at the site until 29 October, when two groups of canvas-covered vehicles, presumably oxidizer and fuel trailers, were If, as is considered most probable, kerosene is the fuel used in the MRBM, the Soviet authorities would not have needed special facilities for its shipment to site areas.
Fuel trailers of the type observed at sites could have been filled from any convenient storage point, and such a storage point would not have contained any unusual features.
Problem of Combat Readiness Assuming the presence of nuclear warheads at the MRBM sites in Cuba, which cannot be confirmed, it is virtually certain that some missiles could have been launched at the United States from one or more sites by the time the sites were first identified in of 14 October and that some missiles could have been launched from ail six sites by 28 October, when the Soviet authorities announced their decision to withdraw the missiles.
On the other hand, the sites were not so complete as the Soviet authorities evidently planned them to be eventually.
Although there was a steady improvement in the readiness of the units throughout the period of observation, there is no evidence that an effort was made to alert or ""peak"" any part of the MRBM force in Cuba during the crisis.
Although this information is not directly applicable to the circumstances of MRBM deployment in Cuba, it is extremely useful in evaluating and interpreting the Cuban evidence.
The documents indicate, for example, that MRBM units can move into permanent sites while they are under construction, receive their system equipment from depots, and launch their missiles from these sites.
Similarly the documents describe the fairly rapid movement of MRBM units to pre-survey but relatively unprepared ""alternate sites"" from which missiles are launched.
From these descriptions it appears that in the USSR an MRBM unit would be expected to be able to launch its initial round of considerably less than a day after all personnel and equipment had arrived on site.
Unit equipment and personnel apparently did not arrive on site en masse.
In the case of San Cristobal Site 4, for example, this activity occurred over a period of at least 4 days, culminating in the arrival of the missiles, erectors, 2nd other key system equipment on 18 or 19 October.
The problem of determining readiness status is further complicated by the inability at times to identify the presence or quantity of essential system components, owing to the limitations of coverage and analysis, as well as Soviet camouflage, dispersal, and concealment after 22 October.
The most striking example of this is the fact that only 33 MRBM's were identified in Cuba before the observation of 42 being withdrawn.
At San Cristobal Site 3, only two missile transporters were ever and only four were observed at Sagua la Grande Site 2, although observations during the withdrawal indicate that some additional trailers and missiles must have been present at both sites or enroute to them.
Finally, it is not possible to determine whether nosecones and missiles were ever mated at any of the Cuban MRBM sites, a prerequisite to bringing the missile units to Readiness 3.
Mating would have occurred within the missile-ready tents where it could not be directly observed, although the presence of cabling into some tents indicated that some form of missile checkout had been or was being conducted.
However, nosecone vans were not identified in the immediate vicinity of the missile-ready tents at any time, and repeated observations and measurements of the canvas-covered loads on missile transporters did not disclose the additional 13 feet in length required if a nosecone had been attached to a main missile body.
Notwithstanding these difficulties, there is evidence available from that assists in making a general evaluation of the readiness status of the MRBM sites.
By 23 October, for example, sufficient quantities of essential MRBM system equipment to effect the launching of at least four missiles per site were present and positively identifiable at four of the six MRBM sites; at San Cristobal Sites 1 and 2 and at Sagua la Grande Sites 1 and 2.
Because missiles probably were delivered to the area of these two San Cristobal sites from the Poltava about 18 September and to Sagua la Grande from the Kimovsk about 25 September, it appears that one and possibly both sites in each area had started receiving system equipment 4 to 5 weeks before the beginning of the crisis.
This time would certainly have been sufficient for these units to reach a reasonably high degree of combat readiness, provided equipment deliveries were planned so as to bring the MRBM units to such a condition on an individual basis relatively rapidly.
Although it is not known whether there were simulated launch exercises involving erection of missiles on launcher, which could have occurred before of the sites or at night, there is evidence of practice in the movement of some equipment to the launch areas at San Cristobal Site 1 and probably at both Sagua la Grande sites.
At San Cristobal Site 1 on 15 October a missile transporter with prime mover was aligned with the erector at one launch area.
On 19 October, one erector was uncovered, and propellant vehicles were in the area; on the following day the erector was again covered, and the propellant vehicles were removed, suggesting that an exercise of some kind was in progress the day before.
On 26 October propellant vehicles were at camouflaged positions near all four launch areas at Sagua la Grande Site 1; four missile transporters also were present near the launch areas, although only two were aligned with erectors.
This may have been an exercise simulating the transition from Readiness 3 to 2, in which the propellants would be moved to the launch area and the missiles erected on launcher.
In this case, however, it was clearly an exercise and not an actual alert condition, for the transporters, as determined by the length of their loads, were carrying missiles without nosecones.
At Site 3, as previously indicated, it was not possible to make positive identificationfof sufficient missile transporters and propellant vehicles to support operations from all four launch positions.
However, this equipment may well have been obscured in by the relatively heavy tree cover in the area, as suggested by the withdrawal of five more missiles from the San Cristobal area than had been identified at the sites.
Nevertheless, by 26 October at the latest, erectors were in position at the launch by 26 October at the latest, erectors were in position at the launch.
There is no firm basis in the evidence, however, for judging the reaction time that would have been required following a decision to launch or the total number of missiles that could have been salvoed from the 24 launch positions.
Reaction time, for example, might have been affected appreciably by the absence of completed hardstands and graveled roadways at some sites Both reaction time and salvo capability also would have depended on the readiness of missile and other system equipment that, of course, cannot be determined.
Potential targets within this zone include about 20 bases of the Strategic Air Command, as well as Washington, D.C., and several other major United States cities.
Attempts were made, therefore, to identify the target system against which the missiles were programed by determining the probable direction of flight from the relationship between the theodolite and the launch position.
This method, however, has not yet yielded consistently meaningful results.
IRBM System It is evident from of the uncompleted IRBM sites under construction in Cuba that these sites were to be far more elaborate than the MRBM sites and that they required a number of substantial permanent installations.
As a result, although construction of the first IRBM site may have started somewhat earlier than the MRBM sites, the first IRBM site would not have been ready for launch operations until about mid-November.
Construction of the .other two IRBM sites was about a month behind the first.
Target Coverage o/ the United States That Would Have Been Provided by MRBM's and IRBM's Deployed in Cuba avoiding the long and relatively extensive construction effort involved in the Cuban sites, it is virtually certain that the IRBM system is designed solely for deployment at fixed facilities and that IRBM units are incapable of movement to alternate field positions. of Guanajay Site 1, which was in a relatively advanced stage of construction at the time of the crisis, provides a clear indication of the general character and layout of a completed IRBM site.
The other two sites under construction were far enough advanced to indicate that they would have generally resembled Guanajay Site 1.
The launch facilities were comprised of four launch positions and included a control building for each pair of launch pads.
Timing of Construction Activity at Individual Sites Evidence concerning the timing of activity at the three IRBM sites comes only from photography.
As in the case of the MRBM sites, there is no effective coverage available for more than a month before the photography of mid-October on which the sites were first identified, following which there is virtually continuous photographic coverage until the sites were dismantled.
The earliest firm indication of activity in the IRBM site areas is contained which discloses the presence of vehicles and construction materials at a location later identified as the construction support area for Guanajay Sites 1 and 2.
In fact, this equipment and material must have been intended for Guanajay Site 1, for that Site 1 was in a considerably more advanced stage of development than Site 2.
However, there is no evidence site construction had begun by 29 August.
When first of mid-October, Guanajay Site 1 was approaching completion, while Guanajay Site 2 and Remedios were in essentially the mid-stage of their development.
Guanajay Site 1 was essentially complete except for the missile-ready buildings, but it is estimated that 3 to 4 weeks more would have been required to ""cure"" the concrete in the launch areas.
This intention was suggested by the pairing of all other strategic missile sites in Cuba, which also is Two pages located between pages 66 and 67 sanitized in their entirety.
Moreover, it is known that Soviet MRBM units, at least, are organized on the basis of two sites per regiment.
Finally, a senior Soviet official stated that 24 ""sites"" had been completed in Cuba and that 16 were under construction.
Because all 24 MRBM launch positions were completed but only 12 IRBM launch positions were identified as under construction, this statement implies that an additional IRBM site was planned.
If the construction time relationship between the two known sites at Guanajay is applied to the known and a postulated IRBM site at Remedios, activity at the postulated site would not have been far enough along to be identifiable in until just about the time of the President's speech on 22 October.
It is possible, therefore, that a second Remedios site was planned by the Soviet authorities and that it was not identified because the initial preparations were halted by the onset of the crisis.
Had construction of the site been carried out at about the same pace as the other sites, it would have been operational by about the third week in January.
If the construction crews from Guanajay as well as those at Remedios were to have been used, a second Remedios site might have been completed somewhat earlier, possibly about the end of 1962.
Search for Nuclear Warheads It cannot be demonstrated from available evidence that the USSR had delivered nuclear warheads to Cuba by the time of the United States quarantine.
If they had not been delivered, then the USSR probably had no capability whatever during the crisis to attack the United States by missiles fired from Cuba, for it is highly unlikely that the USSR would have provided conventional, high-explosive warheads for the MRBM’s.
On the other hand, the evidence indicates that much of the equipment believed to be necessary for the handling and on-site transportation of MRBM warheads and nosecones was present and that permanent facilities almost certainly intended for the storage of nuclear warheads were being constructed at both the MRBM and the IRBM sites.
Although a thorough effort failed to uncover direct evidence concerning the presence of warheads, there is no assurance that they could have been detected by photography or other means; hence there is also no basis in evidence for concluding that the USSR did not have a nuclear capability in Cuba.
Equipment and Facilities There are three bodies of evidence, all ambiguous and inconclusive, that may relate to the presence of nuclear warheads.
The first of these concerns the equipment and facilities required for their handling and storage.
At five of the six MRBM sites, as well as at the Mariel Naval Air Station, special-purpose units because of their unique equipment and physical positioning have been identified as probable nosecone handling units.
These units also may perform some function with respect to warhead handling or processing.
At the missile sites these units generally were located in an area by themselves, just as the propellant vehicles were in separate areas, indicating a special function.
In some cases they were positioned in close proximity to the arch-roofed, probable nuclear weapons facilities Moreover, most of the equipment at the missile sites has been identified as to function, and no other equipment that appears suitable for nosecone handling.
It is known from Soviet documents that nosecones and war-heads normally are stored separately from the missiles for which they are intended.
When an increased state of readiness is ordered, the nosecones with warheads are transported to the missile-ready facility for mating to the missile.
In Cuba the MRBM nosecones probably were stored in the vans of the nosecone handling unit and would have been transported to the missile ready tents in these vans.
The presence of the vans, however, provides no assurance of the presence of warheads.
The only activity of the nosecone handling units at the MRBM sites that may have been indicative of some nosecone/warhead checkout consisted of a single instance of photography of a van at one of the San Cristobal sites being loaded or unloaded, but the cargo cannot be identified.
It is likely that nuclear warheads would have been delivered to Cuba in special hermetically sealed containers in order to maintain proper temperature and humidity control, regardless of whether they were shipped installed in the nosecones or separately from them.
Although they might have sufficed for a temporary receiving facility, their appearance seems somewhat out of keeping with the stringent procedures and precautions that normally surround Soviet handling of nuclear weapons, especially in view of the general availability of more appropriate facilities in Cuba.
If warheads were present and 02erational at the MRBM sites, therefore, they must have been maintained and stored elsewhere, presumably in vans.
Because of its size, however, the single bunker at Guanajay probably was intended to serve both Guanajay missile sites It is curious that both of the IRBM warhead bunkers were virtually completed by 28 October, in contrast to those at the MRBM sites, even though missiles and most other IRBM system equipment had not yet arrived, whereas MRBM's and equipment had been arriving on site for well over a month.
Although any shipment of military cargo to Cuba during the buildup period could have included nuclear warheads, the Aleksandrovsk is suspected of having had some special cargo aboard, possibly nuclear warheads, because it was the only ship that departed from and returned to a Soviet Arctic naval port during the entire Cuban buildup.
The Aleksandrovsk was engaged in transporting cargo to Cuba exclusively from Baltic ports during 1961 and most of 1962.
On 3 October the Aleksandrovsk was photographed at the Arctic port of Guba Okol'naya, a part of the naval complex in the Severomorsk area that serves submarines and surface craft of the Northern Fleet.
The Aleksandrovsk is the first merchant vessel known to have called at this port.
The Aleksandrovsk was one of the first Soviet ships to depart Cuba, leaving Mariel with a deck cargo of nosecone vans on 5 November and arriving at Guba Okol'naya in late November.
The reason for this unique voyage from a Soviet Arctic port is not readily apparent.
It can be hypothesized that the use of Guba Okol'naya enabled the vessel to reach Cuba and return with an unusually sensitive cargo, such as nuclear warheads, without risking surveillance or an incident of any kind in narrow waters under Western control, such as the passages from the Baltic or Black Seas.
If this is the correct explanation for the voyage of the Aleksandrovsk, it must have been the first delivery of warheads to Cuba, for all other known voyages transited the Baltic or Black Sea passages or, in a few cases, the Panama Canal.
Moreover, they could have achieved such a capability during the critical week thereafter only if the cargo of the Aleksandrovsk had been unloaded and delivered to the sites, which seems unlikely in view of the general Soviet reaction to the crisis.
On the other hand, the movements of the Aleksandrovsk following the Soviet decision to withdraw the offensive missiles seem inconsistent with a conclusion that it was making the first delivery of warheads to Cuba.
Because of the cargo's sensitivity, the Soviet authorities presumably would have ordered the vessel to return directly to the USSR as soon as they considered it safe to do so.
It is difficult to account for the ship's movement unless the ship was to load a cargo of at least equal sensitivity – that is, additional warheads that had previously been delivered to Cuba from some port other than Guba Okol’naya.
The only remaining hypothesis involving nuclear warheads that seems to fit all the circumstances of the mysterious voyage of the Aleksandrovsk is that it was carrying IRBM warheads which for some reason the USSR chose to transship through Guba Okol'naya, whereas MRBM warheads were shipped earlier, probably from a Black Sea port.
On 12 November, Khrushchev twice stated to British Ambassador Roberts that nuclear warheads had been removed from Cuba.
Aside from an interview between Khrushchev and at the height of the crisis, these have been the only explicit Soviet references on the subject; however, there also have been Soviet statements that missiles were operational in Cuba in October 1962, implying that warheads were present.
I1-28 Light Bombers I1-28 light bombers began arriving in Cuban ports during the last half of September 1962, at about the same time that MRBM's were being delivered.
Nevertheless, viewed in the context of the over-all Soviet military buildup in Cuba, the evidence strongly indicates that the I1/ UI128's delivered to Cuba were not a part of the establishment of a Soviet offensive base on the island but were intended from the outset to be turned over to Cuban forces as the early generation MIG fighters had been.
Although there had been occasional reports of a Soviet intention to introduce I1-28's into Cuba since early 1962, the earliest indication of their delivery to Cuba came from an informant who reported seeing four crates that he believed contained I1-28's arriving a t the Port of Mariel on 19 September 1962.
Another informant reported the arrival of an unspecified number of possible I1-28 crates in the Port of Havana on 20 September 1962 and identified photographs of I1-28 fuselage crates in the Port of Havana on 20 September 1962 and identified photographs of I1-28 fuselage crates as resembling those he had observed.
Photography of Soviet ships carrying I1-28 crates on deck and bound for Cuba was first taken in September.
Ten I1-28 fuselage crates were observed on the deck of the Kasimov, which arrived in Cuba about the end of September.
Subsequent disclosed seven I1-28 fuselage crates on the deck of the Bratsk, which arrived about 20 October.
The Leninskiy Komsomol, which was in Danish waters on 9 October with 13 I1-28 fuselage crates on deck, also arrived in Cuba about 20 October.
San Julian Airfield was on 15 October, at which time 2 fuselages and 20 fuselage crates were present.
Between 15 October, when fuselages out of their crates, and 27 October, one day before the Soviet decision to withdraw the missiles, only one aircraft had been completely assembled However, from 27 October to 15 November, the date on which assembly apparently stopped, six additional aircraft were completed, an assembly rate of slightly more than 3 days per plane.
At this rate, assembly of the 42 I1/UI1-28's would not have been completed until March 1963.
Sari Julian Airfield has long been able to handle aircraft of the I1-28 type.
Holguin Airfield, on the other hand, before the completion of a new runway in June 1962, could not accommodate either I1-28's o r MIG-21's and construction of that runway, as well as of revetments and taxiways, was observed to have been well underway by December 1961.
Although the runway itself was completed by June 1962. work on aircraft revetments and new taxiways continued after the arrival of the I1-28 fuselage crates.
Special facilities for their assembly probably were not required at either airfield, for the aircraft at San Julian were observed being assembled in the open, with no specialized equipment in evidence. the early collateral reports that the Cuban Air Force would receive I18's and the high proportion of UI1-28 trainers among the aircraft uncrated , indicates that it was the Soviet intention to place these aircraft under Cuban control.
Moreover, at the slow rate at which the I1/UI1-28's were being assembled, all would not have been operational until 2 to 3 months after the estimated date on which the last IRBM sites under construction would have become operational.
Finally, whereas the quality of most of the other Soviet-controlled weapons in Cuba was high, the.
Soviet Withdrawal of Offensive Systems At the time of the President's speech on 22 October, approximately 22,000 Soviet military personnel were in Cuba.
All of the air defense, naval, ground, and offensive weapons systems that had been delivered to Cuba since late July, with the exception of the I1-28 bombers, were then totally manned and controlled by the Soviet authorities.
This is evidenced by a substantial body of information indicating that Cubans were excluded from the areas where Soviet troops and weapons were located; training programs that would have enabled the Cubans to operate these complex weapons had not been accomplished; and an exclusively Soviet command and communications structure was established to control their use.
Although the Soviet authorities may have planned before the crisis to turn some of these systems over to the Cubans eventually, this transfer could not have been accomplished quickly and would have required training programs such as that carried out with the I1-28's.
The Soviet authorities clearly intended to maintain their complete military establishment in Cuba for an extended period of time.
Although some actions were taken to improve the combat readiness of elements of the Soviet forces, most of these did not occur until several days after the President's speech and appeared to have been taken earlier than intended; other elements of the Soviet forces showed little or no change in status throughout the height of the crisis.
The small but complete air defense system did not become operational until 27 October, and it expanded steadily thereafter, suggesting premature activation.
These defensive measures may have been occasioned as much by the commencement on 23 October of low-altitude reconnaissance missions as by reaction to the President's speech, for the low-level missions must have vividly impressed the Soviet personnel at the sites with the danger of attack by United States forces.
The concealment of equipment also may have been intended to prevent close observation of deployed units.
In addition to these measures, one cruise missile unit was moved from an inland location about 25 or 26 October and deployed operationally on the coast, and one armored group was moved out of its encampment at about the same time.
Finally, the only aggressive act ever committed by the Soviet Forces in Cuba occurred on 27 October, when a U-2 aircraft was shot down near the Port of Banes, probably by the surface-to-air missile unit located north of the port.
Even in retrospect the causes underlying this unusual action cannot be determined, although collateral reporting strongly supports a contention that a surface-to-air missile was the weapon used to down the aircraft.
On the other hand, all or virtually all of the Soviet-manned MIC-21 aircraft continued to be based a t the same airfield where they had been assembled, but apparently they did not maintain an unusually high level of activity during the crisis and were not dispersed to other airfields until the first week in November.
Pattern of Withdrawal By 1 Novemeber the Soviet authorities, evidently having had enough of high-risk, low-profit confrontation, had begun dismantling the long-range missile sites (and withdrawing the MRBM's and key items of associated equipment.
Becautie none of the large-hatch ships in which the missiles had been brought to Cuba as hold cargo was near Cuban waters on the first of November, the Soviet authorities chose to use the shipping immediately available in Cuba to return the missiles as deck cargo.
Casilda, therefore, may have been the closest port to Sagua la Grande at which both suitable port facilities and shipping were immediately Three pages located between pages 78 and 79 sanitized in their entirety available.
Soviet Withdrawal of MRBM's from Cuba November 1962 Although the use of immediately available shipping required deckloading of the missiles and thus contributed to the overtness of the withdrawal, there are some inclications of a deliberate effort by the Soviet authorities to demonstrate as plainly as possible, short of on-site inspection, that the offending offensive missiles and bases were gone.
Moreover, at Guanajay Site 1, the only IRBM site at which concrete had been poured for the launch pad and apron, the metal launch rings were removed, and the launch areas left visibly demolished; the other IRBM sites were simply bulldozed over.
Finally, the Soviet authorities generally cooperated in drawing back the tarpaulins from the missiles when challenged at sea by United States inspection parties.
Although the nuclear storage facilities at the MRBM and IRBM sites have still not been dismantled, there is no evidence from repeated photographic coverage that additional construction work has been performed or that they are being used for storage of any element of an offensive weapon system.
In contrast to the expeditious withdrawal of the MRBM’s, the 42 I1-28's in Cuba at the time of the quarantine were not removed until early December and then only after Mikoyan had apparently spent some uncomfortable days and nights in Havana exercising his powers of persuasion.
In fact, assembly of the I1-28's went on slowly but steadily after 28 October until about mid-November, following which no change was observed in the status of the aircraft.
At that time, 7 aircraft had been completed and an eighth lacked only an engine cowling; most of the remainder were still in crates.
After Khrushchev's announcement on 20 November that the I1-28's would be withdrawn, all of the aircraft were moved from San Julian and Holguin Airfields to the ports of Nuevitas and Mariel, where they were loaded on the decks of three vessels that departed by 7 December It is certain, in mew of the limited shiipping space required and the return of several of the aircraft to the USSR uncrated as deck cargo, that the I1-28's could have been withdrawn at any time after 28 October.
The fact that they were not, together with the apparent disarray between Moscow and Havana on the subject, provides further evidence that these aircraft, as previously indicated, were intended from the outset to be turned over to Castro's forces.
Concept and Timing of the Soviet Venture in Cuba During a 3-month period beginning a t the end of July 1962 the USSR delivered to Cuba and deployed Soviet forces and weapons systems representing all major elements of a complete military establishment.
Defensive Systems Among the defensive systems the first SAM equipment probably arrived in early August, and deliveries continued throughout August, September, and possibly the first part of October.
Although deliveries of MIG-21 aircraft began about the end of August and the first aircraft was assembled by the first week in September, the first known flight of one of these aircraft did not occur until the second week in October, nor were they all assembled until about mid-October.
It was not until early November that they were operationally deployed to three separate airfields.
It appears, therefore, that even though the Cubans and the Soviet authorities probably were aware of United States reconnaissance overflights of Cuba at least by July 1962 and must have had increasingly complete knowledge of these activities during the buildup period, the Soviet authorities did not rush to completion either the parts of their air defense capability or the entire system.
Offensive Systems Significant differences are apparent in the time-phasing of the various offensive weapons systems.
By mid-September, MRUM's and related system equipment were being delivered to sites.
Although I1-28 bombers probably arrived in mid or late September, at the rate they were being assembled they would not have been completely operational until well into 1963, thus being quite out of phase with the deployment of other systems.
In view of other evidence suggesting that these aircraft were intended for delivery to Cuban forces, it appears unlikely that the I1-28's were regarded by the Soviet authorities as an integral or significant element of the deployment of offensive weapons to Cuba.
Whereas the MRBM units were combat-ready to some degree during the crisis and probably would have been entirely combat-ready, with a full refire capability, by mid-November none of the IRBM sites was completed by the end of October and virtually no system equipment had arrived in Cuba.
It is clear, however, that the Soviet authorities did not plan the deployment of their offensive missile systems in Cuba so as to achieve a full operational capability with both systems more or less concurrently, as appeared to be the case with the major defensive weapon systems.
Implications of the Timing of the Program The most striking aspect of the Soviet plan as it was unfolded in Cuba was the high degree of concurrency in the phasing of the development of offensive and defensive capabilities.
The evidence which has been presented makes it clear that the Soviet authorities did not conceive of the Cuban military buildup as a sequential program in which weapons intended for the defense of the island would be established first and brought into operation early enough to screen the subsequent deployment of offensive weapons.
This probably could have been done, for example, by delaying the beginning of IRBM site construction and of MRBM deployment by only a matter of weeks to insure that the air defense system was operational before the strategic missile sites were detectable by United States reconnaissance.
As the program was carried out, however, the first MRBM unit and its readily identifiable equipment were on site about 1-1/2 months before the air defense system was activated, on 27 October.
Also, the first IRBM site, although not equipped, was nearly completed by that time.
The schedule of deployment of the MRBM units, moreover, could have been planned to minimize the length of time during which some of the MRBM sites were detectable before all of the MRBM sites were emplaced, equipped, and combat-ready.
Because the first delivery of unique equipment, including missiles, probably was made to a site area in mid-September, approximately 8 weeks would have elapsed before the estimated date on which refinements at all the sites would have been finally accomplished.
During most of that time the MRBM sites would have been subject to and would have been readily identifiable by the presence of such obvious items of equipment as missiles and fuel and oxidizer trailers openly situated in the site areas.
The actual program, as has been indicated, with the sole exception of the IRBM force, would have resulted in all of the major elements of the Soviet military establishment in Cuba becoming fully combat-ready more or less simultaneously at some time between the end of October and mid-November.
Soviet Policy Considerations and Objectives There is no apparent significant event or action in Soviet external or internal affairs that indicates the particular point in time when the Soviet leaders made the momentous decision to project their armed might into the Caribbean Sea, historically a United States mare nostrum.
Soviet View of the Risks In a sense the Cuban crisis had its origin in February 1960 when First Deputy Premier Mikoyan was Bent to Cuba to conduct economic negotiations with the Castro government.
Sometime in late 1961 or early 1962, Cuban pilots evidently began training in I1-28 bombers, but there are no indications of a Soviet intention to deliver more advanced offensive or defensive weapons.
In any event, they had acquired relatively full knowledge of United States photoreconnaissance capabilities in May 1960 and could hardly have failed to consider them in planning the Cuban venture.
Nevertheless, they made no apparent effort to minimize the chances of detection by establishing an operational air defense system before the introduction of offensive weapons, by camouflaging or concealing the deployment of MRBM units, or by minimizing the length of time in which some of the MRBM sites were identifiable before all these sites would have been finally complete and combat-ready.
Given their knowledge of United States photoreconnaissance capabilities and of United States overflights of Cuba, as reflected in the evidence of radar-tracking up to that time, the Soviet authorities could easily have judged that at least some of the United States information came from Thus they probably calculated that the nature and general scope of the buildup visible by the end of August were known to the United States and that the subsequent deployment of offensive missiles also could be detected.
Although the President's warnings did not cause the USSR to attempt thereafter to conceal the buildup from overhead reconnaissance, perhaps because the IRBM sites would have been difficult to camouflage, certain publicized statements indicated increasing Soviet concern over the developing United States attitude toward the presence of Soviet forces in Cuba.
In contrast to their attitude toward United States reconnaissance, Soviet personnel took considerable pains to prevent ground observation of or access near their weapons and related equipment in.
In fact, Soviet personnel did succeed in concealing from the general population the true extent of the Soviet presence on the island, and even in retrospect it is impossible, without photography, to judge where, when, and what weapons arrived and were deployed.
In view of the magnitude and complexity of the buildup that was to follow, it is possible that an advance party was sent to Cuba at about this time for the purpose of planning, perhaps on a contingency basis, for the deployment of Soviet forces.
This action would suggest that the venture was conceived at the end of 1961 or very early in 1962.
Although this information appeared to apply to allocation of resources in the USSR and contained no hint of the establishment of overseas bases, the timing of the decision, the target date, and the motivation could have applied equally well to plans for the Cuban missile bases.
Because the information of the informant, although secondhand, originated in high Soviet military circles, this report may have been a reflection of actual planning for the Cuban operation or of some other plan under consideration at the time that was later supplemented or supplanted by the Cuban venture.
In any event, the report indicates that in late 1961 or at the beginning of 1962.
Khrushchev was seeking some military means of rapidly and significantly improving the USSR's bargaining position in the German negotiations and suggests the climate in which the Cuban decision was made.
Other evidence connected with the Indonesian buildup suggests that the planning of the Cuban operation was well along by mid-May.
The only direct evidence available as to the date of the Cuban decision is a remark attributed to a Soviet diplomat, that an important decision had been made with respect to Cuba and who later, during the crisis, indicated that the decision had been made in May.
Probable Soviet Objectives In deciding to deploy offensive missiles in Cuba, the Soviet leaders probably were seeking to reduce the strategic missile imbalance against the USSR drastically and rapidly.
Moreover, they would have known that even if they followed an initial success with the deployment of additional offensive missiles in Cuba, the gain in their relative power would be temporary in view of the high rate of ICBM and Polaris launcher would be temporary in view of the high rate of ICBM and Polaris launcher activation programed by the United States in 1963 and thereafter.
It is possible, therefore, that the Cuban venture represented to Khrushchev a clear but transitory opportunity to open the way for a dramatic victory elsewhere, such as Berlin, which would alter the long-term ""world relation of forces"" in his favor.
The Withdrawal As it happened, Khrushchev was faced with a direct military confrontation at a point where the United States was able to concentrate an overwhelming conventional military force -and the Soviet leaders were well aware of this situation.
In effect, the Soviet authorities had only one possible response to make against the threat of United States conventional forces striking Cuba, and that was a nuclear response.
This recourse could hardly have been appealing, inasmuch as they were well aware that the United States was massing conventional forces in the southeastern United States and that the USSR also was faced with a fully alerted, nuclear strike capability of uncomfortable proportions.
Their only possible course of action was to insure that the Cuban crisis did not escalate, to test United States resolve, and if it were found firm, to attempt to salvage as much out of the venture as they possibly could.
This, apparently, is precisely what occurred in the days between the President’s speech of 22 October and Premier Khrushchev’s announcement on 20 November of his agreement to withdraw the I1-28 bombers.
The United States position, both as regards what constituted offensive weapons lifted, was made unmistakably clear in the President's address of 22 October and his quarantine proclamation of 23 October.
Cuban bitterness over the Soviet missile withdrawal, confirmed by a number of sources, may have played, in fact, as much a part in Soviet reluctance to remove the I1-28's as their own desire to preserve as much of the Cuban investment as possible.
The next day, in what appears to have been an action coordinated with the Cubans, Premier Khrushchev announced that the I1-28's were being withdrawn and was rewarded by the lifting of the United States quarantine.
At that point, both parties allowed the ""Cuban crisis"" to recede slowly and uneasily into history without further concessions on either side, the final formality being observed with a joint letter to the UN Secretary General on 8 January 1963 removing the situation from further consideration by the UN Security Council.
