In the USA, schools held regular 'duck and cover' rehearsals incase of a nuclear attack.
StatisticsUSSR's figures were overestimated.USA's biggest concern was the rate at which the USSR was building nuclear weapons and the size of the weapons.USSR's biggest concern was that the United States missiles were much closer to them than USSR's missiles were to USA.In 1958 the USA had missile bases in the Uk.In 1961 they also had missile bases in Turkey and Italy.USSR could not fire missiles at the USA because they had to travel further, and this meant they could no be targeted accurately.
America had B52 bombers that could drop nuclear weapons on the soviet union.
By 1957, Russian scientists launched Sputnik 1worlds first man-made satelliteBy 1960 the Russians had landed a robotic spacecraft on the moon.This demonstrated the sophistication of Soviet technology.
Many Americans believed that rockets used to put the satellites in space could be used to launch nuclear missiles at America.
The Cuban Revolution of 1959 overthrew cuba's pro american government.Led by Fidel Castrowanted greater independence from America.America banned the import of cuban sugar in responsethis would threaten to bankrupt the cuban economy.Cuba turned to USSR for help, Khrushchev was delighted to have an ally deep in the american sphere of influence and agreed to offer economic aid to cuba.
The Bay of Pigs incidentCIA persuaded Kennedy to launch an invasion of Cuba to dislodge Castro's government and put Batista back in charge.
This invasion had been kept secret ad planned for over a year.CIA promised they could make it look like a cuban revolution by training Cuban exiles and disguising old United States planes to look like cuban ones for bombing.Castro's hold on the country was weak.
It was a disaster.The 'secret' plan was known to Castro so he was expecting the attack.
Targets missed and the disguised planes were photographed and United States involvement was made public.
This ended any chance that the USA and Cuba may negotiate a friendly relationship.Castro declared himself as a communist.
Khrushchev stationed russian nuclear weapons on cuban soil.This placed Russian nuclear missiles within striking range of America.
This plan was secret for a long time but by mid October, american spy planes had discovered what was going on.
