Just 17 years after the bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki, a stark warning of the devastating consequences of launching a nuclear warhead, fear of nuclear conflict was at America’s doorstep.
Over the course of 13 days, the world avoided nuclear catastrophe through shrewd diplomacy and sheer luck.
United States National Security Advisor McGeorge Bundy briefs President John F Kennedy on evidence the Soviets are constructing nuclear missile sites in Cuba, just 90 miles from United States territory.
Earlier that year, Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev had reached a secret agreement with Cuban leader Fidel Castro after the island experienced a failed United States attempt to overthrow the government.
United States photos showed a medium-range ballistic missile site in San Cristobal, Cuba on October 14, 1962 President Kennedy meets with a group of trusted advisors to discuss options.
This group would meet daily during the crisis and later be named the Executive Committee of the National Security Council or ExComm.
Following days of meetings, including one with Soviet Foreign Minister Andrei Gromyko, Kennedy decides on a naval blockade.
Kennedy addresses the American public revealing the news of Soviet moves in Cuba and announcing the United States establishment of a naval quarantine until the Soviets dismantle the missile sites.
Soviet freighters bringing supplies to the island move into the area but ultimately alter course or stop in their place.
Soviet freighters turn back toward Europe but a commercial oil tanker — the Bucharest — continues toward Cuba.
The United States allows the Bucharest to pass through the blockade without search after the Navy was satisfied it was carrying petroleum.
As work on the missile sites continues, Castro requests Khrushchev launch a nuclear first strike against the United States This never happens.
Kennedy’s brother, Attorney General Robert Kennedy, plays a crucial role in diplomatic efforts, meeting with Russian Ambassador Anatoly Dobrynin who likens the Soviet buildup in Cuba to the United States nuclear missiles stationed in Turkey.
AG Kennedy informs Dobrynin the United States is ready to discuss the issue as part of a potential agreement to end the crisis.
The two most powerful nations had been squared off against each other, each with its finger on the button.You'd have thought that war was inevitable.
In the Caribbean, United States ships drop depth charges to the left and right of a Soviet submarine as a warning and to force it to the surface.
Unbeknownst to the Americans, the submarine was carrying a nuclear weapon and, believing a war had started, the Soviets prepared to launch.
Meanwhile, negotiations continue between the United States and Soviets in sincere efforts to find a solution to the crisis before it escalates to sustained conflict.
Khrushchev publicly announces the Soviets would dismantle the missile sites in exchange for United States assurance it would not invade Cuba without direct provocation.
ExComm meets in the White House, October 29, 1962 The naval blockade formally ended on November 20, 1962 after the Soviets agreed to remove their bombers from Cuba.
In accordance with the secret U.S.-Soviet agreement, United States missiles were removed from Turkey in April 1963.
The crisis ended and it was clear to both the Soviet Union and the United States just how close they had come to nuclear conflict and how necessary communication was in avoiding catastrophe.
To prevent similar situations from taking place, a direct nuclear hotline was created between the United States and the Soviets to improve transparent communication.
In addition, the signing of the Limited Test Ban Treaty in 1963 banned further nuclear testing in the atmosphere, outer space and under water.
Despite reductions in nuclear arms , the risk of nuclear-armed countries engaging in conflict that could escalate to nuclear use remains very real.
Kennedy and Khrushchev deserve credit for de-escalating through diplomacy, but we cannot discount the role of luck in leading the United States and Soviets out of the crisis in Cuba unharmed.
As long as nuclear weapons exist, the world will be at risk of nuclear conflict with global ramifications.
