Khrushchev further assured Kennedy that the Soviet Union had no intention of ""disrupting the relationship of our two countries"" despite the photo evidence presented before President Kennedy.Responses considered President Kennedy meets in the Oval Office with General Curtis LeMay and the reconnaissance pilots who found the missile sites in Cuba.
By October 19, frequent U-2 spy flights showed four operational sites.Operational plansTwo Operational Plans were considered.
OPLAN 312, primarily an Air Force and Navy carrier operation, was designed with enough flexibility to do anything from engaging individual missile sites to providing air support for OPLAN 316's ground forces.Blockade A United States Navy P-2H Neptune of VP-18 flying over a Soviet cargo ship with crated Il-28s on deck during the Cuban Crisis.
Consequently, the United States could find itself bombing operational missiles if the blockade did not force Khrushchev to remove the missiles already on the island.Speech to the nation President Kennedy signs the Proclamation for Interdiction of the Delivery of Offensive Weapons to Cuba at the Oval Office on October 23, 1962.
The two also anticipated that Khrushchev would respond to the Western world in a manner similar to his response during the Suez Crisis and would possibly wind up trading off Berlin.On October 22 at 7:00 pm EDT, Kennedy delivered a nationwide televised address on all of the major networks announcing the discovery of the missiles.
Communications between the two super-powers had entered into a unique and revolutionary period; with the newly developed threat of mutual destruction through the deployment of nuclear weapons, diplomacy now demonstrated how power and coercion could dominate negotiations.US alert level raised Adlai Stevenson shows aerial photos of Cuban missiles to the United Nations, October 25, 1962.
The next day, reports showed more ships originally bound for Cuba had altered their course.Raising the stakesThe next morning, October 26, Kennedy informed the EXCOMM that he believed only an invasion would remove the missiles from Cuba.
This allowed the United States to largely dominate negotiations in late October.Secret negotiationsAt 1:00 pm EDT on October 26, John A Scali of ABC News had lunch with Aleksandr Fomin, the cover name of Alexander Feklisov, the KGB station chief in Washington, at Fomin's request.
The United States responded by asking the Brazilian government to pass a message to Castro that the United States would be ""unlikely to invade"" if the missiles were removed.On October 26 at 6:00 pm EDT, the State Department started receiving a message that appeared to be written personally by Khrushchev.
Additional study of the letter was ordered and continued into the night.Crisis continues Direct aggression against Cuba would mean nuclear war.
Drafting responseEmissaries sent by both Kennedy and Khrushchev agreed to meet at the Yenching Palace Chinese restaurant in the Cleveland Park neighbourhood of Washington, DC, on Saturday evening, October 27.
The Soviets responded by scrambling MiG fighters from Wrangel Island; in turn, the Americans launched F-102 fighters armed with nuclear air-to-air missiles over the Bering Sea.Crisis endsOn Saturday, October 27, after much deliberation between the Soviet Union and Kennedy's cabinet, Kennedy secretly agreed to remove all missiles set in Turkey and possibly southern Italy, the former on the border of the Soviet Union, in exchange for Khrushchev removing all missiles in Cuba.
This convinced the American administration of Bucharest's intentions of detaching itself from Moscow.US leadershipThe worldwide United States Forces DEFCON 3 status was returned to DEFCON 4 on November 20, 1962.
One contradiction that pervaded the Soviet media campaign was between the pacifistic rhetoric of the peace movement that emphasises the horrors of nuclear war and the militancy of the need to prepare Soviets for war against American aggression.Media representationsNon fictionThirteen Days, Robert F Kennedy's memoir of the crisis, posthumously released in 1969; It became the basis for numerous films and documentaries.
