October 20, 2013 Next month, it will be half a century since President John F Kennedy was shot and killed in Dallas, Texas, on November 22, 1963.
Almost from that terrible day, the greatest cover up in the history of the United States began to be implemented.
Combined with what was called Operation Dragon, the disinformation masterpiece orchestrated by the KGB from Moscow and aided by the Cuban DGI , a falsified version of the assassination of President Kennedy emerged.
It is time to offer an alternate version of what most probably really happened in Dallas that fateful November 22, 1963.
The KGB launched Operation Dragon, designed to exculpate the KGB and to place the blame for the assassination on the CIA, began with two simultaneous, well orchestrated “shows”, one in the Soviet Union, the other one in Cuba, on the afternoon of the assassination.
The first was held in one of Fidel Castro’s houses in the famous Cuban beach resort of Varadero.
The guest of honor was the well known French writer Jean Daniel, invited to interview Castro a few days before.
Around 2pm, the telephone rang and Castro, uncharacteristically, rose up to answer it.
They will try to blame us” Weeks later, Daniel published all of the above in a long article in The New Republic.
Suddenly, a party hack burst into the office and excitedly told Ponomarev, in Russian, that Kennedy had been shot.
Childs spoke Russian, unknown to the Soviets, so Ponomarev dutifully translated into English the information, assuring Childs that neither the Soviet Union nor the KGB had anything to do with the assassination.
Childs passed the information later on to FBI Director J Edgard Hoover, who accepted it as fact.
Two months later, in January, 1964, a Soviet deserter asked for political asylum in Geneva, Switzerland.
When Nosenko was later interviewed by FBI agents in Washington, although at least William Sullivan, the FBI’s Intelligence chief, always had his doubts, most everyone else, including Director Hoover believed Nosenko.
That was the last piece of the masterful disinformation campaign known as Operation Dragon.
Even before the preliminary conclusions of the Warren Commission were published a few weeks after the assassination, Operation Dragon had completely deflected any guilt from either the Soviet Union or Cuba.
The almost universally accepted version of what happened in Dallas was that it was the CIA who was responsible.
The Mafia and Texas oil millionaires had financed the entire operation.
By the time the Warren Commission Repot was published in September, 1964, most people in the United States believed the above version.
There is an alternate version of the events that shook the world that morning of November 22, 1963 in Dallas.
The three men made their way separately to Dallas and on the morning of November 22, one or two of them shot at Kennedy from behind the infamous grassy knoll.
All shots, including Oswald’s, hit the president almost simultaneously.
From there, he was flown in a small private plane to Mexico City, where a Cubana de Aviación passenger plane waited five hours in the tarmac until Casas arrived.
Lopez stayed in Dallas to make sure that Jack Ruby, another DGI agent, shot Oswald two days later.
Lopez then also made his way to Laredo, Texas, where he crossed over to Mexico by car.
He then flew to Mexico City, via Tijuana and then left for Cuba on a Cubana flight on November 27.
Escalante flew into Dallas on the morning of November 22 in a private plane from Mexico and left the same way in the evening of the murder.
His entire 20 year counterintelligence archive, including the above information, was destroyed by orders given by CIA Director William Colby in 1975, two years after Colby fired Angleton.
But although this alternate version of the assassination is the most reasonable and credible of all that have been proposed in half a century, it cannot be proven empirically.
Until and unless the KGB archives in Russia and the DGI archives in Cuba are open, the truth will probably never be known.
At that time, 18 year-old Marine Lee Harvey Oswald was stationed in the Atsugi Marine Air Base, 35 miles south of Tokyo.
Atsugi was one of the two bases from which American U-2 spy planes flew over the Soviet Union and China in the late 1950s.
The U-2 flights provided up to 90% of the hard information on the Soviet Union’s and China’s military and industrial installations.
Oswald, who was highly intelligent and had good mathematical skills, was assigned to the U-2 radar operations office.
Soviet intelligence knew of the U-2s over-flights and had been tracking the U-2s for months.
But neither its SAM missiles nor its MiG fighter planes could reach the U-2s.
Marine recruits at Atsugi base usually went to Tokyo on their leave and while there, visited many of Tokyo’s prostitute bars.
Oswald went along, but he visited one bar in particular, the Queen Bee, which catered to a higher clientele of officers, including U-2 pilots and KGB agents.
Some Queen Bee prostitutes worked for the KGB and that is probably how Oswald was recruited and was able to afford their services.
This knowledge allowed Soviet technology to develop high interceptors called Su-9s.
One of these Su-9s downed Francis Gary Powers’s U-2 when it flew close to the U-2’s fragile wings.
The air current caused one of the wings to crack and the U-2 went down.
It was not a Soviet SAM, as it was believed for many years, that was responsible for the U-2 downed on May 1, 1960.
Oswald’s trajectory since he defected to the Soviet Union in 1959 is well known, so it will not be covered in detail.
But it must be mentioned that since he was 12 years old, he was attracted to “progressive” causes and was well read in Communist literature, describing himself as a Marxist.
He also taught himself enough Russian to allow him to live for three years in the Soviet Union, mostly in Minsk.
While he lived there, he was trained by the KGB in espionage and marksmanship.
He probably met Fabian Escalante, who was also being trained by the KGB in Minsk at the time.
Ramiro Valdés and José Abrantes, who later headed the Cuban Interior Ministry security apparatus for years, were also at the KGB school for spies in Minsk.
Oswald was considered too unstable to be used as an assassin, but he remained in the United States as a “sleeper” agent and so probably did his wife Marina, too.
He certainly helped both financially and introduced them to Dallas friends during most of 1963.
However, while the Soviet leader and the KGB may have abandoned the idea of killing Kennedy, neither Oswald nor Fidel Castro did.
Castro never forgave Khrushchev for withdrawing the Soviet missiles from Cuba.
Indeed, he urged Khrushchev to launch a missile against the United States in case of an invasion of Cuba in October, 1962.
Castro also knew of the many assassination attempts against him made by the CIA, on Kennedy’s orders, since 1961.
He hated Kennedy with a passion and he now saw an opportunity to get even.
Since Oswald was bent on killing Kennedy, the KGB informed the Cuban DGI and requested that someone be sent to Dallas to kill Oswald afterwards.
But the DGI instead made plans for Oswald to shoot the president, and, unknown to him, also for DGI agents to shoot at Kennedy at the same time.
Both services always intended for Oswald to be the escape goat, for him to be held responsible for the assassination afterwards.
Khrushchev did not give the order to shoot Kennedy and may not even have known of the operation.
He and the president had, after all, grown closer since the end of the Missile Crisis.
By the time he was deposed less that a year after Kennedy was killed, almost all the Politburo members and most of the military and KGB were against him.
It is entirely possible that secret KGB/DGI plans to kill Kennedy were withheld from his knowledge.
Castro may have been mollified by Khrushchev’s assurances of Kennedy’s promise not to invade Cuba as a result of their secret agreement in exchange for the withdrawal of the missiles from Cuba and from Turkey.
However, there never really was a binding promise by Kennedy not to invade Cuba, as the Soviets did not comply with the conditions of on site inspection in Cuba.
But Castro did not know that and Khrushchev made him believe the terms of the agreement were firm.
The plot was discovered by the FBI just in time and on November 17, three Cuban “diplomats” at the UN mission and two members of the Fair Play for Cuba Committee were arrested.
On the back of a jewelry store owned by FPCC member José García, more than 1000 pounds of TNT, along with detonators, grenades and incendiary devices, were found.
If the plot had succeeded, it would have been more devastating than the attack on the Twin Towers of 9/11.
The Cuban “diplomats” were held for five months, and then quietly exchanged for some CIA operatives imprisoned in Cuba since the Bay of Pigs invasion.
But now Castro found out that the Kennedys were still trying to kill him this late in 1963.
He knew this because former Cuban Army Major Rolando Cubela had been working with the CIA to that effect since 1961.
Cubela was probably discovered by the DGI sometime in 1962 and became a double agent.
He was keeping Castro informed of the CIA plans, which he knew were ordered by the President and his brother Robert, the Attorney General, who was in charge of Operation Mongoose up to the time his brother was killed.
Indeed, almost at the time Oswald was shooting at President Kennedy in Dallas, CIA agent Desmond FitzGerald was meeting with Cubela in Paris to finalize the details of Cubela’s attempt on Castro.
It is not known when Castro decided to go ahead with the DGI plan to murder President Kennedy.
Nor is it known when Oswald decided to go ahead with the assassination on his own, but it was probably in early October, 1963, after he returned from Mexico to Dallas.
Oswald had become disillusioned with the Soviet system after living there for three years.
He still considered himself a Marxist, but he became convinced that the Soviet Union had become a bureaucratized society which was not very different from the United States.
He had been following the Cuban revolution since 1959 and was an admirer of American William Morgan, who fought for Castro against the Batista dictatorship and became a Cuban Army Major after the revolution was won.
Since he came back to the United States in 1962, Oswald became obsessed with establishing his bona fides with Cuba so that he could become a revolutionary just like his new hero Morgan.
In April, 1963, Oswald tried to kill retired Army General Edwin Walker.
He barely missed, but documented his attempt with photographic evidence and may have escaped with the help of Cuban DGI agents.
Several months later, Oswald moved to New Orleans, then a focus of anti Castro activities by Cuban exiles.
Oswald tried to organize a chapter of the Fair Play for Cuba Committee in New Orleans, but he also tried to infiltrate anti Castro organizations.
He had a run in with Cuban exile Carlos Bringuier which resulted in the arrest of both men.
Oswald later appeared in a radio program with Bringuier and others and expounded his pro Castro views.
In late September, Oswald traveled from New Orleans to Mexico City by bus, but he made a stop in Dallas, where on the night of September 25, he visited the home of the Odio sisters with two Cubans.
They all presented themselves as enemies of the Castro regime and tried to get information from Sylvia Odio about anti Castro activities.
Sylvia’s father was imprisoned in Havana as a result of his involvement, along with Cuban Army Major Rolando Cubela, in a plot to assassinate Castro.
Sylvia and her sister became suspicious and told Oswald and the Cubans nothing.
Much later, they found out the truth about Oswald and also that his companions were DGI agents.
Oswald arrived in Mexico City on the morning of September 27 and checked into the Hotel del Comercio, a few blocks from both the Cuban and Soviets embassies.
The Hotel del Comercio was a notorious meeting place for Cuban intelligence agencies and Oswald probably met with some of them while in Mexico.
He went to the Cuban embassy later in the morning to get a visa and travel to Cuba.
He had a lengthy conversation with Silvia Tirado de Durán, who worked as a receptionist but may have been a DGI agent.
Durán explained that he needed a visa from the Soviet embassy to be able to get a Cuban visa.
Oswald, who expected to travel to Cuba in a few days, became agitated and argumentative.
The Cuban Consul, Eusebio Azcue was called by Durán and finally convinced Oswald to go to the Soviet embassy, which he did.
Oswald walked over to the Soviet embassy and was directed to a consular officer named Valery Kostikov.
Kostikov called in two other KGB officers, but eventually, Oswald was told he could not get a Soviet visa, that it would take months to get one from the embassy in Washington.
A dejected Oswald then went back to the Cuban embassy, where he had another heated argument with Durán and Azcue.
He finally left, after shouting that he intended to kill President Kennedy.
That weekend in Mexico City, Oswald went to a party with Silvia Durán and met other prominent Mexican society members who were sympathizers of the Cuban revolution.
That “lost weekend” , Oswald probably met again with Kostikov and Cuban DGI agents, including Rolando Cubela.
Final plans for the Kennedy assassination were then likely finalized between Oswald and DGI agents that weekend, after Oswald was told by Cubela in detail of the latest Kennedy-ordered, CIA plan to kill Castro, the one involving Cubela.
But it must be pointed out that what Oswald truly wanted was to go to Cuba.
When he found out he could not, he apparently decided to kill Kennedy as a final “proof” of his devotion to Fidel Castro and the Cuban revolution.
That same day, his visa to travel to Cuba was approved, contingent on his getting a Soviet visa.
He was living in a rooming house in Dallas while Marina and their daughters stayed with Ruth Paine at her house in Irving, a Dallas suburb.
It was announced in September and the itinerary was released to the public around November 18.
Oswald therefore knew well in advance that the president would be traveling through downtown Dallas.
When the itinerary was announced on November 18, all he had to do was to bring his rifle into the building and wait for the presidential caravan to pass by.
A second stage of the assassination was being planned in Havana under the direction of Fabian Escalante, the head of Cuban counterintelligence and a close confidant of Raul Castro.
It is possible that the two DGI agents under Escalante, Casas and Lopez, only provided logistical support and did not shoot at Kennedy.
There is some evidence that after the killing, Oswald had made plans to escape to Cuba.
Tippit as he was trying to escape after the assassination, he shot and killed Tippit.
Now Fabián Escalante left Dallas and the final plan to silence Oswald, by having Jack Ruby, a DGI agent, kill Oswald two days later, was implemented.
The great disinformation campaign of Operation Dragon began in the afternoon of November 22.
Shortly afterwards, the great cover-up of the assassination would begin in full by the new Johnson administration.
James Angleton’s theory implicating the Cuban DGI in the Kennedy assassination has a critical flaw and another very difficult obstacle to overcome.
The first is that Angleton unfortunately never gave details of the operation to investigative writer Joseph J Trento.
Because ALL “experts” agree that only Oswald shot at Kennedy and the bullets that struck the president ALL came from Oswald’s rifle, that is a major problem.
However, there is plenty of evidence—including photographic evidence—that the Cuban DGI agents were in Dallas on November 22 and that they escaped to Mexico in the following days.
The second obstacle, that Oswald was the only shooter, is not insurmountable, it can be overcome.
Evidence, including forensic and ballistic evidence, can be altered and falsified; it can be created as well as it can be destroyed.
But in the end, it is not that important whether the Cuban DGI agents did the shooting.
What matters is that they were in Dallas and that the entire operation was planned and carried out by the DGI under orders from Fidel Castro.
SOURCES The main sources for the above reconstruction of President Kennedy’s death in 1963 come from a handful of relatively recent books.
Disinformation, by General Ion Mihai Pacepa and historian Ronald J Ryslack provides all the information on Operation Dragon.
Because General Pacepa, who defected from Rumania in 1978 was the head of Rumanian intelligence and he personally knew all the highest members of Warsaw Pact intelligence services, including the KGB, his information must be given high credibility.
He still lives under a secret identity and under United States government protection after all these years.
No one alive today probably knows more about communist dezinformatsiya that General Pacepa.
General Pacepa believes that Khrushchev did not want to risk another such spectacular assassination at the time.
If it failed and was discovered, it would certainly provoke another nuclear confrontation.
General Pacepa’s analysis of Cuban DGI involvement in the Kennedy assassination provides strong support for Angleton’s theory, although he does not say they were directly involved in the assassination.
He also explains how the KGB was deeply involved in the planning along with the Cuban DGI and identifies Jack Ruby as a DGI agent.
His book Disinformation is invaluable to understand what happened in Dallas on November 22, 1963.
After General Pacepa reads this article, I hope that he can provide me with additional information.
J Trento is a long time investigative reporter and author of several books on United States intelligence.
In The Secret History of the CIA , Trento reveals Angleton’s theory of DGI involvement in the Kennedy assassination.
As has been mentioned a few times, Angleton’s evidence of his theory was ordered destroyed by CIA Director William Colby in 1975, after he had fired Angleton the year before.
Angleton, because of his 20 years as CIA Director of Counterintelligence, probably knew more than anyone else about the Kennedy assassination.
Trento interviewed him for many hours and was his close friend for eleven years.
Trento also interviewed hundreds of other top CIA agents, including John Sherwood and Robert Crowley and Dr.
William Corson, who worked as an advisor for four different presidents.
The book is a treasure trove of information about the CIA and is especially valuable in explaining the controversy within United States intelligence agencies about the Soviet defectors Nosenko and Golitsyn and how that affected the investigation into Kennedy’s murder.
Nosenko was a KGB disinformation agent; Golitsyn was legitimate, but he was avaricious and amoral and the information he provided was of little value.
This book offers a very disturbing and depressing overview of the espionage and counterintelligence world.
It leaves the reader shaken and feeling that there was not much difference between the KGB and the CIA top personnel.
In a recent telephone conversation, he assured me that Angleton’s version of the assassination is correct and he is satisfied that Angleton was right in his theory.
He also told me that the truth about Kennedy’s death will probably never be known.
Hopefully, he will also offer some comments when he reads this article.
But Justice Warren refused to accept such evidence and nothing was included in the final report.
Epstein offers details of Oswald’s visit to the Odio sister in Dallas in September, 1963, on his way to Mexico.
He interviewed Sylvia Odio 15 years later and she told him that according to her father , the Cubans who were with Oswald in Dallas when they visited her home, were DGI agents.
Mr Epstein will also review this article and hopefully provide some new inputs.
Cuban Intelligence, the CIA and the Assassination of John F Kennedy in 2012.
In a newly published paperback edition this year, Brian, who is a friend, has added a long, 8,000 word introduction which includes some extraordinary recent research by him.
Perhaps the most important new information provided in the paperback edition is the informal investigation conducted in Mexico after Kennedy’s death by United States ambassador Thomas Mann.
Mann uncovered evidence that the Hotel del Comercio where Oswald stayed during his week in Mexico City was “headquarters for pro Castro activities” and that the DGI used the hotel for intelligence purposes.
Mann also had some evidence that Oswald had received money at the Cuban embassy, perhaps from DGI agent Luisa Calderón.
Mann wanted Calderón and the Cuban consul, Azcue, arrested by Mexican authorities for complicity in the plot.
All this evidence was suppressed and Mann was ordered to stop any and all further investigations of Oswald’s activities in Mexico by new president Lyndon Johnson, a close friend, who was himself under pressure from FBI Director Hoover, Robert Kennedy and CIA Assistant Director Richard Helms.
Latell also provides important evidence from former North Carolina Senator Robert B Morgan, who was a member of the Church Senate investigative subcommittee on assassinations in 1975.
In a telephone interview in 2009, Morgan, who had been a prosecutor in North Carolina before he was elected Senator, and who was convinced of Castro’s involvement in the assassination, told Latell that he believed he would have convicted Castro of complicity in Kennedy’s death.
But Morgan’s views were not included in the final report of the Church Committee.
Two books by Gus Russo, Live by the Sword and Brothers in Arms are extremely important.
They offer a great deal of information on the assassination, especially on Oswald’s stay in Mexico prior to the attempt on the president’s life.
The books also provide hard evidence of the DGI agents escape from Dallas—including photographic and documentary evidence—and of Escalante’s deep involvement in the execution of the plan.
But Russo does not accept that DGI agents were directly involved in the shooting because he firmly believes that it was impossible for anyone else to shoot at Kennedy from the grassy knoll or any other spot in front of the caravan.
He believes this because he believes the forensic evidence that only two bullets fired from behind struck Kennedy.
Russo is nevertheless one of the few authors who is convinced that Castro was responsible for Kennedy’s death and his books argue that the Kennedys brought it upon themselves what happened in Dallas.
Russo believes that because the Kennedys had been trying to kill Castro for years, Castro finally retaliated and struck before Robert’s final plan to kill him, by using Rolando Cubela as the assassin, could be implemented.
Russo provides a devastating indictment on the DGI’s record of assassinations and of Fabian Escalona’s participation in many of those murders.
As of 2005, according to Russo, 67 foreign nationals have been killed by the Castro regime; 25 have been assassinated, including 14 Americans on United States soil.
In a final ironic twist on the final attempt against Castro’s life by Cubela, a CIA agent was meeting with Cubela in Paris, France, right at the time Oswald was killing Kennedy.
Cubela had requested direct proof that Kennedy was behind the assassination plot on Castro.
Desmond Fitzgerald of the CIA was dispatched to Paris on orders from Robert Kennedy to provide Cubela’s proof.
The Warren Commission Report, rushed to publication in late September, 1963, because Lyndon Johnson wanted the findings to be known before the 1964 presidential election, is basically useless.
But two other Congressional Reports, by the Senate in 1975 and by the House of representatives in 1978-79, have lots of useful information.
The Senate Report includes much evidence from forensic and ballistic “experts” and tries to re-establish the ‘fact” that Oswald was the only assassin and there was no conspiracy.
Besides, the Senate investigation was more concerned with revealing some of the CIA’s past misdeeds, which it did.
Other scientific evidence does not preclude the possibility of two gunmen firing at the President.
C The committee believes, on the basis of the evidence available to it, that President John F Kennedy was probably assassinated as a result of a conspiracy.
It is to be noted that the Committee DID find evidence to conclude that there was more than one shooter and that there WAS a conspiracy to kill the president.
Those who read it probably decided it was old news because it did say there was a conspiracy, but not who was involved in it.
The evidentiary evidence that still exists can be found in the Mitrokhin and Vassiliev archives.
These contain copies of original KGB documents brought out of the USSR by two KGB defectors, Vasili Mitrokhin y Alexander Vassiliev.
Mitrokhin hand-copied thousands of secret documents and smuggled them out during 10 years.
In 1999, part of the archive was published in the book The Sword and the Shield, by Mitrokhin and British historian Christopher Andrew.
A second book by the same authors was published in 2005, The World Was Going Our Way.
It contains important documents about KGB dealings with espionage in Third World nations.
The Vassiliev archive consists of a number of notebooks and lots of unbound pages copied from original KGB documents in 1993 by Alexander Vassiliev, who was a KGB agent in 1987-90.
Although the Soviet Union had disintegrated by then, its archives were still secret.
Two great books about Operation Venona, the secret intercept program by the United States Army during the Second World War, are essential to understand Soviet espionage, not only dealing with the Kennedy assassination but with Soviet penetration of American society.
Decoding Soviet Espionage in America, by John Earl Haynes and Harvey Klehr.
Exposing Soviet Espionage and America’s Traitors, by Herbert Romerstein and Eric Breindel.
How the Assassination of John F Kennedy Shattered American Liberalism, by James Piereson, describes in detail how a large segment of American society was preconditioned to accept Operation Dragon and blame the assassination on the CIA and “conservative” elements, rather than on the responsible party, Lee Harvey Oswald, a committed communist.
The book also illustrates how the myth of “Camelot” was created almost singlehandedly by Jacqueline Kennedy and how the president became a “martyr” of civil rights instead of the most important victim of the Cold War.
It has many fascinating details of Oswald and how he went from an unbalanced but convinced anti American and Kennedy hater, to a “nut”, a CIA “puppet” or an inconsequential “silly little communist”, in the words of Jacqueline Kennedy.
Seymour M Hersh’s book The Dark Side of Camelot is worth reading because it has most of the well-known conspiracy theories and numerous anecdotes about the reaction to the assassination by many notable Washington insiders.
Additional material on the U-2 piloted by Francis Gary Powers are Powers’s own memoirs, Operation Overflight , in which Powers accuses Oswald of revealing U-2 secrets to Oswald; and two more recent articles, one by Khrushchev’s son Sergey in American Heritage magazine ; the other by the pilot of the Soviet Sukhoi Su-9 which accidentally downed Powers’s U-2, Captain Igor Mentyukov.
Mentyukov broke 36 years of silence when he revealed the truth in 1996.
The Su-9 was ordered to ram the U-2, but Captain Mentyukov lost the U-2 in space and when his Su-9 passed too close to the U-2, the air current created by the Su-9 broke the U-2’s wing and it came down.
As part of the cover-up, the CIA gave the Warren Commission a memorandum stating that Oswald knew nothing about the U-2’s operations and provided no information about it to the KGB in 1958-59.
He was present at the radar shack when pilots routinely asked about “winds aloft at 90,000”, a clear mention of the plane’s altitude.
General Pacepa is the main source as to the Soviet leader’s intentions and change of mind.
The Man and His Era, by William Taubman, an admittedly sympathetic book, does not mention anything about Khrushchev’s possible ill will against Kennedy.
However, three other books are much better to illustrate Khrushchev’s personality.
Perhaps one of the best books on the Cold War, The Fifty Year Wound, by Derek Leebaert , is excellent in its objective but highly critical treatment of the Soviet Premier.
All the minutes and shorthand notes of the deliberations inside the Kremlin during the Missile Crisis are there.
Nothing illustrates better Khrushchev’s motivations and reactions during the Crisis than what the authors reveal in their great book.
And the chapter about Khrushchev in The Rise and Fall of the Soviet Empire, by the renowned Russian historian General Dmitri Volkogonov is without compare.
Lyndon Johnson always suspected, but did not know, about the Kennedy brothers multiple plans to kill Fidel Castro since before the Bay of Pigs invasion.
He was, however, quite sure, that Castro was involved in the president’s assassination.
Kennedy’s fine biography by Robert Dallek, An Unfinished Life is one of them.
Johnson shared his suspicions about Castro with many friends and advisors, such as his Chief of Staff Joseph Califano and the powerful Georgia Senator Richard Russell, who also agreed with Castro’s guilt.
Johnson said that in a telephone call to his aide Bill Moyers, minutes after being told of the shooting.
But Johnson was not just convinced of Castro’s involvement in the assassination.
To that effect, he endeavored to send a number of messages to Cuba that he was stopping all further attempts against Castro’s life.
He also dismantled all anti Castro activities, including Operation Mongoose, and stopped all CIA aid to anti Castro exiles within a few months.
He died convinced that Castro was responsible for Kennedy’s death Robert Kennedy was more convinced of Castro’s involvement than anyone else.
He was, after all, in charge of Operation Mongoose since after the Bay of Pigs invasion.
He told his brother, in a memorandum written April 20, that Castro must be eliminated.
Robert considered Castro’s Cuba by far the most pressing matter for the administration, and Castro the most dangerous man in the world.
He was so convinced of Castro’s intervention on his brother’s death, that he was the first to propose to Johnson an independent investigation.
Robert convinced him that an independent investigation could immediately stop the dangerous rumors that either the Soviet Union or Cuba was involved in the assassination.
If not stopped, indeed, if confirmed, those rumors could bring a new nuclear confrontation with the USSR and calls for an immediate invasion of Cuba.
If Castro’s involvement was proven, all the attempts to kill him by the Kennedy administration since 1961 would be known.
That would stain his brother’s reputation and his legacy forever, so Castro’s role in the assassination had to be suppressed, covered up.
And so it was, but Robert could hardly hide his grief and regret for his responsibility in the plots to kill Castro.
He was heard to exclaim, “I have killed my brother” when an especially compromising report came in from Ambassador Mann in Mexico.
And he was dramatically changed, realizing the tremendous consequences of the administration’s “assassination politics” and accepting that it was wrong and it brought fatal results to him and his brother.
But national security considerations prevailed and the great cover-up was implemented.
There are three upcoming events that may shed some new light on the assassination.
Brian Latell, Miami Herald writer Glenn Garvin and others will participate.
I expect to be able to express my views and y alternate version at the conference.
Perhaps, at least, a new discussion of the Kennedy assassination will ensue.
The second is a documentary to be shown by NBC on November 22, the 50th anniversary of Kennedy’s death.
Perhaps something different, if not new, will come out, especially from Carlos Bringuier, who was interviewed for the program.
Finally, there is a new book written by Carlos Bringuier that will be published in December of this year.
Fabián Escalante waited for Oswald to take him to Cuba at an airport in Dallas.
Oswald thought he would be received in Cuba as a hero, but I believe he might have been dumped in the Gulf of Mexico on the way to Cuba.
Other members of the Fair Play for Cuba Committee from Tampa were involved.
Santos Trafficante, when he was released from jail in Havana in 1959 by Cubela, became a Castro agent and used his friend Jack Ruby to silence Oswald.
The CIA was infiltrated to its highest levels by pro communist Castro sympathizers.
Crime Without Punishment: How Fidel Castro Assassinated President Kennedy And Got Away With It.
When I first wrote this article in Spanish a month ago, one of my purposes was to stimulate a new discussion on a matter shamefully covered up for half a century by the United States government.
My other purpose was to try to cleanse the reputation of Cuban exiles, unjustly saddled with at least some of the responsibility for Kennedy’s murder.
But I must admit I was never particularly interested in the subject and have never read any of the multiple “conspiracy books” on the assassination.
Until I read General Pacepa’s and Joseph Trento’s books a few months ago, I generally believed there was a conspiracy to kill the president and it was made up of the CIA, the Mafia, some Cuban exiles and some Texas oilmen.
That research has helped enormously in my new understanding of what happened and why.
I hope I can do something to correct the historical record and to help some others to change their minds and to see different, alternate aspects of the assassination.
The final truth may never be known, but the truth is definitely NOT what we have been led to believe for half a century.
You have 2 missed calls… subscribe for a daily fix of Babalú by email Name Email babalú is social, never socialist founding editorValentín ""El Machete"" Prietomanaging editorAlberto ""El Americanito"" de la Cruzwebmaster and past editorHenry ""Conductor"" GómezwritersAsombra Dr.
