Narrator: The Soviets seemed intent on testing the quarantine line that Saturday.
A United States ship dropped depth charges on a Soviet submarine in the Caribbean.
And, most harrowing, an American spy plane on a mission over Cuba fell off the radar.
We have said that if Russia shoots down one of our U-2 reconnaissance planes, we will immediately retaliate.
We'll immediately bomb that missile site that took out the plane, and then we will prepare for an all-out invasion.
Time and again, when the hawks in that room, when the Joint Chiefs of Staff are insisting on invading, Kennedy pulls them back.
Kennedy could see the chance for a peaceful solution was slipping away, so he chose the person he most trusted, brother Bobby, to take an urgent message to the Soviet Ambassador in Washington.
He was proposing a way out, which involved the United States giving up a set of redundant weapons -the newly installed Jupiter missiles in Turkey.
Kennedy repeats his demand for Khrushchev to pull out, says that time is of the essence, if Khrushchev pulls his missiles out of Cuba, the United States will over the next few weeks pull its missiles out of Turkey.
The President was willing to back down, pull out the American missiles from Turkey, but only if that was kept secret.
The Strategic Air Command bombers are circling over the Arctic, waiting for the ""go"" signals.
Other bombers, in the United States, they're being handed their target packets to bomb Russia the next day.
In Florida, the Fifth Marine Expeditionary Force is readying for the invasion -an invasion, war.
If Russia's drawn into it -and it will be, these are Russians on Cuba -nuclear war.
A colossal engineering failure, the dam was built by William Mulholland, who had ensured the growth of Los Angeles by bringing water to the city via aqueduct.
Flood in the Desert Explore el derrumbe de la represa en 1928 y las secuelas del segundo desastre más mortal en California.
Explore el derrumbe de la represa en 1928 y las secuelas del segundo desastre más mortal en California.
The American Diplomat Explore the lives and legacies of three African American ambassadors who broke racial barriers to reach high-ranking appointments in the Truman, Eisenhower and Kennedy administrations and left a lasting impact on the Foreign Service.
The Rescue When a Japanese destroyer split his PT-109 boat in half, Kennedy felt it was his duty to get his men to safety.
JFK | Clip Jackie's Culture of Elegance Jackie Kennedy created a new culture of elegance in the White House.
JFK | Clip Jackie and the White House Jackie Kennedy set out to restore the White House and make it a center of art and culture.
Zip/Postal Code: Get the latest on new films and digital content, learn about events in your area, and get your weekly fix of American history.
