Today, however, one finds a certain generational divide as perhaps the salient characteristic of the enterprise.
Mostly younger scholars clustered around the Cold War International History Project of the Woodrow Wilson Center—including James Hershberg, Vladislav Zubok, Chen Jian, Kathryn Weathersby, Mark Kramer, Csaba Bekes, and Hope Harrison—have pioneered the integration of sources from the ""other side"" of the Cold War into a nuanced, contextual, and truly international version of our recent past.
Acutely aware of the contingent nature of the new sources, these young historians avoid entanglement with any of the old, ideologically divided schools of Cold War history.
To oversimplify drastically, the orthodox school of Herbert Feis and Arthur Schlesinger, Jr., blamed the Cold War on the Soviet Union.
The revisionist school of William Appleman Williams blamed American economic expansion for frightening the Soviets.
A few senior scholars already established in these debates have also dared to grapple with the new evidence—none to greater effect than the leading owl himself.
The work is endearing because, in exposing the errors of past histories, Gaddis focuses frequently on his own.
Hardly anyone in either the older or younger generation of Cold War scholars will agree with all of Gaddis's judgments.
Thus was born the myth of calibrated brinkmanship—the belief that if you stand tough you win, and that nuclear superiority makes the difference in moments of crisis.
This myth, midwifed by the Kennedy family and its hagiographers, had untold consequences for the planning of the Vietnam War and the nuclear arms race.
The terms, according to the memoir, were that this could not be an explicit quid pro quo and that the deal would never be publicly acknowledged by the United States.
Next came a trickle of declassified United States government documents in the mid-1980s, including notes and transcripts from the meetings of John F Kennedy's top advisers, in which the president appears not as the fastest draw at the OK Corral but as a peacenik.
In 1987 Rusk himself revealed JFK's willingness, had the crisis persisted much longer, to propose a public Turkey-Cuba trade through the United Nations—a willingness, in short, to blink.
Since then, the revisions have mounted as the documents have flooded out.
Theodore Sorenson has admitted that while editing Thirteen Days he cut references in RFK's diary to an explicit Turkey-Cuba deal.
On the Soviet side, the Blight-Lang sessions were forced to rely on the largely uncorroborated memories of aging veterans and their children (such as Khrushchev's son) rather than on solid documentation.
It is a treasure-trove of a book, studded with quotations and citations from still-secret archives in Moscow, woven together with the new United States documentation.
It is also a dramatic and highly readable narrative, the most authoritative to date, of the six-year period from the Cuban Revolution through the aftermath of President Kennedy's assassination and the October 1964 coup that ousted Khrushchev.
Soviet intelligence and embassy reporting from Havana to Moscow, a similar flow from Soviet agents and officials in Washington, and internal Politburo and Khrushchev office records.
The first category alone makes this book essential reading for any serious analyst of U.S.-Cuban relations.
It yields extraordinary insights into the personalities of Castro, his brother Raúl, Che Guevara, and other leaders, as well as abundant information about Cuban military and intelligence capabilities.
Perhaps most striking is evidence of the Cubans' unrelenting fear, before and after the Bay of Pigs landing in 1961, that a United States invasion was imminent.
The authors' evocative rendering of the resulting paranoia suggests that when Khrushchev claimed that the missiles were there to defend the Cuban Revolution, he was not just scoring a propaganda point.
Equally fascinating is the second category, Soviet reporting from Washington.
For example, summaries of reports from a personable military intelligence officer named Georgi Bolshakov reveal that he hit it off with RFK and met with him on a backchannel basis some 51 times during 1961-62.
Yet despite these alleged penetrations, during the October crisis the KGB fell back on invasion tips from a bartender at the National Press Club.
Perhaps most astonishing is the degree to which the Soviet premier acted as his own intelligence analyst.
So closed was Khrushchev's inner circle that he rarely consulted with the KGB about decisions regarding the United States.
Instead, he would summon whatever prominent Americans happened to be in Moscow.
As with all such exclusive scholarly arrangements, the strength of Fursenko and Naftali's book is also its weakness.
Moreover, the authors' acknowledgments and source notes give little indication of what sorts of conditions were attached to their exclusive access—a discouraging omission, indeed.
That said, if the authors had not pushed for whatever access they obtained, our understanding of the Cold War would be demonstrably the poorer.
President Kennedy later estimated the odds of nuclear war during the missile crisis as having been one in three.
