By Max Holland and Tara Marie Egan Writing in August 2007 about the major candidates’ credentials, Washington Post columnist Anne Applebaum concluded that it’s questionable whether foreign policy experience is essential for anyone aspiring to the presidency.
Lyndon B Johnson had held national office for years before becoming president, but he still couldn’t cope with Vietnam.
Applebaum’s implication was that Johnson did not absorb the right lessons while serving as John F Kennedy’s vice president, even though one of the greatest teaching tools of the Cold War, the Cuban missile crisis, occurred during President Kennedy’s watch 45 years ago.
While sketchy on the subject of the missile crisis—there are only a few references on the tapes over a period of years—enough can be gleaned from them to confirm that Johnson was never privy to the true history of the missile crisis.
False history led to mistaken lessons, including a belief in the efficacy of calibrated force, which helped prevent Johnson from seriously entertaining the concessions necessary for a negotiated political solution to the Vietnam War, the supreme crisis of his presidency.
The conscious exclusion of Johnson from the truth goes far beyond the superficially parallel situation that occurred when Harry Truman succeeded Franklin D Roosevelt.
In that case, Truman’s ignorance of the Manhattan Project, and of the mounting problems with the Soviet Union, was not at all purposeful.
Roosevelt’s conduct of foreign policy was shambolic by nature, and excluding Truman from important knowledge was not calculated.
Top presidential advisers, of course, are generally loath to share the secrets of one administration with another administration, even of the same political party.
But in this case, an additional and powerful reason for keeping Johnson ignorant was the shadow cast by Robert F Kennedy over the entire Johnson presidency.
Men who had stayed on to serve LBJ as they had served JFK—Dean Rusk, Robert McNamara, McGeorge Bundy—were already regarded, by the late president’s brother, as insufficiently loyal.
Had one of them shared JFK’s biggest secret with Johnson, the leaker surely would have been fingered and his indiscretion regarded as unpardonable.
Circles within Circles Out of the 12 regular members of the fabled ExComm, four were not privy to the secret codicil that helped end the October 1962 missile crisis, namely, the explicit guarantee that America’s Jupiter missiles in Turkey would be quietly removed following a Soviet withdrawal of offensive missiles from Cuba.
The ExComm members denied this knowledge were General Maxwell Taylor, C Douglas Dillon, John McCone, and Lyndon Johnson.
President Kennedy presumably excluded Taylor, chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, because the chiefs had expressed unwavering opposition to any linkage between the missiles, surreptitiously emplaced in Cuba, and the Jupiters, openly sited in Turkey.
Treasury Secretary Dillon was also denied knowledge of the settlement terms, probably because he was a prominent Republican (Dillon had served as under secretary of state in the Eisenhower administration) who had argued vigorously against a deal involving the Jupiters.
But not even the fact that he was director of central intelligence and energetically supported withdrawal of the obsolete Jupiters, if it facilitated getting the Soviet missiles out of Cuba, was sufficient for his admittance into the president’s inner circle.
Yet since President Kennedy was intent on keeping every Republican, from Dwight Eisenhower on down, in the dark about the true terms of the missile crisis settlement, he could hardly confide in McCone, who regularly briefed the former president on national security matters.
Finally, John Kennedy also decided, quite deliberately, to shut out Lyndon Johnson, a Democrat and the second-highest officeholder in the land.
Like any consummate politician, Johnson valued one quality— loyalty—above all else, and since he expected it, he gave it in return.
Though bitterly disappointed at the meager responsibilities given him by the Kennedy White House, Johnson had been a team player since January 1961.
In word, deed, and appearance, he had been completely loyal, airing all of his private differences over policy (and he had some) with the president alone, and dutifully following the president’s lead in any group larger than the two of them.
Washington Decoded Hardened Washington columnists, some of whom had known Johnson for decades, were keenly aware of the indignities and humiliations he suffered as vice president.
Johnson was the uncouth Texan who simply didn’t fit, ridiculed behind his back as “Uncle Cornpone” for his accent and manner.
Yet LBJ amazed these columnists with his self-discipline, for he refused to be a source of political dirt or information about the administration’s internal machinations.
Still, not even LBJ’s repeated demonstrations of fidelity had been sufficient to overcome the Kennedys’ distrust of Johnson, and in Robert Kennedy’s case, intense and ineradicable dislike.
In the days following the discovery of the Soviet missiles on October 15, Johnson had played an ambiguous, even contradictory, role at the ExComm meetings—that is, when he chose to speak at all, which was not often.
When JFK specifically solicited Johnson’s opinion on October 16, the first day of deliberations, the vice president expressed the view that the offensive elements of the Soviet buildup were intolerable for domestic political reasons.
The administration simply had to remove the threat, by force if necessary, and regardless of whether America’s allies approved.
As the ExComm’s discussions turned to the crucial question of whether to impose a blockade or take more violent action, however, LBJ went missing in action, albeit through no fault of his own.
The impending off-year election meant Johnson had been booked to make a long campaign swing.
Because the administration did not want to signal Moscow that its missiles had been sighted in Cuba, it was decided to keep LBJ on the political hustings as if nothing were untoward.
On the evening of Sunday, October 21, when Johnson finally made it back to Washington, the president directed DCI McCone to brief the vice president on everything that had transpired, including the controversial decision to impose a blockade.
Johnson initially expressed disagreement with the policy that had been developed in his absence.
But McCone had also briefed Dwight Eisenhower that morning, and when the DCI informed Johnson that the former president opposed a surprise attack, and was willing to accept the military handicap that came with imposition of a blockade, Johnson reluctantly changed his position to favor the quarantine.
Few people exercised as much influence on Johnson’s judgment as Eisenhower did when it came to matters of national security.
Once the crisis became public on October 22, Johnson attended every ExComm session thereafter, though his return hardly seemed to matter.
Johnson may have been sticking to his “general policy of never speaking unless the president asked ,” and behaving as he thought a vice president should—which was to agree in public with Washington Decoded whatever the president decided, or at least mimic his leanings.
Still, when JFK specifically asked Johnson for his opinion, LBJ chose to remain silent and withdrawn.
Befitting his shrunken status, and discomfort with all the “Harvards” in JFK’s inner circle, LBJ repeatedly declined to offer a strong opinion during several meetings, particularly when the president was in attendance.
Johnson only began to assert himself during the critical ExComm meeting on Saturday, October 27, which began at 4 PM and lasted for more than three hours.
Just after the ExComm heard the unsettling news that a U-2 had been downed by a Soviet surface-toair missile, Johnson insinuated that unless there was a firm response, the public would soon perceive the administration as backing away from the strong position enunciated in President Kennedy’s October 22 speech to the nation.
Overall, LBJ seemed to favor a negotiated solution to the crisis, though he also came down on both sides of the key issue of linkage.
At one point he criticized Robert McNamara’s stiff opposition to a missile swap, arguing that the Jupiter missiles were “not worth a damn” anyway.
Minutes later, LBJ likened an outright trade to appeasement, asserting that it would be tantamount to dismantling the containment edifice Washington had painstakingly built over the past 15 years.
But when the president convened a rump ExComm session on October 27, after the regular one broke up and just before RFK’s evening meeting with Soviet ambassador Anatoly Dobrynin, Johnson was purposefully excluded from the trusted inner circle.
Thus, Johnson was left unaware of the genuine settlement terms which were offered that Saturday night, and hastily accepted by Nikita Khrushchev the next day.
Perhaps it was feared that because Johnson was still very close to Richard B Russell, his Senate mentor, he might be incapable of “disinforming” the Georgian, who was highly critical of the administration’s handling of Castro’s Cuba.
The notion that Johnson would have to contend with the legacy of the missile crisis appeared very unlikely, for LBJ seemed like a relic from a by-gone political age.
Johnson himself was practically the only person who believed he might be a viable candidate for the 1968 Democratic nomination.
In two months’ time, when The Saturday Evening Post would publish an “exclusive” account of the missile crisis—one that was widely viewed as the administration’s preferred version—LBJ would not be mentioned in the article at all, the only regular Washington Decoded member of the ExComm to be so slighted.
In little more than a year, though, LBJ became the first president forced to grapple with JFK’s storied handling of the missile crisis.
Because of the ostensibly authoritative Saturday Evening Post article published in December 1962, the crisis had become quickly encrusted with legend and lore, an “eyeball to eyeball” confrontation with Moscow that abruptly ended when Khrushchev blinked.
According to this Hollywoodized version, Kennedy’s resoluteness, restraint, and controlled escalation of force prompted Moscow to capitulate, and no one demonstrated more wisdom and foresight than Robert F Kennedy.
Meanwhile, the standardbearer of liberal Democrats, Adlai Stevenson, was depicted as an appeaser, and Lyndon Johnson, of course, was nowhere to be found.
This vigorously propagated image, of “wonderfully coordinated and error-free ‘crisis management,’” was generally swallowed by the media.
The president’s 1963 assassination subsequently added the luster of martyrdom to the narrative, making it all the more difficult, if not almost blasphemous, to try to discern the truth.
Learning the Wrong Lessons As Stanford Professor Barton Bernstein, a leading missile crisis scholar (and member of Washington DeCoded’s editorial board), was the first to point out in 1992, the myth of the missile crisis settlement created an enormous burden of expectation for Lyndon Johnson, one that could never be actually met.
This burden, it must be pointed out, was also one that Johnson was peculiarly—almost uniquely—ill-suited to shoulder, given his deep-seated insecurity and the barely concealed attitude of many Kennedy loyalists, most notably the attorney general.
Their view was that Johnson was an undeserving successor, even a usurper, who occupied the White House temporarily, and only because of a terrible accident.
Of course, as he succeeded Kennedy in office, Johnson knew that several elements of Kennedy’s “finest hour” were sheer puffery, if not downright wrong.
Having participated in the ExComm meetings, LBJ well knew that the deliberations had not been coolly analytical, closely argued, and rational at all times, but rather, “desultory, spastic, and often inchoate,” in Bernstein’s words.
LBJ also recognized, undoubtedly, that Adlai Stevenson had been unfairly and maliciously depicted as advocating a “Munich,” when his only sin was that he had dared to be the Washington Decoded first adviser to suggest a missile swap.
Johnson, lastly, was also cognizant of Operation MONGOOSE, and surely realized the instrumental role that provocative covert action had played in precipitating the crisis.
Yet unbeknownst to Johnson, other elements that he believed were true were, in fact, false.
The most critical fact about the missile crisis settlement—the reality that Kennedy had claimed toughness, but cut a private deal—was not beyond Johnson’s ken, because such deal-making was hardly foreign to him.
Instead, LBJ labored under the false impression that American power, when expertly applied, could force a Communist leader bent on “nuclear blackmail” to back down and become pragmatic.
What made this false narrative doubly crippling for Johnson were some of his own tendencies.
LBJ was an overbearing, controlling personality in the first place, prone to micro-managing a war if he had the misfortune of getting involved in one.
The fact that Johnson kept intact the national security team assembled by Kennedy, so as to prove continuity with JFK’s policies, also exacerbated matters.
It has long been known that Johnson was unduly awed by Kennedy’s brainy advisers.
LBJ’s unspoken presumption was that the same men who were at Kennedy’s side in October 1962 would surely see Johnson through to a similar, unmitigated victory, regardless of the differences.
In a similar vein, Johnson may have been too reluctant to buck the counsel of the holdovers even when his gut instinct told him to do so.
After all, these were the same men who had guided Kennedy to his spectacular victory.
Of course, had Johnson had a more accurate understanding of the missile crisis’ true history, he still would have had to contend with the false analogies and “lessons” that were rife in public.
The explicit and implicit comparisons with his predecessor’s success in Cuba began with the Gulf of Tonkin incidents in the late summer of 1964, and grew in intensity as Vietnam began to overshadow everything else.
The inevitable juxtaposition was seldom put as crudely, however, as it was in December 1964.
With the situation in Vietnam rapidly deteriorating following President Ngo Dinh Diem’s violent ouster, Washington Post columnist Joseph Alsop, a leading hawk, directly raised the missile crisis analogy.
For Lyndon B Johnson, Alsop wrote, Vietnam is what the second Cuban crisis was for John F Kennedy.
If Mr Johnson ducks the challenge, we shall learn by experience about what would have been like if Kennedy had ducked the challenge in October, 1962.
Washington Decoded Alsop’s remark sparked outrage in Johnson, whereas if he had been privy to the truth, the column might have been received with a shrug, or a caustic remark about Alsop’s ignorance.
In February 1965, when LBJ stood at the first crossroads with respect to Vietnam— whether to send in ground forces or not—at least one aide, Bill Moyers, suggested to the president that he reconstitute ExComm, or something very much like it.
Probably no realization about the missile crisis would have been sufficient, at this juncture, to overcome Johnson’s sense that like all Cold War presidents, his mettle and resolve were being tested by the Communist powers.
Occasionally, Johnson articulated his reluctance to commit United States troops to a Southeast Asian sinkhole.
Moreover, because of the way Washington had connived in Diem’s overthrow in November 1963, a decision with which Vice President Johnson had vehemently disagreed, LBJ apparently felt a deep obligation to re-stabilize South Vietnam.
Yet by early 1966, once it was apparent that United States power was not having the desired affect, accurate knowledge of the missile crisis end-game might have persuaded Johnson to be more ruthless or cynical in his efforts to achieve a face-saving settlement.
The literature on Johnson’s peace feelers suggests that he was not really prepared to concede South Vietnam after a decent interval, unlike his successor in the White House—or as LBJ’s predecessor might have done, had he lived to deal with the consequences of his policy.
While the references below are brief, they are a sobering reminder about the pitfalls of drawing the wrong lessons from history—or more precisely, the wrong lessons from the wrong history.
With Walter Jenkins, 10 October 1964, Saturday, 10:38 AM With just weeks to go in the campaign that would elect Johnson president in his own right, LBJ discussed stump strategy with his long-time chief of staff, Walter Jenkins.
A key plank in Barry Goldwater’s platform was that the Democrats were failing to hold the line against Moscow and its Communist allies.
The morning this conversation occurred, Goldwater was quoted in the major newspapers as criticizing Kennedy’s handling of Cuba.
During a campaign stop in Los Angeles, Goldwater asserted the assassinated president had “stopped short” in 1962, thereby allowing the Communist menace in Cuba to grow.
Johnson’s powerful rebuttal was to frame his GOP opponent as an unsuitable choice for a nation that had to be poised for war at a moment’s notice.
Indeed, there was some criticism that Johnson was going overboard in that regard, because of some of the imagery used to suggest that Goldwater was dangerously unstable.
The implication, of course, was that Johnson was the only candidate with the experience and wisdom to carry on Kennedy’s unique blend of restraint and resolve—not the genuine version, but the one deemed suitable for Johnson and public consumption.
And then I want Quayle to do the same thing, and submit ‘em and have ‘em ready for me on Monday.
And I know we oughta have one on foreign policy, and I know we oughta have one on the waste in government, cuttin’ taxes, and stuff like that.
When I came in 11 months ago . . . when I started off, and I said to ‘em, “God help me,” and they would pray for me . . . why, I’d just do the best I could, that’s all I could promise.
Ah . . . now if they wanna throw me out after 11 months, they can do it.
I sat there in that Security Council for 37 days and I had 37 meetin’s.
I never left in the mornin’ knowin’ whether I’d see my family that night or not.
He had a eyeball to eyeball with Khrushchev, and had a confrontation and both of ‘em decided we couldn’t destroy the world.
For anybody now to say, at this late date, that there’s somethin’ wrong with that – one of the greatest, courageous acts any leader ever performed—I say shame on you.
Now we oughta have a 15 minute speech like it—that’s the only thing that really makes ‘em pee in their britches.
And I’m not gonna recommend him not recommend him – you . . . you be your own judge, whose . . . who do you want to answer that phone, and who do you want to put that thumb on the . . . who’ll have that thumb there on the table close to that button.
That’s a question for you to decide, and you decide on your own judgment, and you decide without emotion, Washington Decoded and you decide without fear.
They build up a straw man . . . try to get me to say that my opponent does this or that – I’m just not gonna do it – that’s a matter for you to decide.
With McGeorge Bundy, 3 December 1965, Monday, 1:15 PM Barely four months after United States forces had begun streaming into South Vietnam on a massive scale, there was increasing discomfort in Washington about the marked lack of progress—so stark that it raised basic questions about United States assumptions and expectations.
Disturbing indicators suggested Communist forces were adapting to the influx of troops, and even taking advantage of United States weaknesses and constraints.
Previously overflowing with confidence, McNamara had returned from Vietnam with “grave doubts,” convinced that it would be “a long war” and that as many as 600,000 American ground troops might be needed.
This grim reality led to a series of meetings that involved Johnson’s top advisers on national security, many of them unchanged from Kennedy’s storied ExComm.
As the deliberations over escalation began, there was already a consensus among LBJ’s advisers that because the United States could not withdraw, a massive infusion of troops was the only choice which might result in an acceptable outcome.
In this conversation with Bundy, Johnson, who was at his Texas ranch while his advisers were meeting daily in Washington, harked back to his first-hand knowledge of how policy had been hammered out during the missile crisis.
In effect, Johnson was asking the men who had served Kennedy so well to do the same for him.
I think the weakness of the government at this stage is that you ought to get Rusk and Ball . . . and McNamara, and maybe Clifford . . . yourself in a room and pick all the proposals to pieces.
And we observed, from the past, that . . . our original judgment on Cuban missile crisis was—what we wanted to do the first hour, and what ultimately was done—was quite different.
Yes, I got his thinking, which I think was very good, but—on a good many things.
And then summarize it, and say, “Now, here are the pros, and here are the cons.
And you can take the red candy or the vanilla, whichever you want, Mr President.
With Hubert Humphrey, 28 January 1966, Friday, 4:26 PM Faced with General William Westmoreland’s call for still more troops, President Johnson had declared a temporary lull in the bombing of North Vietnam on December 22, hoping the gesture would lure Hanoi to the negotiating table on Washington’s terms before he had no choice but to order an escalation in the United States presence.
The pause was then extended repeatedly in January, to see if the administration’s “peace offensive” elicited a response.
By January 27, Johnson was resigned to ending the bombing pause, and in a series of intensive sessions not unlike the ExComm meetings, was consulting with his key advisers on how to apply additional force.
Shortly after the end of one such session on January 28, Vice President Hubert Humphrey, who was out of town, called the president.
But in the conversation with Humphrey, Johnson revealed that he was still hoping against hope for Washington Decoded some slight movement on Hanoi’s part, anything that might give him a pretext to extend the peace offensive.
According to Johnson, there was a basis for his continuing to have a sliver of hope.
Having been left out of the loop with respect to the Cuba-Turkey linkage, Johnson had manufactured his own speculative understanding of what, at that final moment, made Khrushchev retreat.
LBJ apparently believed that word of an imminent United States attack on Cuba had leaked to Khrushchev in October 1962, and that it was this intelligence that prompted the Soviet premier to accept the United States offer with alacrity.
The Joint Chiefs of Staff wrote a letter to Kennedy recommending that he bomb . . . ah, the missile bases in Cuba, and that he—he let ‘em have it.
With McGeorge Bundy, 22 February 1966, Tuesday, 9:04 AM By early 1966, public criticism of the Johnson administration’s conduct of the war was increasingly under attack, exacerbated by his decision to resume bombing North Vietnam on January 31.
The early consensus in Congress over the war was breaking down, and, still worse, members of Johnson’s own party were leading the charge.
Washington Decoded Beginning on January 28, Fulbright had initiated a series of hearings, some of which would be televised “gavel-to-gavel” over the three national networks.
These sessions exposed the administration’s leading figures, namely Secretaries Rusk and McNamara, to withering and sustained criticism, mostly from moderate and liberal Democrats.
In effect, the Fulbright hearings were making dissent as legitimate and mainstream as support for the war.
The elephant in the room, insofar as Johnson was concerned, was one particular Democrat not even among the “problem senators” on the Foreign Relations committee.
Two days before this conversation, and under great pressure from those seeking a restoration of Camelot, Kennedy had issued a statement that cautiously, but unmistakably, distanced himself from the administration’s prosecution of the war.
RFK argued for a third way—a negotiated political settlement, which would invite the Viet Cong to share power—rather than outright withdrawal, or the simple military victory he insinuated Johnson was bent on achieving.
During this conversation with Bundy, the president summarized his position on negotiating with Hanoi, and in the process made several allusions to the missile crisis.
He recalled how Fulbright, a dove with respect to the Vietnam War, had been a leading hawk in October 1962.
Johnson suggested that bombing North Vietnam was simply a way of pressing Ho Chi Minh to negotiate, just as John Kennedy’s supposedly unyielding stance had forced Khrushchev to bargain.
The parallel Johnson drew between the bombing resumption, and President Kennedy’s resolve, was not apt.
It again betrayed a lack of understanding about what had happened in October 1962, specifically, and a lack of appreciation for the lengths JFK did and was prepared to go to avoid a conflict that might spiral out of control.
Johnson also repeated the striking claim made during his February conversation with Humphrey, namely, that a leak about imminent military action had galvanized Khrushchev into action.
In other words, a Kennedy twist on Eisenhower’s 1950s policy of brinkmanship had caused the Soviets to beat a hasty retreat.
Bundy did nothing to correct Johnson’s understanding, content to leave the president in his state of his mistaken belief.
All we ask you to do is just Washington Decoded proudly—if you want to—walk into a meeting hall with us, and to reason, and talk, and be prepared to give and take, and we’ll try to do the same thing.
I don’t know . . . you just got to know, that we’re not goin’ get out, and, ah, we . . . we don’t think that you goin’ take it over, and we think if you’re willin’ to let them decide it, that that oughta be fair to everybody.
And these, I think, are the places where the needle goes in . . . in terms of people’s fears.
Yes, I think everything we’ve ever had . . . we have . . . we’ve had that.
They were certainly . . . they certainly were air strike plus invasion, really.
I was told by my military aide that he was told that they had signed it . . . that Taylor was on board, that he signed it.
That he was going to take it over . . . that he . . . he talked to somebody, and then called them back in, and said that he wanted to interpret it a little differently, and he backed away from it . . . at that very moment.
And a good many people over there—who were gossipers and who are still gossipers—were of the opinion that, ah . . . the Commies knew about that, and that’s why Khrushchev came in . . . when he did.
Being privy to the truth about the missile crisis settlement might not have altered materially Johnson’s decisions about Vietnam.
But more knowledge would have indisputably served him better than what he was allowed to know. © 2007 by Max Holland Max Holland is the editor of Washington DeCoded, and Tara Marie Egan is the editorial assistant.
Anne Applebaum, “What Presidents Don’t Know,” Washington Post, 21 August 2007.
Following the end of the Cold War, information from the Soviet Union surfaced to suggest that Khrushchev was so shaken by the unauthorized downing of a U-2 aircraft on October 27, and Castro’s endorsement of a conflict involving nuclear weapons, that the explicit assurance involving the Jupiter missiles was unnecessary and perhaps superfluous.
That may have been true, but administration officials in 1962 would have had no way of knowing this was the case, or for decades afterwards.
Thus, it was natural to assume the secret trade clinched the settlement.
Bundy was even more precise, telling Bernstein that Johnson did not know.
It may also have been the case that apart from being under the watchful eye of President Kennedy’s brother, Johnson’s advisers did not tell him about the secret assurance because they themselves did not want to give LBJ any reason for departing from a hawkish policy.
In November 1964, for example, Rusk directly juxtaposed the deteriorating situation in Vietnam with the missile crisis, although he knew better than anyone that it was a misleading comparison.
The ExComm was formally constituted on October 22, but effectively the group existed as of October 16.
The only explanation for the exclusion of Dillon and McCone was party affiliation, since other ExComm members opposed to linkage were allowed into the inner circle.
It was largely because of McCone, a notorious and stubborn hard-liner, that the ExComm had the luxury of several days to ponder and debate a United States response in the first place.
McCone had been the only senior adviser who consistently warned the Soviets were bound to include offensive nuclear weapons as part of their military build-up in Cuba.
He then pressed the White House into keeping up U-2 surveillance of Cuba at a time when virtually everyone in the administration believed that Khrushchev wouldn’t dare.
On October 15, McCone had been proven right and everyone else wrong; but more importantly, since the missiles were still discovered before they were operational (albeit nearly a month late), it gave the administration precious time to collect itself.
McCone had served as chairman of the Atomic Energy Commission during Eisenhower’s second term, and was close to the former president.
Indeed, McCone was considered a likely candidate for secretary of defense had Richard Nixon, Eisenhower’s vice president, won the 1960 election.
In all, Johnson attended 37 of the 42 ExComm meetings, although those sums are somewhat misleading.
In addition, they include the sessions that stretched until March 1963, long after critical phase of the missile crisis was over.
It is worth noting Johnson’s attendance is not accurately rendered in the relevant Miller Center of Public Affairs volume of Kennedy tapes.
President Kennedy also had political speaking engagements lined up, but they were not as distant from Washington and the president was often able to return to the capital on the same day.
According to Baker, Johnson was called back from his campaign tour, but this claim could not be confirmed by us.
Dallek Washington Decoded suggested in his LBJ biography that since Johnson’s first impulse was to launch an attack against the sites rather than impose a blockade, that his confidence in his own judgment was subsequently undermined.
This ignores the fact that after McCone told Johnson about Eisenhower’s reaction, the vice president assented to the blockade.
Moreover, if the standard were one’s initial thoughts, virtually every member of ExComm would have had reason to doubt their own judgment.
Johnson was hardly alone in switching positions, and strongly supported a compromise involving the Jupiters on October 27, when it mattered.
George Reedy, who served as LBJ’s press secretary in the Senate and the White House, once told historian Sheldon Stern that Johnson and Kennedy were the two most charismatic men he had ever known.
But while LBJ was vice president, Reedy observed, he seemed to turn off his own charisma in JFK’s presence.
One possible explanation for why Johnson suddenly seemed to find his voice on October 27 was that he feared the administration was about to take a step that would be as disastrous for it as the Bay of Pigs had been.
In that case, Johnson’s ambition to run in 1968 as the natural successor to a successful president would be severely damaged.
The precise details of how four regular ExComm members were disinvited from the gathering in the Oval Office remain murky.
Bundy, who was the first to reveal the inner circle meeting, described it in a passive manner, as if it were an organic development.
It is just conceivable, given RFK’s animus toward Lyndon Johnson, that the attorney general was instrumental in the vice president’s exclusion.
When the Congressional leadership was briefed on October 22, Senator Russell was easily the most vocal critic of the president’s decision to impose a blockade, almost incredulous that Kennedy had not already ordered up an invasion.
Baker, Johnson Eclipse, 123; Stewart Alsop and Charles Bartlett, “In Time of Crisis,” Saturday Evening Post, 8 December 1962.
The article was thought to reflect the Washington Decoded administration’s preferred account because Bartlett was JFK’s personal friend, dating back to the 1950s, and Alsop was known for having top sources of information.
In addition, the article openly claimed to have privileged access to unimpeachable sources.
As Baker points out, in the uproar over the unfair depiction of Stevenson, the fact that Johnson was omitted altogether from the article escaped notice, although LBJ surely realized it.
The insult was perpetuated in Robert F Kennedy’s edited memoir, Thirteen Days, which suggested that Johnson was an intermittent ExComm attendee, though in fact he had been designated a regular member in the memo officially establishing the ad hoc group, and missed meetings only because the White House desired to project an image of normalcy prior to October 22.
After Bernstein raised the issue, many scholars have weighed in on the question of how the missile crisis influenced LBJ’s decision-making on Vietnam.
By the late 1960s, the “eyeball-to-eyeball” mythology had burgeoned to a point where even Theodore Sorensen, one of the chief myth-makers, began to have reservations Washington Decoded about its impact.
Of course, Sorensen, as one of the secret-keepers of the explicit deal, would not be inclined to admit to another outcome.
McNamara, writing in 1995, argued that JFK’s willingness to trade the Jupiters meant it was “highly probable” he would have reversed course in Vietnam.
Robert E Thompson, “Goldwater Hits United States ‘Retreat’ Before Reds,” Los Angeles Times, 10 October 1964.
Washington Decoded No doubt LBJ was referring to news reports about Goldwater’s October 9 luncheon address in Los Angeles.
In earlier campaign remarks, Goldwater had also impugned Kennedy by suggesting he timed the missile crisis for political gain in the 1962 elections.
Johnson was justifiably defensive about the instantly infamous “daisy petal” TV advertisement, which depicted a young girl picking daisies in a field.
When the ad first aired in September, the GOP had vehemently denounced it as perpetrating “a violent political lie” for insinuating that Goldwater was likely to set off a nuclear holocaust on a whim.
Susanna McBee, “Chairman Clash Over Fairness Pledge,” Washington Post, 12 September 1964.
At this juncture, Clifford, the archetypal Washington lawyer and Democratic fixer, had no official position in the government, apart from being chairman of the President’s Foreign Intelligence Advisory Board.
Robert E Thompson, “Bob Kennedy Urges Share for Reds in Saigon Regime,” Los Angeles Times, 20 February 1966; “Excerpts From R Kennedy’s Statement,” Washington Post, 20 February 1966.
Johnson, of course, was also in the dark about the “Cordier ploy,” a gambit which President Kennedy intended to put into motion if Moscow turned down his initial October 27 offer.
On Washington’s behalf, Andrew Cordier, a former UN official, was to approach Secretary General U Thant and get him to propose an exchange of the Jupiter missiles in Turkey for the Soviet missiles in Cuba.
A public proposal from the secretary general, it was thought, would presumably allow Moscow to save face.
The only other administration official Washington Decoded who knew about the Cordier ploy was Secretary of State Rusk.
Johnson was referring to abiding by the results of a free election in South Vietnam under international supervision, a position both Hanoi and Washington claimed to espouse.
The day after Kennedy’s statement, Bundy had appeared on “Meet the Press,” a Sunday interview program on the NBC television network.
Bundy had attempted to rebut Senator Kennedy by quoting President Kennedy on the dangers of a coalition government that shared power with Communists.
In his statement on the war, RFK had specifically mentioned the possibility of a wider war that would involve China.
To every American who remembered the price paid after the Chinese intervened in the Korean War, this was a worrisome thought.
When the Congressional leadership was briefed on October 22, just before Kennedy’s nationwide address, Senator Fulbright had denounced the blockade as the “worst alternative” and advocated an immediate invasion.
Here Johnson seemed to be referring to the so-called “madman theory,” a tactic first attributed to the Eisenhower administration.
The idea was to leak the notion that Washington was willing to use excessive force unless a Communist power cooperated.
Supposedly, such coercive brinkmanship had persuaded North Korea to agree to an armistice in 1953. © 2007 by Max Holland Max Holland is the editor of Washington DeCoded, and Tara Marie Egan is the editorial assistant.
