Sixteen high school President Kennedy’s re-invigoration students particiof the President’s Council on Physical Senators John F Kennedy, Henry “Scoop” Jackson, pated in this year’s program.
Fitness as an essential element of his and Mike Mansfield join colleagues in a game The students were recruited of softball.
As early as December 1960, John F Kennedy wrote an School, as well as Boston article for Sports Illustrated about the growing decline in the level of Americans’ College’s College Bound program, physical activity compared with that of other nations, a fact that was especially TeachBoston, Urban Scholars, worrisome during the Cold War period.
He warned readers that the Boston Student Advisory if Americans neglected physical fitness, their intellectual and creative capabilities Council.
The exhibit is on display through choice including images of September 2008. ★ beauty, the prevention of AIDS, the war in Iraq, world poverty, HIGHLIGHTS pollution, funding for Boston Public Schools, teen fathers, 2 The Cuban 4 Reading, 5 Upcoming 6 How Do and domestic violence.
The day-long program featured eyewitness and historical perspectives of this landmark event, and provided unique teaching tools to support United States and World History curricula.
He then presented four ways to enhance students’ understanding of the event.
He suggested teachers use the movie 13 Days, a film directed by Roger Theodore C Sorensen addresses Conference participants Donaldson, centered on the 13 days of the crisis in the United States He played excerpts of the film and highlighted book presents three frameworks for (Historian and Director of the Nixon different ways to tie the movie into analyzing decision-making during the Presidential Library and Museum) classroom units.
In addition, the web site and events taking place today. the Cuban and Soviet perspectives based on their research of previously closed documents and new oral histories.
Professor Lang opened the As a personal friend and adviser to Kennedy, Sorensen panel by advising the teachers that a true picture of the October events admired him as a leader who possessed “a sense could not be fully understood without of history and perspective, humanity and modesty.” incorporating the Cuban and Soviet When asked about his own personal fears during the viewpoints.
Fidel Castro’s concerns as the leader of a small socialist nation in the shadow of the United States.
Cuban and Soviet Perspectives planes thundered over the island, and applications to today’s world.
He also The next session featured panelists an impending United States invasion seemed recommended that teachers consider his James G Blight (Professor of imminent.
Timothy Naftali noted that book, Essence of Decision, as a way to International Relations, Brown Nikita Khrushchev, knowing that the demystify the event for students.
During the lunch hour Allan Goodrich, the library’s chief archivist, presented a special display of President Kennedy’s own annotated map of the missile sites.
Besides that, history is a natural with The Greensboro Sit-ins and Moses: children.
Join outstanding lum-relevant workshops presented by For further information, please contact authors and educators as we discuss classroom teachers, children’s literature Sam Rubin at sam.rubin@nara.gov or how history engages young readers specialists and history educators.
MASS MEDIA IN AMERICA, PAST AND PRESENT THE LIBRARY’S ANNUAL AMERICAN STUDIES SUMMER The “beats” of crime , INSTITUTE, in partnership with UMass Boston, offered sports (Bill Littlefield, host, “Only a Game,” National participants an opportunity to critically examine the Public Radio), and foreign affairs (Nicholas Daniloff, news media in the United States.
Professor Michael Milburn of UMass 2008 program please visit the “Professional Development” Boston discussed the content and effects of television news. portion of our web site at www.jfklibrary.org.
To register for a forum or for more information, visit our web site at www.jfklibrary.org.
A Screening and Discussion of American Idealist Sunday, January 13, 2008 ★ 2:00 to 4:30m.
American Idealist, a documentary about the many accomplishments of Sargent Shriver during the Kennedy and Johnson administrations, including the Peace Corps, Sargent Shriver Head Start, Legal Services for the Poor, VISTA, and Job Al Hunt , Chair of the Profile in Courage Award Corps, will be introduced by his daughter, Maria Shriver.
Committee and Caroline Kennedy honor Maia Gottlieb Following the screening, there will be a conversation with film director , winner of the 2007 Profile in Courage Essay Bruce Orenstein; Sargent Shriver’s biographer Scott Stossel; and Contest and Phillip Stephenson, her nominating teacher from Baltimore City College High School. close friends and colleagues of Sargent Shriver, William Josephson and Edgar May.
ENCOURAGE YOUR STUDENTS to participate A Conversation with Madeleine Albright in the annual Profile in Courage National Monday, January 14, 2008 ★ 5:30 to 7:00 PM Essay Contest.
The Contest invites students from across the nation to write an essay Former Secretary of State Madeleine Albright will on the political courage of a United States elected discuss her new book, Memo to the President official who has served since 1956.
How We Can Restore America’s Reputation Madeleine is a companion program to the John F. and Leadership.
In response, President Kennedy called Maia Gottlieb of Baltimore City College out the National Guard; Governor Wallace stepped aside; and High School wrote the 2007 winning essay, the President delivered his major civil rights address to the nation.
After President Kennedy’s speech, civil rights leader Medgar Evers Winning essays, including Ms.
Join James Hood, Myrlie Eversare posted on the Profile in Courage Williams, civil rights activist and widow of Medgar Evers; Nick Essay Contest section of our web site Katzenbach, former Attorney General; and Theodore C Sorensen, at www.jfklibrary.org.
Special Counsel and Adviser to President Kennedy, as they discuss the events of this historic turning point in American history.
The Contest and an online curriculum Callie Crossley will moderate. supporting its use in the classroom address national standards for social studies and Welcome to the new Poet Laureate language arts, and provide lessons on Monday, January 28, 2008 ★ 5:30 to 7:00m. identifying and analyzing acts of political courage.
Both help to prepare students for Former Poet Laureate Robert Pinsky and new the writing component of standardized tests.
Poet Laureate Charles Simic discuss poetry and read their favorite poems.
Charles Simic Kennedy Library Foundation and generously supported by Fidelity Investments.
Third and fifth grade teachers in Boston Public Schools are implementing a new approach to teaching history through biography with exciting results.
During the twelve-week program, Boston Public School teachers participating in the History Makers seminar learn to evaluate biographies teachers meet with guest authors and and guide their students to read biographies with a critical eye. children’s literature specialists.
They practice, adapt and implement critical Reading and Writing Biographies.
A Questioning Approach to Elementary and Early Education at same person.
They examine similarities RELATED TEACHING RESOURCES AND CLASSROOM APPLICATIONS Related Teaching Resources student to read.
A Questioning Refer to the annotated bibliographies above to select at Approach to Reading and Writing Biographies. least two books about the same historical figure for each Portsmouth, NH: Heinemann, 2003.
It should also tell the story in an interesting way, showing Several teachers who have implemented what the person was really like, how he or she acted, and how others the strategy found that students responded.
Biographers interpret also discovered that some biographies information in different ways.
To answer make their writings accurate by learning as much as possible about their these questions, students had to think subjects.
They study materials such as diaries, personal letters, oral histories like historians as they evaluated the and autobiographies.
The most accurate biographies are based on historical evidence presented by the author. evidence.
But some biographers are less thorough and careful in their research and may not use the best source materials.
Also, the book may Students were fascinated to find that be fictionalized, or partly made up.
Sometimes authors use their imaginabiographers interpret the same historical tion in writing about a person’s thoughts, feelings and conversations.
Older biographies can be excellent, but newer books may include new information an author she deemed trustworthy, based on more recent research.
They may also have fewer stereotypes. based on having evaluated his source Newer books often look more appealing, too; they are designed for kids material.
Sometimes were going on in the classroom were these images were actually created many years after the event by artists who amazing.
They were not made to show about learning than any what life was actually like, they were created as art.
The images may other subject.” ★ also be based on stereotypes of certain groups of people.
Look to see if the captions show when and by whom the pictures were made.
It is important (History Makers is presented in to be aware that just because an image appears old and “historical” doesn’t partnership with Boston Public mean that it is authentic.
Prepared by Sasha Lauterbach and Marion Reynolds for History Makers, a professional development program presented by the John F Kennedy Presidential Library Education Department in partnership with Boston Public Schools, supported by a Teaching American History Grant from the United States Department of Education, 2007.
To download this student handout, visit the “For Teachers” section of our web site.
Presidential Campaigns and Elections and Equal Rights for All: Investigating the Civil Rights Movement.
The three-hour program includes of the early 1960s using primary source documents preand post-visit materials.
Closed Thanksgiving, Christmas and New Year’s Day The Kennedy Library Education Department offers free museum passes to teachers considering a field trip to the Library.
