ALMAGEST Non-Profit U S P o*1 tg« P*kT Shreveport L«u Pirmll No, 1134 Vol.
Several faculty and staff members have been contacted for their comments on the petition and on rumors of faculty divisiveness should a selection be made from among the seven LSUS applicants.
There lias also been criticism of the work done by the cliancellor Search Committee thus far. fi I feel that the group that is conducting the search is sincere in its efforts to find tlie best person for tiie job,” Dr.
It is not an easy tiling to select a cliancellor; these people have to solicit and study applications, he said.
If asked, people would have different preferences, he said, but he hoped Uiey would be able to work with tlie one chosen.
As far as committee secrecy goes, Thompson said there is a need for confidentiality.
THOMPSON feels the committee is composed fairly in terms of representation from all four colleges, the community and the administration.
Thompson said he is not aware of wliat other institutions do concerning student input in these matters.
Because he feels the best person should be named to the job regardless of geographic considerations, Thompson did not sign the petition.
Wilfred L, Guerin, professor and chairman of the English department, thinks there is bound to be some feeling of being left out if the chancellor is chosen from LSUS because of human nature, “but I don’t think tliat lias to translate into divisiveness.
When we divide, 1 like to believe it is on honest, professional opinion,” he said.
The committee is not taking an unusually long time to fill tlie vacant position, Guerin said.
At first, it seemed the spot would be filled fast, so the psychology of it makes the time elapsed seem longer by contrast, he said.
GUERIN feels ti*e committee has been very cautious in releasing any information.
To Guerin, the delay in selecting tlie chancellor means, if anything, tliat tlie committee is working very liard, and he lias no reason to believe they are doing anything against any set regulations.
As much as Guerin would like to liave student input in many areas on campus, lie feels tliat possibly students would have a disadvantage on such a committee as this because their views concerning LSUS are only sliort-range as a result of Uie brief time they've been on the campus.
Guerin did not sign tlie petition because “it said the obvious, and to my mind, local candidates are still being given consideration/' John Tabor, director of alumni affairs and assistant professor of communications, said Uie people lie has talked to favor a local candidate, but lie feels Uie faculty would support any of the local candidates no matter wlio was chosen.
THE LENGTH of time taken by the committee in making their selection is Uie norm at other campuses, Tabor said.
If the committee is being secretive, Tabor said, maybe it’s for good reason.
Tabor feels it would be good to liave some student representation on the committee.
JOSEPH GOERNER, professor and cliairman of the chemistry department, feels tiiere would be no divisiveness among faculty members should a selection be made from among die LSUS applicants.
He said he lias not been in enough school systems to be an authority on how long such a committee should take in making a selection, but he feels the elapsed time lias not been too long.
Confidentiality is needed because of Uie job situations of the applicants, he said, but maybe there should be more discussions of things that wouldn't matter, like statistics, but not names.
Goerner hopes tlie length of time Uie committee is taking is a result of Uie care needed in making a selection.
But lie feels the committee should contain more faculty members with a more even distribution of rank.
He also feels the interim cliancellor should not liave been on the committee.
However, this sampling of faculty and staff would appear to indicate that the LSUS community is willing to cooperate and be patient with Uie Chancellor Search Committee as well as with tlie committee's final selection.
And, should the committee select an LSUS faculty member, feelings of divisiveness appear unlikely to occur.
F acuity members promoted Manifest yearbook ’s new name The LSUS yearbook has officially changed its name from Bagatelle to Manifest.
Manifest, wliich means a list of passengers and cargo on a overheat, was chosen after two polls seeking student opinions were taken.
Manifest is thought to be better suited to LSUS, whose mascot is a riverboai pilot, than Bagatelle, which means a th in g of little value.
Students wanting to work on next year’s yearbook should see Nancy Griswold in the yearbook office from 2-3m., Monday through Friday. by Ellen Davis Promotions for 16 members of the LSUS faculty were approved by the Board of Supervisors at their April 11 meeting on campus.
Jolm A Marts, from assistant to associate professor in accounting; and Dr.
Paul E Merkle, from assistant to associate professor in economics and finance.
In the College of Education, those promoted from assistant professors to associate professors were Dr.
John B Powell III, education, PROMOTIONS in the College of Liberal Arts were Dr.
Zeak M Buckner Jr., from associate professor to professor in English; Dr.
Lillian J Hall, from associate professor to professor in communications; Dr, Kenneth E Hinze, from assistant to associate professor in social sciences; Doris L Lynch, from instructor to assistant professor in social sciences; Dr, Alice A Morgan, from assistant to associate professor in communications; Dr.
Norman W Provizer, from assistant to associate professor in social sciences; Dr, Marvin Stottlemire, from assistant to associate professor in social sciences; and Dr.
Alan S Thompson, from assistant to associate professor in social sciences.
Anita L Hark* ness was promoted from instructor to assistant professor, and Dr.
SGA to consider day care center by Cathy Raranik Die Senate’s approval of new legislative proposals recently resulted in Uie passing of Uiree resolutions.
One resolution provided a committee that will investigate Uie need for a campus day care center facility and assist in its implementation.
Cliairman of tlie committee, Liz Diompson, said all persons who would patronize such a facility should contact lier as soon as possible so that the committee can begin work.
Thompson said this service would be available to both students and faculty members.
Other resolutions providing for the installation of a pay pfwne in the lobby of tlie library and emergency communication equipment or alarms in buildings and parking lots were also approved.
Also, tlie candidate’s forum, scheduled for Monday, was cancelled by a mutual agreement between Jeff Lanius and David Finck, Hie two presiden* tial candidates on Uie ballot.
The Board Is currently trying to hold at least one meeting on every campus in the LSU system.
The board members discussed the appointment of former Governor Edwin Edwards to a post at LSU Law School, as well as other matters.
Over the next two weeks , President John F Kennedy and Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev waged a tense war of nerves over the presence of the weapons so close to the United States.
Khrushchev finally backed down and removed the missiles, an act which eventually led to his downfall in the Soviet hierarchy.
In November 1979, militant students in the Iranian capital of Tehran imprisoned 50 Americans in the United States embassy, demanding the return of the deposed Shah of Iran as ransom for their release.
As of April 1980, President Jimmy Carter and Iranian revolutionary leader, the Ayatollah Khomeini, were still waging a something-less-than tense war of nerves over the hostages.
Both situations involved young, relatively inexperienced Democratic presidents.
Both situations came at a time when the foreign policy of both men was under severe attack for not being tough with Russia.
The most important distinction is the fact that while the Cuban crisis was, for all intents and purposes, over in thirteen days, the Iranian situation has dragged on for nearly six months.
In fact, many commentators have ceased to use the word '‘crisis” when writing of Iran.
They contend that a crisis is a sharp turning point, not an embarrassment that continues forever.
The answer lies in the vast changes that have taken place since the Kennedy administration.
The world of 1980 is a different place altogether from the world of 1962.
First of all, both situations involved the threat of Soviet involvement.
The Russian bear that JFK baited was a much weaker animal overall than the one Carter is facing today.
In 1962, the United States had a much larger and better-trained land army than the Soviet Union, and a vastly superior navy.
In terms of nuclear weapons, the so-called ‘‘missile gap” did not, in fact, exist, and we were well prepared to blow Russia to smithereens if it came to that.
Today, the Soviets outnumber us in almost every category of conventional weaponry and in nuclear warheads as well.
Khomeini and Iranian Defense Minister Sadegh Ghotbzadeh have been linked, at least circumstantially, with the Soviets.
Some people even believe that they are operatives of the KGB, the Russian secret police.
Another reason for Carter’s ineffectiveness is the changes that have taken place in SovietAmerican relations since the early ’60s.
Carter must deal with Henry Kissinger’s policy of detente as well as with his own rather bungled dealings with the Soviets.
The Strategic Arms Limitations Treaties have hampered any get-tough stance with the Soviets, or with any other nation.
Possibly the most important reason for the current situation is the basic difference between Kennedy and Carter.
Because of his “human-rights” foreign policy, Jimmy Carter has been cast as a white-hatted good guy in the international scene.
Everything he does, he feels, must fit in with that humanitarian image.
Unfortunately, humanitarians are not well-respected by aggressor nations.
Kennedy, on the other hand, had made his pisition clear — the United States would not bother any country that chose Communism from within , but we would resist the imposition of Communist governments by acts of foreign aggression.
This is not to say that Carter could have gotten the hostages out of Iran in two weeks.
Possibly the era has ended when the United States can face down an aggressor without firing a shot.
We don't need a John Kennedy now, nor do we need a Harry Truman or a Teddy Roosevelt.
Our present chief executive, hamstrung by his own policies, has shown he can’t do the job.
All editorial niews expressed herein are the opinion of the writer end should not be construed to represent administrative policy.
Almagest Is published weekly except for summer school semesters end except holidays, examination end special periods.
One WS*k for Midfs master One week tor Thanksgiving, six {®j weeks tor Christmas and semester breaks; one week for Spring break, Almagest welcomes contributions from readers but reserves the right to edit correspondence received and reject any and all contribu Ilona, Contributions becoma the properly of the Almagest.
I am writing this letter in response to the newspaper we so fondly call the Almagest.
I have never seen a newspaper that acts so irresponsible, so idiotic, so self-serving and so antifunctional in my life.
Tile Almagest staff should publish and print only 19 copies of their rag because the newspaper only serves 19 people at L3U, the 19 on the staff.
This semester I have seen inaccurate reporting, personal vendettas and inexcusable propaganda in the Almagest.
As for the area of personal vendettas, many examples can be found following your letters to the editor, I liave never seen nor worked for a campus newspaper that comments after each editorial the way you people do.
No student on this campus lias been able to gripe or state an opinion without your comments following.
This is a very poor practice tliat must be stopped immediately, if you are a newspaper Umt concerns itself with its readers.
The last edition of your rag iiad an interesting commentary that was biased, even though you stated tliat you supported no candidate.
You failed to mention tliat the writer of the article was past president of Phi Delta Theta.
Whichever position you choose you had best be prepared to explain, because f feel you liave overstepped the boundary of a responsible newspaper.
Do not feel that this letter is all against the Almagest; you do have a few good aspects tliat serve the student body; they are Greek Beat and Campus Briefs, It is a sliame tliat your best and most useful newspaper this semester was the Almajoke.
If the truth of the matter be known you should call your Almagest the Alma joke, and the Almajoke should have been called the Almagest.
Carter received the bachelor of general studies degree in criminal justice in 1979 and has done work toward her master’s degree.
All currently enrolled sophomores, juniors and seniors are eligible for awards.
LSUS grade point average, total LSUS hours pursued, level of transfer work and achievement and leadership in each student’s field.
Sachs English Scholarship, the Society of Louisiana Certified Public Accountants, the Bingham-Willame tie Scholarship, National Association of Accountants Award, Melton Truck Lines Scholarship, the Traffic and Transportation Club Scholarship, National Secretaries Association , Cole, Evans* and Peterson Junior and Senior Accounting Scholarships, the Selber Bros.
Mutual Benefit Club Scholarship in Marketing and Office Administration, Uie Wall Street Journal Award, the Accounting Faculty Award, the National Collegiate Association for Secretaries Chapter Scholarship, the Sigma Delta Chi Journalism Award and the Bossier Quota Club Scholarship.
L, Edward Jenkins, senior class; Melanie J McKnight, sophomore class; Nancy W, Hutson, assistant professor of English and Dr.
C, Donald Smith, assistant professor of mathematics* A reception honoring the students, their families and friends will follow the program* The public is invited to attend.
First, the government must eventually balance tile federal budget, he said* It should not be done over ni gilt because the shock of an immediate “belt tightening” process could be more damaging than helpful, he said.
Tillman explained tliat an immediate balancing of the budget could be the catalyst to send the economy into a recession because it would be too abrupt, too quick.
Another problem is finding a politician who will take the necessary action to “settle” the economy.
It collects money from one source and gives to another In equal amounts* People want to “have/’ he said, but do not want to give* This “free ride” attitude will have to change if we are to remain economically sound, he said.
HE thinks grades are important, but are not the deciding factor in getting a job.
A student with a 2. grade point average may be more well-rounded than a student with a 4. grade point average, lie said.
GPA may liave proven to himself tliat he can “ take Uie bad as well as the good ; the C's and maybe an occasional D t along with the A's and B's,” lie said.
GPA lias never had to “pick himself up,” and a company may not know what to expect from him whenever a problem arises on the job, Grout said.
Many prospective employers pay the most attention to grades earned in the student's major.
IT IS extremely important that a student's electives are consistent with his short-term and long-term goals* he said.
Tlie choice of electives and extracurricular activities tells the interviewer something about the student's personality that he may not be able to determine from the interview.
One aid in landing a good permanent job after graduation is to get a summer job directly related to the student's field of interest.
For many students, this may not be possible until the summer before graduation, but it is a great opportunity to get to know the practical aspects of their chosen work, Grout said.
How well the students are prepared for an interview is directly related to the effectiveness of Uie school's placement office* lie said.
Good grammar and the ability to communicate well with others is also very important in the business world, he added.
The lack of either shows up almost immediately during Uie interview, he said.
Department of Labor reports there will be 61,000 new jobs in accounting in 1980.
The trend is towards specialization, although many companies are relying on “on-the-job training” more tlianever.
Grout said students should begin planning their futures now, and the placement office, located in the science building, is a good place to start* Page 4 ALMAGEST Friday, Apri] 18 , 1980 Capt.
Stu* dents also receive a certificate and patch from the state of Louisiana Wildlife and Fisheries Commission certifying them as safe hunters.
Moore, a professional gunsmith residing in Shreveport, served as a pilot and test pilot and aircraft maintenance officer with over 6,000 flying hours.
Last week, Moore discussed the effects of different ammunition for rifles and shotguns, focusing on tiie aspect of hunter safety.
Chorale to give concerts by Karen Rosen grant Special to (be Almagest Tiie LSUS choir, directed by Norma Jean Locke, will Iiave its annual spring program on April 23 and 24 in the UC theatre.
The college has gained national attention for its ability to attract and recruit foreign language students.
Williams attributes tliis partly to the fact that “they are very vigorous, adroit recruiters/ 1 and partly to the nature of the town.
It is a large metropolitan area with an international airport, so naturally there is more interest in foreign languages, he said.
The main thing Williams was impressed wiUi is the option of one-hour credit courses that the college offers beyond the foundation level.
Tliis permits the department to “handmake"" language courses for students in biology, history and other subjects so they can do specialized readings and work in a specific area.
THE ONE-HOUR courses are also structured in tiers of difficulty, so they can be used in conjunction with the regular tliree-hour courses.
Tliis would allow students to review tiie basics as they learn new material.
Williams was not sold on everything at the Tarrant County Community College.
The foundation grammar courses are covered in four semesters instead of two, as most colleges do.
Williams said the LSUS foreign language department is considering implementing the one-hour courses, probably starting at the sophomore level.
He said they are most beneficial after a student has learned basic grammar.
It will be at least one year before any significant changes can be made in the department, he said. exhibit Wood carvings on by Cathy Baranik The wood carvings of the late Charles C Canterbury, a 96year resident of the Ark-La-Tex, are currently on display for everyone’s enjoyment in the lobby of the Library Building.
Justin Kidd, assistant professor of English at LSUS, the carvings represent the people who comprised Canterbury's environment — family members, Red River County residents, politicians, television actors and occasionally, imaginary citizens.
Kidd also said that while Canterbury’s technique incorporates the artist’s personal touch, it also includes primitive and non-Westem art styles.
As personal touches, the artist carved works from the raw materials he found instead of purcliasing those materials and allowed the shape of the wood’s grain to dictate the subject matter, Kidd said.
In fact, the donation process, called ""plasmapheresis,"" removes from whole blood the only element it needs — the plasma.
Shreveport, LA 71101 It pays to help . . . and your donation will give to others.
Cubby was sitting by the magazine rack in the Library when I caught up with him.
He was focusing on a rather salient young coed who looked as though she had been poured into her jeans.
You could mistake her for a seven, but notice that she is dressed to the max.
She’s obviously just had her hair done and that’s a new outfit she’s wearing.
Friday , April 18, 1980 ALMAGEST Page 5 Successful advertising agent says ‘well-rounded education’ necessary to students in the field by Jim Robinson Special to the Almagest Without advertising, TV and radio would not exist today as we know it.
Millions of dollars are spent every year in the SlireveportBossier area on advertising, and tliis area is only the 72nd largest market in the United States.
Jack Hodges III Communications advertising and public relations agency of Shreveport and Baton Rouge is the largest and best-known agency in this area.
If you watch TV and listen to radio, chances are you will liear or see at least one of the agency’s commercials.
Some of its clients are McDonald’s, SWEPCO and Louisiana Bank and Trust.
ONE must be able to write and have some training in advertising, according to Jack Hodges.
He also said that knowledge of demographics is important in the advertising business.
Without it, it would be hard to make the most effective use of his client’s budget, he said.
Hodges stressed that a good, well rounded education is important ; but somehow, some way, you must be able to sell yourself.
Hodges feels advertising is a tough business, but one that ultimately has its rewards.
Willie Nile’s debut album shows promise by Joey Tabarlet Every once in a while, a new performer will appear on tlie pop music scene who is unique.
But a singer-songwriter named Willie Nile has just released his first album, and in my humble opinion, thns young man is going places.
Listening to Nile’s songs, orae . gets the feeling that, although it Next semester, find yourself in the woods Orienteering.
But, it’s also adventure training, where you learn to lead in an environment that challenges both your physical and mental skills.
And It will help you develop your confidence and stamina in the classroom or out.
Add Army ROTC to your prgoram. and you automatically add a new dimension of excitement to your campus life.
Although Nile is firmly rooted in the blues-based rock favored by so many other performers, he adds touches of folk, country and basic blues to create his sound.
This blend creates a clean, pure artistic statement, wonderfully free from the pop-star ego claptrap that ruins too many albums these days.
Here is a cute bit of comedy, reminiscent jf Janis Joplin’s “Lord, Wontcha Buy Me a Mercedes Benz,” that succeeds largely because Nile chooses to present it in a laid-back, tongue-in-cheek manner instead of trying to be Steve Martin.
Nile owes a debt to the Byrds, and he pays it back to great effect in the guitar intro to “Vagabond Moon,” one of the most engaging and catchy tunes of the album.
Most of the songs, though, don’t sound like anything so much as they just sound good.
What Nile says here is not so important as what he doesn’t say, which is, of course, what makes the song so appealing.
Album review But don’t assume that Willie Nile is a wimpy folk-rocker who longs for the lost ’60s.
With a debut album under his belt and a planned tour this summer, Willie Nile should get plenty of exposure.
He deserves success; anyone who can write intelligent, distinctive rock ’n roll these days is a rare treasure indeed.
Show her you appreciate the job she does for you with a thoughtful gift of flowers.
KATHERIN AULDS COUNTRY FLORIST 7847 E Kings Hwy Shreveport, la 71115 PHONE 797422 1 Helping you say it right Page 6 ALMAGEST Friday, April 18, 1980 -^iCO^DCgTS^WHAT you Dcnne I to LEARniflGHOU) TO Reco6ni2e evlu j# 4.
Old shows Aging helps some , hurts some in techniques tested Dukes of Hazzartf by Ken Martin Greek Beat ALPHA PHI — Epsilon Tau Chapter of Alpha Phi was both busy and successful this past week.
During the Spring Fling activities, Alpha Phis won the pyramid contest.
Teri Penfield and Bryan Germany won the kissing contest* Our pledges had a very successful bake sale.
The Greek Formal was a lot of fun and we appreciate Panhellenic for all their efforts.
A pre-party was held for Alpha Phi at Teri Penfieid's house* The friendship and fun shared by all was just the beginning of a very enjoyable evening.
KAPPA ALPHA — Congratulations to the winners of the KA Arm Wrestling Tournament.
We thank all of the other contestants for participating, A quick look at the death of the CBS hit ""Dukes of Hazzard"" will reveal a lot about the problems with TV today* I know tile show has been riding high in the ratings and has made stars of the principal actors, but believe me, if the show is not already dead it has been seriously wounded.
I was a “Dukes of Hazzard” fan from the very beginning when I did not knowanyone else who had even heard of it.
The first shows did a good job of blending car chases and good oY boy humor into an entertaining, if light-weight* program I thought the show was genuinely funny and an acceptable substitute until the theatrical release of ""Smokey and the Bandit Have a Baby/’ Besides, it was the only show concerning the South that really looked Southern; it was filmed on location in Georgia.
BUT AS Uie show gained in popularity, production was moved to California in order to cut costs.
Most of the car chases now take place in wliat appears to be an orchard with a dirt road running through the middle of it.
THE ELEMENTS deemed most popular by those in cliarge are so emphasized that the show no longer exists and viewers are left with a couple of story elements so exaggerated and overbearing that they soon become monotonous* Instead of stories written to achieve the goal of entertainment, a viewer finds stories written for the sole purpose of including some built-in element such as a car jump.
The same mentality is at work thinking up new reasons for Charlie's angels to work as hookers and new ways for Pondi and Jon of ""CHiPs” to wreck their Harleys* Another growing problem in television which is very evident in the California-produced ""Dukes” episodes is the lack of technical quality in the shows.
When the position of cars, characters, etc., changes from one scene to another the viewer lias to wonder if anyone from the studio ever looks at the finished product, or if they really care about wlmt they are doing.
Problems like these make me wander if even a little common sense is just too much to ask for anymore.
Lou Grant Lou Grant is the last living relative of the old Mary Tyler Moore Show.
Actually, the kinship is in name only since Ed Asner's Lou Grant character lias grown a great deal from MTM's gruff boss.
The new Lou Grant is a more well-rounded character tlian his predecessor ; lie is easier for the audience to identify with; he is real.
IN THE real world, life's problems cannot be worked out in an hour between commercials, people do not change overnight and sometimes things just don’t work out for the best* “Lou Grant” is one of the few show's on TV today to acknowledge these facts and build its scripts around them.
The show has a habit of presenting the audience with a problem, examining the different viewpoints involved and then leaving the problem at the viewer's feet with no neat, tidy solutions and Imppily-everafters.
A recent episode dealing with Grant's relationship with an alcoholic staff member (Allen Williams) ended without a miracle turn around to sobriety, but instead simply with Grant's declaration that lie would no longer cover up for what was the man's own problem.
One show dealt only with Uie marathon coverage of a mine cave-in as the passing hours were sliown in the corner of the screen from scene to scene.
Another episode had the reporters solving an extremely old murder case much in the tradition of a Sam Spade detective mystery.
Either of these shows could iiave turned out trite or mawkish, but were pulled off with good writing and fine acting* THE ACTORS on tile show can always be counted on to turn in strong performances.
The show’s casting is another example of the ensemble-type cast tliat make such shows as M WKRP In Cincinnati"" and ""M-A-S-H” such a joy to watch.
THE course emphasizes furthering would-be teachers' understanding of the prophecies and inquiries of science, Silverman said.
And* he said.it also provides students with a background in experimental science and teaches them to hypothesize, speculate and test theories.
Massey and Slaughter’s experiment tested the effectiveness of over-the-counter antacid drugs by weight, price and dose.
The experiment proved tliat Alka-2 is more effective than Rolaids, Turns, Di-Gel or Maaiox* ALTHOUGH Slaughter said the subject matter of the experiment was not all that important, both agreed the designing of the experiment taught them valuable procedures in experimental science.
Massey is a junior education major and Slaughter is a biology education major* Recently, Slaughter participated in a field experiment where lie taught a unit in biology to a Captain Shreve High School class.
PHI DELTA THETA — We would like to thank everyone who attended the crawfish boil.
Even though we had to substitute shrimp for the crawfish, it was a big success and a lot of fun.
If you enjoyed the sauce and the plates, thank Dan Lawson in the cafeteria.
Also, we would like to thank the Tri Delts for helping us with the Cokes* Most importantly, thank you, UCPC for such a fun week.
Tomorrow is La Grande Fete featuring Southpaw, Otis Wheat and Expresso.
For a mere admission charge of $5 ($6 day of show) you can enjoy all the beer and crawfish you can handle.
Get your tickets from any Phi Delt or Stan's* ZETA TAU ALPHA — Nominees for the chapter's Zeta Lady Award are Ellen Davis, Nancy Griswold and Mari Luce.
Sunday and the game is at 2 A retreat for Eta Omega has been tentatively scheduled for May 16, 17 and 18* Thanks to Dr.
Congratulations to Zeta faculty advisor Dr* Lillian Hall who has been promoted to full professor status.
STUDENT Indiscriminate idiocy ‘Beautiful but dumb’ theory may be true, but proof exists also of the ‘handsome idiot’ by Sharon Robinson It lias long been accepted Uiat a woman with beauty (or blond hair) cannot possibly possess brains, or at most, only sufficient brains to keep her bodily processes running smoothly — such things as knowing when to eat and when to sleep.
And while in some cases there may be a grain of truth in this, it lias long been ignored that the same assumption can, and should, apply to attractive men.
I have known several quite handsome idiots, but one in particular stands out in ray memory.
He was the original tall, dark and handsome — big brown eyes, athletic build and a voice like a southern gentleman.
A friend managed to get me a date with this man of my dreams, but my bubble was quickly burst, as the southern gentleman became just an or country boy before my very eyes.
WE HAD decided to have a nice dinner somewhere and then take in a movie.
I first began to wonder about John when he ordered a double cheeseburger with extra catsup and a chocolate malt at one of the finest restaurants in town.
A cheeseburger of sorts was produced, but the waiter said he'd have to forego the malt and order something else to drink.
This prompted angry remarks from my indignant companion that an expensive place like tliat ought to liave sometliing as popular as chocolate malts.
TECHN1C0L0H PAKAVISJON 1 From WARNER BfiOS.-SEVEM ARTS UC Theater at 7:30 & 9.
Admission $1, invisible, I nibbled my Quiche Lorraine, sipped my wine and said nothing.
As we ate dessert (John was again outraged Uiat there was no banana split to be had) we began discussing the racial problems at the local high school.
John declared that pretty soon they'd be calling in the MWACP That s double A/ I corrected.
ON THE way to the theater I mentioned that I had gone to visit friends in Baton Rouge the previous weekend.
Then lie began talking about his roommate who had just returned from a fishing trip.
Now, granted, John is a rather extreme example of a handsome idiot, but lie is living proof that attractive men can be just as stupid as attractive women liave always been thought to be.
This man that I wouldn't trust with a slingshot had actually been issued a revolver to use as he saw fit.
Site becomes liberated and decides to no longer center her life around fighting cavities, being fussy about peanut butter, passing her paper towel test and worrying if her hands look as young as her married daughter's.
Bom beck struggles to become the sexiest, smartest, happiest, healthiest and thinnest.
Aunt Erma's self-help book is for anyone who can't seem to make it from Monday to Friday in 12 days or less.
Stimson portrays a little girl whose father give& her to Matthau, a bookie, as collateral for a gambling debt.
The development of the plot stems from the fact that the girl's father never shows up again.
BOB NEWHART plays Matthau's sidekick and seems to be mainly a stock character.
As a matter of fact, I wondered why Newhart would play such a trivial role.
Of course, to round out the plot, there had to be a woman in Matthau's life,e.
Julie Andrews, who also forms an affectionate relationship with the child.
Curtis blackmails Matthau into letting him in on a partnersliip in ownerslup of a gambling casino and, before the movie ends, he informs the police that Matthau is liarboring the child.
In fact, when die plot is finally revealed, I wondered why Uie writer took such a round-about way to get there.
BILLED as a comedy, the movie doesn't develop comically until the second half.
Even then, the humor is light, not Uie ""rolling in Uie aisles"" type that many people who attend comedy movies expect.
But it isn't long before she becomes overshadowed by the other characters, namely Matthau and Andrews.
Her acting seems to consist mainly of facial expressions, displays of affection and walking.
However, I recommend that ""Little Miss Marker"" be considered in U*e vein its title suggests, as a marker for something more entertaining next time.
Page 8 — ALMAGEST — Friday, April 18, 1980 Phi Delts win Fling events by Ellen Davis Phi Delta Theta Fraternity was the big winner in the Spring Fling track events.
Holiday in Dixie annually commemorates the anniversary of the signing of the Louisiana purchase on April 30, 1803, in Paris, Originally the festival commemorated the lowering of the Confederate Flag for the last time in Shreveport on May 26, 1865, which occurred six weeks after Lee's surrender at Appomattox.
Some of the highlights of Holiday in Dixie include the carnival at the Louisiana State Fairgrounds, the $1,000 treasure hunt and the Classic parade April 26 at 4:30m.
The carnival will be open from 3 m, until midnight each weekday, and from noon until midnight each Saturday and Sunday of the festival.
The Holiday in Dixie treasure will be hidden somewhere in Caddo or Bossier parishes and clues will be provided throughout the festival.
OTHER exhibitions include a display of children's art at the Louisiana State Exhibit Museum on the fairgrounds, a junior and senior high school art show at Mali St.
Vincent, an exhibition of working models of Leonardo da Vinci inventions circulated by IBM at Meadow Museum of Art at Centenary.
College and a handmade miniature figure contest at the Hobby Hut at 1744 E, 70th St.
A kite fly-in is scheduled for 2 m. next Saturday in the LSUS parking area.
Prizes will be awarded to the biggest, smallest, most original and to the kite with the longest string.
Sports events include the annual Red River Run scheduled for 8m. tomorrow on the Clyde Fant Parkway.
THE HOLIDAY in Dixie pirogue races are scheduled for tomorrow at 8 am. and will last until 5m.
The crawfish eating contest and crawfish races are also scheduled for Bayou Park tomorrow from noon until 3:30m.
The Holiday in Dixie public ball will feature the big band sound of the Sandy Sandifer Orchestra from Dallas and will be held next Saturday from 8 m. to lm. in the Convention Center.
Barksdale Air Force Base will hold its annual open house next Sunday from 9a.m. until 5m., and will include displays of military aircraft and equipment.
Holiday in Dixie is sponsoring such programs as golf turnaments, antique and model car contests, flower shows, a Frisbee tournament, baton twirling competition, a photography contest, bowling tournaments, bike races and much more.
Rowe and Mike Cascio won the men's gorgeous legs contest, each contributing a leg.
Bryan Germany and Teri Penfield were the winners of the kiss -a -U ion.
The women's gorgeous legs contest was won by Colleen Lynch, and Aipha Plii Sorority won pyramid building.
Jimbo, a dog with eyes of different colors, won tile ugly pet contest; Vicky Slay is the animal's owner.
WORTH Prerre Marques Conveniently located to downtown, Pierre Marques features golf and lenms facilities and lour pools.
Although it is difficult for a reader to compare the Almagest with other college papers, we are interested in your opinion of LSUS’ paper.
Moa Afrika Gabe Sims t president of Moa Afrika, recently presented a $100 check to Donald Moss, president of the Northwest Louisiana Sickle Cell Anemia Foundation * The LSUS organization held a benefit dance to raise the money for the foundation* Moa Afrika is sponsoring an end-of-semester dance at Little Joe and Stroud’s Thursday, from 9 p -la.m.
Tickets are $1 in advance, $1.50 at the door and can be purchased from any dub member, The organization is also selling T-shirts priced at $10* For more information contact Gabe Sims or Gloria Douglas* Overdue books At the end of each semester all overdue books are considered lost and charges are forwarded to the Business Office for collection.
All books checked out and not returned by Tuesday, May 6, will be overdue and, if not returned* will be considered lost.
The charge for lost books includes the cost of the book plus a $3 fee* For further information regarding the library’s book circulation policy consult the “Library Handbook” available at the circulation desk , i j j Almagest f \ Applications are now being accepted for positions during the fall 1980 semester on the Almagest staff.
The pregram allows students to enroll in selected freshman classes and earn credits which can be used to satisfy degree requirements when they are admitted as freshmen.
Calendar Friday, April 18 Movie — ""Camelot"" at 2 and 7:30m. in the UC Theater.
Michael Oliva won a full Graduate Fellowship for 1980-81 which pays $4,500 for the nine-month period with no teaching responsibilities.
Scholarships are limited to those young men and women whose roots lie in the South.
Applicants must convince the awards committee that they firmly intend to pursue a career in daily or weekly ■ newspapering and that their interests and apj titudes are such that they are likely to become I leaders in this field.
Condemned buildings and rundown shotgun houses draw the lines of demarcation for what can only be described as a battleground, a combat zone if you will.
This is the part of -town where fine Victorian homes have fallen to the status of one-room boarding houses, where children play in trash and garbage-filled lots, once the setting of many a Sunday picnic on soft green grass long since gone.
Here the dogs run the streets and alleys in packs, no longer pets, but scavengers on the prowl.
Drunks and junkies wander aimlessly through the streets, like the wounded and the shell shocked across a battlefield, and the old men sit on the porches like refugees, watching, waiting and remembering.
This is the place where hopes, ambitions, and dreams are frustrated to the point of extinction.
Because here, as in all combat zones, good and evil have no form, no meaning; they weave together in a fabric so tight that one corrupts the other and they become inseparable.
Taken separately these photographs are little more than pictures of people we don’t want to know , who by birth or choice live in a place we refuse to acknowledge exists.
The emotions they evoke in us range from pity to sympathy to contempt and disgust.
Taken as a whole these photographs depict a way of life, a way of life whose meaning is often sought in a bottle of wine, a roll of the dice, or a squeezing of the trigger.
They seem to mingle together to form a portrait, a portrait of life in a combat zone.
Friday, April 18, l$80 — ALMAGEST — Page 1 i Story and photos by Donna O'Neal The arrival of spring is heralded by many things— the blossoming of flowers, the budding of tiny, bright green leaves, the arrival of mild weather.
The most obvious indications that spring, along with the end of this semester, lias arrived, however, are the crooked smiles frozen on the faces of dazed, work-weary students who are looking forward to the final week of classes.
Although the end of the semester lias almost been as reluctant to get here as spring, tiie countdown has begun at last and final exams are less than two weeks away.
One drawback to the pleasant weather is the big temptation to toss homework and worries aside and head for the frisbee golf course, the bike trail or the lake.
On campus, there also seems to be more people “hanging around” (in true “Joe Cool"" form) outside or just any place where a class isn't being held.
Page 12 — ALMAGEST — Friday, April 18, 1880 Proper first lowers rate of accidental deaths Dlin to study in Jerusalem by Melanie Stone Special to the Almagest Society lias created a system of laws, law enforcement officers and formal courts to deal with the criminals who murder or injure innocent people.
However, society has done very little to prevent anoUier burden— the accidental death or injury.
Accidents are the leading cause of death among persons from the ages of one to 38, according to the manual “Standard First Aid and Personal Safety,’* which is prepared by The American National Red Cross, Accidents caused by human carelessness can usually be avoided.
For instance, a person should never be intoxicated or drowsy while operating an automobile or machine.
However, there is a solution tliat can be applied to decrease the liig.li rate of accidental death and injury— first aid.
A person who possesses first aid knowledge and skill often makes the difference between life and death for the victim or victims involved in an emergency situation.
The trained person can also mean the difference between temporary versus permanent disabilitv, and rapid recovery versus iong hospitalization.
Even the person who has liad little or no formal first-aid training can save a life or lessen the severity of an injury if lie follows some basic guidelines wliich everyone should know in tfte event of an emergency.
FIRST, telephone or have someone else contact the appropriate authorities.
At LSUS, the campus police sliould be contacted immediately if there are injured or ill persons on campus.
Their office is located on the first floor of Bronson Hail, At home or elsewhere, consider the circumstances surrounding the accident and then determine wlK) should be summoned.
If a list of emergency numbers is not readily available, call the telephone operator for assistance.
Finally, give the location of the accident, the number of persons involved, your name and the telephone number where you can be reached.
Do not hang up until after die other party liangs up— he may wish to confirm some of Uie informa lion.
When a person applies the basic guidelines, he performs a valuable service to society.
One example of die effective application erf basic first aid occurred on campus last year.
A FEMALE sophomore, who was approaching the rear exit of Bronson Hall, tripped and fell into the glass door.
Quickly, he summoned the campus police, who notified the proper authorities.
She was taken to LSU Medical Center , where she was treated and released.
And even though it took more tlian 70 stitches to close die cuts, she survived die serious accident.
Tliis is a good example of how basic first aid can mean the difference between temporary versus permanent disability, and rapid recovery versus long hospitalization.
Dlin plans to spend about seven mondis studying the El Lahamm souq which dates back to die days of Charlemagne and is actually located in old horse stalls left from the days of the Crusaders.
The activity in such a market place should provide a “good window into the socioeconomic and religious life of Jerusalem, 1 * said Dlin, He plans to use his research to prepare a paper to be presented at regional and national meetings.
The trip will be his first to Jerusalem since 1976 when he traveled as part of a fact finding mission for the American Professors for Peace in the Middle East.
Dlin hopes to travel throughout the countryside to see what dianges have taken place since his last visit.
He is especially interested in changes in the beef cattle industry and trends in the Kibbutzs (communal type farms) which he believes may be turning more toward industrialization ■ $70 PER DAY Possible in just 3 hrs,, flexible to your schedule.
And this ones specially designed for service keyed to your ''on-the-go 11 lifestyle.
Six lanes of drive-in service and a Keybanker 24-hour automatic banking center.
Services such as checking, savings, travelers checks, money orders, collections, time deposits and savings bonds are available at the lobby teller windows.
Stop by any of the CNB Branches and open your account now, so you'll be ready to go when we are.
