The confrontation is often considered the closest the Cold War came to escalating into a full-scale nuclear war.In response to the failed Bay of Pigs Invasion of 1961, and the presence of American Jupiter ballistic missiles in Italy and Turkey.
Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev decided to agree to Cuba's request to place nuclear missiles on the island to deter future invasions.
The United States had been embarrassed publicly by the failed Bay of Pigs Invasion in April 1961, which had been launched under President John F Kennedy by CIA-trained forces of Cuban exiles.
United States covert operations against Cuba continued in 1961 with the similarly unsuccessful Operation Mongoose.In addition, Khrushchev's impression of Kennedy's weakness was confirmed by the President's response during the Berlin Crisis of 1961, particularly to the building of the Berlin Wall.
All these were meant to conceal the program from both internal and external audiences.Specialists in missile construction under the guise of ""machine operators,"" ""irrigation specialists"" and ""agricultural specialists"" arrived in July.
He told Khrushchev that the missiles would be concealed and camouflaged by palm trees.The Cuban leadership was further upset when in September the United States Congress approved United States Joint Resolution 230, which expressed Congress's resolve to prevent the creation of an externally supported military establishment.
On August 10, he wrote a memo to President Kennedy in which he guessed that the Soviets were preparing to introduce ballistic missiles into Cuba.With important Congressional elections scheduled for November, the Crisis became enmeshed in American politics.
At the end of September, Navy reconnaissance aircraft photographed the Soviet ship Kasimov with large crates on its deck the size and shape of Il-28 light bomber fuselages.In September 1962, analysts from the Defense Intelligence Agency noticed that Cuban surface-to-air missile sites were arranged in a pattern similar to those used by the Soviet Union to protect its ICBM bases, leading DIA to lobby for the resumption of U-2 flights over the island.
Although he provided no direct reports of the Soviet missile deployments to Cuba, technical and doctrinal details of Soviet missile regiments provided by Penkovsky in the months and years prior to the Crisis helped NPIC analysts correctly identify the missiles on U-2 imagery.That evening, the CIA notified the Department of State and at 8:30 pm EDT, National Security Adviser McGeorge Bundy chose to wait until the next morning to tell the President.
Not wanting to expose what he already knew, and wanting to avoid panicking the American public, the President did not reveal that he was already aware of the missile build-up.By October 19, frequent U-2 spy flights showed four operational sites.
This took place the next day, and the Marucla was cleared through the blockade after its cargo was checked.At 5:00 pm EDT on October 25, William Clements announced that the missiles in Cuba were still actively being worked on.
They also noted that the Cuban military continued to organize for action, although they were under order not to initiate action unless attacked.Template:Fix At 9:00 am EDT on October 27, Radio Moscow began broadcasting a message from Khrushchev.
The two went their separate ways, and Scali immediately typed out a memo for the EXCOMM.Template:Fix Within the United States establishment, it was well understood that ignoring the second offer and returning to the first put Khrushchev in a terrible position.
Template:Fix At 8:05 pm EDT, the letter drafted earlier in the day was delivered.
The Soviets responded by scrambling MiG fighters from Wrangel Island; in turn the Americans launched F-102 fighters armed with nuclear air-to-air missiles over the Bering Sea.On October 27, Khrushchev also received a letter from Castro – what is now known as the Armageddon Letter – interpreted as urging the use of nuclear force in the event of an attack on Cuba.
There is some dispute as to whether removing the missiles from Italy was part of the secret agreement, although Khrushchev wrote in his memoirs that it was; nevertheless, when the crisis had ended McNamara gave the order to dismantle the missiles in both Italy and Turkey.At 9:00 am EST, on October 28, a new message from Khrushchev was broadcast on Radio Moscow.
Khrushchev determined that because the Americans had not listed the missiles on their list of demands, keeping them in Cuba would be in the Soviet Union's interests.Anastas Mikoyan was tasked with the negotiations with Castro over the missile transfer deal designed to prevent a breakdown in the relations between Cuba and the Soviet Union.
Bomber gap Cuba–Soviet Union relations Leninsky Komsomol class cargo ships Mutual assured destruction Norwegian rocket incident Nuclear disarmament Soviet Navy Notes ↑ McNamara mistakenly dates the shooting down of USAF Major Rudolf Anderson's U-2 on October 26.
