Finally, the “Careers in International Relations” feature at the beginning of the book helps students think about job possibilities in the field.
Many people find information—especially abstract concepts—easier to grasp when linked with pictures.
Thus, the book uses color photographs extensively to illustrate important points.
Photo captions reinforce main themes from each section of the text and link them with the scenes pictured, including in this edition many 2012 and 2013 photos.
Traditional MBA and business school programs will be helpful for all three types of jobs, yet for jobs based abroad, employers often also look for a broader set of skills taught in economics, political science, and communications.
One advantage of an academic and research career, whether at a teaching-oriented institution or a large re«L I ON Whether one wants to pursue an adsearch university, is intellectual freedom.
Charleston Dallas Jaasenuiiiu Ei fas® 0 deans Hcrmosllla BAHAMAS Cflihuahua Torracm.
Watch the Video ""Authors' Chapter Introduction"" at MyPoliSciLab Globalization, International Relations, and Daily Life International relations is a fascinating topic because it concerns peoples and cultures throughout the worldThe scope and complexity of the interactions among these groups make international relations a challenging subject to master.
In general, collective goods are easier to provide in small groups than in large ones.
At the G20 meeting in 2009, leaders of the major industrial countries announced that the G20 would replace the G8 as the key group coordinating global financial matters.
Actors and Influences J Watch the Video ""Conflict Diamonds and the Kimberley Process"" at MyPoliSciLab The principal actors in IR are the world’s governments.
Just as Greenpeace can travel to a remote location and then beam video of its environmental actions there to the world, so too can al Qaeda place suicide bombers in world cities, coordinate their operations and finances through the Internet and the Nonstate actors participate in IR alongside states, although generally in less central roles.
For instance, democracies and dictatorships may act differently from one another, and democracies may act differently in an election year z Singer, J David.
Actors and Influences 19 the global level that reach down to influence international relations.
Levels of analysis offer different sorts of explanations for international events.
For example, many possible explanations exist for the 2003 U.S.-led war against Iraq.
A third school of thought sees globalization as more profound than the skeptics believe, yet more uncertain than the view of supporters of liberal economics.
These “transformationalists” see state sovereignty as being eroded by the EU, the WTO, and other new institutions, so that sovereignty is no longer an absolute but just one of a spectrum of bargaining leverages held by states.
While scholars debate these conceptions of globalization, popular debates focus on the growing power of large corporations operating globally, the disruptive costs associated with joining world markets , the perception of growing disparities between the rich and the poor, and the collusion of national governments in these wrongs through their participation in IOs such as the As the world economy becomes more integrated, markets and production are becoming global in scope.
Nine Regions of the World North merica The North The South Latin merica Europe & Russia /CIS China Japan / Pacific South Asia 2000 Kilometers Global Geography 23 geographical element at the global level of analysis.
With perhaps just two other cases in history—the Thirty Years’ War and the Napoleonic Wars—the two world wars were global or hegemonic wars in which almost all major states participated in an all-out struggle over the future of the international system/ For many people, World War I symbolizes the tragic irrationality of war.
It fascinates scholars of IR because it was a catastrophic war that seems unnecessary and perhaps even 1 /A _ u Ferguson, Niall.
Hitler signed a nonaggression pact with his archenemy, Joseph Stalin of the z Van Evera, Stephen.
The pass-the-hat financing for this war was an innovation, one that worked fairly well. 'l Q The final collapse of the Soviet Union followed only months after the Gulf War/ The 15 republics of the Soviet Union—of which Russia was just one—had begun taking power from a weakened central government, declaring themselves sovereign states.
Many Iraqis welcomed the end of a dictatorial regime, as had most Afghans in late 2001, but the war 'Z'l Bacevich, Andrew J., and Eliot A Cohen.
Old wars have ended faster than new ones have begunr * * 3 Latin America and Russia/CIS have nearly extinguished wars in their regions, joining a zone of peace already encompassing North America, Europe, Japan/Pacific, and China.
Realism Power ■ Defining Power ■ Estimating Power ■ Elements of Power The International System ■ Anarchy and Sovereignty ■ Balance of Power ■ Great Powers and Middle Powers ■ Power Distribution ■ Hegemony ■ The Great Power System, 1500-2000 Alliances ■ Purposes of Alliances ■ NATO ■ Other Alliances ■ Regional Alignments Strategy ■ Statecraft ■ Rationality ■ The Prisoner's Dilemma J Study and Review the Pre-Test & Flashcards at MyPoliSciLab Bardin, Terry, and David R Mapel, eds.
Theories of IR Individual Domestic Levels of AnalysisInterstate Realism Neorealism Global Liberal Theories Democratic Liberal Institutionalism Peace CjOCAW-"" *• ** ** / I I \ Constructivist Theories Postmodernist Theories Peace Studies Gender Theories Marxism *** \ 5 Morgenthau, Hans.
Anarchy and Sovereignty © Watch the Video ""Chamberlain's Appeasement Speech"" at MyPoliSciLab Realists believe that the international system exists in a state of anarchy—a term that implies not complete chaos or absence of structure and rules, but rather the lack of a central government that can enforce rules.
In domestic society within states, governments can enforce contracts, deter citizens from breaking rules, and use their monopoly on legally sanctioned violence to enforce a system of law.
Middle powers have not received as much attention in IR as have great powers.
Power transition theory holds that the largest wars result from challenges to the top position in the status hierarchy, when a rising power is surpassing (or threatening to suro i pass) the most powerful state.
Here, a nuclear-powered submarine sails near China's coast, 2009. ■j o J Kapstein, Ethan B., and Michael Mastanduno.
United States foreign policy has historically alternated between internationalist and isolationist O Q moodsW It was founded as a breakaway from the European-based international system, and its growth in the 19th century was based on industrialization and expansion within North America.
The Great Power System, 1500-2000 o> IS5 Wars Spain conquers Portugal Spanish Armada War Si Nc War of the 7 Years' Spanish War iccession ipoleonic Wars FrancoPrussian War World War 1 World War II Cold War Major Alliances ___ , Hapsburgs Turkey M a Franc _ vs ' Netherla Europe vs. e, Britain, nds, Sweden France ^ vs.
Or, two countries may create the practical equivalent of an alliance without a formal treaty.
NATO Expansion Alliances 67 the Czech Republic, and Hungary joined the alliance.
Longtime members France and Germany strongly opposed the war, and Turkey refused to let United States ground forces cross into Iraq.
At the same time, United States leaders began shifting some operations (and money) to new members in Eastern Europe such as Romania—with lower prices and a location closer to the Middle East—while drawing down forces based in Germany.
ALLIANCE OF THE STRONG The NATO alliance has been the world's strongest military force since 1949; its mission in the post-Cold War era is somewhat uncertain.
Japan pays the United States several billion dollars annually to offset about half the cost of maintaining these troops.
In 2009, Georgia withdrew from the CIS, due to its 2008 military conflict with Russia. limits because of the war’s growing unpopularity, budget pressures due to the global recession, and uncertain prospects for victory.
Being on top of a dominance hierarchy does not just mean ordering Funeral of two Spanish soldiers killed in Afghanistan, 2010. around underlings.
The United States had very hostile relations with Iraq before z Hemmer, Christopher, and Peter Katzenstein.
Explore the Simulation ""You are the Prime Minister of India"" at PoliSciLab Strategy 73 Statecraft Classical realists emphasize statecraft —the art of managing state affairs and effectively maneuvering in a world of power politics among sovereign states.
Optimal Imperfection1 Domestic Uncertainty and Institutions in International Relations.
Reciprocity governs UN dues in principle, since all countries contribute according to a formula based on each individual economy’s size, but in pracIDENTITY Liberal Theories 93 federation, Kant proposed, the majority of states could unite to punish any one state that committed aggression, safeguarding the collective interests of all the nations while protecting the self-determination of small nations that all too easily became pawns in 14 great power games.
Over the past two centuries, democracy has become more widespread as a form of government, and this trend is changing the nature of the foreign policy process worldwide.
And existing democracies are imperfect in various ways—from political apathy in the United States and corruption in Japan to autocratic traditions in Russia.
Nonetheless, the trend is toward democratization in most of the world’s regions.
Upsurges of democratic movements throughout the world in recent years testify to the power of the idea of democracy.
However, although mature democracies almost never fight each other, a period of transition to democracy may be more prone to war than either a stable democracy or a stable authoritarian government.
Therefore, the process of democratization does not necessarily bode well for peace in the short term.
These theories contrast with the assumption of fixed, timeless preferences in most theories u Mansfield, Edward D., and Jack Snyder.
One prominent line examines how states’ interests and identities are intertwined, as well as how those identities are shaped by interactions with other states.
European identities are now intertwined with the European Union, not with the violent nationalism that led to two world wars.
Here, the morals police close a barber shop in Iran for giving Western-style haircuts, 2008. piracy.
Switzerland, for example, values its role as a neutral, though the pirates had no political goals in their violence.
Even if not terrorism, no one would doubt the costs associated with 1 c D Checkel, Jeffrey.
Scholars have examined the role of the European Union in socializing elites in new member states 01 as well as the role of the United Nations in conferring legitimacy on the use of a 'j force as a source of its power.
Others have investigated how international organizations 'i 1 'Finnemore, Martha.
None of these is an objective reality, and all are filtered through an interpretive process that distorts the ■j o J Barnett, Michael, and Martha Finnemore.
The hidden meanings not 'X O explicitly addressed in the text are often called the subtext/ Omissions are an aspect of subtext, as when realist theories of IR omit women and gender, for example.
We will discuss Marxist © Watch the Video ""Castro's Cuba"" at MyPoliSciLab 0 Shapiro, Michael J Textualizing Global Politics.
Disparity of wealth is a central aspect of global North-South relations.
Proletarian workers in industrialized countries enjoyed rising standards of living and did not ^ Moore, Barrington.
Peace Studies Peace studies challenges fundamental concepts behind both realism and neoliberal ism.
Johns Hopkins, 1989. z Crocker, Chester A., Fen Osier Hampson, and Pamela Aall.
Thus, some feminist scholars find in realism a hidden assumption of masculinity.
Furthermore, the sharp distinction that realists draw between international politics and domestic politics parallels the distinction in gender roles between the public and private spheres.
Feminist scholars emphasize the importance of gender roles in IR, especially the traditional distinction between males in the political-military roles and females in the domestic-family roles.
Difference feminists find much evidence to support the idea of war as a masculine pursuit.
During the subsequent years of war in Iraq, United States women military police have acquitted themselves well in numerous firefights.
Indeed, women in nontraditional gender roles may well perform better than their male counterparts, because presumably women who self-select into such roles are near the high end of the Q ""7 _ z Katzenstein, Mary Fainsod, and Judith Reppy, eds.
Legislative Quotas Are Important for Equal ty and Development Equal representation is important for democratic government.
Making Foreign Policy ■ Models of Decision Making ■ Individual Decision Makers ■ Group Psychology ■ Crisis Management Domestic Influences ■ Bureaucracies ■ Interest Groups ■ The Military-Industrial Complex ■ Public Opinion ■ Legislatures J Study and Review the Pre-Test & Flashcards at MyPoliSciLab FIGURE 4.
Similarly, Soviet leaders in 1941 and Israeli leaders in 1973 ignored evidence of pending invasions of their countries. undermined by emotions that decision makers feel while thinking about the consequences of their actions—an effect referred to as affective bias.
As hard as a decision maker tries to be Foreign policies often deviate from rationality as a result of the misperceptions and biases of decision makers and populations.
FASTEN YOUR SEAT BELTS Misperceptions can affect the implementation of policy by lowlevel officials as well as its formulation by high-level officials.
Second, the rationality of individual cost-benefit calculations is rational in making a decision, the decision-making process is bound to be influenced by strong feelings held about the person or state toward which a decision is directed.
When five of the people are secretly instructed to say that line A is longer—even though anyone can see that line B is actually longer—the sixth person is likely to agree with the group rather than believe his or her own eyes. z Simon, Herbert A Models of Bounded Rationality.
Because of the domestic political clout of these actors, the z Smith, Tony.
In many countries, the state owns or controls major mass media such as television and newspapers, mediating the flow of information to its citizens; however, new information technologies with multiple channels make this harder to do.
National leaders traditionally have additional latitude to make decisions 1 c _ D Rourke, John T., Richard P Hiskes, and Cyrus Ernesto Zirakzadeh.
Public opinion polls show that elite opinions sometimes differ considerably from those of the gen'l eral population, and sometimes from those of the government as well/ Governments sometimes adopt foreign policies for the specific purpose of generating public approval and hence gaining domestic legitimacy.
In 2006, President Bush’s popularity, which had soared early in the Iraq War, deflated as the war dragged on 1 A . rage, Benjamin I., and Marshall M Bouton.
For example, because legislatures hold the “purse strings” , they have the ability to stop a war in its 1 Q 0 Milner, Helen.
For example, both capitalist and 1 Q ^Howell, Will, and Jon C Pevehouse.
ARGUMENT 2 Legislatures Should Play a Role in Deciding Whether to Use Mil tary Force More input regarding military force leads to more careful policy.
Civil war refers to war between factions within a state trying to create, or prevent, a new government for the entire state or some territorial part of it.
The situation is doubly painful because conventional armies fighting against guerrillas often cannot distinguish them from civilians and punish both together.
You Are a Strategic Analyst"" at MyPoliSciLab J Collier, Paul, and Nicholas Sambanis, eds.
Kung bush people in Angola and _LW Political scientists do not agree on a theory of why great wars like World War II occur and cannot predict whether they could happen again.
Eventually the idea of nationalism itself became a powerful force and u Gellner, Ernest.
Today such conflicts are widespread—in Northern Ireland, Quebec, Israel-Palestine, India-Pakistan, Sri Lanka, Tibet, Sudan, and many 'l 1 other places/ The Netherlands helped establish the principle of self-determination when it broke free of Spanish ownership around 1600 and set up a self-governing Dutch republic.
In the 1990s, rival Kurdish guerrilla armies fought both o 1 __ z Gurr, Ted Robert.
If killings based on age-old hatreds are inevitable, then inaction by the rest of the world might 1 Q Krause, jiii, and Neil Renwick, eds.
In the Soviet Union and Yugoslavia—multinational states—the existence of a single strong state (willing to Q y Power, Samantha.
RELIGIOUS DIFFERENCES Islamist Movements Currently, violent conflicts are being prosecuted in the name of all the world’s major religions.
Religious intolerance can exacerbate tensions between groups, sometimes increasing violence, with international implications.
Members of the Islamic Conference and Areas of Conflict 3 Serbia/Kosovo 4 Turkey 5 Cyprus 6 Georgia 7 Southern Russia/Chechnya 10 Tajikistan 11 Western China 12 Philippines 13 East Timor/Indonesia 14 India 17 Israel/Palestine 18 Egypt 19 Algeria 20 Sudan 21 Nigeria Shaded countries are members of the conference; numbered regions are areas of conflict between Muslims and non-Muslims or secular authorities.
These anti-Western feelings in Islamic countries came to a boil in 2006 after a Danish newspaper published offensive cartoons depicting 'i/i °Binder, Leonard.
Fanatical Not respectful of women Muslims think non-Muslims are: Fanatical Not respectful of women Source: Pew Global Attitudes Survey, 2005 and 2010.
Iran strongly supports—with money, arms, and training—the Hezbollah militia in Lebanon and the government in SyriaHezbollah runs hundreds of schools, hospitals, and other charities, but is also included on the United States list of terrorist organizations.
Efforts by a region to secede from a state are a frequent source of international conflict, but international norms generally treat such conflicts as internal matters unless they spill over borders.
ARGUMENT 2 No New Cold War Will Emerge Between the United States and Russ a Russia depends on Western aid and acceptance.
By 2009, more than 44 million land mines had been destroyed under the treaty, with 86 countries eliminating their stockpiles.
A new norm seems to be emerging, but its effect on actual military practice is not yet clear.
China has spent large sums in the past ten years rejuvenating its aging air force capabilities.
United States Department of Defense n ^ 'Harkavy, Robert E Bases Abroad: The Global Foreign Military Presence.
More than guerrilla warfare, terrorism is a shadowy world of faceless enemies and irregular tac1 'l tics marked by extreme brutality.
For example, Chechen radicals seized a school in Beslan, a small city in the Caucasus region in 2004.
For three days, they held nearly 1,200 children, parents, and teachers without food or water.
As of 2011, the United States has accused four states of supporting international terrorism—Iran, Syria, Sudan, and Cuba, All have been on the list for more than a decade.
The United States government has barred United States companies from doing business in those states.
But North Korea, Iran, Iraq, and Libya all built the infrastructure to do so in recent years.
But a plutonium bomb is more difficult to build than a uranium one—another obstacle to proliferation.
Fusion weapons are extremely expensive and technically demandNuclear weapons were invented during World War II and used on two Japanese cities in 1945.
Here, in 1999, a United States congressman displays a mock-up of the Soviet-built nuclear ""suitcase bomb"" that, in the wrong hands, could kill hundreds of thousands of people.
Chemical weapons can be produced using processes and facilities similar to those for pesticides, pharmaceuticals, and other civilian products, which makes it difficult to find i n . u Mistry, Dinshaw.
Several states (including India, China, South Korea, France, and Britain) admitted to having secret chemical weapons programs, which are now being dismantled under international oversight.
In 2001, the United States pulled out of talks to strengthen the 1972 treaty, declaring the proposed modifications unworkable.
VULNERABLE Civilians are more vulnerable to chemical weapons than soldiers are.
As broader political unrest occurs in other nuclear states, notably Pakistan, thoughts often turn 9 A toward the safety of nuclear weapons and materials. z Lederberg, Joshua, ed.
An attack intended to destroy—largely or entirely—a state’s nuclear weapons before they can be used is called a first strike. z Leventhal, Paul L., and Sharon Tanzer, eds.
It aims to impede the development of new types 'j r ' 3 Adler, Emanuel, ed.
Military Economics 22 Watch the Video ""Civil-Military Relations and Revolution in Egypt"" at MyPoliSciLab Choices about military forces depend on the connection between a state’s military spending and its economic health.
Princeton, 1996. -1 Q Forsberg, Randall, Robert Elias, and Matthew Goodman.
Although the test had only a small yield, North Korea clearly possesses the knowledge, resources, and ability to produce nuclear weapons.
This weaving together of people across national boundaries through specialized groups reflects interdependence / —*■-l3 International norms are evolving in such areas as humanitarian intervention and human rights.
For example, Greenpeace attends UN meetings about the global environment.
At the center of that web of connection stands the most important international organization today, the United Nations'he United Nations § Watch the Video UN Aid in Somalia"" at MyPoliSciLab The UN and other international organizations have both strengths and weaknesses in the anarchic international system.
East Timor, operate under their national flags but their missions are authorized by UN resolution.
Proposed Changes The structure of the Security Council is not without problems.
Japan and Germany are great powers that contribute substantial UN dues (based on economic size) and make large contributions to UN programs and peacekeeping operations.
In an effort to provide longer-term support after wars, in 2005 the UN created a Peacebuilding Commission to coordinate reconstruction, institution building, and economic recovery efforts after peacekeeping missions end. b Whitworth, Sandra.
The Assembly has met in emergency session in the past to deal with an immediate threat to international peace and security, but this has happened only nine times and has now become uncommon.
Its regional commissions look at how UN programs work together in a particular region; its functional commissions deal with global topics such as population growth, narcotics trafficking, human rights, and the status of women; and its expert bodies The universal membership of the United Nations is one of its strengths.
HELPING WHERE NEEDED Autonomous Agencies In addition to its own programs, the UN General Assembly maintains formal ties with about 20 autonomous international agencies not under its control.
An array of UN programs, operating under the General Assembly, aim to help countries in the global South to overcome social and economic problems.
Although revolution does not free a state from its obligations, some treaties have built-in escape clauses 1 ^ J Shaw, Malcolm N International Law.th ed.
Uruguay brings in foreign companies to build 2 pulp mills across the river from a major Argentine tourist resort.
Under the 1963 Vienna Convention on Consular Relations, citizens arrested in a foreign country must be advised of their right to meet with their home country’s representatives.
Q Watch the Video ""The Uncertain Status of Enemy Combatants"" at MyPoliSciLab Laws of Diplomacy The bedrock of international law is respect for the rights of diplomats.
Aggression refers to a state’s use of force, or an imminent threat to do so, against another state’s territory or sovereignty—unless the use of force is in response to aggression.
Human Rights One of the newest areas of international law concerns human rights—the rights of human 9 1 beings against certain abuses of their own governments/ u Johnson, James Turner.
Thus, a consensus on what are the most important human rights is difficult n 'l to reach.
The concept of human rights arises 'l ^ , from at least three sourcesA The first is religion.
These two covenants, along with the UDHR, are often referred to as 'l Q the International Bill of Human Rights/ The remaining treaties each deal with a particular group that the international community considers vulnerable.
Free trade agreements frequently contain provisions that condition trade benefits on the o r\ respect for human rights, especially workers’ rights. u Because these treaties provide policies beneficial to the developing states, they create a ready mechanism to punish countries who abuse their citizens.
Risse, Ropp, and Sikkink, The Power of Human Rights . z Hopgood, Stephen.
Enforcing norms of human rights is difficult because it involves interfering in a state’s internal affairs.
A major summit of world leaders in 2005 enshrined the concept of the responsibility to protect , which holds that governments worldwide must act to save civilians from genocide or crimes against humanity perpetrated or allowed by their own governments.
In states where abuses are severe or becoming worse, United States foreign aid has been withheld. 37 ■j J Amnesty International.
In wartime, international law is especially difficult to enforce, but extensive norms of legal conduct in war as well as international treaties are widely followed.
United States leaders are concerned that American soldiers, rather than under the American military’s own justice system.
The AU Explore the Simulation ""You are Egypt's Representative to the UN"" at PoliSciLab has called for the ICC to suspend all ICC proceedings relating to Darfur, and the Arab League has condemned the indictment of al-Bashir.
This is a very large number, about 12 times the world’s military spending, for example.
In the short term, a state can trade for a few years at a deficit and then a few years at a surplus.
Comparative Advantage The overall success of liberal economics is due to the substantial gains that can be realized through trade.
A classic case in recent decades was the small state of Albania in southeast Europe.
Trade Regimes © Watch the Video ""IMF Conditionality and the Irish Bailout"" at MyPoliSciLab As technology links the world across space, a global integration process based on free trade is shaping the international economic agenda.
At the 2003 meeting in Cancun, Mexico, states from the global South walked out after the industrialized countries would not agree to lift their agricultural subsidies, which were shutting out poor countries’ agricultural exports.
The main obstacle remains the resistance of the industrialized West to cut agricultural subsidies as demanded by countries in the global South.
In explaining the difficulty in wrapping up a major trade agreement such as the Doha Round, game theorists might look to the game of Chicken as an explanatory model.
Until the participants find agreement on these pesky remaining issues, nobody can enjoy the economic boost that a new WTO agreement will bring.
The group, unlike some other Asia-Pacific IGOs, does not include the United States, but it does include half the world’s population and some of its most dynamic economies. 11 z Hakim, Peter, and Robert E Litan, eds.
It can punish the use of violence and can 1 Q ^Hansen, Wendy L The International Trade Commission and the Politics of Protectionism.
In this period of mechanization, however, factory conditions were extremely harsh, especially for women and children operating machines. i ^osencrance, Richard.
Mar PI Keynes Br >. dollar as world currency shall United States drops Russia an gold joins IMF —^ standard IMF etton Woods debt crises Communication telegra ^ ^ telephone invented transoceanic cables radio — communication satellites information revolution — ^ Internet fax, modem, cellular, etc.
Adopting the principles of Keynesian economics, the United States government used deficit spending to stimulate the economy, paying itself back from new wealth generated by economic recovery.
The Soviet Union launched the world’s first satellite in 1957, and in the early 1960s its leaders O -3 J Markwell, Donald.
Because they contain both some government control and some private ownership, the economies of the industrialized West are often called mixed economies.
Today there is a single integrated world economy that almost no country can resist joining.
I j r • / ff f l tL t J 1 J J f, \ K x ■ 1 A J ^ mr fr Tokyo brokerage, 2010.
You Are a Foreign Market Analyst"" at MyPoliSciLab Nearly every state prints its own moneyThe ability to print one’s own currency is one of the hallmarks of state sovereigntyYet, in a globalized system of trade and finance, businesses and individuals often need other states’ currencies to do business.
They are private markets, not as strongly regulated by governments as are stock markets.
The United States has blamed the undervalued yuan for costing AmerExplore the Simulation ""You are CEO of a Multinational Corporation"" at PoliSciLab ica 1. million jobs, and the 2012 American presidential election featured recurrent ""China bashing,"" further exacerbating political tensions.
If not, it will have to begin selling off part of its standing wealth 9 Kindleberger, Charles P International Capital Movements.
Thus, for all the Failure to make payments on international debt, called a default, is a very serious action because it can cut off a country's access to future investment and loans.
By 2013, stock markets had fully recovered from the 2008 crash, but a new European recession threatened to hurt United States exports. n Thorbecke, Willem.
In a more decentralized, more privatized world economy with an uncertain United States role, collective goods problems would be harder to solve and free trade harder to achieve.
But internal power struggles created political instability in Russia, discouraging foreign investment.
A foreign MNC selling an imported product in the host Foreign direct investment is often sought by host governments because it stimulates employment and economic growth, though at wages that home countries would not tolerate.
Watch the Video ""Authors' Chapter Introduction"" at MyPoliSciLab Globalization and Integration Common to most discussions of globalization is a sense that there are forces in the world bringing us all closer together.
Such a shift in sovereignty to the supranational level would probably entail some version of federalism, in which states or other political units recognize the sovereignty of a central government while retaining certain powers 1 Risseri'Kappen, Thomas, ed.
Here, in 2006, the Tour de France crosses into Germany, passing only a road sign where in centuries past, great armies faced off across massive fortifications. z Eichengreen, Barry.
Moreover, as states increasingly fear transnational terrorism, the prospects of open borders can give state leaders pause. ■j J Mitrany, David.
Income Levels of Old and New EU Members, 2005 LO O o C\J CO H—■ ""o. cO o CD Q Q_ O CD 12 Euro Other 10 Countries 2 Countries Countries* Pre-2004 Joined in 2004 Joined in 2007 Members Germany, France, Italy, Belgium, Netherlands, Lux., Ireland, Greece, Spain, Portugal, Austria, Finland Poland, Czech Rep., Slovakia, Hungary, Slovenia, Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania, Malta, Cyprus Britain, Denmark, Sweden Bulgaria, Romania Turkey (wants to join) * Slovenia adopted the euro in 2007, Cyprus and Malta in 2008, Slovakia in 2009, and Estonia in 2011.
IMPERFECT UNION capitals Iff* * The European Union added 12 members, mostly from Eastern Europe, in 2004 and 2007.
DOMESTIC CONSIDERATIONS Turkish membership in the EU is not popular domestically.
The reality is that most poor villages cannot afford the Internet, cannot read the language of most Web 9 n sites, and cannot maintain computers and Web sites without extensive training.
Zi The computers, designed 19 Data on information access are from the International Telecommunication Union unless otherwise noted.
Recall that new “smart weapons” technologies empower foot soldiers HOT OFF THE PRESS r Information, which easily crosses state borders, is a major factor in both international and domestic politics and may even be laying technological foundations for a global identity.
The EU Integration Process Is Funished Progressing Troubles with the proposed Constitution and new Lisbon Treaty prove there are difficulties.
Interdependence and the Environment ■ Sustainable Development Managing the Environment ■ The Atmosphere ■ Biodiversity ■ Forests and Oceans ■ Pollution Natural Resources ■ World Energy ■ Minerals ■ Water Disputes Population ■ The Demographic Transition ■ Population Policies ■ Disease FIGURE 11.
In global environmental politics, it is hard to manage collective goods problems because of the large number of actors.
Growing and compelling evidence shows that global warming is a real problem, that it is caused by the emission of carbon dioxide and other gases, and that it will get much worse in the future.
Western Europe and Japan have been more willing to regulate greenhouse emissions than has the United States (which burns more fossil fuel per person). extracted from each state individually.
GLIMPSE OF THE FUTURE International treaties have been much more successful at addressing ozone depletion than global warming, mostly because of costs.
Territorial waters have expanded to hundreds of miles off the coast , so that state sovereignty encloses substantial resources such as fisheries and offshore oil and 1 rj 'Dauvergne, Peter.
New data in 2002 showed that higher women’s status and literacy are reducing population growth more than expected 1 Q 5 Kahl, Colin H States, Scarcity, and Civil Strife in the Developing World.
In the industrialized countries, the death rate bottomed out around 10 per thousand by 1960, and now stands around 7 in 'X i . z Anderson, John Ward.
In 2007, UNAIDS corrected earlier estimates, resulting in a significant drop in infection rates. ooubbotina, Tatyana P., and Katherine Sheram.
Even moderate deficiencies in fetuses can lower intelligence by 10 to 15 I.Q. points, and serious deficiencies can stunt growth and cause mental 'J rn ~ 'Rosenthal, Elisabeth.
ARGUMENT 2 Only Developed Countries Should Pay to Stop Warm ng The costs to developing countries will undermine development.
Most Middle Eastern states are around 50 percent urbanized, and South American ones are 70 to 85 percent urban.
Women in Development Economic development in poor countries is closely tied to the status of women in those societies/ This is a relatively recent revelation; most attention for decades had focused on men as supposedly the main generators of capital.
Oxford, 2003. z Boserup, Ester, Nazneed Kanji, Su Fei Tan, and Camilla Toulmin.
Discrimination against girls is widespread in education and literacyWorldwide, nearly twice as many women as men are illiterate.
Women have organized cooperatives throughout the global South, often in rural areas, to produce income through weaving and other textile and clothing production, retail stores, agriculture, and so forthA In the slums of Addis Ababa, Ethiopia, women heads of household with no land for subsistence farming had been forced into begging and prostitution.
Explore the Simulation ""You are Zimbabwe's Minister of Agriculture"" at PoliSciLab n your health care system, already strained by the AIDS epidemic, would be quickly overtaxed by refugees streaming in from Zimbabwe infected with cholera.
Perhaps 20,000 of these people are trafficked to 1 Q Singer, David A Migrant Remittances and Exchange Rate Regimes in the Developing World.
In 2010, the United States State Department listed 13 countries making insufficient efforts to stop human trafficking, including friends such as Kuwait, Malay'l O sia, and Saudi Arabia/ 1 Q United States Department of State.
The World-System The global system of regional class divisions has been seen by some IR scholars as a world-system or a capitalist world economy.
Regions in the global South mostly extract ■j i 1 Wallerstein, Immanuel.
Republic S Asia Emergence of Hinduism, Buddhism; Ancient India; Arab conquest Turkish period Taj Mahal Europear built o o_ o Z5_ CD c/T 3 1 independence Africa Kingdom of Ghana Yoruba, Mali, Benin slave trade — Congo Zimbabwe Buganda Ashanti -CD O c European -§ colonialism §“O Middle East Mesopotamia, Egypt, Persia; Jews, Christians; Greeks/Romans; Islam Crusades — Arab empire -► Ottoman Empire Arab Islamic nationalism rev.
Europe colonized most of the world’s territory at one time or another . -1 Q _ y Howard, Michael.
S Slave trade Q O LU Angola, |p ortU g U ese) Mozambique Scramb for coloni (Brit., Fr. f C Middle East flttnman Fmniro British & French mandates A| 9 erian independence U LLU II 1 Q II LIIIUIIo 1 1 1 1 1 1500 1600 1700 1800 1900 2000 FIGURE 12.
For instance, a GM factory in Brazil MY DOLL MY SELF European colonialism worldwide promoted values and norms implying that the colonizer's culture was superior to the indigenous culture.
But the new government usually discovers that, once it holds power, it has the same interest as other states in promoting national sovereignty and territorial integrity.
Their state also has the same geographical location as before, the same historical conflicts with its neighbors, and the same ethnic ties.
So it is not unusual over time to find similar foreign policies emanating from a revolutionary government as from its predecessor.
Thus, although revolutions create short-term shifts in foreign policy, over the longer term the rules of international relations have tended to triumph over revolutionary challenges.
Chapter 13 therefore turns in depth to the question of how economies in the South can develop the accumulation process and what role the North can play in that process.
He had the advantage of coming to power nonviolently (relatively speaking), enjoying tremendous world respect, and leading a country that is relatively prosperous in a very poor continent.
Watch the Video ""Authors' Chapter Introduction"" at MyPoliSciLab Experiences Chapter 12 discussed the situation in the global South and how it came to be; this chapter takes up the question of what to do about itEconomic development refers to the combined processes of capital accumulation, rising per capita incomes (with consequent falling birthrates), increasing skills in the population, adoption of new technological styles, and other related social and economic changes.
The Newly Industrializing Countries Before China took off, a handful of poor states—called the newly industrializing countries —achieved self-sustaining capital accumulation, with impressive economic growth/ These semiperiphery states, which export light manufactured 1 Stiglitz, Joseph, and Gerald Meier.
If there was ever doubt that the successes of the NICs could be replicated elsewhere and on a larger scale, China ended those doubts.
Despite efforts to clamp down on political expression, many Chinese citizens expressed their views not only in strikes and demonstrations but also on wildly popular microblogging sites, China’s version of Twitter.
CAR CULTURE China's rapid economic growth has raised incomes dramatically, especially for a growing middle class.
The small countries with large oil exports—such as Saudi Arabia, Kuwait, Bahrain, and the United Arab Emirates—have done well economically.
But they are in a special class; their experience is not one that others without oil can follow.
Iran began to grow robustly and to attract foreign investment after the Iran-Iraq War ended in 1988.
In addition, Islamic radicalism creates frictions with Western powers and makes investors wary.
Turkey was somewhat successful in developing its economy without oil revenues.
Like South Korea and Taiwan, Turkey was an authoritarian state for many years but has allowed political liberalization since the 1990s.
This woman in Recife, Brazil, runs her own convenience store in 2010 with help from a microloan. n 'Yunus, Muhammad.
The United States in recent decades has barred United States companies from making corrupt deals abroad, but other countries of the North had not done so until recently.
Germany and Canada even allowed their companies to deduct foreign bribes on their taxes.
North-South Capital Flows | Watch the Video 'Fair Trade Coffee"" at MyPoliSciLab Capital from the global North moves to the South and potentially spurs growth there in several forms—foreign investment, debt, and foreign aid.
A Comparative Analysis of Democracy Assistance and Politi cal Conditionality.
Princeton, 1993. u Ensign, Margee M Doing Good or Doing Well1 Japan’s Foreign Aid Program.
Grants are funds given free to a recipient state, usually for some stated purposeTechnical cooperation refers to grants given in the form of expert assistance in some project rather than just money or goods.
Nor does UNICEF have the quality of IDENTITY Foreign Assistance Disaster relief is something of a collective good because the states of the North do not benefit individually by contributing, yet they benefit in the long run from greater stability in the South.
When the drought hit, the 20,000 herders who had been brought to the lake to learn fishing were left in an overcrowded, overgrazed environment in which every tree was cut for firewood and 1 'Z J Pelling, Mark.
Instead of becoming selfsufficient, the Turkana people became 'j r totally dependent on outside aid/ In the past decade, many scholars have undertaken research to understand whether foreign aid is effective at creating economic growth and alleviating poverty in the global South.
J Study and Review the Post-Test & Chapter Exam at MyPoliSciLab r 3 Harden, Blaine.
ARGUMENT 2 DAC Countries Should Not Significantly Increase Foreign Aid Large amounts of foreign aid are wasted or stolen.
Critics call it an expensive failure that will likely be ineffective, See also AntibalHstic Missile Treaty. subsistence farming Rural communities growing food mainly for their own consumption rather than for sale in local or world markets. subtext Meanings that are implicit or hidden in a text rather than explicitly addressed, (p.
