White House.Noam Chomsky’s October 15 TomDispatch article on the Cuban missile crisis quotes extensively from my work.
Unfortunately, he also distorts the historical record and decontextualizes my conclusions.
His insistence that the crisis was actually about United States “ownership of the world” tell us little or nothing about how real people behaved in real circumstances in October 1962.
Even in his most vivid imagination, he could not have conceived of the possibility that we, the public, would ever hear these tapes.
Kennedy could have picked and chosen freely from the tapes when he wrote his memoirs.
JFK and the other missile crisis participants, we should never forget, did not know the outcome of the crisis when they were in the middle of dealing with it.
Historians today would still be listening to the same tapes , but with a radically different outlook.
In other words, if the outcome had been different, the same tapes could then be interpreted to make Kennedy look appallingly negligent rather than diplomatically cautious and reasonable.JFK could not have manipulated his image on the tapes simply because he did not know what was going to happen the next day or even the next hour.
He was eventually persuaded to use so-called “practice depth charges” only after he was assured that they would not damage the submarines.
In fact, they did cause damage and nearly set off a nuclear exchange between the Soviet and United States navies.
That was the only time during those thirteen days that the president accepted such provocative and dangerous advice.JFK and his administration did bear significant responsibility for precipitating the crisis.
The ExComm tapes, nonetheless, prove conclusively that President Kennedy consistently resisted pressure to bomb or invade Cuba.
President Kennedy often stood virtually alone against warlike counsel from the ExComm, the JCS and the leaders of Congress during those historic thirteen days.
Nonetheless, he never abandoned his commitment, even after the missile crisis, to undermine the Cuban revolution and get rid of Fidel Castro.
It was one thing, however, to support efforts to eliminate the Cuban leader, and quite another to recklessly risk unleashing a global nuclear holocaust.
Nonetheless, Chomsky’s assertion that JFK ""took stunning risks to impose American hegemony"" is an ideologically-driven fantasy refuted by the indisputable evidence on the ExComm tapes.
Kennedy argued persistently that nuclear weapons were militarily useless; no rational person would really use them, he told several members of the JCS on October 29, because it could so easily spiral out of control.
He does not mention the fact that if the Soviets had turned down the secret missile trade, JFK was prepared, through a secretly pre-arranged plan initiated by the United States through the United Nations , to publicly accept the trade regardless of the domestic political risks if that was the price that had to be paid to avert nuclear war.
His facts are selective and decontextualized and used consistently to promote his own ideological agenda.
In his whole essay, there is only one tangential reference to the existence of the Cold War.
The Soviet Union and its allies were, of course, just as blinded by ideological dogma as those in West.
