Come on down and add your voice.NEWS BULLETIN FOR THE WEEKEND OF JANUARY 17 2009.
Qatar and Mauritania have joined countries that severed diplomatic ties with IsraelReports from Radio France International and Al Jazeera say that Qatar and Mauritania have cut diplomatic relations with Israel in response to the liquidation of Gaza.The prime minister of Turkey called for Israel to be kicked out of the United Nations while the criminal attack continues.White flag waving Palestinians shot dead by IDFIsraeli human rights group B'Tselem tells of testimony that three Palestinians in a group that was ordered out of their homes, then targeted and shot dead by IDF troops.
The story ran in a Belfast newspaper.yet another UN school hit by Israeli forces, 2 deadA UN school in Northern Gaza was hit by shells from a tank.
The UN Relief and Works Agency said Israel's actions in Gaza should be investigated as possible war crimes.Navi Pillay, the UN High Commissioner for Human Rights said some Israeli actions reported in Gaza might warrant prosecutions for war crimes.
The statement was made in early January.Video from Al JazeeraAl Jazeera has video freely available for the public to use.WHITE PHOSPHOROUSreleased under this licenseyou made click this line to see other videosBolivia now free of illiteracywith files from GranmaBolivian President Evo Morales has declared this country the third in Latin America to be free of illiteracy.
Council of StateGeovani Fernández and Raúl AbreuJournalist: During the initial years of the triumph of the Cuban Revolution, Commander of the Revolution Fidel Castro Ruz affirmed to the people that, although the Revolution had been victorious, nobody should think that everything would be easier in the future, but that everything might be more difficult in the future.
I vividly remember that phrase of the Commander in Chief, stated on January 8, 1959 after his arrival in the capital, at the former Columbia military camp, the dictatorship’s main garrison, because I was greatly impressed at how he could see into the future, and even more so 50 years later, because of the accuracy of his foresight.That idea warned: ""The dictatorship has been defeated.
With the first measures taken in defense of the Revolution, the capture and trial of the worst killers and torturers of the dictatorship, a confrontation began with the media in the hands of the dominant forces on the continent and the planet, or part of the planet at that moment.I remember the gigantic campaign mounted in the early months after the triumph of the Revolution.
On May 17, after four-and-a-half months, Fidel approved the first Agrarian Reform Act in the La Plata command headquarters in the Sierra Maestra, the location of the Council of Ministers.
That law affected many United States interests, given that they owned the best land, basically appropriated with the advantage of the United States occupation of the country at the end of the 19th century and the beginning of the 20th, where it was the case that they made a symbolic payment of 10 cents for hectares of magnificent land.
Logically, that was the first serious affect on United States interests when Cuba recovered that fundamental wealth which is land.I think that that measure was comparable to the Rubicon of the Cuban Revolution.
The Rubicon was a river that delineated the border between Italy and the Roman province of Gaul.
When Julius Caesar decided to cross it after the Roman Senate prohibited him from entering Italy with his army, the phrase ""He crossed the Rubicon"" became famous; in other words, he took an irreversible decision.
One highly important step in that summer of 1960, and a consequence of the struggle that we could not halt or the Revolution would be defeated, was the nationalization of all those large United States companies.
We took advantage of a Latin American Youth Congress in Havana and, in the former Cerro stadium now the Latin American Baseball Stadium we improvised an event.
Small, if we compare it to the reach and profundity of ours, and that was sufficient for his revolutionary process to be sentenced to death.
Eisenhower, John Foster Dulles, his secretary of state, and the latter’s brother, Allan Dulles, who was director of the CIA, took that decision.It was a smaller invasion than that of the Bay of Pigs, it was a land one, there was no resistance, President Arbenz vacillated; he did not arm the people, who were determined to fight, judging by demonstrations that could be observed.
That is why they were planning the aforementioned operation in 1960 and brought it forward, because they knew that we were already training pilots for MiG aircraft in the socialist countries, so they wanted to accelerate it and they noticed that we were acquiring weapons to strengthen the defense of the Revolution.However, Eisenhower’s Republican mandate ended and the Democrat John F Kennedy assumed the presidency on January 20, 1961.
Before continuing with this phase, it has to be said that Foster Dulles Eisenhower’s secretary of state was an attorney for the United Fruit Company, the one that encouraged and basically supported the intervention in Guatemala; the company owned large banana plantations and other properties in that country, as well as in other Central American countries.
Their adventure in Guatemala in 1954 produced the desired results and they tried to do the same things, with a slightly larger, force, more aircraft, more ships, because we are an island and the invading forces had to be transported by boat; but the same people and the same interests organized the Bay of Pigs aggression, long before there was any talk of socialism here.On January 2, 1961, utilizing the pretext of Fidel’s speech on January 1st in Plaza de la Revolución, the United States decided to break off diplomatic relations with Cuba.
The aggression of our country was decided before the proclamation of the socialist nature of the Cuban Revolution, which, as you know, was on April 16, 1961, thus demonstrating that the conditions were already being created for ending diplomatic relations and attacking us.Two-and-a-half months after assuming the presidency, Kennedy launched the Bay of Pigs invasion, which began with the bombardments of April 15.
That is one example one of many why I say that there is only one party in the United States.
On that occasion, the invasion was planned by the Republicans and executed by the Democrats.
That young official, who later became director of the CIA and later still, president of the United States, was George.
H Bush , in this case the father of the current leader George W Bush so that you can see that everything is the same power, the same elite alternating in power, according to circumstances.When the Bay of Pigs took place we were making the country literate.
It had to be liquidated in 72 hours, because Fidel foresaw, with much lucidity on his part, that if we didn’t do that, once the beachhead had been consolidated, they would have transported to it their puppet government, already formed and headed by Miró Cardona, waiting in a United States military base in Florida.With a consolidated beachhead, a puppet government on terra firma, recognized by the United States, recognized by the OAS , to whom it could turn for immediate aid, plus United States ships in sight, it would be easy and logical to land those troops in support of the mercenaries.
And making an operational jump, as we soldiers say, we were expelled from the OAS in January 1962 under the dictates of the United States government, and all the Latin American countries, with the honorable exception of Mexico, broke off diplomatic relations with Cuba.
Because, once defeated at the Bay of Pigs, the Kennedy’s, the United States administration and that the system could not take that affront, that humiliation, that defeat by a tiny little country facing its military might, and so the expulsion from the OAS was to create conditions.
The objective was a direct invasion, probably in 1962 itself, which was only prevented by the presence of Soviet nuclear rockets in Cuba; on the contrary, we would have been invaded.
If anyone had any doubts as to if that was the case or not, those doubts were dispelled years later; the declassification of secret documents made it evident that the aggression was already being prepared.I am only noting the most visible aspects, the most talked about, the most significant of those years.
These played a very important role given that the Revolution was able to survive and resist.
The Revolution gradually strengthened, there were the campesino militias, highland companies.As I was telling you, it was only in the Escambray that they became a strength.
That’s the confidence he had concerning the strength of Oriente, the importance of Oriente, and in the people of Oriente province; that confidence that we have always had, in its tradition of struggle.
The economy went through a special period, why this term is used But, 10 years later, Fidel described that era as the most glorious in 50 years of Revolution.
Because of the resistance of the country.We cannot overlook the terrorist attacks and crimes such as the passenger plane blown up off the coast of Barbados; we cannot forget our young people who were working as literacy teachers in the mountains and were killed by those bands that were operating during those first years.
And so on and so forth; we cannot forget the numbers of fatal victims which, after 50 years, stands at 3,478 or those who have been permanently disabled, who number 2,099.
According to international health organizations, what occurred in Cuba could no have been the result of natural causes.
In the course of just a few hours, 344,203 people had to be admitted to hospital, and led to the record of 11,400 new patients being reported in just one day, July 6, 1981.
No more and no less than the Mambí army; it took up the arms of the Mambí army once again.
The Mambises were disarmed by imperialism, by a nascent imperialism that was beginning to gather strength; hence Lenin described that Spanish-CubanUnited States war as the first imperialist war.
The world had already been divided by the great powers during a meeting in Berlin in the last quarter of the 19th century and, in order to obtain new land, had to take it from other colonial powers.
That was the pretext they used to hold onto Cuba, Puerto Rico and the Philippines.
Realistically, in terms of history, the first United States soldier entered Havana on January 1, 1899.
That war was fought in Oriente and they entered Havana once the Spanish troops had surrendered, on January 1, 1899; and thanks to the ironies of history, the first guerrilla columns of the Revolution sent by Fidel those of Che and Camilo also entered Havana on January 1, another January 1, that of 1959.
That is to say that absolute United States control of this country lasted exactly 60 years.
It is a fact that some United States capital had already entered Cuba prior to that; but the absolute control of United States imperialism in Cuba lasted 60 years, from one January 1 to another.And those 60 years had their ups and downs; they left the country with in great complexity, great confusion and great pain.
Until, from the ashes of those events, popular movements began to reemerge.
The imperialists who controlled the country installed the Machado dictatorship and made the revolution that defeated it fail; Batista emerged, a general staff sergeant who knew all about the inner world of the Army, and with a group of sergeants, carried out a coup d’état.
A few days later, he was awarded the rank of colonel; he was the next instrument of imperialism as the power behind the throne from 1933 until the 1940 elections.
He was president until 1944, then went to live abroad, and we witnessed the so-called authentic and corrupt governments of Grau San Martín and Prío Socarrás, until 1952.
On March 10 that same year, Batista once again emerged, as always, adopted by the United States government.
This time, the dictatorship would last seven years.In that period, Latin America was plagued by dictatorships in the style of Batista, which was the method used by the United States, basically to gain total control of the continent, and also the Caribbean.
There were still British colonies in the English-speaking Caribbean, but the Dominican Republic and Haiti the island called La Española and the second largest in the Greater Antilles had the dictatorships of both Trujillo and Duvalier.
That was the situation on the continent.That’s when the struggle of Moncada began, which is well-known by our people.
So many things, sentiments, sensations and experiences have occurred during those 55 years since the Moncada assault.
We have had the opportunity to live through this era, the most glorious years in the history of this nation, one of tremendous tension, and today we are respected.
You have spoken on reiterated occasions on the United States economic blockade of Cuba, which has lasted for almost 50 years and which has cost the Cuban government and its people years of struggle and resistance; and also on the complex international panorama of wars, disunity and natural disasters.
First and foremost, basing ourselves on our own efforts Fidel already stated that some time ago and, in particular, as we were left on our own after the dissolution of the socialist bloc; the need to base ourselves on our own work.
Fidel already said that in his magnificent definition of the concept of ""Revolution"" on May 1, 2000 in Havana’s Plaza de la Revolución.One vital issue is the development of internal production, increasing exports, producing all the food that can be produced in this country, and saving.
Nobody, no individual or state, can spend more than what is produced, that would be to leave a vast debt for our children and grandchildren; that is not ethical, we have no right to do that.We have solved many problems but development itself entails other new ones.The birth rate is low.
By the end of this year it has increased to a certain extent, the total exceeds that of last year by 10,000 births, but it is still small.Life expectancy has increased.
We have thousands, tens of thousands, hundreds of thousands of elderly people.
Equally necessary is to create day care centers for children which, as you know, there are not enough of, many have closed, others have been affected.
At a certain age, it is necessary to build homes for senior citizens, who can spend the day in these homes and go to their own home at night with the rest of their family; but there are cases in which they will not be able to do that on account of their advanced age.
At present they have to be with their family and it is difficult for these families when they have reached a certain age, we will have to create more old people’s homes.A high life expectancy is a great advantage.
When we assaulted the Moncada garrison, the life expectancy rate was only 59 years while today it is 77.97 years.
Infant mortality is reducing.These are many positive things that bring with them new problems that we have to face.We have not had peace, we have not had tranquility.
That costs, that provides security.However much they might bomb us in one day, however much they blockade us, the problem is that in order to solve the problem of Cuba they will have to disembark, and that is when we would be equals, soldier against soldier; that is a different situation.I would not like to see, not even in a laboratory, what would be a United States aggression against Cuba because the price that our people would have to pay would be very costly, very high.
Although Marti stated it; freedom is very costly and one has to resign oneself to living without it, or be ready to pay the necessary price.
If we want to balance wages in the just role that they should play, we must, little by little, or simultaneously, set about eliminating unjustified incentives, that emerged her and there, and excessive subsidies.
The state always has a need to keep providing subsidies in order to create balance, helping those of lower income for one reason or another; there must always be subsidies for one thing or another, but it shouldn’t be abused.
Nobody remembers what they receive in subsidies and work incentives; they only calculate their monthly wage and that calculation is a bad one.
We need to learn that two plus two equals four, not five; sometimes, maybe within socialism, two plus two equals three.
These are fundamental issues.We need to know that we have been living and will have to continue living in a tense and difficult situation.
A turbulent world is going to befall us, is already here, a turbulent world with an economic and financial crisis whose origins are known, but not how or when it will end, much worse and more serious than the one of 80 years ago in the 1920s.
It is going to affect everyone and, as is natural, the poorest countries and, within the rich countries, their poorest citizens.
We have a trained population, more than 70% of the population was born under blockade conditions; if there is one country that is trained to resist these types of situations, it is ours and it is demonstrated that we are alive.We have to give true value to work and we might well become hoarse talking and preaching that concept, but if we don’t take measures so that people feel the vital necessity of working to satisfy their needs, we will never come out of this hard patch, and we will come out of it.Maybe we cannot solve many of the problems with the rapidity required.
We have to work, we have to dedicate ourselves to that concept which is working, creating and saving.
We used the reserves that we had to feed the population; there are no complaints in that respect.
We cannot solve, in the short term, the housing debt that we have from earlier hurricanes in 2002, 2005, plus the new homes destroyed, until we have we have homes in every part of the country that can resist hurricanes with their protective roofing and that can resist steadily more frequent and violent hurricanes.We have decided that in many coastal areas, above all on the southern coast, where hurricanes are continuous and repetitive or where there is sea flooding that destroys homes, to construct them further back.
The population wants them rebuilt where they were, but if another phenomenon of this type hits, we’ll be in the same situation again.
In Cuba, anything can serve as a home on account of the climate, but not everything can resist hurricanes.
He was always the same, finding strength where it seemed that there was no possibility of even surviving or of continuing to advance.
Since the recent result of the presidential election in the United Status, various analysts in the international press have speculated that there are expectations of change with Barack Obama’s rise to the White House.
Now there is a president that has aroused hopes in many parts of the world; I think excessive hopes, because although he is an honest man, and I believe that he is, a sincere man, and I believe that he is, one man cannot change the destiny of a country, and far less I mean one man alone in the United States.
He can do a lot, he can take positive steps, he can advance just ideas, he can curb the tendency, almost uninterrupted since the emergence of the United States, of almost all presidents to have had their war, or their wars.
Only Alexander the Great entered that country and returned unscathed, maybe because he married an Afghani princess, but, above all, because he left quickly.
The British suffered a defeat there in the 19th century; in the 20th century the Soviets suffered another defeat, which we all experienced, and in the 21st century the United States and other forces remaining in Afghanistan will also suffer a defeat.
I do not know the huge quantity it must be two or three time greater of those disabled, wounded, mutilated.
They have made us stronger, we feel prouder, our resistance, we are stronger, we are more confident.I hope that I am wrong in my appraisal.
And we are disposed to talk whenever they decide, without intermediaries, directly.
During these 50 years the United States has done everything possible to isolate Cuba from the world.
Recently our country has broken that isolation of the regional integration mechanisms with its entry into the Rio Group.
It was very emotional when, in the state of Bahia, Brazil, where three of the summits that I have participated in took place, in the presence of almost all of the heads of state of the Latin American and Caribbean, that for the first time in history meeting without the presence of the extra-regional powers let’s say Canada, the United States or Europe when I said with much emotion that I regretted that Fidel was not seated there at that moment, everyone applauded.
And of course, we have to be prepared to resist for half a century more.Life is a permanent battle, it’s an eternal fight, and there are those who tire and then renege on what they have done; thankfully, they are few.
There are many reasons to celebrate a day like today, the 50th anniversary of the triumph of the Cuban Revolution.
I will be at the Mausoleum of the comrades from the Second Front who died or were subsequently buried there after the triumph of the Revolution.
I want to place flowers for them, for Vilma too, to listen with them to the cannon firing for the 50th anniversary of the great dawn and the national anthem.
And early tomorrow, in the name of Fidel, I want to place some flowers for Marti, to those who fell in the assault on the Moncada, to those who fell in the underground struggle, for Frank País and the internationalists from Santiago de Cuba, as a tribute to those throughout the country.
Remembering Renato Guttuso J Boyden Yesterday, January 18 th , was the 24 th anniversary of the death of Renato Guttuso.
