Khrushchev decided to deploy Soviet medium-range missiles with nuclear warheads on the island of Cuba.
His main goal was to protect the young Cuban revolution from the threat of a U.S. invasion.
The agency was financing, training, and arming detachments of Cuban exiles to invade the island; carrying out terrorist acts; sabotaging Cuba’s economic development, infrastructure, and educational system; setting fire to plantations of sugar cane, the country’s main export, and so on.
In April 1961 a large-scale operation had been carried out, aimed at overthrowing Castro, in which about fourteen hundred Cubans, recruited and trained at a camp in Guatemala, landed in Cuba.
Aircraft with Cuban identification marks, based in Nicaragua, bombed the island’s airfields to eliminate the not-so-numerous Cuban air force.
But the CIA had planned this operation incompetently, without giving it serious thought.
His father, the veteran Soviet politician Anastas Mikoyan, was special ambassador to Cuba in November 1962.
In the Cuban case, the planners relied on false information about the willingness of the Cuban population to join the rebels.
Such an uprising would have created a staging area for resistance in which a “provisional government” could arrive from Florida and request military aid from the United States.
People’s militia detachments kept twenty-four-hour watch around the perimeter of the island.
The invasion at Playa Giron [the actual site of the landing, right next to the Bay of Pigs—Ed.], which began on 11 April, was over in seventy-two hours.
The Pentagon developed military plans and conducted exercises on the Puerto Rican island of Vieques, next to Cuba.
Marshal Sergei Biriuzov, commander of the Soviet Strategic Rocket Forces, visited Cuba with the assignment of sounding out the Cuban leader on a secret deployment of missiles in Cuba.
Fidel Castro and his comrades-in-arms thought that it was the Soviet Union that needed to deploy missiles to strengthen its position in case of a strategic nuclear confrontation with the United States.
By the way, they were right, but this was a secondary reason— derivative.
It is not impossible that USSR Defense Minister Marshal Rodion Malinovsky and Marshal Biriuzov regarded it as the main reason.
Probably this was why Biriuzov assured the Presidium of the CPSU that the Cuban palm trees would create a reliable barrier to aerial photography—especially since S-75 ground-to-air missiles could prevent any flights by United States reconnaissance aircraft over the island.
In those days, only Anastas Mikoyan voiced objections among the Kremlin leaders.
Andrei Gromyko expressed serious doubts on behalf of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
They even brought warheads for the intermediaterange R-14s , which could threaten the entire continental territory of the United States, but these were not delivered in a timely manner.
Only in the last stage—the assembly of the missile launchers—did the visiting generals Issa Pliev, N Grechko (who shared a surname with the future defense minister ), Igor’ Statsenko, and Anatolii Gribko, as well as lower-ranking officers, display a lack of concern with regard to camouflage.
They did not think it necessary to ask Castro for assistance in this regard.
In all other respects, there was a full mutual exchange between the Soviet and Cuban armies.
For reasons that are not clear, the S-75 antiaircraft missiles were not used, and nothing but the weather hindered the flights of the United States reconnaissance planes.
Efforts at serious camouflage began when it was already too late, after President Kennedy publicly announced in his address to the nation on 22 October that the United States had aerial photographs with indisputable proof of what was going on.
In fact, on 14 October 1962 CIA pilot Richard Heyser, taking advantage of an opening in the complete cloud cover that had seemed to help Khrushchev’s plans for several weeks, managed to snap several hundred pictures, many of which confirmed that in the area of San Cristóbal, west of Havana, a complex of R-12 missile launchers was being rapidly built.
Whether nuclear warheads were present there continued to baffle the United States for the next twenty-five years.
For a week, an executive committee set up by the United States president secretly discussed the problem, trying to find an appropriate response to Moscow’s actions.
Bewilderment in the ExCom On 16 October 1962 at 9 A.M., National Security Adviser McGeorge Bundy showed President Kennedy enlarged photographs of missile complexes in Cuba that were close to completion.
The CIA’s expert on decoding aerial NOVEMBER–DECEMBER 2004 27 photography, Lansdale, was called in to provide commentary.
Kennedy immediately ordered complete secrecy and that all questions be discussed by the Executive Committee of the National Security Council ,1 which he set up specially to deal with the emerging Cuban missile crisis.
Information Agency ).3 The president called the first meeting at 11:45 that morning.
Because Kennedy’s young daughter, Caroline, was engaged in a conversation with her father, the meeting began at 11:50.
To facilitate the potential for absolutely freewheeling discussion, Kennedy 28 RUSSIAN POLITICS AND LAW sometimes stepped out of the office.
When he had to fly to Chicago to support his party’s candidates for the elections that were to take place three weeks later (to avoid arousing suspicion that something was going on in the White House), the meetings were transferred to the State Department.
The secrecy was also necessary to prevent Moscow from learning what they knew and undertaking new steps that could further complicate the situation.
We must note here that McGeorge Bundy was the first to receive “veiled” information from CIA Deputy Director Ray Cline over the phone as early as the day before—late on 15 October.
This was because the CIA subdivision in charge of aerial photography needed the entire day of the fifteenth to interpret the results obtained on 14 October and precisely identify the sites.
It could produce considerably enlarged pictures only by the morning of the sixteenth.
Bundy decided not to inform Kennedy , as he believed that there would be no point in himself, McNamara, and Rusk rushing to the White House.
At the time, they were all, except the president, at dinner in other people’s homes, where such an unusual call was likely to attract attention.
Besides, the president himself had just come back and was tired after his public appearances in Indiana.
In any case, a night meeting without any opportunity to study the photographs confirming the information and hear the experts would not have been useful in any way.
Bundy took it upon NOVEMBER–DECEMBER 2004 29 himself to make the decision, and Kennedy did not reprimand him.
Only after the pictures were received and the head of the aerial photography department, Brigadier General Lansdale, arrived at 9 A.M. did Bundy enter Kennedy’s bedroom, where the president was looking through the morning newspapers, and break the news.
With his customary self-restraint, Kennedy got down to business, listing who was to take part in the discussion and instructing Bundy to call them all to the White House, to the Cabinet Room, by 11:45.
There was a large table in the Cabinet Room, and all those present seated themselves around it.
True, Robert Kennedy took a small chair that stood a little to one side.
Robert Kennedy had the gift of persuasion and knew how to argue effectively.
Under Secretary of State George Ball admitted that he had previously seen Robert Kennedy as a man of simplistic views, but in the course of these discussions he became convinced that the younger Kennedy was a thoughtful analyst.
It was Robert Kennedy’s speech that turned Ball from a “hawk,” a supporter of an air strike and an invasion, into a “dove”— that is, a supporter of a blockade, which made possible a peaceful settlement.
When Robert Kennedy said, “my brother cannot become the Admiral Tojo of the 1960s,”5 he was not understood by Dean Acheson— Acheson simply did not get the analogy.
From his seat, the president could secretly press a button that turned on the microphones hidden in the table and tape-record on a Norwegian-made Tandberg in the White House basement.
The Secret Service, the president’s personal bodyguards, had recently installed the system at Kennedy’s request.
Apparently, the president wanted a safeguard against differing interpretations, even alterations, of his words and those uttered by people who met with him in the Oval Office or other official places.
As the Playa Giron experience had shown, such a thing was quite possible.
In any case, the recording of the discussions on 30 RUSSIAN POLITICS AND LAW the missile crisis has proved to be priceless for scholars, but the tapes were published in full only at the end of the century.
After the initial discussions, in a book published long before the tapes were released to the public, Special Counsel to the President Theodore Sorensen listed the various causes for the missile deployment suggested by those attending the meetings.
Khrushchev believes that, having been forced to face reality, we will not be able to do anything except protest.
If the “test of strength” leads to a win for Moscow, the USSR will try something in Berlin or against United States bases throughout the world.
The UN will be terrified, and our allies will disagree strongly among themselves, while Khrushchev makes a push against West Berlin.
Having a satellite in the Western Hemisphere is so valuable to the Soviet Union, both for reasons of expansion and in its competition with China, that the USSR cannot afford to let Cuba fall through either internal or external factors.
Khrushchev could be convinced that external factors pose a credible threat by the brothers Castro, the statements made by Cuban exiles in Florida, speeches in the United States Congress, and the Playa Giron invasion.
Realizing the significance of Cuba to the United States, the USSR could use it as a bargaining chip in its negotiations over the status of Berlin or the abandonment of United States military bases overseas.
Because the USSR can no longer bluff about the number of its missiles, and because its leaders understand how much time and money they will need to catch up [with the United States], the USSR could quickly and inexpensively increase the number of missiles aimed at the United States merely by installing mediumand intermediate-range missiles in Cuba.
According to Sorensen, although the president acknowledged that there were certain grounds for scenarios 3 and 5, he nevertheless considered them insufficiently convincing and leaned toward scenario 1.
Even so, in the first days of discussion, he repeated several times that it was a mystery to him why such a risky decision had been made in Moscow.
NOVEMBER–DECEMBER 2004 31 The correct understanding of the motives behind the missile deployment had a direct bearing on the choice of response.
When some ExCom members saw the pictures of the site, they even suggested that Moscow might have deliberately not tried to hid the construction of the launchers.
Having received the shocking news that there were Soviet missiles in Cuba, the ExCom did not attribute much importance to the possibility that the missiles had been deployed there for the defense of Cuba.
It is revealing that, like later scholars, all the ExCom members mainly concentrated on the balance of forces and the emerging threat to United States territory.
It did not occur to anyone how the Soviet Union must feel, finding itself in close proximity to United States missiles deployed in the European NATO [North Atlantic Treaty Organization] countries.
Only on 25 October, after Khrushchev had literally flooded the White House with telegrams about the defensive purpose of the missiles, did President Kennedy first express the idea, as food for thought.
Unfortunately, at first that idea went nowhere, because President Kennedy and his team were already convinced that the USSR was either correcting a strategic imbalance or preparing a strike against Berlin, while Cuba had nothing to do with the situation.
Even when, after a five-day correspondence with Khrushchev, the ExCom finally considered exchanging a guarantee of nonaggression against Cuba for the dismantling of the missiles, it did not yet mean that Kennedy and Thompson understood the driving motive behind their deployment.
They perceived Khrushchev’s letter of 27 October as an appeal for help.
The senior American diplomat Averill Harriman, whom Kennedy sometimes consulted, saw the situation the same way.
I personally believe that the “Berlin issue” had been seriously worrying Khrushchev long before the construction of the ill-fated wall in that city.
After all, until the wall was built, there was a continuous outflow of young Germans who had received an excellent and free education [in East Germany] to West Germany.
The population of the German Democratic Republic was shrinking rapidly.
But I well remember my father saying categorically that they could not cut the city in two.
Igor’ objected, saying that in that case soon there would be no educated young people left in the GDR to work in industry and technology.
Old people, too, as is well known, had the right to leave to stay with relatives.
That conversation took place about a month and a half before the Berlin Wall was built on 13 August 1961.
Apparently this was at the same time as his references to a peasant from a Chekhov story , NOVEMBER–DECEMBER 2004 33 who had unscrewed the bolts from some railway tracks but did it “cleverly” to avoid causing the rails to come loose.
That is, from his perspective, the problem had become much less urgent.
Among the scenarios that can only amaze anyone with any knowledge of Kremlin politics is the idea that the missile deployment in Cuba would necessarily “bridge the gap” between China and the USSR by invalidating Mao Zedong’s accusations of a “Soviet–American conspiracy” or convincing China not to develop its own nuclear program by showing how easily Moscow could defend its allies with its nuclear weapons.
This assumption seems so ridiculous to me that I need not comment on it.
The Kremlin was not a center of geniuses, but neither was it an assembly of semiliterate teenagers.
It was clear to everybody that China was about to develop its own nuclear program (and the USSR had given it considerable assistance until the Kremlin came to its senses), and nothing would stop it.
But in the White House they were thinking about anything but Cuba’s security during those ten days.
Possible responses Of course, Kennedy was indignant at Moscow’s deception.
That had been Eisenhower’s response to the first Soviet satellite , launched in October 1957.
The United States then began to look for a NATO country that would show an interest in mis34 RUSSIAN POLITICS AND LAW siles.
It was suggested not to deploy them at all and to replace them with submarines carrying Polaris missiles.
Even so, an agreement on the deployment of fifteen missiles under joint control (the missiles under Turkish control, and the nuclear warheads under United States control) was signed on 28 October 1959.
Nothing happened under Eisenhower, however, because the experts objected.
Therefore, it was not recommended to start construction of the launchers.
On 29 March 1961 President Kennedy proposed to set up a group under the auspices of the State Department, including the Defense Department and the CIA, which would come up with recommendations to revise the previous decision.
The report by McGee, a State Department adviser, was made on 22 June 1961.
The previous decision was left in effect, even though McNamara assumed that the Jupiter missiles were useless, while Kennedy showed a strange indecisiveness.
Rusk discussed it with the Turkish minister of foreign affairs, promising to replace the obsolete weapons with Polaris missiles, which would be deployed on submarines near the Turkish coast to defend Turkey.
The talks took place in the spring of 1961, before NOVEMBER–DECEMBER 2004 35 work began on the sites in Cuba.
In April 1962, just when Khrushchev was becoming more bitter as he looked at the Black Sea, the missiles were placed in service in Turkey—even though Kennedy had asked several times when that issue would be put to rest.
At the end of the summer, as the Soviet R-12 missiles were being loaded on ships for transport to Cuba, Kennedy talked to Ball, whom he trusted more than Rusk.
Kennedy insisted that the issue be resolved even at some political cost— that is, the displeasure of the Turkish military.
Ball and Under Secretary of Defense Nitze tried to persuade the Turkish ambassador in Washington but could not get anywhere with him.
Thus, the opinion of the Turkish ambassador prevailed over the opinion of the United States president.
That means that Kennedy understood intuitively that the presence of the Jupiter missiles in Turkey weakened the United States position and contributed to the potential threat of similar actions by the USSR in Cuba.
Having watched the State Department conduct fruitless negotiations for over a year and sabotage his clearly expressed opinion to please the Turks, he ordered the issue handed over to the Defense Department.
Unfortunately, Nitze was the one who handled the problem on behalf of the Defense Department—the very man to whom the Turkish ambassador had proven more influential than the commander in chief of the United States Armed Forces.
It is clear now why Robert Kennedy, in his Thirteen Days, noted indignantly that somebody had sabotaged the solution to that problem.
Thus, throughout the summer and fall of 1962, the Jupiter missiles remained a thorn in the side of the Kremlin leadership, providing an excuse for it to respond, or at least to do its best to embarrass the United States.
Kennedy reasonably believed that the Turks’ pride was less important than the threat of war and a strike against the Turks themselves.
But because Khrushchev jumped at the opportunity of a missile exchange, based on information supplied by the USSR Ministry of Foreign Affairs (probably prompted by [the Soviet ambassador to the United States, Anatolii] Dobrynin, who was relying on an article by the most authoritative observer of the day, Walter Lippmann), and then added a statement on the Turkish missiles to another letter, he initiated something like a panic 36 RUSSIAN POLITICS AND LAW in the ExCom.
One could almost conclude that the threat of war emerged because of the proposal to exchange the missiles in Cuba for the Jupiter missiles in Turkey.
The “hawks” argued that after the U-2 spy plane was shot down over Soviet territory in May 1960 and the issue of the Jupiter missiles in Turkey was raised, they had no way out other than through a powerful strike against Cuba and the Soviet missiles.
The issue was those very Jupiter missiles whose removal had been predetermined long before.
Kennedy had quite forgotten about them until Bundy reminded him of their existence.
But when he remembered them, he said that Khrushchev’s demand was quite reasonable and fair.
Bundy tried to convince him that NATO would not be pleased with his decision.
In rereading the transcripts, one gets an impression that President Kennedy was not only the most reasonable participant in the discussion but sometimes the only reasonable person present.
Everyone else, except Robert Kennedy, continued to insist on the “double standard,” according to which Soviet missiles in Cuba were not acceptable, while United States missiles in Turkey were just fine.
The number of Soviet troops in Cuba was even larger, but we should not forget that there is no dry land between Cuba and the United States.
Graham Allison distinguishes potential responses that Kennedy could have taken that were considered by the ExCom.
It seems fitting to mention them here, because they reveal the mode of thought and the process of decision making in Washington and ultimately demonstrate once more the extent of mutual misunderstanding among the three participants in the crisis.
That lack of understanding was visible even earlier, in the proposed scenarios as Theodore Sorensen identified these in his Kennedy.
This scenario, based on McNamara’s original assessNOVEMBER–DECEMBER 2004 37 ment, assumed that from the technical standpoint the missile deployment had not changed anything significant.
A first strike against the United States from Cuba was so improbable it could be ignored.
The missiles were a means of applying pressure rather than a threat of war, and any aggressive United States action could make them more dangerous.
McNamara’s view was purely technical (and correct in the narrow technical sense), and for this reason was soon withdrawn by McNamara himself.
It was obvious that the issue was not so much military or technical as it was political, as the secretary of defense himself admitted a day later.
This is precisely what my father had in mind when he told Khrushchev that no president would tolerate such a situation.
Kennedy could tolerate it even less than most, since he had the experience of the failed Playa Giron invasion in 1961 behind him and the Republicans constantly accusing him of being young and indecisive.
Of course, this was purely partisan criticism; it had no factual basis except for the comments about his youth—which, as is well known, is one of those shortcomings that soon disappear.
But the congressional elections were coming up, and the Democrats would probably have lost them if Kennedy did nothing about Soviet missiles that had shown up in Cuba under cover of deceit.
And if they had won those elections, the Republicans would have had their crack at the president, up to and including impeachment.
Sorensen, in contrast, maintained (and he knew well how the president thought, meeting with him every day and discussing all the problems related to the crisis) that if the Soviet Union and Cuba had signed an agreement and made it public, the United States would have had no legal grounds to protest, since the United States itself had a similar agreement with Turkey, which was an absolutely equivalent case.
For this reason, the administration could, for example, have taken quite a different position when it learned that, in accordance with such an agreement, forty-two missiles were being brought in; it could have tried instead to limit the number.
Two former ambassadors to Moscow, Llewellyn Thompson and Charles Bohlen, suggested sending Khrushchev a secret ultimatum, demanding he dismantle the missiles and warning 38 RUSSIAN POLITICS AND LAW him that otherwise he would face the threat of a military solution.
In exchange for the USSR dismantling its missiles, the United States could give up its military base in Guantánamo Bay and remove the Jupiter missiles from Turkey.
Kennedy decided that to engage in that type of diplomacy at such a pressing moment would put Washington in a defensive position, whereas the guilty party was the Soviet Union.
The United States allies in NATO would regard such a step as justification of their suspicion that their overseas ally was ready to sacrifice their security for the sake of a region that was foreign to their interests.
Finally, a summit meeting or conference would overly resemble the Munich Pact with Hitler.
Indeed, that type of diplomacy would have played into Moscow’s hands, giving it an opportunity to bring up many other questions regarding bases around the Soviet Union and to widen the bargaining process as much as possible in order to obtain more concessions in exchange for abandoning its risky behavior.
Rusk thought that there was one chance in a hundred that Castro would prefer to break with the Soviet Union if faced with the threat of a violent overthrow of his regime.
This suggestion indicated a complete failure to understand the nature of Castro himself and of the Cuban leadership as a whole.
Without its alliance with the USSR, Cuba would have been at the mercy of the United States.
But the ExCom rejected that scenario not for any of those reasons but because of the delay negotiations would cause, especially since the talks would not be conducted with the actual owners of the missiles.
General Maxwell Taylor reported that military plans for an invasion had long been ready and had even been rehearsed.
But almost everyone—except Taylor himself, his chiefs of staff, Dean Acheson, and Douglas Dillon—agreed that this was an extreme measure.
That meant running the risk of starting World War III or, at the very least, provoking a response in Berlin.
Whatever happened, they could not let the missiles and their nuclear warheads fall into American hands.
The Soviet troops knew that under no conditions could they allow the enemy to capture the warheads.
At the moment of invasion, Moscow’s order not to use the missiles without permission could be considered obsolete.
It could be ignored, and the nuclear warheads set to explode not under the feet of the Soviet troops but rather on the territory at which the missiles were aimed.
In a defensive battle that was ultimately doomed to fail, the decision not to use the R-12 missiles would have meant surrendering the warheads to the Americans—something the troops obviously could not do—to say nothing of the Luna missiles.
All the launchers that survived the preparatory air strikes would have been used to strike the enemy’s ships as they approached the Cuban coast.
Anyone who doubts that the troops would have disobeyed the order not to use nuclear weapons without Moscow’s permission should consider the ExCom discussion over the neutralization of the missiles in Turkey.
Nitze tried to assure Kennedy that the American commanders in Turkey already had an order prohibiting them to fire without a directive from Washington.
They, too, knew the code and what they were supposed to do if that happened.
Moscow, for its part, could not have stood idly by while its powerful troop deployment was defeated in this way.
The defeat itself would have taken not a few days, as General Taylor calculated, but rather a few weeks.
Taylor planned only five days of air strikes to prepare the way for a landing.
Experience has shown that the United States Air Force typically overestimates its strength.
The Cuban and Soviet troops were expecting an attack, so they would have tried to minimize their losses.
The example of the Yugoslav army, which sustained hardly any losses after months of bombardment in 1999, is revealing in this respect.
During that period, Soviet missiles and planes would have destroyed the Jupiter missiles in Turkey, while the troops deployed in Germany, Poland, and Hungary might have seized Berlin and probably would have advanced into West Germany, Belgium, and France.
My brother Aleksei, who commanded the Air Corps of our troops stationed in East Germany, told me that if there was a war, they were supposed to reach the Atlantic Ocean in a few days.
He explained to me that this was the only way to prevent or to minimize the enemy’s nuclear strikes against the army.
The Kremlin still thought it possible that the war would not go nuclear (Anastas Mikoyan also mentioned that briefly), as all the actions mentioned above could be performed by the regular service arms with conventional weapons, even though United States strategic doctrine envisaged the use of nuclear weapons against the superior conventional forces of its enemy.
Garthoff refers to Khrushchev’s radio address of 28 October, which mentioned only the military participation of troops staNOVEMBER–DECEMBER 2004 41 tioned in Cuba, and not retaliation elsewhere.
At that moment, Khrushchev could not foresee everything, especially the escalation that might follow the beginning of a military action, which is very difficult to control.
Intimidation was more than abundantly present in the messages from 22 October on, in any event.
Of course, at the time Garthoff and the intelligence community were not basing their optimistic estimates on an understanding of the psyche of the Kremlin leaders, or of the army elite, or of public sentiment and public opinion.
In those areas, the United States intelligence community made one mistake after another.
The generals from the Pentagon were invited to the White House only once, when Taylor (then replacing Lemnitzer as acting chairman of the JCS) told them that Kennedy wanted to consult them directly.
At the beginning of the meeting, Taylor “prepared” the president for the necessity of choosing one of the scenarios the generals would suggest.
Admittedly, Taylor warned that even the first scenario did not guarantee that all missiles and other means of delivering a responsive strike against the United States would be destroyed.
The president asked General Lemnitzer what he thought the Russians would do.
The president set out for the Pentagon generals all the dangers of enemy action associated with that choice in different regions and then asked them what they could suggest.
General Wheeler said that the path of “an unexpected air strike—a blockade—an invasion” was optimal from the standpoint of securing United States territory.
General 42 RUSSIAN POLITICS AND LAW Shoup agreed, although he admitted that the USSR had much better ways to deliver a strike against the United States than from Cuba.
All the generals were considering various aspects of military action in Cuba.
Kennedy tried to impress upon them that “the problem was not waging a war against Cuba.
He reminded the generals that in one year the USSR could develop enough intercontinental missiles to threaten from eighty to a hundred United States cities.
Khrushchev was much less dependent than Kennedy on the opinions of those outside the Kremlin, or at least outside the Central Committee.
Even so, he had to be aware that inaction on his part after the defeat of troops he himself had sent to Cuba could have had quite unpleasant consequences for him personally—and not only for him personally but also for the country as a whole.
As for the Soviet leader himself, with his “explosive” and unpredictable temperament, there was no telling what he might do.
Listening to his reasoning, everyone in the conference room felt a chill in the air.
Sorensen did not write “we felt the chill of the grave,” but it is easy to add that on his behalf.
The tendency to wishful thinking has brought downfall to many in the history of international relations.
The Caribbean crisis was the result of such a tendency in the USSR, but our opponents were guilty of the same habit.
Apparently, that is why they did not take into account the real balance of forces in Europe, where their allies would not have been able to resist the Soviet troops for more than a week.
Finally, there were plenty of mediumand intermediate-range R-12 and R-14 missiles in the European theater.
We can assume that the United States would not have wanted its most important NATO allies in Europe—for example, Great Britain or Norway, an inseparable part of the West and its civilization—to cease to exist because of Washington’s hasty and unreasoned actions in the Caribbean Sea.
France and West Germany as well as Continental West Europe in general, if there had been a war, would have become a site for Soviet ground and air forces.
This scenario was advocated by, among others, Dillon, Senator Russell, and Generals Taylor, LeMay, and Lemnitzer.
Of course, they all fundamentally understood that after the completion of the five-day bombing, the logic of war would lead them to an invasion.
Fulbright believed that bombing Cuba meant a strike not against Soviet troops but against Cuba alone, while the blockade carried the risk of a confrontation with Soviet ships, which should be avoided.
President Kennedy, meanwhile, was constantly mulling over the extreme scenario that was left among the possible solutions.
The generals, however, explained that that would mean the simultaneous destruction of twenty-five Il-28 bombers and forty-one MiG-21 fighters, which also had the capability to deliver nuclear pay44 RUSSIAN POLITICS AND LAW loads.
Such a strike would require hundreds of planes and many sorties for each one.
The Pentagon then began to increase the number, to the point where even Taylor restrained the Air Force, letting them know that the option of air strikes would be ruled out completely if they continued.
Bundy and Acheson advocated a “surgical strike” against the missiles, and Kennedy leaned toward the same scenario.
He wanted to avoid mass casualties among the Soviet troops because he thought that if he did not, military action by the Soviet Union in Berlin or Turkey was inevitable.
That is, Kennedy held the same viewpoint now being expressed by me, rather than by Raymond Garthoff.
A seizure of West Berlin was fraught with nuclear war, while Kennedy’s goal was to minimize the risk of nuclear war.
This was beneath United States dignity, because the United States would have found itself in a state no better than that of an international criminal, Japan’s admiral Tojo, the author of the surprise attack against Hawaii on 7 December 1941.
To overcome the “Pearl Harbor complex,” it was suggested that leaflets could be distributed in Russian and Spanish, warning soldiers and civilians to stay away from military installations.
Alternatively, they could shell our strategic missiles with buckshot, to render them inoperable without causing mass casualties among the Soviet troops.
Admittedly, Acheson categorically denied any analogy with Pearl Harbor.
As for John Kennedy himself, we have to admit here that, although he always kept in mind that the situation might force him to give the order to invade—as many in his entourage tried in vain to persuade him to do during the missile crisis—he did all in his power to avoid such a situation.
As early as during the war against Japan , he had objected to those who would play casually with human life.
People are so used to talking about billions of dollars and millions of soldiers that the phrase ‘thousands of casualties’ sounds like a drop in NOVEMBER–DECEMBER 2004 45 the bucket.
So Sorensen wrote on 20 October 1962, at the height of the missile crisis, during discussion of the choice between a surprise strike and a blockade.
In the depths of his soul, Kennedy agonized over the search for a peaceful solution.
Besides, he was reminding his close entourage about relatively recent lessons of history.
A full-scale nuclear exchange, lasting less than sixty minutes, with the weapons now in existence, could wipe out more than three hundred million Americans, Europeans, and Russians, as well as untold millions elsewhere.
There is no mention of von Bülow or Bethmann Hollweg in this speech or in other 1963 speeches by Kennedy available online.—Ed.
They considered the United States an “evil empire” from which they could expect any immoral action.
This is another example of complete failure to understand an adversary.
Put forward by McNamara on the first day of discussion, after the photographs of missile launchers were placed on Kennedy’s desk on 16 October, two days later the idea had won the support of Ambassador Thompson, Robert Kennedy, Sorensen, and Rusk.
According to international law, a “blockade” itself implied an act of war.
The United States could avoid declaring war if two-thirds of the OAS supported a blockade, but there was no guarantee that they would.
There was also no time to twist the arms of large countries like Mexico, Brazil, and Argentina.
A blockade of Cuba would give the USSR a pretext to declare a blockade of Berlin.
For this reason, it was decided not to go beyond the word “quarantine”—if only, as Rusk put it, because nobody knew what that meant according to international law.
As noted above, the Pentagon was opposed to a blockade unless it was accompanied by a military air strike and then by an invasion.
From the point of view of the blockade’s supporters, however, the main point was to relieve the administration of making a decision on military action.
Kennedy’s television and radio address to the nation [on 22 October 1962—Ed.] contained demagoguery and a certain distortion of the facts.
The missiles in Cuba were declared extremely dangerous, as they could hit United States territory too quickly.
The nature of such weapons was well known; and as a result, “or many years both the Soviet Union and the United States, recognizing this fact, have deployed strategic nuclear weapons with great care, never upsetting the precarious status quo which insured that these weapons would not be used in the absence of some vital challenge.
Of course, the United States always operated under the slogan of “containing Communism,” but that explanation does not change anything fundamental.
As for Soviet submarines with nuclear missiles, at that time they were few and far between.
Some passages of Kennedy’s speech are full of the double standard so typical of American political thinking.
As a beginning, it was decided to limit the quarantine to offensive weapons, while all other cargoes, including conventional arms, would be allowed to pass.
The stopping of Soviet ships also carried a risk of military action, which could be quite brusque and unceremonious, such as United States warships unilaterally firing at unarmed Soviet cargo vessels.
The president believed that the inspections would set a precedent, warning Moscow not to let extreme cases occur.
Admittedly, McNamara claimed that he later had to remind the admiral firmly that no ship could be sunk for any reason without the president’s personal approval delivered by the secretary of defense.
The admiral grumbled that he had the Naval Regulations, which stipulates the actions of ships under his command, but a reference to the commander in chief proved effective.
Potential costs of misunderstanding At first, Khrushchev sent a threatening letter accusing the United States of piracy and making any consequences a United States responsibility.
He maintained that he would not order his captains to go along with the inspections.
In general, his first letter of 26 October bears obvious signs of haste and lack of basic editing.
The same phrases are repeated twice in different sections of the letter.
The staff was probably moving those two or three phrases around and did not have the time to cross out the repetition.
To some extent, the same can be said about Khrushchev’s other letters as well.
In essence, nobody edited them, not only from the standpoint of meaning but also in the purely technical sense.
This idea, correct for World War I or World War II, ran contrary to all Khrushchev’s previous and subsequent approaches to nuclear missiles as weapons capable of deciding the outcome of any war—as they are, although he did not invent anything new here.
He himself had threatened the United States with missiles deployed in Siberia and the Urals, without even bothering to mention infantry for some reason.
The blockade/quarantine did not seem to be solving the problem of the missiles that had already been delivered to Cuba.
In line with Moscow’s directives, work continued around the clock and would be completed in a few days.
This was clear from the continuous aerial photography by NOVEMBER–DECEMBER 2004 49 U-2 spy planes.
If they had not yet been delivered, the quarantine would keep them out.
When some vessels turned back, it raised hopes that these were the ships that had warheads on board.
There was no way to hide all those preparations from Soviet and Cuban intelligence, nor did it make sense to hide it, since the sword of Damocles—in the form of an air strike and subsequent invasion— gave the United States a trump card in any negotiations.
It was this sword of Damocles that ultimately proved decisive in pushing Khrushchev to compromise.
When Kennedy declared a blockade and presented his demand to dismantle and remove the missiles, Khrushchev started to bluster; but soon, of course, like the rest of us, he understood that there was no other way out.
At the same time, we had information that in the southeastern ports and military bases of the United States, not only were they carrying out intensive military preparations for an invasion of Cuba but almost everything was ready for a strike.
If we can believe our intelligence, at certain moments, hours could have decided everything.
Even though our intelligence overdid it and created a false alarm, it is better to have it that way than the other way around.
Of course, almost forty-two thousand of our troops were deployed on the island to defend our missiles and construction groups.
But we had very limited air power there—Il-28 bombers, which were not well-suited for defense against a strike because they were vulnerable to the enemy fighters.
We also had MIG-21s, but not enough of them to challenge the supremacy of the United States Air Force.
We had our antiaircraft missiles on the island, but, of course, their location was not a secret to the Americans.
The Cubans had less sophisticated antiaircraft weapons, but at least they were easier to camouflage and move.
Therefore, the Americans would have had obvious and overwhelming air superiority while landing their available forces.
At the time, after all, they were not yet waging a war in Vietnam and could therefore unleash their entire military machine against Cuba.
Of course, we meant to ask Fidel’s opinion about the decision to remove the missiles, explain the reasons to him, and so on.
Khrushchev had not yet raised the point in his correspondence with Washington, even though it was increasingly clear to us that we would have to make concessions.
We were engaged, so to speak, in squabbling, mutual recrimination, and explanations.
In those days, nobody could seriously get involved while he was dictating his letters to Kennedy, except for introducing minor corrections in his texts.
But I should have interfered to finalize our decision, which was already inevitable, and to inform Fidel.
In the last two days, when a draft agreement was definitely emerging, everybody was caught up in the correspondence with Washington.
Khrushchev’s letters were long, verbose, and full of repetition, digression, and general remarks; and they took up a great deal of time.
Nobody dared to suggest asking Fidel’s opinion and taking into account his inevitable corrections or additions.
Even so, we should have sent Havana either copies or abstracts of our telegrams to Washington.
At least, on Saturday, 27 October, we should have sent Havana a copy of our telegram of 26 October to President Kennedy, the one in which the missiles in Turkey came up—and that would have been very unpleasant for Fidel, but at least it mentioned that the Cuban government would have to give its consent before inspectors could be admitted.
But that was the message that did not receive an answer, and we did not demand one.
Even more, in our telegram to Kennedy on 27 October we should have emphasized that inspection of the territory was under Cuban jurisNOVEMBER–DECEMBER 2004 51 diction, and only the Cuban government could consent to it.
Khrushchev had to be reminded about such things; he used to get carried away with general remarks.
But I did not always participate in the writing because sometimes he went into another room, so that the noise of other people talking did not distract the typist.
Later, when the document was being read, again there was a sense of haste, and everybody’s anxiety was taking its toll.
In essence, the quarantine gave us the time we needed; we could have discussed everything calmly and have taken into account the subtleties contained in Alekseev’s telegrams on the opinions of the Cuban leadership.
Khrushchev’s state of mind was close to panic; that is why we were all unable to discuss things calmly.
On 27 October it would have been quite possible to inform him of our decision, to send him a copy of our message to Kennedy and to request his opinion.
Even on Sunday, 28 October, while Khrushchev’s radio address was being prepared, even if it was not quite ready, a brief telegram could have been sent to Havana for comments.
Also, Khrushchev’s statement, which he was polishing together with Gromyko and Il’ichev, should have underlined Cuba’s right to consent to inspections.
It did not clearly state that only the Cuban government could decide what to do about UN inspections on site.
If we had done both these things, at least it would have looked like a consultation, and Fidel would have learned about our decision from us rather than over the radio.
If the statement had stipulated that inspections depended on the decision of the Cuban government, Fidel, the leadership, Cuba as a whole, and the entire world would have seen that we respected the opinion of his country.
Later, especially when I was in Havana, I often reproached myself for not having introduced such suggestions before Khrushchev when Gromyko and Il’ichev withdrew to the other room where the typists were sitting.
Il’ichev read aloud to Khrushchev the pages as they were ready, and so on.
And if Khrushchev himself had no corrections, the text remained unchanged.
Later Il’ichev volunteered to take the text to the radio committee himself.
Of course, we did not know that the alarming information that Kennedy was about to declare the beginning of military action against Cuba would not be confirmed.
All the same, since we had agreed to remove the missiles, the danger of a United States attack was over.
Khrushchev said in his memoirs, which he dictated and taped, that Castro had recommended a preemptive nuclear strike against the United States.
Sergei Khrushchev supports this story,27 even noting that after that, his father lost all doubts as to whether he should remove the missiles, even though he admits that it is up to historians to judge whether his father interpreted the letter correctly or misunderstood some point.
In addition, it should be kept in mind that, according to Sergei Khrushchev, “the words of [Soviet diplomat Aleksandr] Troianovskii stuck forever” in his father’s memory.
Many historians, as Khrushchev’s son foresaw, disagree about the meaning of Castro’s letter.
In a 1992 speech, Castro even recalled Richard Sorge [the Soviet spy whose warnings of Hitler’s planned attack were dismissed by Stalin—Ed.] and the warnings he sent to the Kremlin.
Besides, he figured out that the message to Kennedy had been sent before Khrushchev had a chance to read his letter.
Now I would like to express in a few words my personal opinion with regard to the current events.
I say this because I think that the imperialists’ aggressiveness is becoming extremely dangerous.
Until the very last minute, however, we will hope that peace will be preserved; and we will do everything in our power to achieve that.
At the same time, we evaluate the situation realistically and are full of determination to face any test.
NOVEMBER–DECEMBER 2004 53 Castro was proceeding from the assumption that after a massive strike against the forty-two thousand Soviet troops and their military equipment, including nuclear missiles, and after direct military confrontation with them on the ground, the United States would have no option except a full-scale nuclear strike against the Soviet Union—without waiting for the USSR to take action in Berlin, to which NATO military doctrine required a nuclear response anyway.
Castro was not familiar with NATO military doctrine, but his intuition did not let him down.
It was a convenient excuse and the right moment to inform Fidel of the compromise that was necessary to prevent a third, nuclear world war.
As early as 23 October, the day after Kennedy’s televised address, after all, Khrushchev was still pretending in his telegram to Castro that he was not afraid and did not drop the slightest hint that we were searching for a compromise.
Meanwhile, it was clear to all of us after the declaration of the blockade that a compromise had become inevitable.
Washington might see any delay in our answer as an attempt to play for time so to complete the assembly of the remaining launchers.
Many of the launchers were already operable, because during our correspondence with Washington, assembly had been going on at an accelerated rate.
Apparently, he did not really understand that we had no way out except by removing the missiles.
In a sense, one could have understood if the Americans, not receiving an immediate answer, had then started something.
And we had precise information from various sources that it was exactly how matters stood.
To make a long story short, we had to give them an immediate answer—which we did.
Khrushchev agreed to on-site inspections in Cuban territory, which he could not guarantee.
Consent to that had to come from Fidel Castro, from the sovereign state of Cuba—in short, from the Cuban side, whose existence as part of the conflict seemed to have been forgotten by everybody at that dramatic moment.
To be more precise, everybody was sure that Fidel would agree to the UN inspections or to inspections by a neutral country of his choice.
U Thant himself made this suggestion, but Fidel, both in his public statements and during his talks with 54 RUSSIAN POLITICS AND LAW Alekseev, categorically rejected any inspections other than mutual ones— that is, in Cuba and in the southern coastal regions of the United States.
Generally speaking, as matters had developed, no president could have agreed to such a loss of political prestige for the United States right after having been deceived before the entire world.
In my conversations with McCloy and Stevenson I nonetheless supported Fidel Castro, arguing that mutual on-site inspections were necessary to ensure that the United States was not preparing a new invasion of Cuba.
On the contrary, the most militant members of the leadership could use Fidel’s refusal to agree to ground and aerial inspections and even inspections of the Cuban ports as an excuse to overturn the agreement and regard themselves as absolved of all responsibility regarding that agreement.
In the meantime, our people in Cuba had already begun to dismantle our missiles and prepare them to be moved to the ports.
That is, in fact, they had already made us fulfill our obligations; the threat of our missiles being fired from Cuba had already ceased to exist, while they could draw back—not formally but rather by expressing so many reservations and imposing so many conditions that they would in effect refuse.
That is, the conditions for negotiation were extremely unfavorable and difficult.
It is interesting to note that even after the issues of monitoring had been formally settled with the United States, I more than once heard from Americans, specifically Raymond Garthoff, that not all the conditions of the agreement had been fulfilled.
Moreover, in the “early Reagan” years, one of Reagan’s political comrades suggested that they should launch a strike against Cuba because they could prove that the obligation not to attack Cuba did not legally exist, precisely because the conditions placed on the inspections had not been fulfilled.
Personally, I have no doubt that American lawyers can prove the unprovable.
Mikoyan’s trip to the United States and Cuba in the fall of 1962 had been the agreement he won from those two countries to forms of inspection other than those on site.
On 2 November McCloy himself suggested inspections on board Soviet ships by United States warships.
Moreover, when Mikoyan returned from Cuba after staying there for almost a month, he won the official agreement of the United States NOVEMBER–DECEMBER 2004 55 that on-site inspections and low-altitude flights by reconnaissance planes would be replaced by high-altitude flights29 and other forms of monitoring.
That was recorded in Mikoyan’s negotiations with President Kennedy and Rusk as well as with McCloy and Stevenson at the end of November.
They all confirmed that they were actually replacing on-site inspections with aerial photography.
That is precisely why they refused to give up the U-2 flights, which were not visible from the ground (they were detectable only by Cuban radar) and so did not impugn Cuban honor.
As for the visual inspection of missiles on the decks of Soviet ships from United States vessels in the open sea, that did not reflect on Cuba in any way, as it was a bilateral agreement between the USSR and the United States.
Thus, a formula of “adequate inspection,” on which Kennedy had insisted in his telegrams to Khrushchev, was found.
If we return to Khrushchev and his consenting to points on which he had no legal right to agree without having tried at least to inform Castro in advance about the terms, his actions were dictated by two circumstances.
Everybody decided that he would announce a strike against Cuba and our missiles.
Robert Kennedy disseminated that piece of misinformation during his meeting with Dobrynin.
In addition, secret agents from all over were telling us about an unprecedented massing of the United States military around Cuba.
But the agents simply did not know, and Robert Kennedy did not tell Dobrynin, that the president had not yet made and would not soon make his political decision, regardless of all the efforts of his chiefs of staff.
McNamara confirmed this at a conference in Havana in 1992, when he said that Kennedy was not about to order an air strike and an invasion.
That does not mean that he could not have given such an order later, but he was about to announce a tightening of the blockade, a ban on delivering fuel and lubricants, then on something else, and so on.
That is, Kennedy wanted to give Moscow more time to cool down and recover its common sense.
But Moscow, solely on the basis of the unconfirmed rumor about the televised address and Robert Kennedy’s words, was 56 RUSSIAN POLITICS AND LAW thrown into a state of feverish haste.
The Kremlin leaders were in a hurry to save humanity, which they themselves had brought to the brink of extinction.
There was neither time nor inclination to consider the subtle nuances of diplomacy, respect the sovereignty of small nations, or support the prestige of Cuba.
Besides, the mentality of any Kremlin boss always included a slightly disdainful attitude toward friends ; in fact, they showed greater respect for their adversaries.
The events in Poland and Hungary in 1956 [that is, the Soviet response to rebellions in those countries—Ed.] showed that friends could be subjected to treatment that was by no means friendly.
That meant that he was very nervous, something the White House did not understand.
He instructed the Ministry of Foreign Affairs to prepare the first letter, and it was sent.
Then he decided to dictate his own letter, which, as usual, was full of generalities but not the necessary words.
The Ministry of Foreign Affairs mentioned that Cuba and Turkey would have to agree to inspections of missile removal.
Unfortunately, a convenient opportunity to insist on Cuba’s rights was lost because of Khrushchev’s self-assurance in diplomacy.
For technical reasons, his letter arrived before the one from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
As a result, in the ExCom Thompson and Robert Kennedy suggested that the second letter containing the phrase on the necessity of getting Cuba’s consent simply be ignored.
If Khrushchev had had a similar team to the one President Kennedy had, using the same guidelines, somebody would undoubtedly have noticed the mixup, recalled that Castro had written about mutual oversight, and stated that Cuba could not agree to unilateral monitoring.
Kennedy understood that departmental interests could devalue the advice of people from the same department; that is why he needed personal advisers who could question everything.
His last letters to Khrushchev were endlessly polished by all the members of the ExCom.
Kennedy edited his own televised address on 22 October, together with Sorensen and Robert Kennedy, many times, even at the last moment.
Every word—even a nuance of a synonym of some term—could be significant.
He began to read the address before the last pages of it were even typed.
He was not happy even with Anastas Mikoyan, because Mikoyan did not agree with him.
When First Deputy Minister of Foreign Affairs Vasilii Kuznetsov, an experienced diplomat, made just one question or suggestion, Khrushchev snubbed him in such a way that he did not utter another word.
Gromyko knew his boss’s temperament, so he was ready to agree to everything in advance.
Even in May, in passing, in the corridor, he had shared with Khrushchev his doubts with regard to the risk of deploying missiles in Cuba.
Troianovskii calmly voiced his apprehensions, in the way only he could, but that, too, had no effect.
As for a frank, freewheeling discussion of every phrase that was dictated, every word or connotations of related words, let alone ideas, Khrushchev simply could not tolerate that.
As for the text of his Sunday address to Kennedy, it badly needed thorough editing and consideration of key definitions.
It was wrong to agree to everything right away without proposing any conditions.
First, the issue of international monitoring over the dismantling of the launchers should have been made contingent on the agreement of the Cuban government.
The Kremlin should have suggested that Kennedy either conduct negotiations independently or give Moscow time to conduct them.
Second, Moscow should not have said that all measures to protect Cuba were no longer necessary—for example, the presence of all military advisers.
Moscow should not have limited itself in terms of the principle of military advisers, who had nothing to do with the emergence of the crisis.
Third, we should have clearly linked the dismantling of the missiles to a simultaneous documentation in the UN of the United States commitment not to attack Cuba.
Because that was not done, after the missiles were dismantled, the United States clearly sabotaged that process of documentation, citing various pretexts.
And it has never been completed, even though an initial agreement was reached with the United States and with then UN Secretary General U Thant.
Instead, we should have specified which missiles were meant and which the USSR agreed to remove, which weapons it did not agree to remove, and which weapons were not even an object of discussion.
Nothing like that was done because one person imagined himself capable of everything.
A retreat really was necessary, but it should have been done without panic, after careful consideration, and with foresight regarding all possible connotations and consequences of the retreat.
Khrushchev, meanwhile, never planned even one move ahead—he had no plan from the beginning, from May through November 1962.
He could not afford to risk a nuclear war, even if it were the fault of the Soviet premier, whose obstinacy reached the level of stupor.
Kennedy’s last-ditch scenario is also mentioned in On the Brink, a book about the conferences on the history of the missile crisis.
This detail testifies to the real greatness of John Kennedy as a world political leader.
The Cuban aspect of the crisis Although an outsider might believe that the acute stage of the crisis had passed, in reality the absence of a specific agreement with Cuba after Khrushchev’s radio message to Kennedy of 28 October 1962 could be— and was!—used to continue calling for a strike against the island.
Of course, morality and politics no longer favored such an action, but from the military standpoint the goal had been facilitated by the removal of the Soviet missile launchers.
The most important point was that its absence would have apparently invalidated the guarantees of nonaggression against Cuba.
On-site inspections would not have been effective, since it was rumored that the missiles had been hidden in caves.
Some went so far as to suggest inspecting Soviet ports, not only Cuban ones.
But if the issue involved an indeterminate future, that meant that inspectors would have to remain in place for decades.
The idea of mutual oversight linked to a promise to close the training camps used to prepare for invasion was rejected outright.
One had to assume that the United States would do this, with help from the voting machine in the OAS, which it controlled.
Although the largest countries there did not support the anti-Cuban line, there were enough “banana” republics, which in those days were dominated by military dictatorships supported by the United States, to [win the] vote.
In any case, the United States could always ignore the OAS and rely only on CIA data.
In general, Cuba might behave “badly”—that is, it might contradict United States interests, as defined by the United States, in one way or another.
We had to fly to Fidel immediately to discuss the situation with him and to clarify with the American side other scenarios for monitoring the missile removal.
I had decided in advance, and the Central Committee agreed, to try to get both sides to make concessions—to consolidate the situation.
The missiles had not been loaded on the ships yet, so I still had some time at my disposal.
But I also understood that there were points to which Fidel would never agree.
In addition, that he had learned about the missile removal from a United States radio broadcast obviously worsened the conditions under which we would talk.
I was extremely concerned about Cuba and very much wanted to visit it at this dangerous time in its history.
As far back as April 1961, I had NOVEMBER–DECEMBER 2004 61 succeeded in being included in a group of journalists that was supposed to fly to Cuba to cover the battles against the invaders at Playa Giron and subsequent events.
After all, it was believed that Playa Giron was only the beginning, that there would be landings and prolonged battles in other places as well.
Cuba’s ambassador to Moscow, Faure Chomon, and I looked at a map of Cuba, decided that Playa Giron was a feint, and tried to figure out where the main landing was likely to be.
I thought it would be closer to Escambray; Chomon agreed but added that the main operations were to be expected on the northern coast with the idea of cutting communications between the eastern and western parts of the island and taking over the Santa Marta region, because the choice of marshy sites for a landing seemed very strange.
I agreed, recalling Laguna del Tesoro, not far from the Bahía Cochinos— the Bay of Pigs, as it is known in United States sources.
But no sooner had the group of journalists in which I was included left for Cuba than the Revolutionary Army won a complete victory.
Although somewhat alarmed, my mother was also glad that I would accompany my father.
Last time you left the United States, it was thanks to your presence that tragedy did not happen.
She was confined to bed at our summer cottage after another heart attack.
Unfortunately, in those days our doctors believed heart-attack patients should stay in bed almost all the time for a long period.
As a result, she had become weak, and walking was too much of an effort for her.
Sometimes she felt as though she did not have enough air, even when the window was completely open.
I remember how in the summer my brothers and I used to lift her chair from both sides and take it out to the garden.
My brother Vano, an aviation engineer working for the MiG company, attached wheels to her chair, because Mama categorically refused to use a wheelchair for the disabled.
I am sure that with the current approaches to treating heart-attack patients, to say nothing of contemporary medicines, she could have lived much longer.
The ineptitude and the obsolete thinking of our doctors 62 RUSSIAN POLITICS AND LAW were further aggravated by the excessive caution traditional of the Kremlin Hospital.
Of course, after the “doctors’ plot” and Stalin’s arrest of those who treated Kremlin patients in 1952, excessive caution became even more typical.
Crises and Missiles [Nikita Khrushchev: Krizisy i rakety], Sergei Khrushchev wrote that Mikoyan’s wife was in the hospital, near death, and her doctors were saying that she had only a few days to live; that was why Mikoyan hesitated to fly to Cuba.
After a prolonged pause “Khrushchev nudged Mikoyan and said that at that point nothing could help Ashkhen Lazarevna , whereas it would be difficult to succeed in Cuba without him.
The artistic details produced by his creative imagination are sometimes quite picturesque, so we have to give credit to his ability as a writer.
Nevertheless, I always prefer to know where the facts end and the artistic fantasy begins.
My mother was not in the hospital; she was at home, at the Gorky-2 dacha beyond the Usovo Station, on the train line right after the village of Kalchuga in Odintsovo Raion.
The dacha has been known as Zubalovo-1 since Svetlana Stalina-Alliluyeva’s memoirs were published.
Her condition had already been poor for two or three months, but they did not see any dramatic deterioration in her condition.
So I repeat that as we were leaving for Cuba, neither my father nor myself thought that we would never see her again.
That is why such attempts to persuade Mikoyan at the meeting of the Central Committee Presidium simply could not have taken place.
By the fall, my mother was very pale and weak, and she rarely left her NOVEMBER–DECEMBER 2004 63 bed.
A nurse was on duty at our house to render all kinds of assistance and monitor the timely administering of medication.
Her brother, Gai Lazarevich, used to come every evening and stay overnight.
Some days, I did not leave the house at all, as my institute, IMEMO AN SSSR, had certain days when we did not have to come to the office.
We wanted to stay close to her; and she was pleased to see us, not only the nurse and our household help.
Of course, we were all alarmed, but we did not lose hope that the doctors and medicines would help her.
On 31 October, we departed for Cuba on board an Il-18—a specialedition turboprop passenger plane.
These planes were at the disposal of a special detachment of civil aviation for flights of high government officials inside and outside the country.
They had a compartment where two people could sleep and another compartment for work and negotiations in the tail section.
Finally, in the main compartment there were regular seats for those accompanying top officials.
By the way, as we left for the airport, we had not received our Canadian transit visas.
Our United States visas had been granted within minutes, but the Canadian embassy decided to send an inquiry to Ottawa.
By the time we land at Gander, the Canadian government will have no option but to give us the visas.
Our small delegation included Mikoyan’s aide, V Chistov—known for his meticulousness, self-restraint and intellect—and S Kriukov, his personal bodyguard who was also in charge of security—a very nice man who took care of my father as instructed by my mother and had already acquired some experience of his own.
Besides these, there was Roman Carmen—the outstanding Soviet documentary filmmaker who had visited, it seemed to me, every dangerous site where a Soviet cameraman could set foot, beginning with republican Spain in 1936–38.
He was a cheerful and energetic elderly man, although no one saw him as old.
We had been friends 64 RUSSIAN POLITICS AND LAW for a long time, I called him Rima, as all his friends did, and sat next to him the whole way.
The Canadians issued our visas after all, so at Gander we spent about forty minutes in the waiting area while our plane was refueled.
That was very nice of Ottawa, as it is more pleasant to spend forty to forty-five minutes in an airport than shivering on board a plane.
Amazasp Arutiunian, Soviet ambassador to Canada, previously in charge of the Economic Development Department of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, a highly educated and intelligent man, came to meet my father.
It was a luxurious mansion in a luxurious neighborhood, as I remembered from our trip in 1959.
When a regular multistory building was constructed for the mission on 67th Street, the mission staff pleaded in vain with the Ministry of Foreign Affairs to persuade the government not to sell the mansion, but the Ministry of Finance prevailed.
Gromyko was not yet a member of the Politburo in those days and could not exercise decisive influence.
A few years later, they already had to pay more for our consulate to buy an unattractive mansion not far from the Metropolitan Museum.
Before Rima Carmen and I decided to call it a day and leave for our small hotel next to the famous Council on Foreign Relations, Igor’ Chechetkin, an important member of the UN staff, invited us to a jazz club where Peggy Lee was performing.
I had heard a recording of her; but there, hearing her sing, I was stunned.
We had probably not slept for more than twenty-four hours since leaving Moscow, and jet lag was taking its toll.
Igor’ suggested we go and rest. but since he had promised earlier to introduce us to Peggy Lee after the performance, I would not agree.
She sang one beautiful song after another, and they have stayed in my memory NOVEMBER–DECEMBER 2004 65 for the rest of my life.
We were forced to give in after Chechetkin promised to bring us to another Peggy Lee concert when we came back.
The most important were his talks with United States Ambassador to the UN Adlai Stevenson and with President Kennedy’s personal representative in charge of the crisis settlement, John McCloy.
My father had known them both since his visit to the United States in January 1959.
At that time, Stevenson and my father spoke before an audience of almost a thousand people at the Lawyer’s Club of Chicago, where their jokes made their listeners laugh almost nonstop.
The serious topic of Soviet– United States relations was presented in an atmosphere of brilliant humor and universal satisfaction.
Troianovskii interpreted well and conveyed my father’s humor to the audience.
So our relationship was special, even better than mine with Stevenson, although my relationship with Stevenson was also very good.
On the whole, Stevenson conducted himself well, although sometimes he did something unacceptable and tried to exercise special pressure.
Apparently, it was his post as UN ambassador that forced him to do that.
The UN ambassador must follow the orders of the State Department, even if he is Stevenson.
So the officials sent him their instructions, and there was nothing else he could do.
I had been thinking nonstop about means to achieve a mutual agreement on monitoring the removal of the missiles.
Fidel Castro had already announced to the media and to U Thant that he would not allow any monitoring on Cuban territory, or even in Cuban territorial waters.
Meanwhile, if the Cubans would not allow American inspectors in their 66 RUSSIAN POLITICS AND LAW territory, we could not allow them to set foot on our ships either, while the Americans were demanding both.
The Central Committee40 authorized me to try to persuade Fidel to agree to on-site inspections.
Knowing Fidel, I had a very good idea of how difficult, practically impossible, that would be.
McCloy, of course, understood that our most important goal was to find a compromise solution.
And, lo and behold, during our conversation he casually mentioned a very important idea, which I grasped immediately but pretended not to notice.
This was because it was possible that he had let the cat out of the bag accidentally.
In that case, he would immediately deny the idea and say that he had been misunderstood.
But taking into account his experience and intellect, I believed that he had intentionally suggested a possible solution.
I wanted him to bring it up again, to avoid a situation in which it would seem as though I had asked him to agree to a scenario that, in fact, he himself had brought up.
Since he had a permanent connection with President Kennedy, that meant that our consent would immediately have the force of a bilateral agreement.
He repeated that if the worst came to the worst, the removal of the missiles could be subject to visual inspection by United States ships, which would approach our ships in the open sea—that is, outside Cuban territorial waters.
This phrase—or to be more precise, the idea it conveyed—offered a real way out from a situation that had seemed hopeless, in which the United States had a pretext to attack Cuba.
Based on my informal orders from Moscow and the formal instructions I had received from the Central Committee, however, I was still supposed to try to persuade Fidel to agree to on-site inspections—by UN observers, by the Red Cross, by representatives of Latin American countries that were not hostile to Cuba, or in some other version.
That would have accelerated the preparation and submission to the UN of an appropriate document on behalf of the two powers, or of a separate document from each of them and one from Cuba.
I was sure that Havana would not agree to any type of on-site inspection unless inspections were also conducted in the United States to ensure the dismantling of the exile camps that were preparing to invade Cuba.
It goes without saying that the United States would have categorically rejected such NOVEMBER–DECEMBER 2004 67 mutual inspections, and that would have brought us to an impasse.
If he got his own way in one respect, it would be psychologically easier for him to make concessions somewhere else.
It was not in his character to make concessions in every case, just as it was not in the character of Ernesto Che Guevara, whom I also knew quite well.
The opinions of Fidel and Che Guevara were especially likely to sway them.
I told Che one day, even before the crisis, that in Armenian che means “no,” so from my point of view this name was just right for him.
He was a man with a fine sense of humor, so he didn’t take offense but laughed merrily instead.
Sometimes, it is only by demanding the maximum that you can achieve the minimum.
Apparently Fidel wanted to tell me in advance where he stood, because he made that speech on the morning of the day he was expecting me to arrive in Havana.
I believe that did much to start off our talks with him on a friendlier footing and changed the mood of the Cuban leadership.
It was a piece of sheer insolence, dictated by the State Department, of course.
In this way, I made it clear that their demands were out of the question.
So did the meetings at the Soviet Mission, although I was not present during the talks.
Only in the corridors did I have a chance to meet McCloy and greet Stevenson as an old acquaintance.
Khrushchev and President Kennedy, which allegedly involved the Il-28 planes as well as the nuclear warheads and missiles.
NOVEMBER–DECEMBER 2004 69 Kennedy’s letter of 27 October mentions both “offensive missile bases” and “all systems that can be used for offensive purposes,” which, they argue, implies jet bombers as well.
The Americans said they regarded both missiles and jet bombers as offensive weapons.
Stevenson and McCloy insisted no agreement could be reached unless the issue of the removal of the Il-28 bombers from Cuba was resolved.
It is clear that all the tactical advantage in the negotiations was on the United States side.
The USSR had already dismantled its missiles, and the threat of a retaliatory strike from the island no longer existed.
Extending the conflict in this way only played into Washington’s hands by giving it an opportunity to present new demands and abandon its previous concessions.
For example, as noted above, Mikoyan had told me of McCloy’s suggestion at a crucial moment in the crisis that the missile removal could be visually confirmed on board Soviet ships by United States vessels.
There was a one-on-one between Kuznetsov and McCloy at McCloy’s summer house.
McCloy told Kuznetsov that he had met with President Kennedy the day before in Washington.
The latter was alarmed by an intelligence report that new Il-28 bombers were being assembled.
When I asked McCloy why he was bringing up the submarines, he answered that the United States government had paid attention to it.
I told him I knew nothing about submarines, but even if they had been spotted, they were in international waters, where vessels of any country had the right to be.
In accordance with your 1290 and 1306, I said we had no objections to letting the Americans see pictures of the dismantled missiles and those loaded on ships.
I also said that we also would not object to United States vessels taking a close-range look at missiles transported on Soviet ships in the open sea.
Of course, McCloy could not have forgotten that this was the solution he himself had proposed to Mikoyan.
Most probably, the issue of monitoring had already been discussed with Kennedy and his approval secured.
It seems, however, as though McCloy’s common sense did not appeal to somebody in Washington.
Probably this was not the president, since McCloy cleared all issues with him.
But for one reason or another, the next day McCloy was already silent about any document that would have guaranteed nonaggression against Cuba.
Our ambassador to Cuba, Aleksandr Alekseev, after all they had gone through together, said later that Fidel had not planned to go to the airport.
NOVEMBER–DECEMBER 2004 71 Fidel came to the airport with Che Guevara, Dorticós , and Carlos Rafael Rodriguez.
By making such a statement, Mikoyan managed to weaken considerably Fidel’s impression that there was a conspiracy of great powers at Cuba’s expense.
Of course, that impression was not gone—and it was justified—but Fidel felt better because Moscow had openly supported his demands against the United States.
In fact, at the time Moscow did not even know that it had supported his demands; Mikoyan informed the Kremlin somewhat later.
When that demand was transmitted to Moscow, Washington apparently understood that Khrushchev had set off on the path of concessions.
Kennedy made lifting the blockade against Cuba contingent on the USSR’s commitment to withdraw the Il-28 bombers.
Admittedly, bargaining made it possible to withdraw the bombers within a month instead of right away, and at least that worked in our favor.
If we had reminded the Americans at the beginning, before the missiles were dismantled, that there was no agreement on withdrawing anything except the missiles, they probably would not have tried to extend the list by adding the bombers and the cutters to it.
We could have told them, firmly and immediately, that we would not allow them to add things to the agreement as their appetite grew.
After all, from a military standpoint the bombers, though theoretically capable of carrying nuclear weapons, were not only classified as “light” but were also obsolete.
They could not have any apprehensions in this regard—to say nothing of the Komar cutters.
Probably Kennedy needed all that to show the “domestic market” how tough his stand was on Cuba and the Soviet Union.
Of course, he must have been pressured by the hawks in government and military circles.
In my view, it created a new and significant obstacle to our talks with the Cubans, threatening the success of the negotiations at the very moment when it seemed that a breakthrough was possible.
Usually, if the negotiators for the opposing side sense such a psychological nuance, they take advantage of it by all means available.
Kennedy imposed a condition—the extension of the blockade—that Cuba would not have survived.
And the United States agreed in its radio address to the conditions stated in Khrushchev’s statement.
If the Soviet leader had insisted that was out of the question, Kennedy would probably not have pushed him that hard.
He might have said something—for example, made a joke of those apologies for bombers, which indeed they were.
But when he raised the possibility of extending the blockade, we had no other way out.
Kremlin decision making In my view, a misunderstanding developed concerning the Il-28 light bombers and the Komar cutters because of the stupid decision made by the Kremlin and our entire propaganda machine to use only expressions that had been approved and widely used rather than call a spade a spade.
Instead, the expression “the weapons that you call offensive” was introduced.
Such word play was pointless, since in a number of documents the Kremlin had promised not to NOVEMBER–DECEMBER 2004 73 deliver surface-to-surface missiles.
So the whole point of our tricks—to prove that the missiles had been delivered to defend Cuba and were, therefore, a “defensive weapon”—was lost.
Even so, Khrushchev would not abandon these positions even on the brink, when the entire world knew what had caused the crisis.
In his telegrams and in his last radio message, he still did not use the word “missile” even though there precise definitions were absolutely necessary.
Sometimes the Ministry of Foreign Affairs prepared a basic document later “massaged” by Khrushchev himself and by other members of the Presidium.
Sometimes Khrushchev dictated a text from scratch and gave it to those around him for discussion.
He did not attach much importance to such discussion; at best, he might grasp that a certain amount of stylistic editing was necessary.
Unfortunately, after the purge of the Presidium carried out by Khrushchev in June 1957 and the introduction of new members, primarily based on the principle of personal closeness and loyalty—although that may sound ironical after October 1964—the new Presidium could not ensure a thorough and multifaceted discussion of everything Khrushchev wrote or said.
In that sense, the Washington ExCom was an incomparably more effective and productive collective body.
Above all, the inertia of agreeing with the first secretary that became traditional under Stalin in the middle of the 1930s was still a factor.
Debates took place only during the period of “collective leadership” from March 1953 to June 1957.
Mikoyan was the only person who continued to argue with Khrushchev both in private and at meetings of the Presidium, even after Khrushchev’s “cult of personality” was established.
Sergei Khrushchev even writes, with obvious irritation, that Anastas Ivanovich always had his own opinion on every issue.
Unfortunately, in reality the other members of the Presidium either did not have their own opinions or lacked sufficient courage to express their opinions in case they differed from those of their leader.
Sergei Khrushchev is unsparing in his description of the determination and strong will of Nikita Sergeevich 74 RUSSIAN POLITICS AND LAW and notes that Mikoyan had no equal as a diplomat but lacked enough determination and firmness, for example, to suppress the Hungarian rebellion with one blow.
Khrushchev’s willpower was remarkable during the struggle for de-Stalinization and, thank God, he had it.
It gave rise to absurdity, however, when ordinary issues came up—the virgin soil campaign, the imposition of maize production, the struggle against architectural excesses to promote mass housing construction.
It was also ill-suited to handling extraordinary problems, like the missiles in Cuba, which required truly collective, calm, and thorough discussion.
Of course, I am using the term “Khrushchev’s personality cult” with reservations here.
Except for Mikoyan, members of the Presidium preferred to say “yes,” knowing Khrushchev’s intolerance of criticism in any shape or form.
Still, under Khrushchev the fear of repression characteristic of Stalin’s “cult of personality” was gone.
Khrushchev stopped the “Great Terror,” and for that alone we should build him a monument in one of the main squares of our capital city.
The threat, if no longer deadly, was still very effective among those in power.
Thus, “unexpectedly,” Kirichenko, Furtseva, Ignatov, and others were dropped from the list.
Mikoyan was the only person to whom Khrushchev sometimes showed the list and asked for advice about it.
Khrushchev read the list of Presidium members at the plenary session of the Central Committee; he had handwritten the names on a sheet of paper.
It turned out that he had merely forgotten to write down Kirilenko’s name.
I cannot say that Kirilenko was a giant, indispensable to the high council.
It is merely a detail that shows the degree of independence to which people at that level could aspire.
Khrushchev’s American biographer wrote, “According to Adzhubei [a Soviet journalist and Khrushchev’s son-in-law—Trans.], Khrushchev had a deciding vote in determining the makeup of the Central Committee and other leading bodies.
Khrushchev’s one-man control of the Presidium membership was the main, if not the only, argument in favor of agreeing with everything the first secretary said.
From my perspective, Khrushchev’s dismissal marked a big loss for the development of our society, but for the party elite it meant emancipation.
In fairness, we should mention here that even in the later years of a tyrant like Stalin—let us say, from 1939 to 1951—there were individual cases in which someone from the Politburo, more rarely the entire Politburo, expressed disagreement or, we might better say, doubts.
All those who “doubted” sat in silence as the leader presented a proposal.
Of course, if Stalin continued to insist, everybody would have had to agree, but whether that happened depended on the issue and the leader’s mood.
In other cases where he was insisting on an obviously absurd proposal, members of the Politburo would agree to set up a commission, which would meet once and then die quietly if no forceful reminder followed.
One day everybody agreed in advance that they would insist on Vasilii Stalin’s dismissal as supreme air force commander because his behavior reflected badly on his father.
Thus, in my opinion, sometimes Stalin could appear to demonstrate even greater tolerance of the opinions of Politburo members 76 RUSSIAN POLITICS AND LAW than the latter-day Khrushchev.
Sometimes Stalin suggested an issue for genuine discussion, intending to test his ideas without disclosing them first.
Khrushchev preferred to speak first, and in so doing he put paid to all discussion.
To put it simply, he usually had no doubt that his own ideas and decisions were correct.
In discussing the missile crisis, however, a freewheeling discussion was essential—as it had been when the decision was made to deliver the missiles to Cuba.
The issue should have been discussed by experts on an equal footing—military men, diplomats, consultants from the Central Committee, and KGB representatives.
But Khrushchev’s personality and Kremlin traditions made freewheeling discussions practically impossible.
As a result, the heads of such government agencies as the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, the Ministry of Defense, the Committee of State Security , and even the apparatus of the CPSU Central Committee felt they had very little freedom to express their opinions.
Few of them were admitted to the meetings, and those who were admitted were there to provide information when asked.
There was no detailed, thorough discussion of texts as took place, for example, at the White House.
This is why nobody could question the standard phrasing and clichés used in our propaganda or in the statements made by the leadership.
Unfortunately, Khrushchev’s own flights of imagination did not extend beyond the framework of accepted phrases.
In countries with highly developed political systems and time-honored traditions, discussions take a different form.
Political leaders in the upper ranks of the apparatus are joined by those in charge of the largest organizations, and these form the circle of main actors—main in terms of a specific decision or result that an analyst is trying to explain.
Some are required to participate, while others may be invited or get there through their own efforts.
The central arena is then surrounded by concentric circles that, respectively, embrace lower ranks of officials in the executive branch of government, the media, nongovernmental organizations, and the public.
The struggle in the outer circles helps create the atmosphere in which decisions are made by players capable of influencing the choices of the government and the actions taken in regard to the issue that is on the agenda.
NOVEMBER–DECEMBER 2004 77 It is clear that in the secret stages of a discussion the “concentric circles” are narrower.
But a comparison of the discussions held in Moscow from May to October and in Washington from 16 to 22 October 1962 speaks for itself.
The “analysts” and historians in general are lucky that Kennedy gave instructions to tape the discussions secretly.
The problem was not so much one of total secrecy; nobody suspected Malin of leaking information.
The text of the agreement should not have included the clichés of earlier public and private statements, which bore the stamp of inertia typical of standard propaganda devices.
It is amazing that they did not also demand the removal of the tanks or the Kalashnikov rifles supplied to Cuba.
A strict interpretation of the wording of Khrushchev’s letters would have allowed them to do that, since “the weapons that you call offensive” is a label that can be applied to almost anything.
Raymond Garthoff takes responsibility for the Il-28 bombers in particular, because he personally (he was still a young staffer in those days) wrote a memorandum on 29 October, approved by Alexis Johnson and Dean Rusk, reiterating that Kennedy had mentioned the Il-28 bombers in his address to the nation on 22 October.
Kennedy agreed with the way the question was posed at the ExCom meeting on 2 November (the reason Stevenson’s letter was brought to Mikoyan at the airport!), even though earlier, on 20 October, he had said that the bombers “did not worry him” and he was not going to insist on their removal.
Apparently, he was convinced by the reminder that he had mentioned them in his address to the nation.
But Khrushchev had not mentioned the bombers in his telegrams of 27 October, with which Kennedy agreed, thus making a resolution possible.
Although interpretations can differ, the spirit of the negotiations had focused on the missiles.
The bombers had been handed over to the Cuban air force, it was said, and this had not caused any crisis.
For this reason, I think that Philip Brenner is not quite accurate when he writes that all the Il-28 bombers were included in the list of weapons that were supposed to be removed.
I value his work highly, not least because he was almost the first to call readers’ attention to Cuba as a participant in the crisis.
Even so, the initial list of weapons scheduled for removal included only missiles.
It would be more accurate to say that the bombers came up when the American side was extending the list as part of the negotiations and was intended to make Moscow remove as much as possible.
If Khrushchev had persisted in refusing to discuss the topic, as Mikoyan did, or if he had suggested that the American leadership speak to the declared owner of the Komar cutters and the bombers—that is, the Cuban government (it was quite possible to put it that way, although it did not completely correspond to the truth)—Washington would most probably have swallowed the pill.
Or it would have had to negotiate with the Cuban government, NOVEMBER–DECEMBER 2004 79 which would in itself have been a political gain for Cuba.
After all, those in Washington knew they were taking advantage of wording that the Kremlin had produced to its own detriment.
Ultimately, the persistence of a negotiator often rests on his own sense of being right or wrong.
Initially, they had been designed with that goal in mind, but over the years their speed, armament, and avionics appeared to give the USSR an opportunity to supply them to its allies in the Third World instead of scrapping them.
Apparently, it was in response to McNamara’s information that President Kennedy included the Il-28 bombers in the list of weapons mentioned in his first radio and television address.
The subsequent correspondence on “weapons that you call offensive” no longer mentioned them.
We left Idlewild Airport,51 later named after John F Kennedy, in a state of anxiety.
Then followed the episode with Stevenson’s letter, which Mikoyan refused to accept.
It was obvious that after Mikoyan had left for the airport and the president had been convinced by the ExCom, a call from Washington again raised the idea of bringing up the bombers.
Admittedly, Garthoff confirms that Stevenson really had forgotten about the Il-28 bombers.
Kennedy, too, probably recalled them only after he was reminded by Rusk and Thompson.
Even before 16 October the United States had aerial photographs recording both the arrival and the assembly of the bombers, but no protests took place at that time.
The Soviet Union supplied Il-28 bombers and Komar cutters to Indonesia, India, Egypt, and certain other countries.
Komar cutters had missiles with a range of thirty to forty nautical miles and could be used only to guard coastlines, 80 RUSSIAN POLITICS AND LAW so their delivery to Cuba did not cause any anxiety in Washington either.
Nor did the delivery of MiG-21s, although these were modern fighterbombers capable of carrying nuclear weapons; probably the Americans did not object because the MiGs had a short range.
Later, after the crisis ended, the United States began to fortify the antiaircraft defenses of its southern coast precisely because the MiG-21s were capable of carrying nuclear weapons.
Another reason that the Il-28 bombers became a matter of principle for Kennedy was the accusations of his being “spineless” made by people who insisted on a strike against Cuba even after Khrushchev had agreed to remove the missiles.
I briefly mention preparations that could have led to World War III, meaning they were designed to attack the Soviet Union.
Even during normal times, 50 percent of the United States Strategic Air Force was kept in a state of readiness at the airfields.
Pilots were to be ready to take their seats in the cockpits within a few minutes.
The crews of the remaining bombers were supposed to be within close reach of their planes, so that they could take off as soon as the order was given.
Powers, commander in chief of the Strategic Air Command, gave additional orders to cancel all events not associated with emergency preparedness.
On 27 October, because, as ordered by Khrushchev, the missile launchers in Cuba were being hastily completed and on the evening before a Soviet missile had been launched against a U-2 for the first time, B-52 bombers with nuclear payloads were already patrolling the arctic waters.
LeMay ordered F-100 fighter-bombers carrying Zuni missiles made ready to strike the S-75 antiaircraft batteries in Cuba.
On 3 June 2002 Dino Brugioni told me by telephone that seventy-five cities in the Soviet Union were supposed to be destroyed in the NOVEMBER–DECEMBER 2004 81 first United States nuclear strike.
Such were the plans of the Air Force, headed by General LeMay, in case of an attack on the Soviet Union.
To comfort ourselves in hindsight, we can also read that Secretary of Defense McNamara supported a plan to strike only military installations and weapons rather than cities with civilian populations, in the hope that the “retaliatory strike” would also leave United States cities alone and be targeted against the armed forces and military installations of strategic value.
I am afraid that the Soviet missiles were also aimed not only at military installations.
But after 22 October, the only step taken toward a “full state of alert” was to cancel all military leave.
In line with the laws of radiation, which are sufficiently well known, the rest of the world could have expected a death that would have been slower but no less agonizing.
From executive committee [and given in transliterated English in the original], as ispolkom has quite different, purely Soviet connotations.
In 1941, Admiral Tojo, head of Japan’s General Staff, planned the surprise attack against the United States military base at Pearl Harbor, which took place on 7 December and ensured Japan’s freedom of action in the Pacific Ocean.
Garthoff has spoken and written on his views more than once, including in a speech at a conference on “Cuba Between the Superpowers, 1961–1963,” held in Antigua, West Indies, on 3–7 January 1993.
Admittedly, he acknowledges that no one can be certain, and the possibility of escalation remained.
I am afraid that Garthoff relies on the opinion of a cynic, such as the political and social commentator Fedor Burlatskii.
Jumping ahead of ourselves, I will mention here that Anastas Mikoyan suggested taking aerial photographs while flying along the Cuban coast, without violating its air space.
Kennedy agreed that would be the best option but said that contemporary photography was not yet sufficiently advanced.
The advent of reconnaissance satellites automatically overcame that problem.
Alexander L George and William E Simons, eds., The Limits of Coercive Diplomacy , 114.
In August 1942, at the request of his son Volodia, a fighter pilot who had just turned eighteen and whose flight training was absolutely inadequate, my father interceded on his behalf and asked the air force to send Volodia to the most dangerous front line of the day—Stalingrad.
Volodia was killed there in aerial combat against overwhelmingly superior German air power.
Due to a misunderstanding— Oleg Troianovskii, the interpreter, and myself had been waiting for each other for a long time at different entrances to Macy’s (I simply did not know that there were several entrances)—we arrived at the airport forty minutes later than scheduled.
My father was sitting in the airplane; he did not say anything to me, but his glance was eloquent enough.
The plane sat there for another hour with the engines running, waiting for a signal that the runway was free.
Then, over the ocean, rather far from the coast, first one engine caught fire, then another.
The extinguisher system put out the fire, but it was no longer possible to start the engines.
I must add here that I bear no responsibility for Sergei Khrushchev’s stories 84 RUSSIAN POLITICS AND LAW about Anastas Mikoyan’s stay in the United States and Cuba in November 1962.
These stories are based on his imagination and partly on documents, but in no way on anything he may have heard from me.
Both in Stalin’s day and under Khrushchev, my father used to say “the Central Committee” rather than name the party leader.
It is interesting to note here that the United States did not know for a long time whether nuclear warheads had been delivered to Cuba.
I knew from my father that they were and said so—without mentioning my father.
I thought those present would understand me and accept my point of view, but that did not happen.
Different sources presented different opinions right up to the 1990s, when General Gribkov set all doubts to rest at the conference in Havana.
Norton, 1997) that we were supposed to fly to Montreal and then to Havana.
