But what this meant to a historian is that the archives were certain to contain some real surprises.
Indeed, some of President Kennedy's closest associates were surprised-even incredulous-at the disclosure.
They cover the period from July 30, 1962 to November 8, 1963; eighteen tapes, including eight tapes of official ""ExCom"" meetings, relate directly to the missile crisis.
There is also a dictabelt containing the President's reflections on the crisis-the only known evidence, according to the register in the Kennedy Library, of ""this sort of reflective diary-keeping"" by Kennedy during his presidency.
The first missile crisis tape-or actually extracts from it, together with an 87-page ""sanitized"" transcript-was released last year by the Kennedy Library.
The transcript, sections of which are presented here, covers what was 1.
International Security, Summer 1985 0162-2889/85/0164-40 $02.50/1 C 1985 by the President and Fellows of Harvard College and of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
It represents about two and a half hours of conversation recorded in the White House on October 16, 1962.
President Kennedy had just found out about the missiles earlier that morning.
The other documents presented here are not quite as unusual, but are still very revealing.
After President Kennedy gave his famous speech on October 22 announcing the existence of the missiles and outlining the measures the United States was taking to deal with the problem, the group of advisers he had brought together at the beginning of the crisis was officially designated the ""Executive Committee of the National Security Council,"" or ""ExCom"" for short.
The first major revision relates to the issue of a trade involving the American missiles in Turkey.
Many writers have assumed, on the basis of very explicit claims by the participants, that President Kennedy refused to countenance a trade involving the Jupiters in Turkey.
Although Bernstein here backed away from the more extreme claims he had made in earlier articles, he still tended to minimize the degree to which the President was committed to the idea of a trade.
He presented Kennedy as ""wavering"" on October 27 between war and peace, as ""prepared to countenance a trade"" only ""at a few points"" when ""he seemed desperate.
According to Arthur Schlesinger, Jr., Robert Kennedy ""was a dove from the start.
If you bomb the missile sites and airports, he said on the first day, 'you are covering most of Cuba.
The passage Schlesinger alludes to was introduced by Robert Kennedy raising the issue of an invasion, and in fact practically every time he spoke in the course of these October 16 meetings, his comments seemed to point in that direction.
Extracts are published below; the full transcript and an audiocassette containing extracts from the original tape are both available by mail from the Kennedy Library.
His opposition to the blockade was also reflected in the ExCom minutes.
On October 25, for example, he ""repeated his view that we may decide that it is better to avoid confronting the Russians by stopping one of their ships and to react by attacking the missiles already in Cuba.
All of this, perhaps, may force us to reconsider some traditional judgments about Robert Kennedy's moderation and moral sensibilities.
For this reason alone, some standard claims about his attitude during the crisis merit close examination.
A third point has to do with the military significance of the missiles in Cuba.
There is the claim, made most recently by Raymond Garthoff, that even McNamara ""did not deny that there was military significance to the deployment,"" and that the ""question of the actual impact on the military balance, therefore, did not become an issue of contention.
These claims about Robert Kennedy's moderation from the very outset were made even more strongly in the televised series based on Schlesinger's biography that was shown early in 1985.
In fact the script for the episode dealing with the Cuban missile crisis showed both of the Kennedy brothers as eager from the start for a negotiated solution.
And it is clear that the issue did play a certain role in the discussion.
In particular, McNamara's view was the basis for his belief that the missiles posed not a ""military problem"" but simply a ""domestic, political problem""-and this assumption lay at the heart of his thinking about what should be done.
But it is not simply because they force us to make specific revisions of this sort that these documents are so valuable.
They are fascinating because they give us such a direct and unfiltered sense for these events-a rare glimpse, for example, at the disorderly, unsystematic but not necessarily inefficient way in which things were worked out.
Myths are easy enough to deflate, and some of the hyperbole lavished on this episode-""this combination of toughness and restraint, of will, nerve and wisdom, so brilliantly controlled, so matchlessly calibrated""17-is almost embarrassing to read in the light of the evidence.
This is from the concluding paragraph in the chapter on the missile crisis in Arthur Schlesinger, Jr., A Thousand Days , 841.
General Marshall Carter, the Deputy Director of Central Intelligence, said that the CIA estimate was ""that these could be fully operational within two weeks,"" although maybe a single missile would be operational much sooner.
All this strikes the reader as very unclear; and even at the time, McNamara, it seems, was uncertain about whether the crucial time constraint was six hours or two weeks.
A document as complete as this transcript evidently is, recording a free and fairly unstructured discussion, can be revealing as much for what it does not contain as for what it does.
Everyone has heard the story about Sherlock Holmes and the significant episode of the dog in the night.
The October 16 transcript is full of ""significant episodes"" of this sort.
Similarly, there is the question of what the United States government knew about Soviet command and control.
McNamara's unwillingness at this point to attack Cuba once any of the missiles there became operational was rooted in his fear that Soviet control over the missile sites might be loose, and in the event of an attack the local commander might decide on his own initiative to launch his missiles against American cities.
But his comment that we just ""don't know"" what kinds of communication and control system the Soviets had over the missiles in Cuba scarcely seems adequate.
One wonders whether there was any reaching down into the bureaucracy for answers to questions of this sort.
Historical analysis in fact proceeds largely by focusing on these little issues, and practically any project worth doing involves scores of such second-order problems.
This mode of operation reflects as much as anything else the prejudice of the professional historian-or really the intellectual style of the discipline.
A line of ellipses between sections represents material in the documents not selected for reprint here.
Page numbers at end of sections refer to pages in original transcriptions in Kennedy Library.
It's one that we, all of us, had not really believed the Soviets could, uh, carry this far.
Now, uhm, I do think we have to set in motion a chain of events that will eliminate this base.
The questioning becomes whether we do it by sudden, unannounced strike of some sort, or we, uh, build up the crisis to the point where the other side has to consider very seriously about giving in, or, or even the Cubans themselves, uh, take some, take some action on this.
The thing that I'm, of course, very conscious of is that there is no such thing, I think, as unilateral action by the United States.
It's so involved with 42 allies and confrontation in many places, that any action that we take, uh, will greatly increase the risks of direct action involving, uh, our other alliances and our other forces in other parts of the world.
Uhm, so I think we, we have to think very hard about two major, uh, courses of action as alternatives.
The point where we , that is the, uh, overwhelming, overriding necessity to take all the risks that are involved doing that.
I think that with or without such an invasion, in other words if we make it clear that, uh, what we're doing is eliminating this particular base or any other such base that is established.
We ourselves are not moved to general war, we're simply doing what we said we would do if they took certain action.
The other would be, if we have a few days-from the military point of view, if we have the whole time-uh, then I would think that, uh, there would be another course of action, a combination of things that, uh, we might wish to consider.
Uhm, first, uh, that we, uh, stimulate the OAS' procedure immediately for prompt action to make it quite clear that the entire hemisphere considers that the Rio Pact has been violated what acts should in, under the terms of the Rio Pact.
The OAS could constitute itself an organ of consultation promptly, although maybe, it may take two or three days to get, uh, instructions from governments and things of that sort.
The OAS could, I suppose, at any moment, uh, take action to insist to the Cubans that an OAS inspection, uh, team be permitted to come and, itself, look directly at these sites, provide assurance to the hemisphere.
That will undoubtedly be turned down, but it will be another step in building up the, uh, building a position.
I think also that we ought to consider getting some word to Castro, perhaps through the Canadian ambassador in Havana or through, uh, his representative at the United Nations Uh, I think perhaps the Canadian ambassador would be the best, the better channel to get to Castro privately and tell him that, uh, this is no longer support for Cuba, that Cuba is being victimized here, and that, uh, the Soviets are preparing Cuba for destruction or betrayal.
It ought to be said to Castro that, uh, uh, this kind of a base is intolerable and not acceptable.
The time has now come when he must take the interests of the Cuban people, must now break clearly with the Soviet Union, prevent this missile base from becoming operational.
And I think there are certain military, uhm, uh, actions that we could, we might well want to take straight away.
Unless we feel that it's better, more desirable to go to a general national emergency so that we have complete freedom of action.
If we announce, at the time that we announce this development-and I think we do have to announce this development some time this week-uh, we announce that, uh, we are conducting a surveillance of Cuba, over Cuba, and we will enforce our right to do so.
We reinforce our forces in the southeastern part of the United States-whatever is necessary from the military point of view to be able to give, to deliver an overwhelming strike at any of these installations, including the SAM sites.
And, uh, also, to take care of any, uh, MIGs or bombers that might make a pass at Miami or at the United States.
I'll assume that we can move on this line at the same time to interrupt all air traffic from free world countries going into Cuba, insist to the Mexicans, the Dutch, that they stop their planes from coming in.
Tell the British, who, and anyone else who's involved at this point, that, uh, if they're interested in peace, they've got to stop their ships from Cuban trade at this point.
Uh, in other words, isolate Cuba completely without at this particular moment a, uh, a forceful blockade.
I think it would be important to use the, uh, consider, uh, calling in General Eisenhower,3 giving him a full briefing before a public announcement is made as to the situation and the action which you might determine upon.
Mr Khrushchev may not himself really understand that or believe that at this point.
I think we'll be facing a situation that could well lead to general war; that we have an obligation to do what has to be done but do it in a way that gives, uh, everybody a chance to, uh, put the down before it gets too hard.
I naturally need to think about this very hard for the next several hours, uh, what I and what my colleagues at the State Department can do about it.
Mr President, there are a number of unknowns in this situation I want to comment upon, and, in relation to them, I would like to outline very briefly some possible military alternatives and ask General Taylor to expand upon them.
But before commenting on either the unknowns or outlining some military alternatives, there are two propositions I would suggest that 3.
My first is that if we are to conduct an air strike against these installations, or against any part of Cuba, we must agree now that we will schedule that prior to the time these missile sites become operational.
Because, if they become operational before the air strike, I do not believe we can state we can knock them out before they can be launched; and if they're launched there is almost certain to be, uh, chaos in part of the east coast or the area, uh, in a radius of six hundred to a thousand miles from Cuba.
Uh, secondly, I, I would submit the proposition that any air strike must be directed not solely against the missile sites, but against the missile sites plus the airfields plus the aircraft which may not be on the airfields but hidden by that time plus all potential nuclear storage sites.
It is not just a strike against the missile sites; and there would be associated with it potential casualties of Cubans, not of United States citizens, but potential casualties of Cubans in, at least in the hundreds, more likely in the low thousands, say two or three thousand.
It seems to me these two propositions, uh, should underlie our, our discussion.
We would be ready for the start of such an air strike within, within a matter of days.
If it were absolutely essential, it could be done almost literally within a matter of hours.
I believe the chiefs would prefer that it be deferred for a matter of days, but we are prepared for that quickly.
The air strike could continue for a matter of days following the initial day, if necessary.
Uh, presumably there would be some political discussions taking place either just before the air strike or both before and during.
In any event, we would be prepared, following the air strike, for an air, invasion, both by air and by sea. after the start of the air strike, that would be possible if the political environment made it desirable or necessary at that time.
Associated with this air strike undoubtedly should be some degree of mobilization.
Uh, I would think of the mobilization coming not before the air strike but either concurrently with or somewhat following, say possibly five days afterwards, depending upon the possible invasion requirements.
The character of the mobilization would be such that it could be carried out in its first phase at least within the limits of the authority granted by Congress.
Now, this is very sketchily the military, uh, capabilities, and I think you may wish to hear General Taylor, uh, outline his choice.
Uh, we're impressed, Mr President, with the great importance of getting a, a strike with all the benefit of surprise, uh, which would mean ideally that we would have all the missiles that are in Cuba above ground where we can take them out.
Uh, that, that desire runs counter to the strong point the secretary made if the other optimum would be to get every missile before it could, becomes operational.
Uh, practically, I think the, our knowledge of the timing of the readiness is going to be so, so, uh, difficult that we'll never have the, the exact permanent, uh, the perfect timing.
What we'd like to do is to look at this new photography, I think-and take any additionaland try to get the, the layout of the targets in as near an optimum, uh, position as possible, and then take 'em out without any warning whatsoever.
That does not preclude, I don't think, Mr Secretary, some of the things you've been talking about.
I'm having all the responsible planners in this afternoon, Mr President, at four o'clock, to talk this out with 'em and get their best judgment.
I would also mention among the, the military actions we should take that once we have destroyed as many of these offensive weapons as possible, we should, should prevent any more coming in, which means a naval blockade.
So, really, the, in point of time, I'm, I'm thinking in terms of three phases.
One, a, an initial pause of some sort while we get completely ready and get, get the right posture on the part of the target, so we can do the best job.
Then, virtually concurrently, a air strike against, as the secretary said, missiles, airfields, uh, nuclear sites that we know of.
I'd then start this continuous reconnaissance, the list that you had, continue over Cuba.
Then, then the decision can be made as we, as we're mobilizing, uh, with the air strike as to whether we invade or not.
Uh, it may be of some interest to know what he says about this, if he says anything.
I might say incidentally, sir, that you delay anything else you have to do at this point.
Secondly, I don't believe, myself, that the critical question is whether you get a particular missile before it goes off because if they shoot those missiles we are in general nuclear war.
In other words, the Soviet Union has got quite a different decision to make.
So, I'm not sure that this is, uh, necessarily the precise element, Bob.
Well, I would strongly emphasize that I think our time should be based on the assumption it is, Dean.
We don't know what kinds of communications the Soviets have with those sites.
This is why I suggest that if we're talking about an air attack, I believe we should consider it only on the assumption that we can carry it off before these become operational.
What it'd give 'em is primary, it makes the launching base, uh, for short range missiles against the United States to supplement their rather defective ICBM system, for example.
Of course, I don't see how we could prevent further ones from coming in by submarine.
Well, I think the only way to prevent them coming in, quite frankly, is to say you'll take them out the moment they come in.
You'll take them out and you'll carry on open surveillance and you'll have a policy to take them out if they come in.
If there are nuclear warheads associated with the launchers, you must assume there will be nuclear warheads associated with aircraft.
Even if there are not nuclear warheads associated with aircraft, you must assume that those aircraft have high explosive potential.
Still, about why the Soviets are doing this, uhm, Mr McCone5 suggested some weeks ago that one thing Mr Khrushchev may have in mind is that, uh, uh, he knows that we have a substantial nuclear superiority, but he also knows that we don't really live under fear of his nuclear weapons to the extent that, uh, he has to live under fear of ours.
Uhm, for the first time, I'm beginning really to wonder whether maybe Mr Khrushchev is entirely rational about Berlin.
But, uh, they may be thinking that they can either bargain Berlin and Cuba against each other, or that they could provoke us into a kind of action in Cuba which would give an umbrella for them to take action with respect to Berlin.
If they could provoke us into taking the first overt action, then the world would be confused and they would have, uh, what they would consider to be justification for making a move somewhere else.
But, uh, I must say I don't really see the rationality of, uh, the Soviets' pushing it this far unless they grossly misunderstand the importance of Cuba to this country.
It's important, I think, to recognize that they did make this decision, as far as our estimates now go, in early summer, and, this has been happening since August.
Their Tass statement of September 12, which the experts, I think, attribute very strongly to Khrushchev himself, is all mixed up on this point.
It has a rather explicit statement, ""The harmless military equipment sent to Cuba designed exclusively for defense, defensive purposes.
The president of the United States and the American military, the military of any country know what means of defense are.
The rest, as the secretary says, has many comparisons between Cuba and Italy, Turkey and Japan.
It's not likely, but it's conceivable the nuclear warheads for these launchers are not yet on Cuban soil.
It's perfectly possible that this, that they are in that sense a bluff.
The only thing I'd, would say is that, uh, this alternative course of, of warning, getting, uh, public opinion, uh, OAS action and telling people in NATO and everything like that, would appear to me to have the danger of, uh, getting us wide out in the open and forcing the Russians to, uh, Soviets to take a, a position that if anything was done, uh, they would, uh, have to retaliate.
Whereas, uh, a, a quick action, uh, with a statement at the same time saying this is all there is to it, might give them a chance to, uh, back off and not do anything.
The difficulties-I, I share the secretary of the treasury's feeling a little bit-the difficulties of organizing the OAS and NATO; the amount of noise we would get from our allies saying that, uh, they can live with Soviet MRBMs, why can't we; uh, the division in the alliance; the certainty that the Germans would feel that we were jeopardizing Berlin because of our concern over Cuba.
But, of course, warning them, uh, it seems to me, is warning everybody.
And I, I, obviously you can't sort of announce that in four days from now you're going to take them out.
They may announce within three days they're going to have warheads on 'em; if we come and attack, they're going to fire them.
Of course, we then announce, well, if they do that, then we're going to attack with nuclear weapons.
I would think this business about the Soviet reaction, that there, that might be helpful, uh, if we could maybe take some, uh, general war preparation type of action that would show them that we're ready if they want to start anything, without what you might, with starting anything.
I think we ought to, what we ought to do is, is, uh, after this meeting this afternoon, we ought to meet tonight again at six, consider these various, uh, proposals.
So it may be that we just have to, we can't wait two weeks while we're getting ready to, to roll.
We're certainly going to do number one; we're going to take out these, uh, missiles.
Uh, the questions will be whether, which, what I would describe as number two, which would be a general air strike.
You want to be clear, Mr President, whether we have definitely decided against a political track.
You're never sure of having, absolutely of getting everything down there.
But, as the secretary says here, there was unanimity among all the commanders involved in the Joint Chiefs, uh, that in our judgment, it would be a mistake to take this very narrow, selective target because it invited reprisal attacks and it may be detrimental.
Now if the, uh, Soviets have been willing to give, uh, nuclear warheads to these missiles, there is every, just as good reason for them to give nuclear capability to these bases.
We don't think we'd ever have a chance to take 'em again, so that we lose this, the first strike surprise capability.
If it really threatens the United States, then take it right out with one hard crack.
The first is what I would call the political course of action, in which we, uh, follow some of the possibilities that Secretary Rusk mentioned this morning by approaching Castro, by approaching Khrushchev, by discussing with our allies.
This seemed to me likely to lead to no satisfactory result, and it almost stops subsequent military action.
It's not twenty sorties or fifty sorties or a hundred sorties, but probably several hundred sorties.
It's very difficult to do so when we lack certain intelligence that we hope to have tomorrow or the next day.
It seems to me almost certain that any one of these forms of direct military action will lead to a Soviet military response of some type some place in the world.
But I think we should recognize that possibility, and, moreover, we must recognize it in a variety of ways.
We must recognize it by trying to deter it, which means we probably should alert SAC, probably put on an airborne alert, perhaps take other s-, alert measures.
Almost certainly, we should accompany the initial air strike with at least a partial mobilization.
We should accompany an, an invasion following an air strike with a large-scale mobilization, a very large-scale mobilization, certainly exceeding the limits of the authority we have from Congress requiring a declaration therefore of a national emergency.
We should be prepared, in the event of even a small air strike and certainly in the event of a larger air strike, for the possibility of a Cuban uprising, which would force our hand in some way.
Either force u-, us to accept a, a, uh, an unsatisfactory uprising, with all of the adverse comment that result; or would, would force an invasion to support the uprising.
I think that, um, uh, any course of action involves heavy political involvement.
Um, it's going to affect all sorts of policies, positions, uh, as well as the strategic situation.
I think also that, um, uh, we have to consider what political preparation, if any, is to occur before an air strike or in connection with any military action.
I completely agree that there isn't any doubt that if we announced that there were MRBM sites going up that that would change, uh, we would secure a good deal of political support, uh, after my statement; and, uh, the fact that we indicated our desire to restrain, this really would put the burden on the Soviet.
Because if we announce that it's there, then it's quite obvious to them that we're gonna probably do something about it.
It seems to me, uh, my press statement was so clear about how we wouldn't do anything under these conditions and under the conditions that we would.
And his statement to Kohler6 on the subject of his visit and so forth, completely hypocritical.
That was what the estimators felt, and that the Soviets would not take the risk.
Mr McCone's reasoning, however, was if this is so, then what possible reason have they got for going into Cuba in the manner in which they are with surface-to-air, uh, missiles and cruise-type missile.
He just couldn't understand while their, why the Soviets were so heavily bol-, bolstering Cuba's defensive posture.
There must be something behind it, which led him then to the belief that they must be coming in with MRBMs.
You're quite right in saying that these, these are just a few more missiles, uh, targetted on the United States.
Uh, however, they can become a, a very, a rather important adjunct and reinforcement to the, to the strike capability of the Soviet Union.
But more than that, these are, uh, uh, to our nation it means, it means a great deal more.
JFK: .. . let's just say that, uh, they get, they get these in there and then you can't, uh, they get sufficient capacity so we can't, uh, with warheads.
Then you don't want to knock 'em out , uh, there's too much of a gamble.
Then they just begin to build up those air bases there and then put more and more.
We'd have to target then with our missiles and have the same kind of, of pistol-pointed-at-the-head situation as we have in the Soviet Union at the present time.
And the fact that you got, uh, these things in the hands of Cubans, here, and then you, say your, some problem arises in Venezuela, er, you've got Castro saying, You move troops down into that part of Venezuela, we're going to fire these missiles.
Well, it's a psychological factor that we have sat back and let 'em do it to us, that is more important than the direct threat.
Not that we're going to do anything, but the existence of them, without any say about what we're gonna do.
Let's say we, twenty-four hours ahead of our doing something about it, we make a public statement that these have been found on the island.
That would, that would be notification in a sense that, uh, of their existence, and everybody could draw whatever conclusion they wanted to.
Say, say we're going to move on a Saturday and we would say on Friday that these MRBMs, that the existence of this presents the gravest threat to our security and that appropriate action must be taken.
And at the same time or simultaneously put planes over to make sure that they weren't taking any action or movement, and that you could move in if they started moving in the missiles in place or something, you would move in and knock, that would be the trigger that you would move your planes in and knock them out.
They can pull in under trees and forest and disappear almost at once, as I visualize.
And they can also be readied, perhaps, between the time we, in effect, say we're going to come in and the time we do come in.
Their bombers take off against us, then they have made a general war against Cuba of it, which is a, it then becomes much more their decision.
The political advantages are, are very strong, it seems to me, of the small strike.
Uh, it corresponds to the, the punishment fits the crime in political terms, the we are doing only what we warned repeatedly and publicly we would have to do.
Mr President, while we're considering this problem tonight, I think that we should also consider what, uh, Cuba's going to be a year from now, or two years from now.
Mr President, this is why I think tonight we ought to put on paper the alternative plans and the probable, possible consequences thereof in a way that State and Defense could agree on, even if we, uh, disagree and put in both views.
Because the consequences of these actions have not been thought through clearly.
The one that the attorney general just mentioned is illustrative of that.
If, he may be proceeding on the assumption, and this lack of a sense of apparent urgency would seem to, to support this, that this isn't going to be discovered at the moment and that, uh, when he comes over this is something he can do, a ploy.
That here is Cuba armed against the United States, or possibly use it to try to trade something in Berlin, saying he'll disarm Cuba if, uh, if we'll, uh, yield some of our interests in Berlin and some arrangement for it.
I would think one thing that I would still cling to is that he's not likely to give Fidel Castro nuclear warheads.
I'm sure his generals have been telling him for a year and a half that he had, was missing a golden opportunity to add to his strategic capability.
Yes, I think, I think you, you look at this possibility that this is an attempt to, to add to his strategic capabilities.
I think there's an enormous political advantage, myself, within these options, granting that all the Chiefs didn't fully agree, taking out the thing that gives the trouble and not the thing that doesn't give the trouble.
It seems to me that there are some major alternatives here that I don't think we discussed them fully enough today, and I'd like to see them laid on the paper, if State agrees.
And I say it isn't gonna end with one because once you start this political approach, I don't think you're gonna have any opportunity for a military operation.
Now, the second alternative, I, I'd like to discuss just a second, because we haven't discussed it fully today, and I alluded it to, to it a moment ago.
Well, it's just exactly this problem, that, that, uh, if Cuba should possess a capacity to carry out offensive actions against the U.S., the U.S. would act.
There're two kinds of, of blockade: a blockade which stops ships from coming in and, and simply a seizure, I mean a, simply a search.
And then an ul-, I call it an ultimatum associated with these two actions is a statement to the world, particularly to Khrushchev, that we have located these offensive weapons; we're maintaining a constant surveillance over them; if there is ever any indication that they're to be launched against this country, we will respond not only against Cuba, but we will respond directly against the Soviet Union with, with a full nuclear strike.
Now this alternative doesn't seem to be a very acceptable one, but wait until you work on the others.
And really what I tried to do was develop a little package that meets the action requirement of that paragraph I read.
Yeah, well, as far as the American people are concerned, action means military action, period.
October 26, 1962, 10:00 AM Secretary Rusk summarized political actions now under way.
The United States quarantine would continue until a UN quarantine is in place.
Navy ships would stay close to all Cuban ports to ensure that there were no landings unknown to the UN inspectors and no cargoes landed anywhere which UN inspectors did not see.
As to the message to Castro, he agreed in general, but wanted to have another look at it.
He doubted that it would do any good, but it might be undertaken if done now with the greatest urgency.
He said the immediate talks were aimed at getting a 2448-hour standstill on the missile buildup in Cuba.
He acknowledged that in these talks it would be impossible to obtain an agreement to make the weapons inoperable.
He wanted to know whether he should seek a standstill on all Soviet arms or only offensive weapons.
He would seek to get a commitment that there be no further construction, but it would not be possible to set up a system to ensure that the weapons were made inoperable and kept inoperable.
In addition, he needed to know whether in return we would be prepared to suspend the quarantine.
Ambassador Stevenson said the aim of the longer terin talks would be the withdrawal from this hemisphere of the strategic missiles and the dismantlement of existing sites.
He predicted that the Russians would ask us for a new guarantee of the territorial integrity of Cuba and the dismantlement of United States strategic missiles in Turkey.
Mr McCone disagreed with Ambassador Stevenson's linking of Soviet missiles in Cuba to United States missiles in Turkey.
He said the Soviet weapons in Cuba were pointed at our heart and put us under great handicap in continuing to carry out our commitments to the free world.
He urged that we do not drop the quarantine until the Soviet missiles are out of Cuba.
He believed that we must keep up the momentum so far achieved by the quarantine.
He doubted that the quarantine alone would produce a withdrawal of the weapons.
He said our objective should be to prevent further military shipments, further construction at missile sites, and to get some means of inspection.
Mr McCone urged that any inspectors sent to Cuba be United States inspectors knowledgeable about strategic missiles.
The President said he understood Ambassador Stevenson to be asking for time during which he would try to negotiate the withdrawal of the missiles.
Secretary Rusk doubted that we could get any pre-conditions to negotiation.
Secretary Dillon agreed that the Soviets could not back down merely in return for dropping the quarantine.
Mr Bundy said negotiations for a standstill or a standdown were not enough for our security because we must press, in addition, for guaranteed inspection of Cuba.
Secretary Dillon said we could not negotiate for two weeks under the missile threat which now exists in Cuba.
The President noted that there appeared to be little support for Ambassador Stevenson's plan.
General Taylor urged that we increase our reconnaissance activity in order to keep informed as to what was happening in Cuba.
The President decided to delay night reconnaissance missions, at least until the Soviets turn down U Thant's proposal.
He also agreed that we should announce publicly that construction work at the missile sites in Cuba was going on and that, therefore, we will continue our aerial reconnaissance flights.
The President also wanted attention called by a White House spokesman to his earlier speech which insisted that work at the missile sites in Cuba cease.
The President decided that a presentation of the current situation should be made to the Congressional Leaders.
Secretary McNamara reported on the positions of Soviet Bloc ships moving toward Cuba.
He said we do not know yet whether any such ships will enter the interception area.
Under Secretary Ball pointed out that the Soviets did not know the extent of our quarantine zone.
The Russians would then be in a position to decide whether to turn back their tanker or allow her to enter the quarantine zone sometime later today.
Secretary McNamara also recommended that a night reconnaissance mission be flown-Secretary Rusk recommended against a night flight.
The President instructed the Defense Department to place the night reconnaissance planes on the alert and to prepare a public announcement of the mission in order that a final decision to be taken this afternoon could be promptly implemented.
The discussion then turned to the question of United States missiles in Turkey.
Mr Nitze said it would be an anathema to the Turks to pull the missiles out.
He feared the next Soviet step would be a demand for the denuclearization of the entire NATO area.
He urged us to focus attention on Cuba rather than on United States bases in other countries.
At this point in the meeting the partial text of a Soviet public statement was read by the President as it was received in the room.
The President commented that the statement was a very tough position and varied considerably from the tone of Khrushchev's personal letter to the President received last night.
The President felt that the Soviet position would get wide support and said we should consider making public the Khrushchev private letter.
Secretary Rusk returned to the question of United States missiles in Turkey and pointed out that this subject must be kept separate from Soviet missiles in Cuba.
The Turkish missile problem should be dealt with in the context of NATO vs.
Mr Bundy said we could not accept the Soviet proposal on Turkish missiles because the Soviet missiles were not out of Cuba.
The President recalled that he had asked that consideration be given to the withdrawal of United States missiles from Turkey some days previously.
Under Secretary Ball replied that the Department had decided it could not raise this question with the Turks at this time for fear of a disastrous Turkish reaction.
He said the question had been raised with Finletter12 in Paris and study was being given to whether any method could be worked out to reassure the Turks if we were going to offer to withdraw the Jupiter missiles.
Mr Bundy said we cannot get into the position of appearing to sell out an ally,e.
Turkey, to serve our own interests,e. getting the Soviet missiles out of Cuba.
The President commented that the Russians had made the Turkish missile withdrawal proposal in the most difficult possible way.
Now that their proposal is public, we have no chance to talk privately to the Turks about the missiles, which, for a long time, we have considered to be obsolete.
Secretary Dillon said that it was possible that the Russians had made their public statement as part of a stalling tactic to provide them with sufficient time for a fullfledged confrontation with us.
Ambassador Stevenson argued for releasing his statement in an effort to keep the ""peace offensive"" from going to the Soviets.
There ensued a discussion of how to handle the discrepancy between the Khrushchev private letter and the Russian offer made public in the Soviet statement.
A suggestion was made that the Russian proposals contained in the private Khrushchev letter be made public.
He said we must ensure that the construction work on the missile sites in Cuba be stopped at once.
He suggested that we talk to the Turks about the missiles, pointing out to them the great peril facing them during the next week.
He acknowledged that the Turks were now in no position to make a statement to the effect that they would ask that the Jupiters be withdrawn.
Secretary Rusk suggested that we tell the Turks they must say that the Jupiter problem is a NATO problem and is not associated with the Cuban missile problem.
Secretary McNamara called attention to the fact that the missiles belonged to Turkey and that only the nuclear warheads are under our total control.
The President returned to a discussion of where we now find ourselves,e. we now have Soviet public proposals and Khrushchev's private proposals.
What we must seek is an immediate cessation of the work on offensive missiles in Cuba.
One explanation for the varying Soviet proposals is that the hard line Russians wanted to make public their preferred demands in order to make impossible progress toward the Khrushchev private offer which may have been drafted by those who are less hard-nosed.
The President noted that it appeared to him that the Russians were making various proposals so fast, one after the other, that they were creating a kind of shield behind which work on the missile sites in Cuba continued.
He said we had a perfectly defensible position,e. work on the missile sites must stop.
Secretary McNamara added the thought that these offensive weapons must be made inoperable.
Mr Bundy suggested that we tell Khrushchev privately that the position in their public statement was impossible for us, but that the position Khrushchev took in his private letter was different and we were studying these proposals.
He resumed the discussion by saying that Khrushchev obviously is attempting to limit our freedom of action in Cuba by introducing the question of the missile bases outside this hemisphere.
Mr Alexis Johnson reported that he had just been informed that the Turkish Government had issued a press statement saying that the Russian proposal with respect to Jupiters in Turkey was not conceivable.
Revisions were made in the Gilpatric draft, which was issued shortly thereafter in the form attached.
The Attorney General said that the statement might make people think that if the Russians stopped the missile buildup in Cuba, we would be willing to withdraw our missiles from Turkey.
He desired that we make doubly clear that Turkish NATO missiles were one problem and that Cuba was an entirely separate problem.
Mr Gilpatric stated that it was crucial for us to stand on the position that we will not negotiate with the Russians while the Soviet missile threat is growing in Cuba.
The President recalled that over a year ago we wanted to get the Jupiter missiles out of Turkey because they had become obsolete and of little military value.
If the missiles in Cuba added 50% to Soviet nuclear capability, then to trade these missiles for those in Turkey would be of great military value.
But we are now in the position of risking war in Cuba and in Berlin over missiles in Turkey which are of little military value.
From the political point of view, it would be hard to get support on an airstrike against Cuba because many would think that we would make a good trade if we offered to take the missiles out of Turkey in the event the Russians would agree to remove the missiles from Cuba.
We are in a bad position if we appear to be attacking Cuba for the purpose of keeping useless missiles in Turkey.
We cannot propose to withdraw the missiles from Turkey, but the Turks could offer to do so.
The Turks must be informed of the great danger in which they will live during the next week and we have to face up to the possibility of some kind of a trade over missiles.
The President left the meeting to meet the State Governors who had been waiting for one-half hour to see him.
It was not possible to say with certainty whether the Soviet public offer included all NATO bases or referred specifically to Turkey.
The Attorney General expressed his concern as to what our position would be if we talked to the Russians for sixty days and then the Cubans refused to permit UN 14.
There was discussion of a second statement to be put out but this proposal was later abandoned.
A draft message to Khrushchev, which had been prepared by Ambassador Thompson,15 was read and a final version was to be completed for the President's consideration later in the day.
At the meeting at the State Department, the Attorney General repeated his view that we should keep the focus on the missile bases.
He preferred to let the Soviet tankers through the quarantine line in order to avoid a confrontation with the Soviets over one of their ships.
He urged that we buy time now in order to launch an air attack Monday or Tuesday.
Secretary McNamara expressed his view that before we attack Cuba we must notify the Cubans.
October 27, 1962, 4:00 PM Secretary McNamara reported on today's daylight reconnaissance mission.
One mission aborted for mechanical reasons, according to preliminary reports.
One plane is overdue and several are said to have encountered ground fire.
There followed a discussion of a draft letter from the President to Khrushchev.
The President added to the draft an offer to discuss with the Russians the proposals they had made public.
The formulation included a comment that Khrushchev must realize that matters relating to NATO must be discussed at a later time.
The purpose of the message was to obtain the halting of work on the bases in Cuba as a condition to discussion of various other problems.
Secretary Rusk reported that one of our U-2 planes had overflown the Soviet Union by accident due to navigational error.
The Secretary thought that the Russians would make a loud fuss about this incident.
The President decided not to make the incident public, but be prepared to do so as soon as the Soviets publicized it.
The President asked whether we wanted to continue to say that we would talk only about the missiles in Cuba.
He believed that for the next few hours we should emphasize our position that if the Russians will halt missile activity in Cuba we would be prepared to discuss NATO problems with the Russians.
He felt that we would not be in a position to offer any trade for several days.
He did feel that if we could succeed in freezing the situation in Cuba and rendering the strategic missiles inoperable, then we would be in a position to negotiate with the Russians.
Mr Bundy pointed out that there would be a serious reaction in NATO countries if we appeared to be trading withdrawal of missiles in Turkey for withdrawal of missiles from Cuba.
The President responded that if we refuse to discuss such a trade and then take military action in Cuba, we would also be in a difficult position.
The President left the room to talk to General Norstad16 on the KY-9 secure telephone to Paris.
In the President's absence the message to U Thant was further discussed.
Secretary Rusk questioned whether the Russians are trying at the last minute to obtain more of a quid pro quo from us or whether they are introducing new elements in the picture merely to weaken our public position worldwide.
Secretary McNamara pointed out, in connection with the current military situation, that a limited airstrike on Cuba was now impossible because our reconnaissance planes were being fired on.
He felt that we must now look to the major airstrike to be followed by an invasion of Cuba.
If we could do this he felt that the Soviets would not attack Turkey when we invaded Cuba.
Our objective should be to seek to avoid any Soviet attack in Europe as a response to our invasion of Cuba.
Ambassador Thompson commented that it was impossible to draw any conclusions from the fact that one of our reconnaissance planes over Cuba had been shot at.
The President returned to the meeting, accompanied by General Lemnitzer.
The President approved the final revision of the statement to U Thant, which was to be phoned to U Thant and released here publicly.
If we reject Soviet efforts to tie in NATO problems to the Cuban situation, then we could persuade NATO to take the same position.
An additional reason for a NATO meeting then is that if the Russians do attack the NATO countries we do not want them to say that they had not been consulted about the actions we were taking in Cuba.
NATO does not realize what may be coming and the Europeans do not realize that we may face a choice of invading Cuba or taking the missiles out of Turkey.
Secretary McNamara urged that a NATO meeting be held tomorrow only if we have decided to launch our strike tomorrow.
He repeated his hope that we can act in such a way as to reduce the pressure on the Russians to hit Turkey.
Secretary Rusk recommended that mobilization measures be authorized immediately.
The President suggested that we talk immediately to the Turks, explaining to them what we were planning to do with our missiles and then explain the entire situation to the North Atlantic Council.
The President said that the key to any letter to Khrushchev was the demand that work cease on the missile sites in Cuba.
He predicted that if we make no mention of Turkey in our letter, Khrushchev will write back to us saying that if we include Turkey, then he would be prepared to settle the Cuban situation.
The President said this would mean that we would lose twenty-four hours while they would continue to work on the bases and achieve an operational status for more of their missiles.
He suggested that we would be willing to guarantee not to invade Cuba if the Soviet missiles were taken out.
Secretary Rusk returned to the Stevenson draft, which the President approved as revised.
The phrase ""and assurance of peace in the Caribbean"" was discussed and the reference to no invasion of Cuba was omitted.
The President also agreed not to call a meeting of the North Atlantic Council.
The Attorney General commented that in his opinion the Stevenson draft letter was defensive.
The State Department draft merely said that we accepted Khrushchev's offer.
Secretary McNamara asked what we should do about air surveillance tomorrow.
He stated his recommendation,e. if our reconnaissance planes are fired on, we will attack the attackers.
General Taylor noted that in order to be ready to invade on Monday, we must continue intensive air surveillance.
If our planes are fired on, we must be prepared for a general response or an attack on the SAM site which fired on our planes.
We will decide tomorrow how we return fire after we know if they continue their attacks on our planes and after we hear from U Thant the Russian reply to our offer.
The President considered a draft message to the Turks about their missiles.
His objective was to persuade the Turks to suggest to us that we withdraw our missiles.
He noted that negotiations with the Turks were very difficult if there was any life left in the proposal which we had asked U Thant to make to the Russians.
General Taylor read a late report of the shooting down of the U-2 reconnaissance plane in Cuba which said that the wreckage of the U-2 was on the ground and that the pilot had been killed.
He felt that we should make an air attack tomorrow on the SAM site responsible for shooting down the U-2 plane.
If we leave United States missiles in Turkey, the Soviets might attack Turkey.
However, we should make every effort to reduce the chance of a Soviet attack on Turkey.
In an informal discussion following the formal end of the meeting, the Vice President asked why we were not prepared to trade the withdrawal of United States missiles from Turkey for the withdrawal of the Soviet missiles from Cuba, if we were prepared to give up the use of United States missiles in Turkey.
Under Secretary Ball responded that last week we thought it might be acceptable to trade the withdrawal of the missiles in Turkey if such action would save Berlin.
He felt that we could accept the Soviet offer and replace the missiles in Turkey by assigning Polaris submarines to the area.
