Fifty-seven years ago, the United States and the Soviet Union stood on the threshold of a nuclear holocaust.
In October 1962, the United States nuclear arsenal was decisively superior to Russia.
Moreover, in the early 1960’s the delivery time from the launching site to the target was a crucial factor.
It took approximately 30 minutes for the Soviet missiles to reach the United Sates.
This was enough time for the Americans to retaliate with a deadly counterstrike.From Cuba, the Soviet missiles would have been able to destroy most of the United States military and urban centers in 7-10 minutes.Another important factor was that the missile accuracy significantly increased with the proximity of the target, making the Marxist island of Cuba the perfect choice to greatly improve Soviet nuclear capacity.In May 1962, the newly appointed Ambassador Alexander Alexeyev, presented the plans to Fidel Castro, who welcomed the idea.
They where received at the airport by Marshal Rodion Malinovsky and Politburo member Anastas Mikoyan.
Next day, Raúl Castro and Guevara met with Khrushchev and arranged the details of the Soviet missiles’ deployment in Cuba, that was to be always under the direct control of the Soviet military command.In mid-July 1962, Soviet cargo ships began moving out of the Black Sea for Cuba.
It was to be a secret operation to allow the full deployment of the nuclear missiles before the United States discovered it.
On September 8, the freighter Omsk brought the first shipment of the MRBM missiles.
Seven days later the Poltava arrived at the Port of Mariel, continuing the delivery of the nuclear rockets that could destroy most cities in the U.S.The first report of large containers been transported from Mariel to the Rosario mountains in Pinar del Rio was provided to Washington by the Cuban underground resistance.On August 10, 1962, after analyzing the reports sent by the Cubans, the CIA Director John Mc Cone dictated a memorandum for President John Kennedy expressing his belief that Soviet missiles where arriving in Cuba.
On August 17, based on additional information from the Cuban underground members, CIA Director McCone presented to a high-level administration official his circumstantial evidence indicating that the Soviet were constructing sites platform to place nuclear missiles in Cuba.Secretary of State Dean Rusk and Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara disagreed with McCone’s assessment arguing that the Russian build up was purely defensive.
National Security Advisor McGeorge Bundy decided to wait until morning to alert President Kennedy.
McGeorge Bundy informed President Kennedy that “hard photographic evidence” had been obtained showing Soviet nuclear sites and missiles in Cuba.
Kennedy immediately call an 11:45m. meeting and dictated the names of the fourteen or so advisers he wanted present.
This is the group that became known as the “ExComm” – the Executive Committee of the National Security council.
Photographic evidence was presented to the group, including pictures of missile sites under construction with canvas-covered missile trailers.For the next five days, in absolute secrecy, the president and close advisors analyzed the available options.
At the end, it was decided to confront, head-on, the Soviet challenge.On Friday, October 19 at 9:45m. in a cabinet room meeting at the White House, the analysts confirmed that there were increasingly certain that two sites near Guanajay were intended for the 2,200 mile-range nuclear missiles.
Seeing new evidence of a nuclear warhead storage site in the area, the analysts predicted that the missiles could be operational in 2-6 weeks.
Despite White House secrecy precautions, several newspapers had, by this time, pieced together most of the details of the crisis.
Pierre Salinger White House Press Secretary notified President Kennedy in four separate calls during the day that security was crumbling.
The Russian ambassador was informed by the president’s brother that the United States was ready to destroy the missile bases and launch an invasion of Cuba if the missiles were not dismantled and removed.Immediately, Robert Kennedy stressed that he wasn’t talking about weeks but hours.
President Kennedy gave instructions for a provisional Cuban government to be prepared with José Miró Cardona as leader of a free Cuba.The roles had been reversed.
Declassified Soviet documents indicate that it was the Russian leaders who were surprised and hesitant at the firmness of President Kennedy, who was willing to wipe out the Russian missile installations in Cuba.It was at this critical moment on October 26 that Fidel Castro’s disregard for the welfare of the Cuban people became evident.
He wrote to Khrushchev, calling on the Soviets to launch a pre-emptive nuclear attack against the Unites States.The next day, a U-2 plane was shot down over Cuba.
The final chapter of Castro’s regime was about to begin when suddenly the Soviet Politburo blinked and gave up the deployment of nuclear missiles in Cuba.The crisis was resolved with the withdrawal of the missiles from the island in exchange for a promise that the United States would dismantle its missiles in Turkey and would not invade Cuba.
Nikita Khrushchev was ousted by the Politburo two years later for his embarrassing fiasco in Cuba, and Fidel Castro survived until his death in 2016 as a senile tyrant of a failed Marxist-Leninist revolution.
