GRAAD 12 NATIONAL SENIOR CERTIFICATE GRADE 12 HISTORY P1 FEBRUARY/MARCH 2012 ADDENDUM This addendum consists of 12 pages.
SOURCE 1A The source below focuses on Khrushchev's reasons to deploy nuclear missiles in Cuba.
A declassified military history of the Jupiter system reveals that the rockets became operational in April 1962 … and that contributed to Khrushchev's proposal to deploy nuclear missiles in Cuba.
SOURCE 2A This source consists of a written and a visual source about African socialism in Tanzania.
Within the Declaration there was a commitment to raising basic living standards.
Humaneness in its fullest sense rather than wealth creation must come first.
Societies become better places through the development of people rather than increasing production.
The policy met with significant political resistance especially when people were forced into rural communes.
Nearly 10 million peasants were moved and many were effectively forced to give up their land.
However, the focus on human development and self-reliance did bring some success in other areas notably in health, education and in political identity.
Education had to work for the common good, foster cooperation and promote equality.
This photograph shows Tanzanian women cleaning a communal plot of land.
I really think I ran the most successful single-party system on the continent.
It was a single huge nationalist movement … I don't believe that our country would be where it is now if we had a multiplicity of parties, which would have become tribal and caused us a lot of problems.
When I stepped down, there was 91% literacy and nearly every child was in school.
This statement was made by J Atkin published in In Motion Magazine in December 1999.
When Nyerere felt the members of Parliament, all elected from the single party, Tanganyikan African National Union were out of touch with the people, he made them walk the two hundred miles through the countryside to the annual party meeting in Mwanza.
Hot and dusty, they stayed with the people in the villages, reexperiencing the real conditions in the country, not those of the city and the educated civil-service class.
SOURCE 3A Below is an excerpt from Speeches that Changed the World on the Civil Rights Movement.
In the late '50s and '60s, when America was burning as it wrestled with its collective conscience over racial discrimination, a young Baptist minister stepped to the fore to lead the struggle for equality.
The man was Dr Martin Luther King Jr, an eloquent (wellspoken), mesmerising preacher driven to rid his country of racial discrimination.
He was thrust into the international spotlight when he led the bus boycott in the town of Montgomery, Alabama.
It was sparked after black factory worker Rosa Parks was arrested for refusing to give up her seat in a section of a bus reserved for whites.
The boycott motivated the United States Supreme Court to outlaw racial segregation on public transport.
This was a victory for Martin Luther King Jr and his lieutenants in the South Christian Leadership Conference.
The following extract is part of the letter Martin Luther King Jr wrote while he was in jail in Birmingham.
The nations of Asia and Africa are moving with jet-like speed toward the goal of political independence, and we still creep at horse and buggy pace toward the gaining of a cup of coffee at a lunch counter.
But when you have seen vicious mobs lynch your mothers and fathers at will and drown your sisters and brothers at whim ; when you have seen hate-filled policemen curse, kick and even kill your brothers and sisters … then you will understand why we find it difficult to wait.
This is a photograph showing an African-American demonstrator being attacked by police dogs in Birmingham, Alabama, 1963.
The following is part of the famous 'I have a dream' speech delivered by Martin Luther King Jr.
As a result of the march and the speech, the citizens of the nation began to put growing pressure on the presidential administration of John F Kennedy, encouraging the President to push for civil rights laws to pass through Congress and become recognised on a national level.
We hold these truths to be self-evident, that all men are created equal.
This extract focuses on the growing disagreement over the Civil Rights Movement.
Despite the civil rights acts, the reality of United States life remained that African Americans were overwhelmingly poorer than whites and they were much less likely to find employment.
Consequently, a new movement appeared, influenced by younger and more militant blacks who argued that the civil rights acts had done very little to end racism or discrimination in the areas where it was most needed.
Prominent among them was Malcolm X, who pointed out that, although segregation was illegal in the north of the country, blacks were still often the targets of racial discrimination.
Organisations such as the Black Panthers argued against a strategy of peaceful civil disobedience and called, instead, for all-out war against white America.
Growing racial tension erupted into terrible violence across the USA in 1965.
SOURCE 4A This extract focuses on the language policy of the Department of Bantu Education.
The issue that caused massive discontent and made resentment boil over into the 1976 uprising was a decree issued by the Bantu Education Department.
The Deputy Minister Andries Treurnicht sent instructions to the school boards, inspectors and principals to the effect that Afrikaans should be put on an equal basis with English and had to be used as a medium of instruction in all schools.
These instructions drew immediate negative reaction from various quarters of the community.
The first body to react was the Tswana School Board, which comprised school boards from Meadowlands, Dobsonville and other areas in Soweto.
Therefore the Secretary for the Bantu Education has the responsibility of satisfying the Englishand Afrikaans-speaking people.
They were influenced by national organisations such as the Black Peoples' Convention , South African Student Organisations and by the Black Consciousness philosophy.
They rejected the idea of being taught in the language of the oppressor.
This is a statement by Khotso Seatlholo – a student and member of the Soweto Students Representative Council, 29 October 1976.
Taken from www.sahistory.org.za/classroom/education-350years/timeline/1970s. html.
In a statement on behalf of the Soweto Students Representative Council , Khotso Seatlholo says, 'We have the full right to stand up and reject the whole system of apartheid.
This extract focuses on Jimmy Kruger's viewpoint of the role of the police during the Soweto Uprising.
Jimmy Kruger, the Minister of Justice and Police, told an emotionally charged gathering in Parliament that the government had 'not expected anything like this to happen' and could have done nothing to avoid the crisis.
He simply blamed the 'riots' on 'agitators' who were polarising the races in South Africa' and emphatically denied that the police provoked the violence.
I have not found any grievances that would indicate that the Bantu Administration has flopped on the job.
Soweto – A History Chrisp, P 2002. 20th Century Leaders Cooper, F 2002.
Thinkers on Education – Julius Nyerere (Paris; UNESCO Publishing) Lane, P 1978.
Biko – The Quest for a True Humanity The Star, 21 April 2011 Waugh, S 2001.
