SHELDON M STERN Newton, Massachusetts Scholars now have access to audiotapes of the meetings between President Kennedy and his advisers made during the 1962 Cuban missile crisis.
This article, by the former Kennedy Library historian who listened to these tapes between 1981 and 1996 and recently checked selections from the published book against the recorded words, reveals that the transcripts contain many errors that significantly distort the historical record.
The author discusses a representative sample of these inaccuracies, suggests how they can mislead scholars, and argues that subsequent printings and future revised editions should document and identify all changes and corrections of the original 1997 transcripts.
From my own long experience, I knew all too well how difficult and frustrating it could be to work with these noisy, low-fidelity reel-to-reel tapes.
Complete transcripts would be of inestimable value to historians, teachers, and lay readers alike.
This article addresses the fact that the transcripts are, unfortunately, far less accurate than they could or should have been.
A plethora of transcription errors distort the substance Sheldon M Stern, a historian and educational consultant, served as the historian at the John F Kennedy Library in Boston from 1977 through 1999.
Also, the omission or mistranscription of passages clearly audible in the original tapes raises troubling questions about the noise-reduction technology used by the editors.
The present author reviewed these transcripts using a home tape player and low-tech Kennedy Library cassettes—without digital audiotape, a real-time timer, or any kind of noise-reduction system.
Zelikow, is now using more expensive and “far better technology” than available in 1997, scholars should be concerned about whether any technical problems have been overcome.
The editors explained that they had commissioned a team of professional court reporters to prepare a set of “draft transcripts” from the Kennedy Library tapes.
Then, audio experts, using NONOISE, a “technically advanced noise-reduction system,” had produced an improved set of tapes, subsequently checked by the court reporters to be sure that nothing had been lost.
The two of us then worked with the tapes and the court reporters’ drafts to produce the transcripts printed here.
Notwithstanding the high professionalism of the court reporters, we had to amend and rewrite almost all their texts.
For several especially difficult sessions, we prepared transcriptions ourselves from scratch.
In a final stage, we asked some veterans of the Kennedy administration to review the tapes and our transcripts in order to clear up as many as possible of the remaining puzzles.
The reader has here the best text we can produce, but it is certainly not perfect.
If they find an error or make out something we could not, we will enter the corrections in subsequent editions or printings of this volume.
However, several months ago, I was unable to find those words in the May-Zelikow transcript.
At that point, I decided to listen again to the entire tape and what I discovered left me dismayed.
The transcript is marred by errors that undermine its practical value for historians, teachers, or the general reader.
Despite the often-poor sound quality of the Kennedy Library cassettes, many of these mistranscriptions were nonetheless clear enough to be heard conclusively.
Since the devil is in the details, we will examine specific examples, side by side, first from the October 18 meeting and then from a spot check of the other transcripts.
None of it changes what a reader of the transcripts takes away concerning the essence or even the minute details of the deliberations that took place in the Oval Office and Cabinet Room in those terrifying thirteen days of October 1962.
The following article should be regarded as a document or source text with which scholars may evaluate for themselves the importance of the problems in an influential and widely distributed historical resource—problems its editors have essentially denied even exist.
But I suppose the only way we have of [using Rusk: I would suppose there would be no real diffithat is] getting two-thirds vote to take necessary culty in getting a two-thirds vote in favor of action.
But if we made an effort and the two-thirds vote , then at least we will failed to get the two-thirds vote, which I doubt have tried as far as the American people are would be the result, then at least we would have concerned.
We’ll have done that. tried as far as the American people are concerned, to have done . . . to have done our . . . to have done our best on that.
I would think you have to go JFK: I would think you have to go on the assumption on the defensive, are not going to commit nuclear that they’re not going to permit nuclear weapons weapons to be used against the United States from to be used against the United States from Cuba.
This is one of the most important McNamara: This is one of the most important thoughts we face in properly interpreting the problems we face in properly interpreting the readiness of these missiles. readiness of these missiles.
We have been deterred, to my view, from Taylor: It may have been a deterrent to my getting ready to invade Cuba, as I think you know. enthusiasm for an invasion of Cuba, as I think On the other hand, now that we see that it’s not you know.
Bundy: I don’t think there’s any harm Bundy: I don’t think there’s any harm in having a in having a neutral-nation inspection instead of neutral-nation proposal for immediate inspection sanitization.
Bundy: I don’t think there’s any bite. harm in having a neutral nation for immediate inspection and sort of sanitization.
I want to say very clearly to the military that I JFK: I want to say very clearly to the military that I recognize the appreciable problems in any military recognize we increase your problems in any action we have to take in Cuba by the warning military action we have to take in Cuba by the we’re now giving. warning we’re now giving.
The legal foundation is, such an act can McNamara: The legal foundation of such an act is be confused . confused.
His public line seems designed Rusk: In spite of their threats of resistance to to leave him with some option to back off, if he United States efforts to stop Soviet ships, his chooses.
The impression of a pure U.S.-Cuban public line seems designed to leave him with some fracas will be hard to maintain once we’re in a option to back off, if he chooses.
On balance we think fiction of a pure U.S.-Cuban fracas will be hard to the probable Soviet is to provoke such an maintain once there’s a U.S.-Soviet incident at incident, in the expectation that the result sea.
On balance we think it probable the Soviets will stimulate pressures on the United States to will risk such an incident, in the expectation that end the quarantine.
Here lies the very kinds of the resultant further rise in tension will stimulate compromise proposed.
This will gain time for the pressures on the United States to end the quarantine.
And Soviets to determine whether the United States here lies the various kinds of compromise on the issues, and whether the Soviet line proposed.
Unidentified: The other explanation Nitze: The other explanation might be that they’re might be that they’re counting on taking political counting on taking forceful action against the first action against the when we did that. one we intercept.
That’s right. : Unidentified: The other explanation Nitze: Afraid this will spread the war at sea . . . might be that they’re counting on taking forceful action against the when we intercept.
Dillon?: I thought the statement last McCone : I thought the statement last night was pretty good. the significance night was pretty good—had altered his course and of it. we don’t know the significance of it. : McCone: I thought the statement last night was pretty good. the significance of it.
Now, the only question I’ve got is how do we still JFK: Now, the only question I’ve got is how do we justify this ship.
In any case, it was successful and I think McNamara: In any case, it’s been successful and I the destroyers . think to do any good the story must be put out immediately.
He said the knockdown of the Cuba trick [in Bundy: He said that the knockdown of the trip to the morning statement] had been very well Cuba had been very well received there. received there.
Obviously, they’re not going to settle the Cuban JFK: Obviously, they’re not going to settle the Cuban question until they get some compensation on question until they get some conversation on Cuba.
I imagine the airports must be looking JFK: I imagine the Air Force must be a little bad . . . mad. . . : JFK: We got the signs of life JFK: We had decided Saturday night to begin this air to begin this air strike on Tuesday . strike on Tuesday . : corrected JFK: But we want you to know that Adlai is JFK: But we want U Thant to know that Adlai is our our voice. voice.
May and Zelikow, both highly regarded scholars, have assured readers that if in listening to the original tapes they discover errors or make out unclear remarks, corrections will be included in future editions or printings.
Also, in the fourth printing, the editors have neither acknowledged these corrections in the preface nor identified them in the text itself.
Of course, the editors and other historians would never assume that any transcript can be absolutely reliable or accurate.
The revisions suggested above will inevitably include some errors; the editing process can never be final or perfect.
If the editors disagree with these findings, I would be delighted to listen to any of these disputed passages, in private or in public, using the Kennedy Library tapes or the NONOISE tapes.
Entirely new transcripts of the missile crisis tapes are now in preparation by the Miller Center, but that in no way addresses the fact that many thousands of the seriously flawed editions discussed above remain in libraries, schools, and private collections.
Regrettably, the claims made for the accuracy and historical value of The Kennedy Tapes transcripts are clearly too good to be true.
