They linked the lifting of the quarantine with an announcement cancelling the ""state of readiness 11 maintained since October 23 by the Sovie, armed forces.
So far, Moscow has net rent ved iU call for an American pledge not to invade Cuba, A TASS dispatch, distributed abroad, led off with the President's order to lift the quarantine.
It quoted the President as saying this move was in line with an understanding reached with Khrushchev.
The U.S, has satisfied itself that all known missile sites in Cuba have been closed down and has received assurances that all IL-28 bombers ""will be withdrawn in 30 days,"" the dispatch said.
No mention was made of inspection* The Cubans responded quickly and at length with a commenta..y on the Havana television network laat night.
Almost no press reaction has been reported from other areas on the press conference.
The news came loo late for early editions, and comment will be further delayed.
It is probable that Soviet propaganda soon will use the President's remarks about the fulfillment of certain USSR obligations to play up Moscow's ""peaceful coexistence 11 role.
Press Conference and Soviet Moves The TASS report on the press conference has so far not been disseminated domestically, Soviet radio audiences hea. d in an unscheduled newscast at noon Moscow time only that the President has ordered the lifting of the naval quarantine.
At the »ame time, the Soviet commander of the Warsaw Pact forces issued instruction f cancelling a number of yet unspecified military preparedness measures instituted when the Cuban crisis started.
His order was based on the argument that tension in the Caribbean has eased, and so has related tension in Europe.
According to the broadcast, the United States was placed in the position of provoking war or honoring its commitments to Khrushchev.
The lifting of the naval blockade was a ""partial application* 1 of the agreement which ""doubtlessly contributes to easing of tensions in the Caribbean. fl The Cuban also said the President ''reiterated his willingness to give guarantees against an invasion of our island oy the United States.
M In addition, the quarantine removal will facilitate withdrawal of the IL-28 bombers on which the United States hat* insisted for political reasons, Again Havana said the bombers are ""obsolete, slow speed and low altitude"" aircraft which ""coulc not undertake offensive actions wortiy of the name.
Brazil continues its ploys* Cuba is stressing the peace theme, and underscores it by relinquishing the bombers.
La Prensa recommended that the UN ""take cognizance of the facts and intervene. . in the verification of the dismantlement of the Cuban basee.
It is an arm of Communist imperialism, "" In Brazil, the November 24 issue of South America's magazine of greatest circulation, O Cruzeiro, carried an article by the respected 4 £tr political commentator Theophilo de Andrade which said, ""Neutralism now reveals itself a deception to weaken those who adopt it and an open road for the Red forces obedient to the Kremlin, The only security against Communist imperiali m is alliance with the West.
His latest move reported by France Presse is the designation of one of his most notoriously neutralist aides, Santiago Dantas, as a special emissary to Washington to explain Brazil's position to the United States administration.
He had previously indicated his displeasure with Brazilian Naval chiefs who favored positive military backing of the United States blockade.
Retired Admiral Silvio Heck, an outspoken critic of Goulart's Cuban policy, was arrestedVice Admiral Helio Gamier Sampaio,was removed from his post as Commander of the Navy General Staff.
He had proposed Brazilian destroyers rendezvous in Northeastern waters as a stand-by position nearer the Caribbean, ( ( WESTERN EUROPE West European media expressed concern over the diplomatic stalemate in the Cuban crisis.
Castro's intransigeance, attributed in many quarters to Red China's support, was viewed as the major cause of the deadlock.
Some papers warned against Soviet duplicity but others felt that Khrushchev was doing his best with the thorny Cuban problem.
The United States was viewed as holding the top cards and urgsd to continue its firm stand.
Prominence was given to reports of impending EastWest negotiations and some attention was focused on Sino-Soviet relations.
Concern Over Delay A number of papers expressed concern ever the long delay in implementing the KennedyKhrushchev agreement.
U« S Position Strong Many papers felt that the United States enjoyed strong advantages in the present situation and argued against any concessions or any weakening of the original agreement.
Influential L.e Monde, Paris, nointed out that a continuation of the blockade would reduce Cuba to the status of a semidependent country while the failure to carry out the agreement would permit Kennedy to reconsider his ccmmitm^t not to invade.
Munich's Sueddeutsch e Zeitung, left-center, held that ""any fear that Kennedy might accept Khrushchev's reported pi opos&l to recognize the German Democratic Republic in exchange for complete Sovi^L withdrawal from Cuba i3 without foundation.
The press also gave prominence to Mayor Brandt* s speech closing a conference of prominent German and American leaders in which he stressed the need for Western initiative on Berlin.
Rome's II Tempo also urged the need for Western preparation, solidarity and determination.
The paper warned that the major question is not the removal of offensive weapons from Cuba, but whether the ""Soviet policy in favor of easing tension or the Chinese bellicose policy will prevail within the communist world. "" ftlr A(s AFRICA Media and official public reaction in Africa continued to be light and varied.
The President of Togo said the American action was n understandable ,f but certain newspapers in Ghana and Nigeria continued their criticism of the United States The scattered post-mortems on the crisis ranged from an alleged connection between Cub^ and the United States elections to a warning that the Soviets may try similar maneuvers elsewhere.
Attitudes Toward United States Actions One of the few pablic expressions of official support for the UcS. came in a atat^mrnt by the President of Togo.
After commenting that the quarantine might have been submitted to UN decision, Mr Olympio said that ""no one would permit a revolver to be pointed at his head* 1 and that the ""action of the United States is understandable.
The ofxicial rr.dio station stated that the ""blockade"" continued in effect despite withdrawal of the missiles and that ""this compels people to wonder if the inissile base excuse was in fact genuine, "" The radio also alleged a connection between Cuba and the United States election.
In Nigeria the West African Pilot, consistently critical of the United States in the Cuban crisis, carried a story mentioning the Alpha 66 ""gang pirates created by the U,S,"" and condemning American ""naked aggression"" against Cuba.
An article in the Daily Express reviewed the pros and cons of American interest in Cuba but was on balance critical.
Post-Mortems on the Crisis L'Action, organ of the governing Neo-Destour party in Tunisia, carried an interpretive article entitled ""Mr Khrushchev's Calculated Risk,"" citing Cuba asxd the Sino-Indian conflict as examples of the Communist tactic of making ''outrageous moves"" in the hopes of securing significant gains in the process of reaching a new settlementReferring to a ""reason of principle"" making it impossible for the United States to swap the bases in Turkey for those in Cuba, the writer warned against permitting Soviet use of the' ""calculated risk"" elsewhere.
NEAR EAST AND SOUTH ASIA Removal of the miasiles from Cuba was merely the beginning, not the end of the Cuba crisis in the opinion of commentators in the Near East and South Asia.
Other trouble spots, they also say, still exist, and the Soviet Union may request United States concessions in exchange for Soviet concessions in Cuba.
The United States will remain firm, however, say America's friends, while ""neutrals"" blame ""obstinate and hard conditions"" by the United States for the lack of a solution to the Cuba crisis.
Removal of these bases would lessen close cooperation between Turkey and the U.S, and would react against the feeling of Turkish people that the United States will immediate 1 } come to Turkey's help when necessary.
Sly FAR EAST Jjap^pan-cmese media gave renewed attention to Cub^. liasrst v^^eek in concentrating straight news coverage oon n tha-^e bomber removal issue.
Wide play was ggivrven ""^ to Castro's announcement that he would ggivrve \z""^op the Soviet bombers.
The Manila TTimfr^ 8 * however, questioned the validity of the rFepor^t about hidden missiles and voiced the p r gs3 :ibility that it might be an effort on tht part orf chf^^ advocates of a Cuban invasion to change thne president's restrained policy.
Japan J s number one paper, ran a aix-part analysis *v^ec * 'Wo rid Aiter Cuba.
This con^nentarv was a:i taming m* r j 12 £g infrequent example of an appreciation of balance -of -power considerations by the Asahi, The idea was partially echoed by a leading NHK (quasigovernmental) TV commentator who said the Cuba issue must be solved before taking up the Berlin problem.
He added that the present power balance should not be disturbed in seeking a solution to Berlin.
Three Cuba-related articles are carried in the December issue of Chuo Koron , a highly influential intellectual monthly magazine.
Hidden Missiles The Philippines He raid and the Manila Times both had editorials on the possibility of hidden Soviet missiles in Cuba, but reached divergent conclusions.
The H erald voiced its suspicion that the Soviet Union and Castro were attempting to double cross the United States by hiding the missiles, in view of such duplicity, the Herald said, it was understandable that Khrushchev would be disposed to remove the bombers.
The paper concluded that President Kennedy ""is expected to assert the same firmness in his insistence on ground inspection"" that he has shown in regard to the removal of the bombers.
