A tax-exempt public charity, the Archive receives no United States government funding; its budget is supported by publication royalties and donations from foundations and individuals.
Post a Comment Newer Post Older Post Home Subscribe to: Post Comments Pan-African News Wire Pan-African News Wire The Pan-African News Wire is an international electronic press service designed to foster intelligent discussion on the affairs of African people throughout the continent and the world.
The PANW represents the only daily international news source on pan-african and global affairs.
PANW editor Abayomi Azikiwe is often solicited by various newspaper, radio and television stations for comment and analysis on local, national and world affairs.
He has served as a political analyst for Press TV and RT worldwide satellite television news networks as well as other international media in the areas of African and world affairs.
He has appeared on numerous television and radio networks including Press TV, RT, Al Jazeera, China Global Television Network, BBC, NPR, Radio Netherlands, the Australian Broadcasting Corporation, South Africa Radio 786, Belgian Pirate Radio, TVC Nigeria and others.
Lessons from the Detroit July 1967 Rebellion & Beyond Order the latest book by Abayomi Azikiwe, editor of the Pan-African News Wire, by just clicking on the image above.
From the Soviet Union to the Bolivarian Revolution Order this book by Abayomi Azikiwe, editor of the Pan-African News Wire, by just clicking on the image above.
Pan-Africanism, Gender Emancipation and the Meaning of Socialist Development Order this book by Abayomi Azikiwe, editor of the Pan-African News Wire, by just clicking on the above image.
Between Holbrook & King, Noon-5:00pm 16th Annual Detroit MLK Day Rally & March Join us on Mon.
Jan., 2018 Rally at Central United Methodist Church, Noon-1:30pm, Woodward and East Adams, Downtown--March Begins at 1:45pm 14th Annual Detroit MLK Day Rally & March, Mon.
Jan., 2017, Noon at CUMC, Woodward at East Adams 1:30 March thru downtown; end at St.
John's Episcopal Woodward at Fisher Freeway 13th Annual Detroit MLK Day Rally & March, Mon.
Jan., 2015, Noon-5:30pm Commemorating the 50th Anniversary of the 'March Against Fear' and the 'Chicago Freedom Movement' at Central United Methodist Church, Woodward Ave. at East Adams, Downtown 12th Annual Detroit MLK Day Rally & March, Mon.
Day Rally & March Took Place on January 17, 2011 The MLK Day Event Was Held at Central United Methodist Church Located Downtown on Woodward at Adams at Noon The Historic Massey Lectures Delivered Over the CBC by Dr.
Coalition Calls for a Halt to All Foreclosures, Evictions and Utility Shut-offs Demonstration at Bank of America on Tuesday, July 22, 2008 Just Click on Here to Watch Abayomi Azikiwe Speaking in Front of Bank of America on July 22, 2008 Watch Abayomi Azikiwe, PANW Editor, Speaking at a Demonstration in the Financial District in Downtown Detroit on June 6, 2008 Check Out Atty.
Uhuru by the African Jazz Orchestra Listen to Kamulanga by African Jazz Listen to African Fiesta Sukisa Featuring Nico Kasanda Doing Bea Okeyi Wapi Check Out Dr.
Nico Playing Echantillon ya pamba Check Out African Fiesta Under the Direction of Dr.
Nico Kasanda Composition Je m'en fous African Fiesta Orchestra With Asala Malekoun Listen to the Classic Sound of Dr.
Nico and the African Fiesta Orchestra Composition Mira Beautiful Harmonies of Dr.
Nico Kasanda and African Fiesta With Sasonado Listen to the Classic Sounds of Dr.
Kwame Nkrumah and Madame Fathia in 1963 Abayomi Azikiwe, Pan-African News Wire Editor PANW Editor Speaking at the Dr.
Lenoir on Film Playing ""Slow Down"" Aretha Franklin Pictured Performing at the Obama Inauguration on January 20, 2009 Aretha Franklin From Detroit Aretha Franklin is One of the Great Artists to Emerge During the 1960s.
Click on Links Below Just Visit This Site to Learn More About Aretha Franklin Rev.
Franklin, the Father of Aretha Franklin, in Rare Film Footage The New Bethel Incident of 1969 Recounted Aretha Franklin Live Singing Running Out of Fools, 1964 Aretha Franklin With Baby I Love You, 1967 The Original Piece of My Heart By Erma Franklin, 1967 Aretha Franklin on Mike Douglas Show Performing Natural Woman, Dec.67 Another Version of Baby I Love You Aretha Franklin on Mike Douglas Performing Chain of Fools, Dec.67 Ain't No Way With Aretha Franklin and Family Watch This Video of Aretha Franklin on TV Singing ""Dr.
Pan-Africanist Founder of Modern Africa Read Nkrumah and Other Writings on Neo-Colonialism: The Last Stage of Imperialism The Bibliography of Dr.
Exposing Bush's Assaults on Venezuela Bolivian States Vote For Autonomy ► May ► April ► March ► February ► January ► 2007 ► December ► November ► October ► September ► August ► July ► June ► May ► April ► March ► February ► January ► 2006 ► December ► November ► October ► September ► August ► July ► June ► May ► April ► March ► February ► January ► 2005 ► December ► November ► October ► September Caribbean Newspapers News From Throughout the Caribbean Dr.
Walter Rodney , Pan-African Historian Click on This Photo to Hear Walter Rodney Discuss the History of Guyana.
