Early Life Fidel Alejandro Ruz was born near Biran in the eastern province of Cuba on August 13, 1926.
He was the third son in a family of six children including two brothers, Ramon and Raul, and three sisters, Augustina, Emma, and Angelita.
He was the son of Angel Castro y Argiz, a Spaniard and a rich sugar plantation owner in Cuba.
His mother, Lina Ruz Gonzalez, was a maid to the first wife of Angel, Luisa Argota.
When Fidel was 15 years of age, his father dissolved his marriage to Luisa and married Fidel’s mother.
Later when Fidel was 17, his father recognized him formally and his name was changed from Ruz to Castro.
Fidel was brought up in a wealthy background amidst the impoverished conditions of the people of Cuba.
He attended the private Jesuit boarding schools and was intellectually gifted, though he liked sports more than studies.
He joined El Colegio De Belen and became the best player of the school’s baseball team.
Early Political Rebellions and Arrests Fidel became more passionate and involved with social justice in 1947.
He joined an expedition in Dominican Republic which was trying to overthrow the dictator of Cuba, Rafael Trujillo.
It was founded by a Cuban presidential candidate, Eduardo Chibas, who had lost the 1948 elections and its goals included social reforms, economic independence, and nationalism.
In 1951, Chibas ran for presidency once more with the cause to expose the corruption in the government and warn Cuban people about the plan by former president, General Fulgencio Batista, to return to power.
Unfortunately Chibas failed once more after some allies failed to provide evidence against the government’s misconduct.
This caused Chibas to shoot himself during a radio broadcast as a punishment for failing his people.
This marriage exposed Castro to more political connections and a wealthier lifestyle.
He later vied for a parliamentary seat but a coup headed by General Fulgencio overthrew the government and annulled the elections.
The results of these events placed Castro in a lifestyle of little income and no legitimate political platform.
He was unable to support his family eventually leading to the end of his marriage in 1955.
He solidified his relationship with the Cuban economic elite and the military, making his government recognized by the United States Castro together with other members of the Ortodoxo party who failed to win the 1952 elections planned an insurrection.
Guerilla War In 1955 an amnesty deal was struck with Batista government and Castro was released.
He travelled to Mexico and met Ernesto “Che” Guevara who helped him devise a strategy for overthrowing Batista using a guerrilla warfare approach.
According to Guevara, the plight of the poor Latin America could only be rectified by the use of violent revolution.
On December 2, 1956, Castro went back to Cuba through the eastern city of Manzanillo with a boatload of 81 insurrectionists.
Castro was able to escape together with his brother Raul and Guevara and they ran to Sierra Maestra Mountain range.
In the next 2 years, Castro’s guerilla forces rebelled against the government of Batista, organizing resistance groups in small towns and cities across Cuba.
Castro also ran a parallel government and controlled provinces rich in manufacturing and agricultural production.
In 1958, Castro’s forces launched major attacks on the Batista government, capturing key areas in the country.
Soon Batista’s government collapsed and, in January of 1959, he fled to the Dominican Republic.
This marked the success of Castro’s guerilla campaign, and at age 32, he took control of Cuba.
This led to the establishment of a new government and the appointment of a new Prime Minister by the name Jose Miro Cardona.
The new government was soon recognized by the U.S., and when Castro arrived in Havana, he took over as the commander-in-chief of the military.
Miro suddenly resigned in February and Castro became the Prime Minster.
The Change to Communism Castro made changes in the government by nationalizing the plantations and factories with the purpose of ending United States dominance on the island.
Castro denied practicing communism but Americans believed his policies were the same as the Soviet-style of controlling government and economy.
In April of 1959, he visited the United States together with his delegates as invitees to the National Press club.
He hired a popular public relations firm in the United States to promote his tour but President Dwight Eisenhower refused to meet him.
This rule restricted the size of land properties one could own and forbade foreigners from owning land.
The intention was to make the farmers independent but in essence the government controlled the properties and the farmers became mere employees of the government.
By the end of his first year in power, he had radicalized his revolution, suppressing any critic of his policies in the media and purging any military or political leaders that criticized his way of ruling.
He signed a trade treaty in February of 1960 to buy oil from the Soviet Union.
As a result the refineries owned by the United States stopped processing oil so Castro confiscated the refineries.
The Missile Crisis On January 3, 1961, Dwight Eisenhower broke off the diplomatic relations between the 2 countries.
The next day, 1400 Cuban exiles attacked the Bay of Pigs to overthrow the regime of Castro.
The attempt failed and 1,000 insurgents were captured with hundreds being killed.
The United States denied any involvement in the attack but it was later revealed that it was the Central Intelligence Agency that trained the insurgents and armed them with United States weapons.
On May 1st of that year, he declared the end of democratic elections in Cuba.
At the end of the year he announced himself as a Marxist-Leninist and adopted communist political and economic policies in Cuba.
On February 7, 1962, the United States instated a full economic embargo on Cuba, a ban that has continued to this day.
Castro improved his relationship with the Soviet Union and got more military and economic aid.
In October of 1962, his reliance on the Soviet Union almost sparked the start of a nuclear war.
The premier of Soviet, Nikita Khrushchev placed nuclear missiles in Cuba only 90 miles from the cost of Florida in response to the United States placing Jupiter missiles in Turkey.
However an American U2 exploration plane discovered the construction base before the missiles were installed.
As a result, President Kennedy demanded the removal of these missiles and ordered the United States navy to search for any vessel that may be headed to the island.
After secret discussions between Kennedy, Khrushchev, and their agents, the nuclear missiles were removed in exchange for a public declaration by Kennedy not to invade Cuba.
Also the Kennedy administration agreed to remove the Jupiter missiles in Turkey secretly.
Cuba Under Castro In 1965, Castro merged his revolutionary organizations with the Communist party and made himself the leader.
In the next few years he started a campaign to support the armed struggle in African and Latin American countries against imperialism.
In 1966, he created the Asia-Africa-Latin American Solidarity Organization which promoted revolution in the 3 continents.
Again in 1967, he founded the Latin America Solidarity Organization which fostered revolution in some Latin-American countries.
Through the 1970s, he made himself the leading spokesperson for third world countries and provided military support to the pro-soviet forces in Yemen, Ethiopia, and Angola.
The agreement by the U.S not to invade Cuba did not entirely limit them from trying to end Castro’s regime.
In fact Castro once said that if avoiding the assassination attempts were Olympic competition, he would have won many gold medals.
Infant mortality also decreased to 1.1% and Cubans enjoyed a health-care system.
Still, civil liberties were whittled away following the shutdown of independent newspapers, the loss of the right to strike by the labor unions, and the harassment of religious institutions.
During his reign, many Cubans fled to Florida Straits in Miami, especially in 1980 when he opened the port of Mariel to the exiles for claiming their relatives.
He loaded the ships with mental patients, prison inmates, and other social undesirables.
The Collapse of the Soviet Union When the Soviet Union collapsed in 1991, the economy of Cuba went into a tailspin.
They lost their cheap oil imports, and their sugar exports to the Soviet Union deteriorated, leading to high unemployment rates and inflation.
Castro appealed to the United States to lift the economic embargo but the request was rejected.
He then adopted a quasi-fee economy which encouraged international investment.
In 1996, he visited the United States and invited the Cubans living there to come back home and start their own businesses.
After Hurricane Michelle in 2001 which caused massive damage, he refused to get humanitarian aid from United States but instead proposed a one-time cash purchase of food.
Decline in Health His well-being and age was questioned in the late 1990s, but it became more significant in 2006 when he underwent a surgery for gastrointestinal bleeding.
During this time, he named his brother Raul as temporary leader of Cuba.
Since this surgery, people have only seen Castro in video and photographs.
On February 19, 2008, he permanently gave up his presidency to his brother Raul as a result of his deteriorating health.
In his retirement, he spends his time as a columnist and publishes the popular column known as Reflections of Fidel.
