The first use of nuclear weapons In August 1945, the United States government, having, at that moment, a monopoly of the “atom bomb,” unilaterally dropped nuclear explosives, successively, on the civilian inhabitants of the Japanese cities of Hiroshima and Nagasaki.
At the time of this clear war crime Japanese imperialism’s conquests and vast expansion in China, the Pacific Rim, and Southeast Asia that began in the 1930s had shrunk sharply.
The Japanese rulers were utterly alone and isolated politically; their German Nazi ally was defeated, smashed and under occupation.
Japanese imperialism was in headlong retreat under intense attack from, on the one hand, rival colonial powers and imperialists fighting to get their colonial territories back, and indigenous independence forces in the remaining lands they occupied, on the other.
The latter was a mass upsurge for national independence and included resistance to Japanese aggression in parts of Manchuria in China, as well as Korea, Vietnam and the “Dutch East Indies,” now Indonesia.
At the time the decision to explode the nukes on Japanese cities was made, the Japanese navy was incapable of any operations and the Japanese merchant fleet was destroyed.
The Japanese government had begun to send out “peace feelers,” fully aware of its hopeless situation.
Washington’s utterly ruthless action – rationalized as necessary to prevent mass casualties for United States soldiers in a ground invasion of Japan – finalized the defeat and prostration of the Japanese Empire in the Asian-Pacific “theater” of World War II…and sent an unmistakable shock and signal to the world for all time.
Hiroshima, August 1945 Cuba in the eye of the storm The young leaders of the Cuban Revolution, now holding governmental power, were in the very eye of the storm during those last two October weeks of 1962.
In the end the diffusing and resolution of the Missile Crisis – in the sense of reversing and ending the momentum toward imminent nuclear exchange between the United States and the Soviet Union – came when Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev gave way to United States President John Kennedy’s demands and agreed to halt further naval shipments of nuclear missiles to Cuba and withdraw those already in Cuban territory.
Khrushchev further agreed to the removal of Soviet medium-range conventional bombers, very useful to the Cubans for defending their coastlines, and a near-complete withdrawal of Soviet combat brigades.
Kennedy also agreed, in a secret protocol, to withdraw United States nuclear missiles from Turkey that bordered the Soviet Union.
The Cuban government, which had, at great political risk, acceded to the Soviet proposal to deploy Soviet nuclear missiles on the island, was not consulted, or even informed, by the Soviet government, at any stage of the unfolding crisis, of the unfolding US-Soviet negotiations.
With Cuban representatives completely excluded, the five points Cuba wanted to see addressed and included in any overall agreement coming out of the crisis were ignored altogether under United States insistence and Soviet acquiescence.
The entire experience was both politically shocking and eye-opening for the Cuban revolutionaries.
They came out of it acutely conscious of their vulnerability and angered over their exclusion.
This major operation to overthrow the “Castro” government and destroy the Cuban Revolution had been devised by the Dwight Eisenhower White House and carried out by the new Kennedy Administration in its third month after taking office.
By 1962 the major domestic and foreign privately-owned major means of production in utilities, transportation, heavy and light industry, manufacturing, mining, and oil refining had been nationalized by the workers and farmers government.
Concurrent with this, the revolutionary government established a state monopoly of foreign trade and the first shoots of central economic planning began which would supersede the old neo-colonial capitalist market.
With all its flaws and contradictions, pressures and counter-pressures, a qualitative class transformation of the Cuban state had been realized in a dynamic way.
Certainly, bipartisan Washington and the entire bourgeois political spectrum in the United States from left to right had no illusions in this regard.
The hostility of the United States Democratic and Republican parties to “Castro’s Revolution” was monolithic and poised for aggression at that time.
Playa Giron was as humiliating and unacceptable for Washington as it had built confidence and was invigorating for the Cuban revolutionaries.
It was certainly no secret to anyone paying the slightest attention that not even a nanosecond passed between Washington’s debacle at the Bay of Pigs and the planning for a new invasion.
But this time it would be directly by United States forces without the proxy agency of the mercenary “troops” of the former ruling classes of Cuba, who were by then ensconced in southern Florida.
Since October 1961 the Pentagon officers assigned to prepare for the United States invasion of Cuba had been revising, updating and “polishing” the concrete details.
These “operational plans” were continually reviewed with President Kennedy.
The impact of United States bombing on the northern Korean state and its capital of Pyongyang could not have been encouraging to the Cuban leadership.
Virtually the entire city was flattened by United States carpet bombings.
United States saturation bombing flattened 18 of North Korea's 22 cities, an unequaled level of destruction in modern wars.
All in all Washington dropped some 635,000 tons of bombs on northern Korea.
This compares to 503,000 tons of bombs dropped in the entire Pacific Theater during World War II by all sides.
The 2017 Kennedy assassination files At the end of October 2017, amid some hoopla, the Donald Trump White House allowed the release of nearly 2900 previously “classified” United States government files and documents pertinent to the November 22, 1963 assassination of President John Kennedy.
A number of these documents reference United States violent plots against Cuba, including assassination attempts against Fidel Castro and other revolutionary leaders by the Kennedy Administration.
These reconfirm what has long been known on the massive military force Washington was planning to employ to invade and occupy Cuba and crush the revolutionary government after the fiasco at the Bay of Pigs in April 1961.
The memo was addressed to a “Special Group” within the Kennedy White House that was coordinating intensifying United States efforts to eliminate the revolutionary government led by Fidel Castro.
The “operational plans” for the United States invasion of Cuba were to involve the initial dispatching of 90,000 troops and was projected to reach the 261,000 figure.
There is no question that once “the dogs of war” were unleashed against Cuba, with the accompanying propaganda onslaught, Washington would wage a war of annihilation under the rote cover of “democratic” and even “humanitarian” verbiage.
Mounting United States casualties would, in the initial period, feed war fever and United States aggression.
Operation Mongoose By this time President Kennedy’s “Operation Mongoose” was in effect.
Kennedy’s cynical purpose was to undertake and carry out any means deemed necessary to disrupt and demoralize Cuban society through constant, incessant violent attacks and economic sabotage to the point where the social and political conditions would be created for a full-scale United States invasion.
But Kennedy and his civilian and military “advisors” continued to underestimate both the caliber of the revolutionary leadership and the capacities of the Cuban working people and youth they were terrorizing, as well as the Revolution’s determination and competence to organize their defenses.
Above all, the United States rulers were not used to facing such a politically savvy enemy.
The young Cuban revolutionary government, with the indefatigable Fidel Castro as its main spokesperson, was adept and quick on its feet in effectively exposing to world public opinion Washington’s anti-Cuba campaign through a vigorous, public, and factually accurate counter-offensive based on telling the truth about what the Revolution was actually doing and what the United States government was actually doing.
On July 26, 1961 – the national holiday declared by the revolutionary government commemorating the July 26, 1953 attack led by Fidel Castro and Abel Santamaria on the Moncada Barracks in Santiago de Cuba – the CIA attempted to assassinate Fidel Castro, Raul Castro, and Che Guevara during the celebrations.
The CIA plan was, if the murders were “successful,” to stage a provocation against the United States base at Guantanamo and make it appear to be Cuban revenge for the murder of their top leaders.
This would then be the pretext for a full-scale United States invasion.
Here on full display is the cynical mendacity operating at the top of the United States government in the drive to bring back the power of the landowners, rich playboys, segregationists, gangsters, and pimps – the full flower of “democracy” to the benighted Cuban masses suffering under literacy drives, free medical care, desegregated public facilities, and the crushing of the United States Mafia.
Raul Castro and Che Guevara During the next month of August 1961, the CIA organized one of its most pernicious campaigns against the revolutionary government.
The Revolution advances its social program So, while all this criminal activity was going on, the Cuban Revolution advanced its program of social justice and human liberation for the oppressed and exploited majority as the most effective counterforce to the Yanqui aggression.
On February 26, 1962 Cuba’s now fully legal and rejuvenated labor unions provided the people power for the campaign of Cuba’s Ministry of Health to carry out a nationwide drive for vaccination against polio.
By the end of the year the disease was completely wiped out on the island.
It took the United Nation’s World Health Organization, then far more subject to pressure from Washington than now, 43 years to finally recognize that Cuba was the first nation in the Americas to accomplish this.
Things like this, and the full array of revolutionary advances taking place in the face of Washington’s mounting terrorist campaign, convinced General Maxwell Taylor, who oversaw Operation Mongoose with Attorney General Robert Kennedy at the White House, that the terrorist operation “mak maximum use of indigenous resources,” could not and would not do the job of overthrowing the revolutionary government.
With the Bay of Pigs debacle still fresh in his mind, and without some of the blinders of more gung-ho invasion advocates, Kennedy hesitated to give a green light to the invasion plans he himself had ordered up.
It remained yellow-lighted however, and Kennedy directed that Mongoose terrorism continue and step up.
More seriously, from May 8-18, 1962 a “practice run” for the United States invasion of Cuba took place.
The full-scale “military exercise” was code named “Operation Whip Lash” and sent an unmistakable signal of intimidation from the United States military colossus to the six million people of Cuba.
All this mounting imperialist intervention had only one possible ending point – short of a Cuban surrender, which would never come.
Events that ineluctably posed and placed the nuclear question in the equation.
While the Cuban government and the overwhelming popular majority were mobilized, armed to the teeth, and prepared to fight to the death, they wanted to live in peace and to enjoy the fruits of building a new society after a hard-fought revolutionary triumph.
The Cuban leadership fully understood that a United States invasion would kill many hundreds of thousands and destroy the Cuban infrastructure and economy.
How to stop the coming United States invasion was the burning question for the revolutionary government.
This position of inequality was perceived in Moscow as an impediment to carrying out political negotiations and maneuvering with Washington and the NATO powers, and defending Soviet interests in the “geopolitical” Cold War arena.
By April 1962 fifteen United States Jupiter nuclear missiles had been installed and were “operational” in Turkey on the border of the Soviet Union.
Each missile was armed with a 1.45 megaton warhead, with ninety-seven times the firepower of the atom bomb dropped on Hiroshima.
The official estimate of the “fatality projection” for each missile was one million Soviet civilians.
The Jupiter deployment in Turkey added to the overwhelming United States superiority in quantity and quality in the “nuclear arms race” between Washington and Moscow.
According to Anatoly Gribkov of the Red Army General Staff , “The United States had about 5000 warheads, the Soviet Union 300.
Khrushchev decided to alleviate this “imbalance” by placing missiles on the Cuban island if he succeeded in selling the idea to the Cuban leadership.
Sometime in the spring of 1962 the Khrushchev government of the Soviet Union proposed to the Cuban government that Cuba receive nuclear-tipped missiles on Cuban territory.
In no other country had the Soviet government located nuclear missiles outside of Soviet territory.
Washington, by contrast, had openly placed nuclear missiles in numerous western European countries as well as Turkey and secretly in Okinawa, Japan, aimed at China.
Additionally, United States “strategic” nuclear armed aircraft were in the air ready for attack orders 24 hours a day, 7 days a week.
United States nuclear submarines were in similar mode, and even more difficult to detect.
Soviet missiles in Cuba would theoretically be a further deterrent to any United States “first strike” threat.
Placing the missiles in Cuba was clearly seen by the Soviet government as a bargaining piece to advance Soviet strategic interests in the nuclear chessboard that animated US-Soviet “diplomatic” maneuvers and intrigue and political objectives on both sides.
Khrushchev evidently presumed that, faced with a fait accompli, Washington would redress the imbalance to the benefit of the Soviet Union.
The Soviet missiles, upon being fully operational, would be able to strike major population centers and whole geographic regions of the US, roughly equivalent to the potential death-dealing capacity Washington had through its missiles in Europe surrounding and targeted on the Soviet Union.
Of course, the big “if” in all of this reasoning was getting to the accompli.
The Soviet officials revealed to the Cuban leaders that their “intelligence” told them conclusively that a United States invasion was being seriously prepared, to be implemented at any time over the next months.
Of course, the Soviets were not telling the Cubans anything they did not already know in general, but there were new specific facts and details.
The now-concrete proposal that measures to fortify Cuban defenses would include the deployment of Soviet nuclear missiles on the island naturally led to intense consultations within the top Cuban leadership.
The chief government ministers involved were Fidel Castro, Raul Castro, Che Guevara, Osvaldo Dorticos, Carlos Rafael Rodriguez, and Blas Roca.
The day after the proposal was received the Cuban leadership told the Soviet delegation that the nuclear deployment was acceptable in principle.
In extensive discussions with European journalist Ignacio Ramonet Fidel Castro referred to the discussions within the Cuban central leadership.
He said that besides Khrushchev and the Soviet leadership’s “sincere desire to prevent an attack against Cuba…they were hoping to improve the balance of strategic forces…I added that it would be inconsistent of us to expect the maximum support from the USSR and the rest of the Socialist camp should we be attacked by the United States and yet refuse to face the political risks and the possible damage to our reputation when they needed us.
In a speech many years earlier in 1992 Fidel Castro had said, “We really didn’t like the missiles.
Losing the moral high ground Having agreed in principle, Fidel Castro, Raul Castro and Che Guevara repeatedly argued with the Soviet leadership that the deployment should be open and public.
The fact was that there was nothing in the Soviet-Cuban agreement to deploy the missiles that contravened any existing international law.
In any case, the Cuban leaders were certain that it would be virtually impossible for the shipment, site construction, and land deployment to remain concealed from the highly sophisticated United States surveillance technology.
Furthermore, that, on the face of it, given the United States missiles in Turkey and Italy surrounding the Soviet Union, and with practically open United States plans to invade Cuba, open and transparent was the way to go politically and morally.
In the book with Ramonet, Fidel Castro speaks of the “strange, Byzantine discussion” over whether Soviet arms shipments to Cuba were offensive or defensive.
Castro continued, “We didn’t like the course the public debate was taking.
I sent Che…to explain my view of the situation to Khrushchev, including the need to immediately publish the military agreement the USSR and Cuba had signed.
But I couldn’t manage to persuade him…For us, for the Cuban leaders, the USSR was a powerful, experienced government.
For the Cuban revolutionaries, the economic, military and political ties forged with the Soviet Union had been a decisive, irreplaceable factor in their survival from the period after the January 1959 triumph of the Revolution through the April 1961 Playa Giron defeat of the US-organized mercenary invasion.
Nevertheless, the unfolding of the Missile Crisis, and its ultimate resolution, left the Cuban leadership feeling vulnerable, bypassed, and insulted by the perceived highhanded behavior of the Soviet government led by Nikita Khrushchev.
Combining great emotion with sharp, cool logic Castro detailed how the “Missile Crisis” unfolded and how Cuba’s relations with the Soviet Union emerged out of the crisis different from what they had been before.
Castro stated that Cuba’s revolutionary leadership looked to the Soviet Union for, “…measures that would guarantee the country’s safety.
Referring to the continuing terrorist attacks against Cuba that never stopped after Soviet missiles, planes, and combat troops were removed from Cuba at the “end” of the October Crisis, Castro stated, “Together with the pirate attacks and the U-2 flights, incidents began to flare up at the Guantanamo base The same Guantanamo base which, we are certain, would have been dismantled had there been a modicum of serenity and firmness during the October crisis.
But Cuba had been alive and Cuba had been living, and Cuba did not want to live at the expense of humiliation or surrender; for that you do not have to be a revolutionary.
Revolutionaries are not just concerned with living, but how one lives, living most of all with dignity, living with a cause, living for a cause…Cuba did not agree with the way the issue was handled; it stated the need to approach the problem from different, more drastic, more revolutionary and even more legal positions; and it totally disagreed with the way in which the situation was terminated.” “ we saw that the United States was creating an atmosphere of hysteria and aggression,” Castro bluntly spoke, “and it was a campaign that was being carried out with all impunity.
And in response to the imperialist’s position, the second weakness was not to stand up and respond that Cuba had every right to own whatever weapons it saw fit…but rather to adopt a policy of concessions, claiming that the weapons were defensive.
The problem wasn’t the legality of the agreement – everything was absolutely legal – but rather Khrushchev’s mistaken political handling of the situation, when even though both Cuba and the USSR had the legitimate right, he started spinning theories about offensive and non-offensive weapons.
The missile transport was the largest sea-borne operation in Soviet history.
All three of the SS-4 missile regiments were operational even as Soviet ships stopped moving towards Cuba.
As the latest batch of 2017 declassified Kennedy-assassination related documents reconfirm, preparations – “contingency plans” – for such an invasion had been in place for many months prior to the secret installation of the Soviet missiles.
This was the only conceivable basis for Khrushchev to make the missile proposal to the Cuban leaders and expect their agreement.
In fact, a United States invasion of Cuba was on the hair-trigger of being ordered at several concrete conjunctures in the course of the crisis.
The decision to actually carry out a direct, large-scale United States military assault was being furiously debated within the Kennedy Administration and the narrow circle of bipartisan Congressional leadership that was privy to the deliberations at the top.
As President and Commander-in-Chief, Kennedy had to choose whether to give the order to invade – again, everything was already in place for the execution of an invasion – the island where many nuclear warheads were already in place, targeting United States territory and where Cuban armed resistance to the invading troops was certain to be massive, highly motivated, well-led, and creative.
For the immense majority of the Cuban population, having just experienced a profound social revolution, drawing millions into revolutionary struggle and consciousness, Cuba would be fighting from their own territory against a foreign invasion force and massive bombing assaults.
Thousands of Cuban civilians would have been instantly killed in these air strikes.
The political consequences of this carnage – against a sovereign people with the gall to make a Revolution, throw out a venal dictator, institute land reform, literacy campaigns, rent reduction, abolishing Jim Crow-segregation, etc. etc. – would certainly have been devastating for Washington even if nuclear warheads were never launched on either side, a dubious prospect at best.
Washington would lose the “moral high ground,” so crucial in concrete questions of world politics.
Cuba would regain what had been eroded by the secretive, clumsy adventurism of Khrushchev’s “initiative” and its incompetent implementation.
The question of the nuclear weapons that were already on the island and the more that were en route would likely have been rendered secondary and the question of Cuba’s right to self-determination would have again risen to the fore.
Kennedy was politically savvy enough to realize all of this and finally rebuffed the advocates of launching an invasion.
Who actually would – in a hair-trigger political atmosphere – fire first becomes almost a moot, secondary question in the framework of such a political confrontation.
US “intelligence” estimates were that 18,500 United States casualties would take place in the first period after a United States invasion, according to declassified material obtained by the National Security Archive.
The presence of Soviet nuclear warheads and large numbers of Soviet military personnel, fighter jets, anti-aircraft gun emplacements, and so on, was another major factor leading Kennedy to repeatedly postpone the invasion plans and opt for a naval blockade surrounding Cuba, and the drama of a relatively slow showdown unfolding over days in the Atlantic while negotiations between Washington and Moscow intensified, negotiations that excluded the Cuban government…as if Cuba had nothing to do with what was happening.
As is always the case when war and combat is actually joined, the “law of unintended consequences” comes into dynamic play.
However, I didn’t hesitate to do it… “We knew, and do not presume that we ignored it, that we would have been annihilated, as you insinuate in your letter, in the event of nuclear war.
Following this undoubtedly correct assumption, Fidel Castro’s logic and formulations in his initial letters became necessarily more abstract and algebraic.
He presents, in the rush and incredible heat and speed of events, a post-invasion scenario where Soviet forces could strike, in a limited “tactical” use , the United States forces before the United States could strike the Soviet forces.
The same technical, military logic of “pre-emption” would, of course, dominate the United States side which had a clear superiority in both quantity and quality of nuclear weapons deliverance at that point, the full extent of which the Cuban leadership was not likely aware.
The MAD doctrine was based on each side’s nuclear arsenal countermanding the others.
The seemingly absurd stockpiling of nuclear warheads and delivery system locations had the “rational” kernel of logic that after a “first strike” or pre-emptive launch of warheads the “other side” would still have enough of an atomic arsenal left to deliver a crushing response.
The key point – the only determinant fact – in whether nuclear holocaust would be unleashed to an unknown degree was whether the United States would invade Cuba.
As the two superpowers geared up for a nuclear war, the chances of something going terribly wrong increased exponentially…By Saturday, Oct., the two leaders were no longer in full control of their gigantic military machines, which were moving forward under their own momentum.
Soviet troops on Cuba targeted Guantánamo with tactical nuclear weapons and shot down an American U-2 spy plane.
Another U-2, on a “routine” air sampling mission to the North Pole, got lost over the Soviet Union.
The Soviets sent MiG fighters into the air to try to shoot down the American intruder, and in response, Alaska Air Defense Command scrambled F-102 interceptors armed with tactical nuclear missiles.
It took place at what was perhaps the nadir of the downward spiral of Cuban-Soviet relations set in motion by the October Crisis of 1962.
This on-the-ground fact was a real blow to the Cuban revolutionaries and the perspective of building a continental revolutionary army to take on and overturn the military regimes backed by the ruling oligarchies.
These regimes of the Latin American ruling classes were themselves allied with, dependent on, and conjoined with the dominant United States power in the Hemisphere.
This new objective reality necessarily raised many challenges in the development and direction of Cuba’s revolutionary foreign policy.
The Cuban revolutionary line in Latin America was opposed – with varying degrees of vehemence – by virtually all of the Latin American Communist parties that looked to the Soviet Union for political direction and orientation.
What the Cuban revolutionary leadership considered betrayal in Bolivia, disrupted and undermined the formation and development of urban resistance forces crucial to supplement the rural-based guerrilla struggle under Che’s command, leaving the guerrillas exposed, vulnerable and politically isolated.
The Escalante affair Prior to Fidel Castro’s speech, the Central Committee gathering had heard an extensive presentation by Raul Castro, then Chairman of the Revolutionary Armed Forces and the President of the Cuban Council of State since 2006.
The report was a damning indictment of a secret faction inside the PCC led by Anibal Escalante.
The PSP initially opposed the July 26th Movement led by Fidel Castro, but by early 1958 they had endorsed the anti-Batista struggle and M-26-J leadership.
Joint political and military collaboration was carried out in the last period before the revolutionary triumph.
Soviet-Cuban tensions escalated in this mid-1960s period, although never to the point of a public break.
Nevertheless, sharp, concrete political and theoretical differences were registered between the Soviet and Cuban leaderships in this period over the United States escalation in Vietnam and serious political divergence in Latin America.
In several speeches in 1966 and 1967 Fidel Castro publicly excoriated the Soviet government for its economic and political relations with Latin American repressive and reactionary regimes.
The betrayal and execution of Che in 1967 sharpened the existing tensions and was followed by the Escalante intrigue and covert plotting against the revolutionary government.
In terms of the economic relations and exchange between Cuba and the Soviet Union during these clashes, there was limited but noticeable Soviet measures affecting the struggling Cuban economy which was being whipped by the United States economic blockade, particularly in the Americas.
In this period, the first decade of the Cuban Revolution, Cuba struggled with diplomatic isolation in the Western Hemisphere under United States pressure, with only Canada and Mexico maintaining formal diplomatic ties.
In the decade following Che’s defeat in Bolivia, all other allied Latin American guerrilla movements into the early 1970s had been crushed, most notably Argentina and Uruguay.
At the same time there was a revival of mass urban and rural working-class and popular struggles in a number of Latin American countries, including Bolivia, which pushed open some democratic and political space, including for revolutionaries.
The September 11, 1973 US-backed bloody military coup against the Popular Unity government pulverized all democratic rights and political space for many years and was extended by the mid-1970s as military rule was consolidated in Argentina and in Uruguay after 1973.
Its resolution led to increased propaganda for “peace” and “reconciliation” in both Moscow and Washington, with accompanying worldwide diplomatic maneuvering.
This culminated in the actual signing by the governments of the United States, United Kingdom, and the Soviet Union of the Nuclear Test Ban Treaty All of this took place as Washington steadily and sharply escalated its military intervention and aggression in Vietnam.
The new Lyndon Johnson White House abided by Kennedy’s verbal “pledge” and invasion plans were put in mothballs, although covert action, terrorism, and containment continued.
Primary focus and attention shifted to Indochina where Johnson maintained continuity with Kennedy’s intervention and deepened it.
Formal and definite improvements in Cuba’s relations with the Soviet Union began after 1968 , particularly in economic exchange, through the 1970s and 1980s until the soviet government collapsed in 1991, setting off a huge economic depression and crisis in Cuba.
In this period fundamental contradictions and sharp policy differences emerged over Soviet policies in Africa, military tactics in Angola, and the soviet invasion of Afghanistan, which Cuba opposed.
The immediate threat of US-Soviet nuclear exchange and war receded on October 28, 1962 with the announcement that Soviet ships had stopped advancing and that Soviet missiles would be withdrawn.
Right up until his assassination Kennedy was approving terrorist attacks against Cuba.
United States intervention by proxy never stopped and became systematic.
United States armed and trained counter-revolutionaries were finally defeated in the Escambray mountains in central Cuba in a campaign from 1963-65.
After a pause and renewal in the late 1960s, Cuba’s revolutionary internationalist foreign policy – in the spirit of Che – reached glorious new internationalist achievements in southern Africa after the great acceleration of events ushered in after the overturn of the hollowed-out Salazarist dictatorship in Portugal in 1974 and the final collapse of the Portuguese Empire in Angola, Mozambique, Guinea-Bassau, and the Cape Verde Islands.
Cuban troops stopped the apartheid South African invasion at the gates of the capital Luanda in November 1975 aiming to topple the newly independent Angolan government.
Cuba’s revolutionary action and solidarity over the next nearly two decades was decisive in the defending the independence of Angola, winning the independence of Namibia, and in the retreat and unraveling of the South African apartheid state.
Cuba did not have anything to do with nuclear weapons, nor with the unnecessary slaughter of Hiroshima and Nagasaki perpetrated by the president of the United States, Harry S Truman, thus establishing the tyranny of nuclear weapons.
Nahem is a retired Amtrak Locomotive Engineer and member of the Brotherhood of Locomotive Engineers and Trainmen, a division of the Teamsters Union.
His writings have been published inline in Counterpunch, Dissident Voice, MRZine, Pambazuka News, ZNet, and various Cuban online journals.
The private owners of nationalized foreign enterprises in Cuba, with their governments, negotiated satisfactory compensation with the revolutionary Cuban government, in accordance with international law.
The United States government, at the time, was already planning and organizing for the overthrow of the “Castro” government and was therefore in contemptuous rejection of any negotiations for compensation to United States owners of Cuban assets being nationalized.
This was a large swath of the Cuban economy, which was dominated by United States capital.
In the 1960 Presidential election, the liberal Democrat John Kennedy shamelessly promoted as an important campaign issue a supposed “missile gap” – in the Soviet Union’s favor – between Washington and Moscow, a conscious fabrication.
On this, Nixon had the disadvantage, as Kennedy was no doubt aware, of being unable to publicly tout the Eisenhower White House’s already advanced plans for the mercenary invasion at the Bay of Pigs, which Kennedy carried out three months after his Inauguration.
Some thirty-five members of the so-called “microfaction” were expelled from the PCC and received prison sentences from two to fifteen years.
This went as far as to urge Soviet economic pressure on Cuba, for which they were charged with treason.
Escalante’s grouping never argued for their political positions openly within the structures and procedures of the PCC, which was their right.
In their secret functioning inside Cuba and intrigues with Soviet and Eastern European officials and diplomats, they portrayed Che Guevara as a “Trotskyite adventurer” and the Castro leadership as “petty bourgeois elements” that seized control of the Revolution and who held the working class in contempt.
