The confrontation between the United States and the erstwhile Soviet Union over the placement of nuclear-armed missiles in Cuba is one of the most researched subjects in Geopolitics.
The incident is worth examining for it holds many lessons for humanity at large especially to the practitioners of global politics and conflict management mechanisms.
The Cold War led to numerous proxy wars with the Western Bloc supporting one side and the Warsaw Pact countries the other.
Cuba’s adoption of a socialist system made it the number one enemy of the United States who imposed crippling sanctions on the country.
Cuba, fearing an invasion from the United States needed weaponry desperately.
When the Americans based their nuclear missiles in Turkey, the Soviet Union sought to counter the American move by covertly basing their nuclear missiles in Cuba.
When the United States detected a large shipment of arms being transported to Cuba they demanded from the Soviets an explanation.
In a letter to President Kennedy, the Russian Premier, Nikita Khrushchev assured him that the weaponry was purely ‘defensive in nature.
Intelligence indicated that SS-4 and SS-5 each with a one-megaton warhead which could target almost the entire Continental United States” had been placed.
This discovery led to a chain of events that very nearly brought the world to a nuclear conflagration.
On 19 October 1962, the American Joint Chiefs of Staff advised President Kennedy to authorize a massive aerial attack.
Wiser sense prevailed on Kennedy who decided to manage the unfolding crisis with greater circumspection.
On 20 October, the United States Secretary of State, Robert Mc Namara advised the President to order a naval blockade of Cuba to pressurize the Soviets and prevent any further shipments of weaponry on the island.
This blockade was not a total blockade but a selective naval blockade in which the only shipment of offensive weapons to Cuba was prohibited allowing essential items such as food or petroleum or other goods to pass through.
To build international diplomatic pressure and strengthen domestic support, Kennedy on 22 October 1962, spoke to the nation on TV announcing that the Soviet Union had to withdraw its nuclear missile or it risked nuclear war.
In response to Kennedy’s TV address, Castro mobilized his country and over 300,000 combatants were called to arms.
While the events were rapidly unfolding on the ground, a diplomatic battle was being waged at the United Nations.
The United States Navy and the United States Air force launched a massive aerial surveillance campaign which enraged Castro who retaliated by shooting down one U-2 spy plane which led to the death of the American pilot.
The American side, however, refused to get drawn into a shooting war as they clearly understood the implications of any precipitous action.
While the two superpowers were busy gauging each other’s next move fully understanding the seriousness of the matter, Castro by his own admission was more cavalier and less thoughtful.
Castro suggested to Khrushchev that rather than give in to American demands, the two forces should carry out a nuclear first strike.
This would not be a simple attack, but rather the beginning of a thermonuclear world war.
Khrushchev realizing the precarious position that the Soviets were in, and given that the Americans had overwhelming superiority in nuclear weapons decided to withdraw the missiles from Cuba on 28 October 1962.
As a Quid Pro Quo, the Americans agreed not to attack Cuba and quietly removed their missiles from Turkey.
Get your 100% original paper on any topic done in as little as 3 hours Learn More Such optimism was however never taken seriously by President Kennedy, who through a clever mix of coercion, diplomacy and posturing forced the Russian Premier to blink first and bring this crisis to an end.
The ‘October crisis’ as the Cubans call it would have turned out differently, had Khrushchev listened to Castro’s reckless advice or had the Americans invaded Cuba to find a retaliation with tactical nuclear weapons which would have possibly spiraled into a full-fledged thermonuclear war.
Powered by CiteChimp the best reference machine Copy to clipboard This paper was written and submitted to our database by a student to assist your with your own studies.
You are free to use it to write your own assignment, however you must reference it properly.
The maximum length is 1000 characters."",""error_max_length_50"":""The field is too long.
