We've got the mighty United States of America on one side and the powerful Union of Soviet Socialist Republics on the other.
Whenever one side builds a nuclear weapon, the other must make one too, as quickly as possible.
The team captains must meet on occasion to decide upon the number and type of nuclear weapons allowed in this race.
Then, a neutral judging panel called the United Nations monitors the teams to make sure they play by the rules.
In other words, if your team wants to win this race, you have to be sneaky.
Neither of the team captains can speak the other's language, and a gigantic ocean separates them.
They have no access to e-mail, fax machines or satellite telephones because they haven't been invented yet.
Frijoles, frijoles, the magical food Now for a few words about the team captains.
If your team leaps too far ahead, your opponent might panic and attack you.
If you fall too far behind, they might destroy you.A good strategy, then, is to stay just a healthy step ahead.
If one team is provoked to press their nuclear button, the world as we know it would cease to exist.
Any living creature that managed to survive the initial attack would eventually die of radiation poisoning.
On the count of three, we'll be blasted back in time to 1962, the closest our world has ever been to nuclear war.
It was early 1962 when the ""captain"" of the USSR-a man named Nikita Khrushchev-started fearing that his nation was losing the Arms Race.
The United States, on the other hand, could wipe out most of the Soviet Union.
If Khrushchev wanted to win the Arms Race, he needed a better missile site.
Having a fleet of nuclear weapons on his island would not only protect him from another invasion, it might gain him some respect from the international community as well.
Khrushchev knew that the ""captain"" of the USA-President John F Kennedy-wouldn't approve of this arrangement one bit.
Soviet troops dressed like tourists brought the missiles over on cruise liners.
In October of that year, an American spy plane flew over Cuba and snapped photographs that would send shivers down the spines of all Americans who saw them.
Specialists determined that the missiles had a range of 1,100 miles, meaning they could demolish every major American city but Seattle.
They broke the news to Kennedy while he was still in his pajamas, eating breakfast.
He immediately organized a group of his closest advisors, who locked themselves in a conference room for seven days and debated what to do.
Kennedy could try to solve the problem in an open, diplomatic fashion with Castro, Khrushchev and a UN advisor or two.
Or he could take direct military action, starting with an air attack on those missiles.
Whatever the path, Kennedy knew the Soviets could not be informed beforehand.
He also kept up with his jam-packed presidential itinerary so that no one noticed anything was wrong.
Jose Salazar, a Cuban who fled his country after Castro's takeover, was ready to go at a moment's notice.
At that age, I was very idealistic,"" said Salazar, now a 59-year-old doctor living in Miami.
At 7m. on October 22, 1962, Kennedy appeared live on national television to announce that a nuclear attack from Cuba would be regarded as an attack by the Soviet Union and would be responded to accordingly.
He also imposed a naval quarantine on the island to prevent further shipments of military weapons.
The instant Kennedy finished his 17-minute speech, panic swept through the streets of America.
Some families constructed bomb shelters and hoarded food; others headed to church.
Stan Stoklosa, a 71-year-old veteran of the Korean War, remembered waking up the next morning and rushing to his bedroom window to see if any nuclear clouds graced the horizon.
They planned to use force against any ship that tried to sail in past 10m.
The world held its breath as a fleet of Soviet ships came closer and closer to the line.
From the beginning, Khrushchev insisted that the Soviets had only peaceful intentions with their missiles.
Once the quarantine had been instigated, however, Khrushchev offered a compromise.
He would dismantle the missiles in Cuba if Kennedy promised never to invade the island again.
Kennedy would only be pleasing the Soviets if he tore down the United States' offensive wall in Turkey.
He dismantled the weapons in Cuba and Kennedy followed suit in Turkey half a year later.
I'd love to end this dispatch by saying that the world is no longer playing the Nuclear Arms Race, and that the threat of nuclear war died with the dawning of the 21st century.
Russia developed the A-bomb to counter America's nuclear threat; China built warheads to combat Russia's; India to knock out China's; Pakistan to take on India's.
In recent years, we've also discovered that nuclear weapons can do a great deal of damage while sitting quietly in their sites.
Take what happened at the Chernobyl Nuclear Power Plant in the Ukraine in April of 1986.
Hundreds of thousands of people were exposed to radiation when an old reactor started leaking.
Several dozen died within a few days and thousands more contracted cancer.
The hospitals and orphanages surrounding Chernobyl are full of men, women and children with horrible deformities that can be traced directly to the radiation.
We already have more than enough nuclear weapons to destroy this entire planet.
