Although they smiled and chatted amiably, they indulged in much finger-pointing at a two-day meeting in Moscow among officials involved in the action, one participant said after the meetings concluded Saturday.
Although Sorensen didn't name names, he said some speakers remained overly concerned with ''national self-interest'' and ''justification,'' blaming everyone but themselves for letting the U.S.-Soviet showdown get out of hand.
Among those around the table were former Secretary of Defense Robert S McNamara and McGeorge Bundy, a former national security advisor to President Kennedy, on the American side, and former Foreign Minister Andrei A Gromyko and Anatoly F Dobrynin, former ambassador to Washington, on the Soviet side.
The focus was on October 1962, when the Soviets deployed nuclear missiles in Cuba, and the United States imposed a naval blockade on the island before demanding and getting withdrawal of the missiles.
In the two-day closed session in Moscow, the Soviets and Americans clashed on whether war had been imminent.
The Soviets had nuclear warheads in Cuba at the time, but they were not mounted on missiles pointed at the United States, Soviet delegates said Saturday.
Dmitry Volkogonov quoted official Soviet documents as showing there were 20 warheads already on the island and 20 more on board a Soviet vessel on the way,'' one delegate said.
But Sergei Khrushchev, son of then-Soviet leader Nikita S Khrushchev, said, ''The warheads were there, but they were not attached to the missiles.
The Soviets have said they sent nuclear missiles to Cuba because they feared a United States invasion of the island.
The incident showed the danger of excessive secrecy in military matters, he said.
Georgy A Arbatov, head of the Kremlin's U.S.A.-Canada Institute, told the conference on Friday that Nikita Khrushchev had erred in shipping nuclear missiles to Cuba because he had not anticipated the United States reaction, which humiliated his country, the participant said.
Risquet, the Cuban official, said his island had had enough of bullying by the United States and Soviet Union and wanted opinions of small countries such as his to be respected.
Vitaly V Zhurkin, who heads a new Soviet institute studying Europe, said the Cuban missile crisis had been unavoidable because of the U.S.-Soviet approach to resolving conflicts at the time.
Lo uis P o s t-Dis patch Cit at ion Compiled From News Services, 'MOSCOW The Soviets, Cubans and Americans who guided their nations through the Cuban missile crisis 26 years ago continue to disagree about who was to blame.', St.
As one of those supposedly comedic and inspirational larks, this movie is actually a ray of hope for aspiring filmmakers.
First-time writer/director Christopher Monger convinced his producer, Ed Pressman, that this occasionally sardonic small-town family comedy, framed by the 1962 Cuban missile crisis, could fly.
The audience hooks here were supposed to be the antics of two smarty-pants siblings in their wonder years in a single-parent family, and another of those occasions when Shirley MacLaine doesn't necessarily act as much as she gusts through a picture in another patently eccentric role.
Teri Garr plays the central part, Kay, the mother of young Eddie and Emily, and even in bad films she can supply naturalism and charm, which is stripped out of the picture every time Shirley rips and snorts into the frame.
The three females and Eddie pack up their belongings in an old station wagon and leave Chicago to take up residency in a small town in Washington, where Kay has inherited the local diner.
The kids run afoul of the mean-spirited next-door neighbor, Mullins, who actually beats them.
One night, she puts Emily up in his frontyard tree in an angel outfit adorned with lights.
The alcoholic Mullins, played by the ubiquitous Vincent Schiavelli, is provoked into storming out on the porch as Aunt Zena sets off bright lights and a refractive poof of magic-kit smoke that briefly, spectacularly illuminates Emily.
He cleans up his life, starts going to church, convinces townspeople that he actually saw this angel, and a reporter from a scandal rag as well as television cameras roll into town, creating a media circus and great business for the diner.
Even during the most tenuous of international events, Americans have a belief in miracles.
And the central idea doesn't work because the filmmaker, in effect, asks the viewer to suspend his disbelief over and over.
But it's tough to believe that the angel ruse could have been pulled off at all, that the cranky Mullins could change so thoroughly, that the townsfolk could be so gullible, that the media would actually cover the event.
Aunt Zena Shirley MacLaine Kay Harris Teri Garr Joe Clancy Brown Mullins Vincent Schiavelli Rev.
But the concession to have the United Nations propose a mutual withdrawal of obsolete American missiles from Turkey in exchange for a Soviet pullout of its missiles from Cuba did not have to be made because, to the surprise of Kennedy, Nikita Khrushchev, the Soviet leader, agreed to an American ultimatum that the missiles be withdrawn from Cuba without an explicit link to the American Jupiter missiles in Turkey.
The step became unnecessary, because on Oct., 1962, the Soviets began dismantling the missiles thereby ending the crisis the day after the statement was dictated.
The Cuban missile crisis erupted in October 1962 when it was discovered that the Soviet Union had installed nuclear warheads on the island and targeted them at the United States.
After a tense, 13-day standoff, the Soviets blinked and withdrew the missiles.
American intercontinental ballistic missiles were alerted, jet fighters were scrambled and an airborne command center known as the president's ""doomsday plane"" took to the air, although without the president aboard.
It was later determined that a training tape simulating a Soviet attack had been mistakenly inserted into the Pentagon's computer system.
The haphazard nature of the data quickly convinced analysts that there was a glitch in the system.
Sunlight reflected off some clouds over Minuteman launch silos in Montana.
Russia's early-warning satellites showed no confirmation of a United States attack, and the crisis was defused.
GEORGE MORRIS Section: People 1121 Words Page: 1 C OpenURL Link As a high school senior 40 years ago, Doris Tavenner wasn't surprised when she was called out of speech class on a Tuesday morning to read an announcement over the school intercom.
All students must pack their things, go to their school buses or cars and go straight home.
In more than five years living on the United States Navy base at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, she had never heard of anything like this.
President John Kennedy had learned about a week earlier that Cuba had Soviet missiles capable of reaching the United States.
A blockade of the island nation and high-wire international negotiating were about to begin.
Her father, a carpentry shop supervisor, came in with no more information.
Suddenly, a soldier in full battle gear walked into their house, tossed a letter on the table and walked out without speaking.
They were to leave their cars in their driveways with the keys in the ignition.
Before the sun set, they were aboard ships and planes leaving Guantanamo.
Those who brought transistor radios listened as President Kennedy broke the news once they were safely out of port.
Instead, it was a four-day trip to Norfolk, Va., and the Little Creek Naval Amphibious Base.
The crisis ended in two weeks, but those who elected to return did so shortly before Christmas.
She noticed foxholes and bunkers that had been hastily built to defend the base if attacked.
Life returned to normal, which despite the remote and exotic location was not unlike what many smalltown American teens experienced in those days.
Kids watched movies at night at outdoor theaters not drive-ins; dry, comfortable weather allowed for outside seating and danced to Elvis Presley songs on the teen club's jukebox.
There were no traffic lights, and parents didn't worry about their children being out at night.
Harris recalls watching movies and seeing napalm being dropped across the bay by Navy airmen in combat exercises.
Another training mission got his attention the first Saturday he was at Guantanamo.
Although the United States had good diplomatic relations with Cuba, then ruled by dictator Fulgencio Batista, most Americans on the base supported Fidel Castro when he came to power in 1959.
But Castro gravitated toward communism and the Soviet Union, and civilians at Guantanamo could no longer leave the base.
That increased the tension when Soviet warships periodically passed through Guantanamo Bay heading for Guantanamo City, which was outside the base.
The same was true of monthly defense exercises in which Marines would play the part of invaders, and Navy personnel defended the base.
The classmates relived these memories at a reunion last month in Norfolk.
Before then, Harris and Reid did not know they lived so close to each other.
Reid was dating one of the base policemen at the time, and the night before it happened, he gave her a hint.
The 11 classified letters exchanged in 1962 after the Cuban confrontation remain `extremely sensitive ... from the national security point of view,' said Pratt Byrd of the department's freedom of information office.
It ended when Khrushchev agreed to remove the missiles in exchange for U.S. guarantees that Cuba would not be invaded.
Mikhail Gorbachev ' absolutely would have gone along with it,' he said.
The State Department has not announced its decision to the school or the library.
Charlotte Sun 1310 Words Page: 5 OpenURL Link Bill Hahn searched for Soviet submarines and communication ships off the Atlantic Coast of the United States for three years during the Cold War.
The Soviets created a missile crisis that focused the whole world’s attention on Cuba during 13 days in October 1962.
After the Cuban crisis, Hahn, now of Punta Gorda Isles, took a job with Sikorsky Helicopter Corp. that captures one’s imagination.
The February 1988 edition of “Rotor & Wing International” magazine had a story explaining the role Hahn and the chopper he helped build played in keeping the presidents safe.
In 1962, shortly before President John F Kennedy was assassinated, Hahn joined the staff of the Sikorsky Aircraft Corp. as an engineer in the Stratford, Connecticut, main office.
Two years later, he was selected by the firm’s president to serve as manager of the Sikorsky Presidential Helicopter Division.
It was thanks to Jackie Kennedy, the president’s wife, that he got the job.
She discovered, while visiting their Cape Cod vacation home, the presidential luggage arrived hours before the president and his wife made it to Massachusetts because it went by helicopter.
Three or four years later, Hahn and his staff were confronted with another big problem involving the presidential helicopter.
The president wanted Sikorsky to build a helicopter that could withstand an atomic bomb blast,” he said.
The end result was the Sikorsky VH-3D Presidential Helicopter that might be able to withstand an atomic bomb detonation.
This is the craft that would fly the first family to safety if nuclear war was declared.
I had to find out how she wanted the Presidential Helicopter decorated,” the 87-year-old former Sikorsky engineer said.
Jackie Kennedy wanted the inside of the president’s helicopter decorated in shades of blue.
After her husband’s assassination, when Lyndon Johnson took over the presidency, brown was the color he chose.
Later, Nancy Reagan would reject the brown colors. “ took over and she didn’t like brown.
Nancy wanted the carpet on the presidential aircraft to be made of blue shag loops.
Reagan,’ I said, ‘Most of the women who get on Air Force One wear high heels.
Earlier, when President Richard Nixon took office, Hahn had to cope with a whole set of problems involving the presidential helicopter.
Nixon got close to Egyptian President Anwar Sadat, who was vacillating between turning Egypt into a democratic country like the United States or putting it in the Russian sphere of influence and turning the county into a totalitarian state.
Nixon had taken three of these bombproof Sikorsky helicopters with him on his Egyptian trip.
They want to set up a helicopter maintenance and training program over there.
Problem was we quickly discovered there were all kinds of wires and cables running above the entranceway to the helicopter, so the door couldn’t be expanded so the president could board easier.
That way if President Ford banged his head against the aircraft, he would be hitting it against a rubber cushion instead of the aluminum side of the helicopter.
They have three children, Sharon, Virginia and William, who live out of state.
Some South Florida communities have moved to stop such cultural exchanges.
FRANCES ROBLES, Frobles@miamiherald.com 1135 Words OpenURL Link Before this year, Cuban filmmaker Gerardo Chijona had not been to the United States in almost a decade.
After months of increased cultural exchanges between the two nations, the Si Cuba Festival has become the most significant demonstration of the Obama administration’s departure from Bush-era policies.
Costing an estimated $2 million, the festival will showcase everything from classical ballet dancers to contemporary artists.
Among the legends of Cuban entertainment expected are the National Ballet of Cuba and its famed director, Alicia Alonso.
Folkloric dance troupe The Muñequitos de Matanzas, the Septeto Nacional, the Creole Choir of Cuba, Danza Contemporanea de Cuba and the Cutumba folkloric ballet dance company are also scheduled.
For some of the groups, it will be their first time performing in the United States.
Brooks-Hopkins and other organizers said the unusual parade of Cuban works offers a “safe space” for artists and Cuba-lovers to engage — away from politics.
In December, the Miami City Commission unanimously passed a resolution asking Congress to end such exchanges, and Hialeah did the same in February.
At the request of the American Missile Crisis Association, Miami Beach Mayor Matti Herrera Bower asked a city commission subcommittee to study it and come up with a similar proposal.
Among the objections are that only the Cuban artists who follow the party line get to participate.
And it’s not like exile performers such as Willy Chirino would get to put on a show along Havana’s malecon, Miami Mayor Tomas Regalado said.
Ileana Ros-Lehtinen about it, and instructed the city’s lobbying team to press legislators.
The American Civil Liberties Union of Greater Miami last week called for an investigation into whether meddling by county commissioners led to the abrupt cancellation of the Fuego Cuban Music Worlds Festival, which was scheduled for Saturday at the Homestead Miami International Speedway.
The event was scrapped a day after County Commissioner Lynda Bell balked on Spanish radio.
Festival co-chair Ben Rodriguez-Cubeñas said organizers deliberately raised only private funds.
Funders include the Cuban Artists Fund, the Ford Foundation, the Rockefeller Brothers Foundation and the Robert Sterling Clark Foundation.
He and others suggested that the festival could become the first step in broader engagement policy between the two nations.
While the Obama administration has allowed more travel to and from Cuba and permitted more cash remittances to the island, most experts are still waiting for Cuba’s quid pro quo.
With an American subcontractor jailed in Cuba for distributing United States government communications equipment, relations between the two governments remain chilly even while the cultural sphere has exploded.
The RF-8 Crusader that now rests at Castle Air Museum provides a monument to history.
According to Joe Pruzzo, the chief executive officer at the museum, the RF-8 Crusader that was recently added to the museum's collection flew during the Cuban missile crisis and the Vietnam War.
Sunday, Denny Baker, a pilot who flew RF-8s over Vietnam, will dedicate the plane.
The day is one of two a year when visitors can hop inside the planes on display.
Thirty of the museum's 53 restored planes will have their cockpits open for public viewing.
Pruzzo said Castle's open cockpit show is the largest in Central California.
Also at the museum are planes from the Korean War, the Vietnam War and the present day.
Russ Schaff, a restoration volunteer at the museum, said Open Cockpit Day is one of Atwater's hidden treasures.
Pruzzo's mission at the museum is to preserve military aviation history for future generations.
Open Cockpit Day is a chance for people young and old to see what the museum has to offer.
But intelligence analysts in Washington discounted their reports of seeing what looked like huge missile-like tubes, believing the Soviet military buildup in Cuba was purely defensive.
The compilation of documents includes notes taken by then-agency director John McCone during White House crisis meetings, estimates by the intelligence community, reports from Cuban agents, and memoranda coded Ironbark meaning they were based on information from one of the most valuable Soviet spies of the Cold War, Col.
If the CIA could do it over, Studeman said, it would pay more attention to the informants' reporting sightings of Soviet missiles in Cuba, and analyze better how the Soviets viewed deployment of missiles outside their borders.
In fact, the documents and reminiscences highlight how the United States nearly missed the deployment of the SS-4 medium-range missiles in Cuba until it was almost too late.
As it was, the deployment only became known when a U-2 spy plane photographed the launch pads on the western third of Cuba on Oct., 1962 at least one month after the first batch got to the island.
Warren Frank, then with the agency's foreign intelligence branch, said much of the Cuban agent reporting was collected in Miami at what became the largest CIA station in the world.
One report declassified Monday was made Sept., 1962, by a 47-year-old Cuban described as a businessman with four years of schooling and of average intelligence.
The CIA received hundreds if not thousands of such reports, many of which its agents in Miami deemed credible, said Frank.
Several analysts said part of the problem was that they could not understand why the Soviets would want to deploy medium-range missiles in Cuba.
There were those who thought the 49-year-old diplomat with a reputation as a skilled negotiator and an expert on the United States legislative process was prepared to sit down and forge a better relationship with the United States.
Instead, Mr Arbesu arrived during a period that has developed into one of the lowest points in bilateral relations since the Cuban missile crisis.
Just a few days after his arrival, President Bush stated publicly for the first time that he supported TV Marti -a United States television broadcast that the Cubans are dead set against -and favored a plebiscite in Cuba as the first step toward democracy.
Mr Bush's comments set the tone for a chillier relationship between the two countries.
Since then there have been more contentious issues than points of agreement.
Cuba's top diplomat in the United States said he had no illusions about his role.
Cuban displeasure at the United States invasion of Panama and the prospect of TV Marti, continuing United States criticism of Cuba's human rights record, disagreement about how the U.S.-Cuba immigration accord is being implemented and most recently the United States shelling of a Cuban freighter.
Some Cuba analysts say that because relations are perfectly bad now and Cuba is particularly vulnerable, this might be a propitious time for the United States to negotiate a new relationship with Cuba.
I don't see any possibilities of any negotiations at the moment,' he said.
Cuba and the United States haven't had diplomatic relations since January 1961, and a United States embargo has prevented most trade and travel between the two countries for nearly three decades.
But in 1977 -during a period of more cordial relations under President Jimmy Carter -the two countries established interests sections in each other's capitals.
The Cuban Interests Section is housed in Cuba's ornate old embassy on 16th Street NW, but officially the Embassy of Czechoslovakia handles its diplomatic affairs.
Right now TV Marti is the issue that receives the most daily attention at the Cuban Interests Section, because it's the next potential area of conflict, Mr Arbesu said.
Cuba is vehemently opposed to plans for the TV broadcast, saying it violates both Cuban sovereignty and international broadcast agreements, and has threatened to jam it and take retaliatory measures.
There haven't been any conversations between the United States and Cuba about TV Marti for about three months, Mr Arbesu said.
Mr Arbesu, now in one of the toughest posts in the Cuban foreign service, has a long history of negotiating knotty issues.
He is a veteran of talks that led to the agreement to withdraw Cuban troops from Angola, and the reinstatement of the immigration accord with the United States.
Mr Arbesu also was in Washington a number of times for talks during the Carter administration, according to Wayne Smith, who headed the United States Interests Section in Havana from 1979 to 1982.
Mr Smith, who has watched Mr Arbesu in action at negotiating sessions, said, ""He is very much a pragmatist; one who believes in engagement.
Before coming to Washington, Mr Arbesu was the deputy chief of the Americas Department in charge of the Caribbean and the United States.
United States academics who have met him are impressed with his breadth of knowledge on the United States political scene.
He knows the American legislative process inside and out,' said Andrew Zimbalist, a Cuba specialist at Smith College.
This draft speech is among several thousand drafts, letters, and handwritten notes from Robert F Kennedy’s personal files that have just last week been opened at the John F Kennedy Presidential Library.
Robert Kennedy’s writings make vivid how close we came to the brink of war.
Had President Kennedy been forced to choose a response in the first 48 hours after an American spy plane discovered the Soviets sneaking nuclear-tipped missiles into Cuba, RFK had no doubt that his brother would have chosen an air strike against the missile sites, followed by an invasion.
The United States would have felt compelled to respond in kind triggering an escalation to nuclear Armageddon.
Instead of the air strike, JFK initially chose to impose a naval blockade on further arms shipments to Cuba.
Yet as the Soviets rushed to complete construction of missiles already in Cuba so that they could be fired against American cities, United States planning for the air strike was refined.
As Soviet ships approached the blockade line on Oct., 1962, Robert Kennedy wrote that “the danger and concern that we all felt hung like a cloud over us all…I think these few minutes were the time of greatest worry by the President.
While the Soviet ships turned around rather than challenge the blockade, the window for United States action to prevent the missiles in Cuba from becoming fully operational was rapidly closing.
As both sides moved military pieces on the chessboard toward the precipice of nuclear war, both President Kennedy and Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev also intensified the search for an alternative.
They included concessions that neither man would have been willing to countenance until coming face to face with the real prospect that they could be principal actors in a process that would lead to sudden death for hundreds of millions of people.
The president chose his brother as the emissary to Soviet Ambassador Anatoly Dobrynin to convey a last and final offer.
What resolved the crisis was an imaginative combination of public deal, private ultimatum, and secret sweetener.
If Khrushchev agreed to withdraw the missiles, the United States would pledge not to invade Cuba.
Privately, RFK warned that unless Khrushchev announced within 24 hours that the missiles would be withdrawn, the United States would act unilaterally to eliminate them.
Secretly, he said that while there could be no official deal promising such, if the Soviet missiles were withdrawn from Cuba, within six months US missiles in Turkey would be gone.
The further away from those 13 days we get, the harder it is for many people to believe that a confrontation over missiles in Cuba or Turkey could have pushed the United States and the Soviet Union to nuclear war.
RFK’s papers allow us to peer over his shoulder in the rush of events to remind us why historians agree that this was indeed the most dangerous moment in recorded history.
Re pro duce d with the pe rmis s io n o f Lo s Ang e le s Time s Was hing to n P o s t Ne ws Se rvice by Ne ws Bank, inc.
Rusk, the son of a minister turned farmer, died Tuesday at his home in Athens, Ga.
After Kennedy's assassination, President Lyndon B Johnson insisted Rusk stay on.
He remained until the end of Johnson's administration in 1969, despite criticism over his advocacy of the Vietnam War.
Rusk never apologized for his role in the war, which killed 57,000 Americans and 1 million Vietnamese.
Vietnam was only one of four major global events Rusk helped preside over as secretary of state.
In 1962, the world held its breath as Kennedy ordered the Soviets to dismantle Cuban missile sites aimed at the United States.
Michael Dobbs Section: INSIGHT 1682 Words OPINION Page: A9 OpenURL Link Imagine a President McCain or a President Obama receiving the following top-secret briefing from his national security adviser: ""Iran has successfully developed a nuclear warhead and may have already mated it with a medium-range Shahab-3 missile targeted at Israel.
After a month in which the campaigns duked it out over national security, it's reasonable to wonder how either man would react to such an emergency.
Chances are that in such a bind, our next commander in chief will want to consider how one of his predecessors dealt with the ultimate crisis, the 1962 standoff over Soviet nuclear missiles secretly placed in Cuba.
The history of those 13 terrifying days when the world stood at the nuclear precipice has become encrusted in mythology and riddled with basic errors of fact.
To use the 1962 showdown as a guide to handling modern-day crises, we must separate history from political spin.
Kennedy and his aides had an obvious interest in stressing the president's cool resolve under fire.
I have spent thousands of hours over the past three years assembling a minute-by-minute chronology of the crisis, combing through archives and interviewing American, Soviet and Cuban participants.
I was startled to discover that the debates inside the White House were often out of sync with events in the rest of the world.
Much of what Kennedy thought he knew about Soviet actions and motivations during the crisis rested on flawed intelligence reports and assumptions.
Far from being an example of ""matchlessly calibrated'' diplomacy, the Cuban missile crisis is better understood as a prime illustration of the limits of crisis management -and the importance of the ever-present screw-up factor in world affairs.
Lest anyone think that faulty intelligence started with the Bush administration, let me say that I uncovered numerous examples of bad information flowing into and out of the Kennedy White House -beginning with the celebrated ""eyeball to eyeball'' episode on Oct., 1962, when JFK was led to believe that Soviet freighters transporting missiles toward Cuba had reached the United States blockade line around the island and turned around at the last moment.
The incident never happened, at least as depicted by Kennedy aides, Harvard professors and Hollywood moviemakers.
Khrushchev had ordered his ships to return to the Soviet Union more than 24 hours earlier.
Charles Maultsby was on a routine mission to keep an eye on Soviet nuclear tests when he took a wrong turn at the North Pole and ended up in Soviet airspace on the most dangerous day of the Cold War.
Air force chiefs failed to inform Kennedy and McNamara for an hour and a half that they had a plane over the Soviet Union, even though the Soviets sent MiG fighters to shoot Maultsby down and the Alaskan Air Command responded by scrambling nuclear-armed United States fighter-interceptors.
As I studied the Cuban missile crisis, I was repeatedly struck by modern-day parallels.
For any future president struggling with an ""Iranian missile crisis,'' I suggest the real lessons most worth learning from 1962.
The president may be the best-informed person in the world, but there's still much that he doesn't know.
The missiles, which were equipped with Hiroshima-sized bombs, could have destroyed Guantanamo in five minutes.
While Kennedy had relatively good (if belated) intelligence about the medium-range Soviet missiles capable of hitting the United States, he had no idea on Black Saturday where the nuclear warheads were stored and how they had been dispersed to various missile sites.
As it turns out, United States reconnaissance planes had actually taken photographs of the Soviet nuclear-storage bunkers at Bejucal and Managua, 25 kilometres south of Havana -but the CIA concluded that neither site could have been housing the warheads because of the lack of adequate security.
Kennedy was also woefully misinformed about the size of the Soviet troop presence on Cuba.
On Oct. 20, following the discovery of the missiles, McNamara told the president that there were about 6,000 to 8,000 Soviet ""technicians'' on the island.
In fact, there were 43,000 heavily armed Soviet troops on Cuba, equipped with tactical nuclear weapons targeted at suspected United States beachheads.
Kennedy rightly rejected as too risky the joint chiefs' calls to invade, but he didn't know the half of it.
Which, of course, makes precisely calibrated ""crisis management'' impossible.
Kennedy understood that the chances of dangerous, unpredictable events occurring skyrocket once you set the machinery of war in motion.
He knew that history is determined not just by the ""rational actors'' but also by the irrational ones -the blinkered generals, the excitable ideologues, the prophets living in caves.
The president understood, better than any of his advisers, that events were spiraling out of control by Black Saturday.
That's why he moved to bring the crisis to an end by sending his brother, attorney general Robert F Kennedy, to meet with the Soviet ambassador to Washington and offer to dismantle United States Jupiter missiles in Turkey if the Soviets would withdraw their missiles from Cuba.
That little detail remained a secret for nearly three decades, even as historians and journalists churned out books celebrating Kennedy's concession-free victory in his game of brinkmanship with Khrushchev.
The White House tapes from October 1962 demonstrate conclusively that Kennedy was the most dovish member of the 13-man executive committee of the National Security Council, known as the ExComm, that he set up to handle the crisis.
On Black Saturday, most of the ExComm was unwilling to swap the obsolete Jupiters in Turkey for the Soviet missiles on Cuba.
Kennedy ""seems to be the only one in favour of it,'' Joint chiefs of staff chair Maxwell Taylor reported to his fellow generals.
Later that afternoon, the joint chiefs recommended a massive United States air attack on Cuba, to be followed by an invasion within seven days -which we now know could have resulted in tens of thousands of U.S., Soviet and Cuban casualties, the nuking of the Guantanamo naval base and, quite possibly, full-scale nuclear war.
Kennedy derived his capacity for independent judgment from his own prior experience, both in and out of the White House.
As the commander of PT-109, a patrol boat in the Pacific during the Second World War, he had learned to be mistrustful of abstract military theorizing.
The Bay of Pigs fiasco of April 1961 had taught him to be skeptical of the assurances of the spymasters and the military brass.
Kennedy viewed history not as a propaganda argument to justify his decisions but as a cautionary tale.
Earlier in 1962, he had read The Guns of August, Barbara Tuchman's now-classic history of the way Europe blundered into the First World War.
He was so taken by the book that he asked all his aides to read it and had it distributed to every United States military base worldwide.
Had someone else been president in October 1962, the outcome might have been very different.
Costner's press agent, Stephen Rivers, said Dr Castro ``was quite animated throughout'' the screening.
The movie tells the story of President John F Kennedy and his staff, and the decisions that led to the removal of the Soviet missiles from Cuba in October, 1962.
Dr Castro and other Cuban officials in power at the time were not portrayed in the film.
They were joined in the screening at the Palace of the Revolution, where Dr Castro has his offices, by Cuban Foreign Minister Felipe Perez Roque, Vice-President Carlos Lage and members of Dr Castro's personal staff.
Costner stars as Kenny O'Donnell, a White House aide to President Kennedy and his brother, Robert.
Two Madison Memorial High School students are offering people a chance to rewrite history as part of their ``Cuban experience'' World Wide Web site, which took top honors in social sciences at this year's ThinkQuest competition, an international Internet learning contest held last weekend in Las Angeles.
Through ThinkQuest, the two were paired with a student from Singapore, Gim Teck Won, 17, meeting Won in person for the first time last weekend.
At one part of the site, visitors can assume the role of Kennedy, Khrushchev or Cuban leader Fidel Castro during the missile crisis.
Another Memorial student, senior Andrew Holbrook, finished fifth in the social science category for his Web page, ``Lessons of War,'' a look at some of the battles that helped shape Western civilization.
Holbrook, who finished first in last year's contest for a site on Mars, teamed up with students from Virginia and Germany.
