In the absence of an explicit agreement in 1962, over the next 20 years the United States and the Soviet Union continued to compete over Cuba by seeking to portray revisionist behaviour as consistent or in concordance with the ’62 Understanding.
I argue that this interaction is indicative of rhetorical-oriented conception of norms.
Against constructivist approaches that focus on social identity and contractual institutionalist literature that focuses on focal points and convergent expectations, this approach emphasizes how states use norms to compete under circumscribed conditions.
Under this perspective, norms are organic entities, which like the concept of judicial review, evolve in meaning in conjunction with their practical use.
In 1970, the United States confronted the Soviet Union with evidence of its building a submarine base in Cienfuegos harbour.
In 1978 the Soviet Union refused to remove from Cuba a squadron of MiG 23 fighter aircraft identified by American reconnaissance.
In 1979, the United States ‘discovered’ a Soviet brigade stationed in Cuba that had in fact been in place since the Missile Crisis but had never been removed.
And in 1985, President Reagan suggested that Cuba’s military activity in Central America released the United States of its 1962 pledge to the Soviets not to invade Cuba.
Michael Griesdorf is a political affairs officer with the United Nations.
Much of the archives that consider Soviet –American relations on Cuba have been declassified, and in addition, several former State Department, NSC, and Politburo staff members have published their own accounts of these crises, adding many second-hand explanations to the documented record.
Of all the existing studies, though, none has ever attempted to explain the resolutions to these four events under the rubric of a single theory.
After establishing the so-called ’62 Understanding, the United States and the Soviet Union continued to compete over Cuba by exploiting ambiguities in the resolution.
These ambiguities determined the type of conflicts over which the superpowers would challenge each other, regulated the manner in which subsequent Cuban conflicts would be framed, and finally constrained how the actors would respond.
In effect, the 1962 Understanding was a non-ratified corpus of rules or guidelines that outlined what appropriate behaviour with regard to post-1962 Cuba entailed, and the United States and the Soviet Union at once honoured these guidelines and yet pursued actions designed to have them favourably interpreted as well.
While by most accounts the United States ‘won’ the Cuban Missile crisis insofar as the Soviets retracted their Cuban weapons, the important result of the conflict was that both players realized that the Cold War itself could not be won in an era where both powers possessed nuclear arsenals.
Under conditions of Mutually Assured Destruction , deterrence theory transformed.
Going to the brink of nuclear war enabled the Soviet Union and the United States to recognize that the mutual gains enjoyed from at least minimal cooperation far exceeded any relative gains one might achieve through defection.
This paper argues that as a result of the Missile Crisis the superpowers also developed a norm-governed relationship that constituted their subsequent interactions over Cuba.
Specifically, my argument is that while the United States and Soviet Union completed the crisis by constructing an unwritten agreement or ‘Understanding’ in 1962, the lack of public ratification combined with its inherent discursive ambiguity had the effect of transforming the Understanding into a type of normative framework around which future Cuban conflicts were built.
Accordingly, each superpower delineated in the ’62 Understanding one specific action that would induce a military response.
The United States agreed to never invade Cuba and the Soviet Union agreed never to place offensive weapons on the island.
Both powers accepted the shared right to monitor the other’s compliance of this resolution.
In part because of Cuba’s geopolitical significance, neither superpower was content with the status quo resulting from the conclusion of the 1962 crisis.
Yet after going to the brink of nuclear war, the superpowers also shared an interest in avoiding any miscommunication that might result in a subsequent conflict deteriorating into an unstoppable spiral.
By exploiting an ambiguity in the ’62 Understanding, a superpower could establish a favourable interpretation that would enable it to achieve a relative gain.
Subsequent conflicts would be won according to the extent to which one party was able to justify its actions as consistent with the existent ’62 Understanding.
Successful revisionist interpretations effectively would become addendums to the original agreement.
If true, such behaviour represents a significant finding for international relations theory because it suggests that states might subscribe to norms according to what might be referred to as a rhetorical rather than strictly expressive or strategic rationale.
According to this perspective, norms are social facts, which define standards of social behaviour and express actors’ identities.
Constructivists argue that states value being accepted or acknowledged by relevant others.
Agents comply with norms for non-instrumentalist reasons associated with socialization and complex learning and because subscribing to a norm has the effect of enabling it to be a part of an in-group community.
In all, the key premises informing constructivism are non-instrumental or expressive of social learning, persuasion, and preference change.
In turn, so-called ‘contractual institutionalists’ conceptualize norms as focal points as a means of conveying credible commitments and around which expectations converge.
Under this approach, norm compliance is conceived primarily as a strategic endeavour that enables agents to signal to partners and rivals their intentions to reduce transaction costs and establish joint gains through cooperation and collaboration.
Griesdorf cost– benefit calculation among egoistic, self-interested actors.
While according to contractual institutionalism norms do not constitute agents’ identities and interests, they nevertheless are intersubjective rules or understandings that agents employ to adjust their strategic behaviour in order to realize joint gains.
They affect state behaviour by ‘providing solutions to coordination problems’, enabling states to adjust their preferences over actions in order to establish common equilibria.
To be sure, the differences between constructivism and contractual institutionalism are pronounced.
In the former, socialization is the pivotal theoretical rationale, with complex learning representing the important mechanism by which in-group actors encourage their out-group counterparts to adopt the norms of the in-group community.
As Schimmelfennig writes, ‘in order to get access to these resources, the actor adopts the constitutive beliefs and practices institutionalized in the social environment and taught by the socialization agency’.10 In contrast, under the contractual institutionalist approach norms serve not as a corpus of meanings that a socializing actor must adopt in order to obtain in-group solidarity but rather represent a modus operandi for signalling congruent expectations.
Amidst conditions of anarchy, here norms are a means through which actors overcome the security dilemma and achieve absolute gains from joint cooperation.
Yet under both approaches, the key premise is that norms are abstracted in a manner that they are conceptualized as causes, whereby actors are perceived as changing their behaviour in order to comply with the norm.
Whether actors ‘are embedded in and circumscribed by a normative structure’ or ‘strategize in an institutional setting’ for both constructivism and contractual institutionalism norms are collective understandings that make behavioural claims upon agents.
The norm exists ‘out there’, and actors are effectively compelled to comply with it for either expressive or strategic reasons.
In this paper I explore a third approach to norms and norm compliance that is inspired by Anthony Giddens’ notion of structuration and his understanding of structure as both the medium and outcome of social interactions.
Applied to the concept of norms, the key insight to this approach is that it suggests that norms themselves can be conceptualized as an emergent effect of social practices that is continually being constituted and reconstituted in conjunction with agents’ social intercourse.
The use of norms under the rhetorical approach is like subscribing to a set of evolving or organic rules, the meanings of which are undergoing ‘a continual “interpretation” and reinterpretation’.16 It follows that this rhetorical conception of norms emphasizes not merely the ‘changefulness’ of norms, but the fact that their meanings are contested by actors as well.
Like the constructivist premise, norms continue to hold an expressive status as something that encourages actors to adopt behaviour in accordance with a logic of appropriateness and the ‘culture of anarchy’ in which interaction is taking place.
At the same time, however, under the rhetorical approach actors confront norms from a consequentialist orientation as well, insofar as they are trying to shift the meaning of a norm in a manner that meets their strategic interests.
Norms structure or guide actor behaviour, but actors nevertheless are empowered agents who, in abiding by normative guidelines, seek to manipulate norms so that the results of social behaviour occur in a manner that concords with their respective objectives.
Insights from legal theory suggest that norms can be conceptualized as something akin to a legal or institutional context in which a prior use of a norm serves as a type of precedent that delimits the available ways that a norm can be interpreted in the future.
To be sure, under a rhetorical approach norms structure the context of interaction.
As Andrew Hurrel asserts, whatever their motives for acting, in order to be persuasive governments that subscribe to a rhetorical approach to norms need to justify their action as being in concordance with the norm, and cannot deny or ignore the norm’s meaning in favour of some baser notion of interest.
At the same time, though, the rhetorical conception of norms would suggest as well that actors will actively contest the meaning of norms by seeking to ‘push’ their precedent meaning towards a new one that more closely conforms with their strategic interests.
Importantly, and in keeping with the legal analogy, the rhetorical approach indicates that this notion of ‘arguing from precedent’ sharply reduces the available ways in which a norm can be reinterpreted to those that contending parties could accept as plausibly consistent with the existent meaning.
To this extent, my interpretation of a rule as well as my uses of words are monitored and reinforced by a group of competent speakers.
Thus while there are likely to be disagreements about the proper use of a term of the interpretation of a rule, purely idiosyncratic uses are excluded even if the use of the concepts remain contestable and contested.
Kratochwil’s comments suggest that the available room for norms to be rhetorically manipulated is at once restrictive and yet nevertheless available to revision.
At the same time, however, neither party was content with Cuba’s stature.
Yet neither of these points captures the interplay between contestation and conformity.
Rather, much like the notion of practising judicial review, both superpowers sought to exploit ambiguities in the ’62 Understanding by claiming a revisionist interpretation of a norm was in concordance with the status quo.
The normative behaviour exhibited amounted to a circumscribed competition.
The objective for each superpower was not to achieve social affinities or convergent expectations, but to act in a manner that would result in the ’62 Understanding retaining its status as the foundation of social interactions while at the same time having it favourably reinterpreted – all without allowing the competition to spiral into violence.
In what follows I conduct a close examination of the four subsequent conflicts, using recently declassified documents and secondary sources to piece together the American and Soviet positions.
In each case, I consider this rhetorical conception of norms against theories based on realist concerns for relative power and domestic politics.
I close the paper by considering how this rhetorical approach to norms might be applied to contemporary conflicts.
Chairman Khrushchev has agreed to remove from Cuba all weapons systems capable of offensive use, to halt the further introduction of such weapons into Cuba, and to permit appropriate United Nations observation and supervision to insure the carrying out and continuation of these commitments.
We on our part agreed that once these adequate arrangements for verification ha been established we will remove our naval quarantine and give assurances against an invasion of Cuba.
Fidel Castro, angry that the Soviet Union had negotiated and indeed compromised Cuban security interests without his consultation, refused to permit the United Nations on to its territory in order to conduct and confirm the Soviet withdrawal.
We know as well today that President Kennedy privately agreed to withdraw the Jupiter Missiles from Turkey as part of the Soviet pledge to remove the surface-to-surface missiles and delivery systems from Cuba.
Thus while the Soviet Union and the United States had intended to ratify and approve a formal resolution to Cuba in the United Nations, the solution to the Missile Crisis instead became an inexplicit agreement between the superpowers, one marked by private overtones.
The Soviet withdrawal of its weapons from Cuba was verified unilaterally through American aerial overflight and satellite reconnaissance.
For its part, the United States never issued an official or legal commitment not to invade Cuba until after the Cienfuegos incident.
In the same 20 November 1962 public address, President Kennedy substituted the unratified resolution to the Crisis with a bilateral agreement, dropping the UN supervision requirement as a condition for agreeing to ‘peace in the Caribbean:’ This government has no choice but to pursue its own means of checking on military activities as for our part, if all offensive weapons are removed from Cuba and kept out of the hemisphere in the future, under adequate verification and safeguards, and if Cuba is not used for the export of aggressive Communist purposes, there will be peace in the Caribbean.
The trail of declassified documents supports the assertion that the superpowers exchanged a series of correspondences in which they sought to clarify how each side thought the Kennedy– Khrushchev Understanding should be interpreted.
These correspondences between the superpowers transformed three aspects of the agreement into guidelines that both accepted but neither sought to codify.
For one thing, the United States and the Soviet Union clearly established an official definition of offensive weaponry.
In a 2 November 1962 letter to UN Ambassador Mikoyan, the American Ambassador Adlai Stevenson listed five categories of weapons that the United States deemed offensive.
Mikoyan acknowledged this list on 3 November and officially accepted its terms several hours before Kennedy’s Press Conference on 20 November, effectively turning the guideline below into a mutually acknowledged definition of offensive weaponry.
Surface-to-surface missiles including those designed for use at sea and including propellants and chemical compounds capable of being used to power missiles.
Mechanical or electronic equipment to support or operate the above items such as communications, supply, and missile launching equipment including KOMAR Class motor torpedo boats.
A second ambiguous element of the 1962 Understanding concerned the extent of the existing Soviet military presence in Cuba and how it might change in the future.
Henry Kissinger, in his description of the Cienfuegos Crisis, reveals that the superpowers engaged in a written exchange regarding bases.
Citing a 5 November 1962 conversation between John McCloy and Vasily Kuznetsov, Kissinger writes that ‘McCloy had raised the issue with Kuznetsov stating that the United States objected to the establishment of any Soviet military base in Cuba.
Kuznetsov said he understood’.30 There is evidence however, that this norm was restricted to any new bases that the Soviets might establish.
In a 19 November 1962 document written by John McCloy summarizing his 18 November meeting with Kuznetsov, existing bases are discussed and dismissed as part of the Understanding.
After noting that the United States ‘had confirmed presence of a number of fully manned Soviet combat teams organized in precisely same manner as army units in Soviet Union’, McCloy explicitly declares that ‘we were not introducing any new conditions [to the no-invasion pledge]’.31 The United States understood that Russia had existing bases in Cuba.
By doing nothing about them, their presence became a mutually acknowledged agreement.
A final ambiguous facet to the Kennedy –Khrushchev Understanding concerned the role of Cuba, specifically how Castro’s support of Communist movements in surrounding states would affect the superpower agreement.
When Kennedy issued Presidential Proclamation 3504 on 23 October, which authorized the naval quarantine of Cuba, he in part justified his actions by citing a Congressional resolution that had outlined American determination to ‘prevent by whatever means may be necessary the Marxist-Leninist regime in Cuba from extending its aggressive subversive activities to any part of this hemisphere’.32 In the 20 November address restated above, Kennedy included a clause concerning Cuban activities as a condition to the no-invasion pledge.
The Soviet response to Kennedy’s comments on 20 November is outlined in a 25 November meeting between McCloy and Mikoyan that took place in Hyde Park.
In a cable dated the same day to Secretary of State Dean Rusk, Assistant Secretary Cleveland comments that Mikoyan found the American ‘no-invasion pledge element of the declaration unsatisfactory and repeatedly came back to the difficulties in which Castro would find himself if the situation in the Caribbean could not be normalized’.33 The American response can be found in a 26 November draft text of the Missile Crisis agreement for the Security Council that was never publicly delivered.
At the bottom of the document, Stevenson notes the excision of Cuban behaviour as a condition to the ’62 Understanding, writing in freehand that a Cuban pledge of non-aggression was already ‘covered by the non aggression obligations of Rio Pact and UN’.34 The Understanding was bilateral.
According to the norm, Cuban activity was exempt from the American pledge to the Soviet Union not to invade the island.
The 1970 Cienfuegos Crisis The public record In July 1970, Soviet chargé d’affaires, Yuri Vorontsov, unexpectedly suggested to National Security Advisor Henry Kissinger that the superpowers renew the terms of the 1962 Understanding established after the Missile Crisis.
Suspicious of the question’s timing, Kissinger ordered an additional series of U2 reconnaissance flights over Cuba that might reveal any new Soviet behaviour.
These U2 missions were met with heavy harassment by Cuban fighters, the most significant military confrontation around Cuban territory since 1962.36 Nevertheless, on 9 September American reconnaissance spotted the arrival of a Soviet naval flotilla in Cienfuegos that included a ship designed for submarine maintenance and two barges used for the storage of nuclear submarine waste.
A week later, the United States discovered at Cienfuegos evidence of a submarine tender moored in a permanent fashion, anti-submarine nets guarding the harbour entrance, a new communications centre, and a soccer field.
Despite Kissinger’s strong objections, President Nixon instructed the National Security Advisor to conceal the information from public scrutiny until he returned from a European diplomatic trip.
According to Richard Nixon’s account, Dobrynin’s face ‘went ashen’ when the United States presented the American evidence of the construction at Cienfuegos and demanded the immediate dismantling of the base.
Kissinger replied affirmatively, and Dobrynin responded that he would inform the Kremlin of the accusation.
Griesdorf On 5 October 1970, the Soviet Union decided to comply with the United States demands.
The Soviet side has not done and is not doing in Cuba now – that includes the area of the Cienfuegos port – anything of the kind that would contradict that mentioned Understanding.
In any case, we would like to reaffirm once again that the Soviet Union strictly adheres to its part of the Understanding on the Cuban question and will continue to adhere to it in the future on the assumption that the American side, as President Nixon has reaffirmed, will also strictly observe its part of the Understanding.
The United States government understands that the USSR will not establish, utilize, or permit the establishment of any facility in Cuba that can be employed to support or repair Soviet naval ships capable of carrying offensive weapons;e. submarines or surface ships armed with nuclear capable surface-to-surface missiles.
In terms of the military balance, the Soviet Union had increased its relative power by developing a second strike capability, a blue water navy, and a more ambitious intervention programme in Africa and the Middle East.
Yet in their diplomatic relations, the United States and the Soviet Union had become less confrontational, increasing their contacts and beginning to build a cooperative relationship that would become détente.
While the change in relative power offers a motivation for why the Soviets might attempt to build a submarine base, their improved diplomatic relations poses a problem for the Cienfuegos incident.
Kissinger notes, for instance, that in 1970 public opinion was decisively in favour of the improving Soviet–American interaction, and before the Soviet concession many voiced concern that the United States was being too confrontational.
First, there is evidence that the crisis was framed according to an ambiguous facet of the 1962 Understanding.
Yet despite the National Security Advisor’s confident response to the Soviet construction, Kissinger knew from the 1962 archives that a submarine base, at least in the American opinion, was not technically illegal.
In his 29 October 1962 memorandum, Garthoff explicitly notes that ‘submarines were not covered by the Kennedy –Khrushchev Understanding’, and advises that ‘the question of excluding visits by Soviet submarines should best be handled by appropriate unilateral US declaration at some appropriate time’.47 When Kissinger won the Soviet concession over Cienfuegos, the United States achieved a favourable revision of the ’62 Understanding.
Again, relative power approaches amidst thawing relations appears to be insufficient without the norms explanation.
Importantly, it was the Soviet Union that first raised the ’62 Understanding, and indeed was what prompted the American reconnaissance.
This suggests that the Soviets recognized that constructing a submarine base in Cuba was an ambiguous act according to the Understanding, but was one they believed could be justified through interpretation.
Moreover, even after backing down on the issue of a submarine base, there is evidence that the Soviets still sought to gain a concession from the United States with regard to the new terms of the Understanding.
If Soviet ships and vessels enter ports of foreign states, including the ports of the Republic of Cuba, on official visits and business calls, they do so with the permission of the governments of the states concerned.
It is obvious that such calls are an inalienable right of sovereign states, universally recognized and confirmed by many centuries of international practice.
You may recall I said that if a nuclear submarine were serviced from Cuba or in Cuba, that this would be a violation of our Understanding with regard to the Soviet Union’s activities in putting offensive weapons or abase in Cuba.
Now as far as this submarine is concerned, the question is a rather technical one, whether it is there for a port call or whether it is there for servicing.
The Soviet Union is aware of the fact that we consider that there is an Understanding and we will, of course, bring the matter to their attention if we find that the Understanding is violated.
A favourable interpretation over port calls, however, was not the only example of the Soviet Union winning a concession in the ambiguous agreement.
Barry Blechman and Stephanie Levinson describe how from 1972 to 1974, the Soviet Union sent submarines into Cienfuegos that challenged the nuclear qualification of the newly established Understanding as well.
In May 1972, the Soviet Union sent into Cienfuegos port a nuclear-powered Echo-class submarine carrying non-strategic cruise missiles, and in April 1974 they sent into Havana a Soviet Golf-class submarine, a diesel-powered vessel that carries nuclear ballistic missiles.
Although in neither of these visits did the submarines undergo servicing, their presence and the lack of an American response suggests that the Soviets again succeeded in having an ambiguity in the Understanding reinterpreted in its favour.
The 1978 MiG Crisis The public record On 15 November 1978, Rowland Evans and Robert Novak published an article entitled ‘Cuba’s MiG 23s’, which publicly broke the story of a second American–Soviet confrontation in Cuba.
In their words, the ‘Kennedy Doctrine any nuclear capable weapon – whether it was actually fitted with nuclear armaments or not – in Fidel Castro’s Cuba’.57 Linking the MiG acquisition to the approaching Senate ratification debate on SALT II, the article predicted that President Carter would face the choice of either doing nothing and allowing the Soviets to violate the 1962 Understanding or else protesting against the MiGs and bringing an instant crisis to détente.
Evans and Novak’s story was based on a secret but leaked document issued by Defense Secretary Harold Brown to President Carter on 23 October.
Although the MiG 23 was indeed the most modern fighter jet in the Soviet airforce, there were two versions of the aircraft, only one of which was equipped for tactical strikes against ground targets.
The American intelligence on the MiGs in Cuba had revealed no evidence that they had been configured for anything other than air defence and aircraft interception purposes.
Despite its presentation by Evans and Novak, Brown’s memorandum had in fact dealt almost exclusively with domestic public opinion.
Brown was concerned not with security, but with how the American public might view the MiG acquisition as evidence that the administration was ‘being soft’ on the Soviets, exactly the type of publicity that would further galvanize opposition to SALT.59 Nevertheless, the White House’s primary response to the crisis was to seek assurances from the Soviets that the MIG 23s in Cuba were not outfitted for tactical warfare, or in the parlance of the 1962 agreement, were not offensive weapons.
Secretary of State Cyrus Vance met with Soviet Foreign Minister Andrei Gromyko four times in November, and while maintaining their intention to modernize Cuba’s airforce, the Soviets assured the United States that the weapons were not capable of delivering nuclear missiles.
When we have interrogated the Soviet Union through diplomatic channels, they have assured us that no shipments of weapons to the Cubans have or will violate the terms of the 1962 agreement.
We will monitor their compliance with this agreement to be sure that there is no offensive threat to the United States possible from Cuba.
Analysis While the narrative above is consistent with the norms theory, several other contending explanations appear at first glance to be more descriptive.
While acquiescing to the Soviets on the MiGs might convince some American Senators that the United States was conceding too much in the treaty, taking military action surely would have scuttled SALT before it even reached the Senate floor.
A domestic politics explanation suggests that, regardless of whether the presence of MiG 23s in Cuba violated the ’62 Understanding, the United States would not have had the political capital to fight for their removal.
An additional contending explanation would point out that at least some members of the White House framed the MiG incident within the context of relative power rather than according to normative behaviour patterns between the superpowers.
It is well known, for instance, that President Carter’s National Security Advisor Zbignew Brzezinski was a proponent of realist theory and the concept of linkage – the conditioning of one foreign policy on another.
Griesdorf relations in Cuba, but how the jets might alter the bipolar conflict in other regions of the world.
Undoubtedly, Brzezinski’s hawkish reaction to the MiGs was consistent with his tenure as the National Security Advisor, and indeed it was his job to serve as a counterbalance to the President’s more idealist outlook on foreign policy.
The norms theory must demonstrate, however, not only that the superpowers framed subsequent Cuban crises according to the ’62 Understanding, but that they attempted to favourably interpret an ambiguity in the Kennedy– Khrushchev agreement as well.
Garthoff notes that the NSC staff carefully researched not only the White House and Department of State records on the 1962 and 1970 Understandings, but also the files in the John F Kennedy Library’.64 In doing so they would have realized that the status of the MiG fighter was not explicit with regard to how the 1962 agreement had defined an offensive weapon.
This term was utilized in reference to President Kennedy’s 22 October public announcement of the crisis when he promised action against the Soviets shipping ‘bomber aircraft, capable of carrying nuclear weapons’.65 All MiG 23s, whatever their format, are capable of carrying nuclear weapons.
It is plausible that Soviets shipped MiG 23s because it was possible to exploit an ambiguity in their shared Understanding, an ambiguity that arose mainly because technology had made the 1962 definition of an offensive weapon outdated.
While the version of the MiG 23 shipped to Cuba was not an offensive weapon, in practical terms the aircraft could be reconfigured ‘on the ground’ with little difficulty; the modifications to rewire the interceptor version can be done easily and from remote locations.
In 1962, fighter jets could not be re-outfitted for tactical strikes on location.
With technology, the Soviets could exploit the definition of offensive weaponry to achieve an advantage.
First, the weapons were transported to Cuba surreptitiously, unassembled and through a series of shipments over the course of three months.
The norms theory suggests that once more the Soviet Union realized its actions pushed the envelope of the ’62 Understanding.
By covertly shipping the MiG 23s, the Soviets sought to present the Americans with a fait accompli, which, in lieu of the Administration’s problems in the Senate, they expected would not be challenged.
Accordingly, not only was the conflict framed according to the ’62 Understanding, when President Carter ended the MiG Crisis on 30 November, he implicitly resolved it by accepting a looser and less favourable interpretation of the Understanding.
The second piece of evidence concerns the norm hypothesis that subsequent Cuban conflicts will serve as precedents.
For 17 tense days in November 1962, the Soviet Union failed to accept the Stevenson definition that had included the bomber prohibition, generating substantial concern within the Administration that the Crisis might restart.
Ultimately, the Soviets conceded, and agreed to remove the IL-28s in an eleventh hour deal reached just hours before Kennedy’s 20 November press conference announcing the lifting of the naval quarantine.
The Soviets had been correct, though, in arguing that the IL-28s’ status as an offensive weapon was ambiguous.
In Soviet eyes, the Americans had exploited an ambiguity in the Understanding so as to favourably interpret the IL-28 bombers as offensive weapons.
The 1979 Brigade Crisis The public record On the morning of 17 July 1979, Florida Senator Richard Stone received a tip about a recent build-up of Soviet combat troops in Cuba.
In a closed subcommittee meeting, which coincidentally was convened that very afternoon for a hearing on SALT II, Stone peppered a group of unprepared retired members of the Joint Chiefs of Staff about the charge.
Senator Stone then issued a letter to Secretary of State Cyrus Vance in which he demanded an explanation to the Soviet forces in Cuba and openly questioned whether the Soviet Union was trying to derail the SALT agreement.
Vance responded on 27 July 1979, and recalling the 1962 and Cienfuegos understandings with the Soviets, the Secretary specifically reassured the Senator that ‘there is no evidence of any substantial increase of the Soviet military presence in Cuba over the past several years or the presence of a Soviet base’.74 For one month, the Brigade Crisis would remain quiet.
While Vance’s letter was technically accurate, the administration had encountered troubling evidence of Soviet action in Cuba.
While the CIA analysis estimated that indeed the force had been in Cuba ‘since at least 1976’, it voiced concern that the soldiers’ activities had recently changed.
Griesdorf August 1979 when the Defense Department discovered through voice reconnaissance new references to the Spanish word ‘Brigada’, suggesting that the Cuban unit had changed from a training force to an infantry brigade.
On 14 August, Brzezinski briefed the President by announcing ‘there is now an actual Soviet brigade in Cuba, with headquarters and regular organization and that in fact it is scheduled to hold firing exercises within a week’.76 Treated like a crisis, the brigade issue quickly became one.
On 27 August, with Carter, Vance, Brzezinski, and Brown all away from Washington on vacation, a reference to the brigade appeared in the classified, National Intelligence Daily.
When an editor of the military journal entitled, Aviation Week called the White House for a comment, Deputy Secretary of State David Aaron and deputy National Security Advisor David Newsom denied the story but recommended to their superiors that senior Congressional leaders be informed in anticipation of the brigade being made public.
On 30 August, eight key members of Congress were briefed, including Senator Frank Church, Democrat of Idaho and Chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee.
Secretary Vance recommended that evidence of the Soviet brigade remain private.
But facing a tough 1980 Senate re-election campaign, Church held a bellicose press conference in his living room the day after his brief, announced the presence of a ‘Soviet brigade of combat troops’, and ‘demanded its immediate withdrawal’.78 After Church’s press conference, the Soviet brigade in Cuba became a prominent topic in Washington, specifically in relation to the Senate ratification of SALT II.79 As the norms hypothesis predicts, the administration framed the crisis exclusively in reference to the 1962 and 1970 Understandings with the Soviet Union.
After publicly confirming on 31 August the ‘presence in Cuba of what appears to be a new Soviet combat unit’, Secretary Vance held a press conference on 4 September and conceded that ‘the presence of this unit is not covered by our bilateral Understandings with the Soviets in 1962 and 1970’.80 The Soviet response to the American discovery of the brigade was also framed according to the ’62 Understanding.
When Senate Majority Leader Robert Byrd approached Dobrynin to explain how the Soviet brigade would jeopardize SALT’s ratification, ‘Doybrynin told Byrd that the Soviets could not because the issue was a phony one they had been in Cuba for a long time and there was no reason for them to accommodate’.82 Moreover, the Soviets claimed that because no new Cuban base had been established, the existing force was permitted by their Understanding.
On 28 September, the President summoned to the White House various actors from 1962 and 1970 to confirm the Soviet explanation.
They decided – although not unanimously – that the recently discovered Soviet brigade had indeed been in Cuba for at least five years, and probably since 1962.83 The domestic political ramifications of the brigade, however, remained significant.
Phoney issue or not, by metaphor alone the Brigade Crisis drove home the concern that the Soviets would be able to evade the monitoring procedures of the SALT treaty.
On 23 October, McGeorge Bundy submitted an op-ed entitled ‘The Brigade’s My Fault’, in which he absolved the Carter Administration of the brigade, and confirmed the existence of shared agreement about existent troops.
Attributing the brigade’s re-discovery to his ‘being lax on intelligence’, Bundy writes, ‘most of them did leave but we neither required nor got a pledge that all would go’.84 In addition, Vance wrestled from Dobrynin a concession that the Soviet Union would not change the status of the unit or provide it with additional capabilities.
Peacefully resolving the Brigade Crisis in a 1 October address to the nation, President Carter attempted to assure the public that the Administration’s actions represented not American weakness but rather a bold commitment to security.
In contrast to the 1962 crisis, no nuclear threat to the United States is involved My fellow Americans, the greatest danger to American security tonight is certainly not the two or three thousand Soviet troops in Cuba.
The greatest danger to all the nations of the world – including the United States and the Soviet Union – is the breakdown of a common effort to preserve the peace and the ultimate threat of nuclear war.
Analysis While clearly the Brigade Crisis was framed and resolved according to the ’62 Understanding, the conflict fails the prediction that a superpower will choose a conflict in which it expects to be able to exploit an ambiguity.
Rather, the United States had accidentally discovered a Soviet force in Cuba that had always been there.
Without this prediction, alternative explanations of the crisis resolution become credible, particularly the domestic politics argument that the Brigade Crisis was solved peacefully to avoid alienating the Soviets or jeopardizing SALT II’s ratification.
Indeed the National Security Advisor appears to endorse this explanation in his assessment of his own performance during the Crisis.
In his concluding summary of the Brigade Crisis to the President, Brzezinski writes that the American actions have added to the ‘persuasive perception here and abroad that in US–Soviet Relations, the Soviets are increasingly assertive and the United States more acquiescent’.87 As in 1978, Brzezinski’s response to the Brigade Crisis emphasized not the terms of the 1962 Understanding but rather how the Soviets’ behaviour was incompatible with détente.
In support of the norms theory, however, there is evidence that the United States attempted to exploit an ambiguity in their Understanding after the crisis had arisen.
Griesdorf suggesting that the United States intended to take action despite acknowledging their shared norm.
Oberdorfer argues that Vance’s strategy involved picking up the term ‘combat unit’, first used by Senator Church in his press conference, to describe a force that American intelligence had described as an infantry brigade.
The present brigade of Soviet troops in Cuba is not a threat to the security of our country no offensive weapons that can reach our shores The thing that concerns us, however – and this is a serious matter, and the status quo is not acceptable to us – is that it’s a combat unit.
But it is a combat unit We’re now trying, through diplomacy, to get the Soviets to eliminate the combat nature of this unit, and I don’t know yet whether we will succeed.
If we do not succeed, we will take appropriate action the change the status quo.
The Soviets’ behaviour also supported the prediction that the superpowers would seek to exploit an ambiguity in the Understanding.
The United States officially requested that the Sovietswithdrawthebrigadeatleastthreetimes,andinallthreecasestheSovietsrefusedto removeit.
The only factual controversy of the Brigade Crisis concerned the definitional term of the unit,withtheSovietsmaintainingitwasatrainingforceandtheAmericansassertingitwasa combat or infantry brigade.
By offering a concession geared to American domestic opposition over SALT, the Soviets effectively committed the United States to the Soviet explanation of the force’s status.
Whatever the exact nature of the unit, not only would it remain in Cuba, its presence would be legitimized as in compliance with the ’62 Understanding.
President Reagan’s threats to invade Cuba The final case study is in fact a couplet of mini-crises, each of which lasted no longer than a daily American news cycle and never warranted a Soviet response.
Several times during the first five years of his administration, President Reagan attempted to loosen the American commitment with the Soviet Union not to invade Cuba.
Reagan’s first comments occurred during a press conference on 14 September 1983 in which the President was asked about Cuban activity in the Western Hemisphere.
While the invasion overtures tell a less intricate narrative than the other case studies, they do underscore the differences between the norms approach outlined in this paper and alternative explanations.
Once again, domestic politics and relative power appear to account for the Cuban invasion threats.
In his 15 September 1982 article, Clines refers to Reagan as ‘bewildered’ and ‘seemingly distracted’, and notes ‘that his reference to the Understanding appeared to elicit surprise from his own staff ’.95 Building from the ramifications of the democratic peace, a domestic politics explanation would argue that these inflammatory remarks about Cuba were resolved peacefully because the American electorate and media – and not norms per se – monitored the leadership and forced the United States to abide by its commitments in Cuba.
Even if the United States thought it could persuade the Soviet Union successfully through the norm framework, American domestic politics promised to hold the Administration more accountable should it fail, increasing its costs of engagement.
Indeed, after the 1983 comments, President Reagan’s Press Secretary Larry Speakes was forced to qualify his boss’ statements, claiming that the President ‘was referring to violations of the “spirit of the agreement”’.98 Reagan’s 1985 charge was annulled unofficially by the State Department.
The relative power explanation also appears to explain the Cuban threats.
In 1983, the United States had evidence that Cuba was serving as a weapons conduit for armaments headed to Nicaragua, and possibly to El Salvador as well.
In 1985, the Americans believed that some 3000 Cuban military personnel were in Nicaragua advising and training its military.
As the Cold War renewed the hostile tone of the Missile Crisis era, it is feasible to argue that Cuba’s status in Latin America became more significant and less tolerable to the United States.
Both alternative explanations, however, fail to account for the entire record.
There is evidence, for instance, that the Reagan administration was appealing to domestic politics when it invoked the ’62 Understanding.
Reagan’s 1985 comments were delivered amidst his struggle with Congress to win support for funding the Contra rebels in Nicaragua.
Importantly, the democratic peace theory does not constrain democratic states in their conflicts with non-democratic regimes.
While it is likely that Clines’ article forced Reagan to retreat, both Evans and Novak’s piece and Senator Church’s press conference demonstrate how the media can escalate a conflict as much as mitigate it.
Alone, domestic politics cannot account for why the Cuban conflicts were resolved peacefully.
The relative power explanation would suggest that President Reagan’s comments undermined the United States’ credibility because they involved making threats and failing to follow through on them.
Whereas existent conceptions of norms focus on either the expressive satisfaction associated with compliance or else the capacity of norms to help realize convergent expectations, this decidedly rhetorical approach suggests that states subscribe to norm-governed behaviour as a means of competing within a circumscribed domain.
In order to ensure against the Crisis spiralling out of control, the ’62 Understanding became the baseline from which future conflicts were framed.
Like opposing lawyers, each sought to achieve an advantage by depicting revisionist behaviour as consistent with ambiguous facets of their existent agreement.
In situations where an actor was unable to justify its actions as consistent with the ’62 Understanding, behaviour was purposefully constrained so as to remain within the envelope of what was mutually acknowledged as acceptable.
One of the ramifications of this conception of norms is that it suggests a benefit to drafting agreements that are deliberately under-specified.
As Abram and Antonia Chayes write, ‘language often is unable to capture the meaning with precision treaty language, like any other language, comes in varying degrees of specificity.
The broader and more general the language, the wider the ambit of permissible interpretations to which it gives rise’.104 The more ambiguous the normative understanding, the greater the creative opportunity for agents to depict revisionist behaviour as consistent with the status quo.
Whereas traditionally norms are portrayed as an understanding between agents who share either social affinities or common knowledge, this approach suggests that norms might also be used successfully for contexts in which agents have little if any interaction at all.
The insight is that norms can be used to transform noncommunicative or even violent relationships into agonistic but inherently rhetorical competitions.
If a norm is acknowledged, albeit under competitive circumstances, an actor might be successful in ‘locking in’ a previously non-responsive rival into an ongoing relationship.
In the case of Cuba, the superpowers’ shared fear of mutual destruction provided a rationale for mutually acknowledging the ’62 Understanding.
Even without the prism of nuclear weapons, though, this approach to norms pushes international relations theory away from constructivism and game theory towards the realm of rhetoric.
The key claim is that norms delimit behaviour but encourage agency as well.
In place of an explicit agreement, norms are more organic in character, evolving in conjunction with ongoing communication.
In place of common values or focal points, norms are basic understandings whose ambiguity enables competition to ensue in a circumscribed manner.
Memoirs; Brzezinski, Power and Principle; Vance, Hard Choices; Carter, Keeping Faith; Dobrynin, In Confidence; Gromyko, Memories.
Kennedy later placed the odds that the CMC might have led to nuclear war as ‘somewhere between one out of three and even, in Sorenson, Kennedy, 705.
Schelling, The Strategy of Conflict; Axelrod, The Evolution of Cooperation; Oye, Cooperation Under Anarchy.
Griesdorf Finnemore and Sikkink, ‘International Norm Dynamics and Political Change’, 891.
On the other hand, the Americans repeatedly presented us with various claims attempting to interpret the accords more broadly, that is, in their own interest.
See Kennedy, Thirteen Days; Rusk, As I Saw It, for confirmation of the Jupiter trade.
The head of the USSR Merchant Fleet, I Bakaev, outlines how the Americans conducted both aerial and on-board inspections of the IL-28 rockets that the Soviets removed from Cuba as part of the Missile Crisis settlement.
See Garthoff, Reflections, 146; Garthoff, ‘Handling the Cienfuegos Crisis’, 54.
Indeed, Garthoff argues that the Soviets were motivated to construct the Cienfuegos base in order to ‘erase that legacy from a time of American superiority , an imposed constraint not in keeping with “parity” with the United States as a global power, to which they now aspired.
Several times in February 1971, United States and Soviet forces exchanged flares and high-speed manoeuvres in the Caribbean.
Kissinger justifies the American concession by writing, ‘formally proscribing port calls would have had widespread ramifications for the movement of the United States Navy and our principle of the freedom of the seas’, Kissinger, Years of Upheaval, 652.
Garthoff claims that the deliveries began in April 1978, in Garthoff, ‘American Reaction’, 438.
Brown cites in particular Senator Stone of Florida, who faced re-election in 1980 and had alienated many constituents when he voted in favour of the Panama Canal Treaty.
Garthoff, Détente, 682; The American reconnaissance is confirmed in a David Newsom summary document prepared during the Brigade Crisis.
In both the MiG 23 and Brigade Crises, Brzezinski continually argues that an enhanced Cuban military will increase its interventions in Africa, particularly in Angola and Zaire.
Griesdorf Carter writes that he chose Brzezinski as his NSA to ensure that opinions from both the left and right were articulated in the White House.
Garthoff felt that it was conceivable that Kennedy would have tightened the embargo on 20 November had the Soviets refused to remove the IL-28s, in Garthoff, ‘American Reaction’, 437.
Quoted in Garthoff, ‘American Reaction’, 429; Oberdorfer, ‘Cuban Crisis’ 1979.
Dobrynin also suggests that the entire Brigade Crisis was a ‘premeditated leak’ instigated by American intelligence.
No such Soviet unit had been in Cuba during his time in office’, Prados, Keepers, 405.
Vance was answering a reporter’s question concerning whether he would ask the Soviets to remove the troops.
Both Brzezinski, Power and Principle, 359, and Prados, Keepers, 404, support this assessment.
