In the period after Fidel Castro’s successful revolution in Cuba, 1959, the Americans considered various plans to restore an anti‐Communist government.
In April 1961 these plans culminated in the unsuccessful Bay of Pigs invasion which the American government authorized and supported.
Throughout 1962 the issue of Cuba caused difficult relations between the superpowers, already tense as a result of the Berlin Wall crisis of the previous year.
The Americans publicly signalled that they would not tolerate the Soviets placing ‘offensive’ nuclear missiles in Cuba, which lay only about one hundred miles from the coast of Florida.
Nikita Khrushchev, the Soviet leader, appeared to understand and to comply with this demand.
President Kennedy stated on 13 September that if Cuba were to become an offensive military base then he would take whatever steps were necessary to protect American security.
During September the first missiles and the equipment to build the launchers arrived in Cuba.
On 14 October photographs from U2 aircraft revealed that medium‐range missiles were being installed and on 16 October the Executive Committee of the National Security Council held the first of its meetings to resolve what the American government regarded as a direct threat to its security.
President Kennedy announced on television the detection of the missiles, demanded their removal, and the ExCom went into semi‐permanent session to consider the next American steps.
A variety of strategies was considered, including doing nothing , various forms of diplomatic action over the missiles’ removal, invasion, an air strike against the missiles, and a blockade.
Kennedy initially favoured military action of some sort and the possibility of invasion and air strike was held in reserve throughout the crisis.
However, a blockade to prevent further missiles reaching Cuba emerged as the preferred solution.
A blockade, accompanied by demands for the removal of the existing missiles, offered various advantages.
It demonstrated American resolve and willingness to use military force, it capitalized on America’s local naval superiority, it gave time for Khrushchev to back down, and it threw back onto him the difficult next step of escalating further the crisis if he were not to comply.
The ultimatum, in short, offered the ‘last clear chance’ to avoid an uncontrollable confrontation which might probably end in nuclear war.
He made a good deal both of the American threat to Cuba’s integrity and the deployment of American medium‐range missiles in Turkey.
Kennedy was reluctant to make any deal which traded the Turkish for the Cuban missiles, though he personally had ordered the removal of the missiles from Turkey several months earlier on the grounds that they were unnecessary to American security and provocative to the Soviet Union.
The imposition of the American blockade went ahead and the risks of incidents between the two naval forces became apparent.
In the days after 16 October the tension increased and the two states appeared to be moving to war as the Soviets showed no willingness to back down.
On 26 October the Americans received in secret what they interpreted as a personal letter from Khrushchev which offered the possibility of a solution.
The letter, in effect, offered to remove the missiles in return for the Americans removing the blockade and agreeing not to invade Cuba.
The following day Khrushchev sent a public letter which was both more belligerent in tone and which demanded the removal of the missiles from Turkey in return for removal of the missiles from Cuba.
The Americans were adamant that such a deal was unacceptable, moreover the tone of the letter suggested to them that Khrushchev might have lost control within the Presidium to more hawkish elements.
The same day Soviet surface‐to‐air missiles in Cuba shot down an American plane.
At that point Robert Kennedy, brother of the President, suggested that the Americans agree to Khrushchev’s first letter, publicize the ‘agreement’, and in that way attempt to lure Khrushchev into acceptance—making clear at the same time that the burden of failure and responsibility for war would fall onto Khrushchev if he failed to accept.
The Americans had secured a great diplomatic victory, though by running enormous risks, and Kennedy’s prestige stood at its new peak.
The Soviets got much less out of the crisis, though they were able to share public credit for the resolution of the crisis.
However, they had got the American promise not to invade Cuba and, some time later, they saw the Americans remove their medium‐range missiles not merely from Turkey but from Europe as a whole.
The Soviet withdrawal appears to have fatally undermined Khrushchev’s prestige within the Presidium and to have led to his overthrow two years later.
The Americans consolidated their leadership within NATO which had been threatened by their inability to prevent the Soviet gains in Berlin in 1961.
The successful resolution of the crisis led to an immediate improvement in superpower relations.
Above all, the mutual realization of how close the world had come to war led the two superpowers to give renewed attention to their doctrines of nuclear deterrence.
In the West the missile crisis was taken as a paradigm case of a new science or art of ‘crisis management’, and the decision‐making processes within ExCom were analysed in order to learn the ‘rules’ or conventions of the new science.
In particular the importance of manipulating risk, or brinkmanship, emerged as a key element in coercive diplomacy—using the risk of war to push the opponent into backing down—together with the equal importance of allowing the opponent a last clear chance to avoid uncontrollable escalation.
Kennedy himself laid great emphasis on finding terms to offer to Khrushchev that would not be so humiliating that in fact he would decline to take them.
