The MPvBM capability we have witnessed will expand and the defensive establishments to protect this capability likewise will be expanded.
To satisfy their ambitions in Latin America by this show of determination and courage against the American Imperialist.
This will increase tension everywhere and undoubtedly bring retaliation against United States foreign military installations, where substantial United States casualties would result,e., Tule, Spanish bases, Moroccan bases, and possibly SAC bases in Britain or Okinawa.
Whether military action should be taken prior to a warning to, or discussions with, Khrushchev and Castro.
This was discussed as a slow strangulation process, but it was stated that ""intelligence reports"" indicated that a blockade would bring Castro down in four months.
Strafing MRBM installations and air fields with MIGs. and plus all SAM sites and coastal missile sites. , , and above plus all other significant military installations, none of which were identified.
Warning to Khrushchev and Castro and if the response is unsatisfactory, convening Congress, seeking a declaration of war, and proceeding with an all-out blockade.
In all probability this type of action would escalate into invasion and occupation, although the meeting was not agreed on this point.
The recording makes it clear that McCone's account is a summarized version that excludes his own comments and observations.
Early in the morning of October 18th, Secretary McNamara called Mr McCone at his residence expressing great concern over the reports from NPIC as a result of their examination of the two flights run on October 15th./l/ Lundahl was at the house with the enlargements which indicated that, in addition to the three mobile MRBM sites detected on flight October 14th, there appeared to be now two IRBM sites with fixed launchers zeroed in on the Eastern United States.
McNamara felt that this development demanded more prompt and decisive action.
The group which had been meeting on Tuesday met in the Cabinet Room at 11:00m. on Wednesday/2/ with the President.
At the opening of the meeting, McCone gave a brief resume of current intelligence and Lundahl presented the most recent photography.
Lundahl stated probably not and that we must have low-level photography for public consumption.
However he felt that the American people will accept danger and suffering if they are convinced doing so is necessary and that they have a clear conscience.
These factors militated in favor of consulting with Khrushchev and depending on the Rio pact.
This, he indicated, might have the possibility of prevention of action and settlement by political means.
Rusk expressed himself in favor of leaning upon the Rio pact, but does not dismiss the alternative of a unilateral declaration of war as the ultimate action we must take.
Ambassador Bohlen was not present but his views were expressed in a message which was read in which he strongly advocated diplomatic effort and stated that military action prior to this would be wrong.
He also stated that limited quick military action was an illusion and that any military action would rapidly escalate into an invasion.
Ambassador Thompson urged that any action be preceded by a declaration of war;/6/ he strongly advocated that we institute a blockade and not resort to military action unless and until it is determined that Castro and Khrushchev refuse to reverse their activities and actually remove the missiles which are now in place.
Dillon was very positive that whatever action we take should be done without consultation with Khrushchev.
Rusk seemed to disagree indicating there was a possibility that Khrushchev might be persuaded to reduce his efforts but he admitted also that he might step them up as a result of discussions.
President Kennedy was non-committal, however he seemed to continually raise questions of reactions of our allies, NATO, South America, public opinion and others.
Raised the question whether we should not move the missiles out of Turkey.
Bundy thought this a good idea either under conditions of a strike or during a preliminary talk.
McNamara discussed in some detail the effects of a strike indicating that we could expect several hundred Soviet citizens to be killed; he pointed out that all of the SAM sites were manned exclusively by Soviets and a great many Soviet technicians were working on the MRBMs and at the air fields.
He agreed that we could move out of Turkey and Italy; pointed out the political complications.
At this point McNamara seemed to be reconsidering his prior position of advocating military action and laid special emphasis on the fact that the price of Soviet retaliation, whether in Berlin or elsewhere, would be very high and we would not be able to control it.
Secretary Ball throughout the conversation maintained the position that strike without warning was not acceptable and that we should not proceed without discussion with Khrushchev.
Second would be referred to as a fast dynamic action which would involve the strike of substantial proportions with or without notice.
Drafted by Akalovsky on October 21 and approved by the White House on October 23.
The President and the Foreign Minister also discussed Berlin, a test ban agreement, and United States -Soviet bilateral relations; memoranda of these conversations are printed in vols.
This, he said, was the basic core, the credo of Soviet foreign policy, and it was not just a statement.
For a record of their conversation, see Acheson, Homage to Plain Dumb Luck, 202.
The President then conferred with Secretaries Rusk and McNamara from 4:30 to 5m.
If one were to compare the human and material resources of Cuba and the United States, one would see immediately that the United States was a giant and Cuba only a baby.
It was strange to believe that small Cuba could encroach upon any Latin American country.
Cuban leaders, including Castro personally, had stated for all the world to know and in the most solemn fashion that Cuba did not intend to impose its system and was in favor of peaceful coexistence.
However, those who called for aggression against Cuba said that Cuban statements were insufficient, in spite of the fact that those statements were substantiated by deeds.
If one were to approach problems this way, then it would be easy to justify any aggression.
All international problems must be resolved by negotiation between the states concerned.
After all, the United States and USSR were now negotiating and making statements which should be given credence.
The President was surely familiar with President Dorticos' speech at the General Assembly 72/ What the Cubans wanted was to make their home and country secure.
They appealed to reason and conscience and called upon the United States not to resort to encroachments.
Mr Khrushchev's conversation with the President at Vienna/3/ had been frank and therefore, with the President's permission, he himself wished to be frank, too.
The situation today could not be compared to that obtaining in the middle of the 19th century.
Modern times were not the same as those when colonies had been divided among colonial powers.
Modern times could not be compared to those when it took weeks or months for the voice of the attacked to be heard.
Mr Khrushchev had been favorably impressed with the President's statement at Vienna regarding the equality of forces of our two nations.
Since this was so,e., since the USSR was also a great and strong nation, it could not stand by as a mere observer when aggression was planned and when a threat of war was looming.
The Soviet Government believed that if both sides were for relaxation of international tensions and for solving the outstanding international problems, such demonstrations could be designed only for the purpose of increasing tensions and should therefore be avoided.
If worse should come to worse and if war should occur, then surely 150,000 soldiers would be of no significance.
As the President was surely aware, today was not 1812, when Napoleon had relied on the number of soldiers, sabres and rifles.
Neither could today's situation be compared to 1941, when Hitler had relied on the number of tanks and guns.
Today, life itself and military technology had created an entirely different situation, where it was better not to rely on arms.
As to Soviet assistance to Cuba, Mr Gromyko stated that he was instructed to make it clear, as the Soviet Government had already done, that such assistance, pursued solely for the purpose of contributing to the defense capabilities of Cuba and to the development of Cuba, toward the development of its agriculture and land amelioration, and training by Soviet specialists of Cuba nationals in handling defensive armaments were by no means offensive.
If it were otherwise, the Soviet Government would have never become involved in rendering such assistance.
If the Soviet Government had pursued a different policy, the situation in that country today would be quite different.
It was quite evident that the Soviet Union and its friends had broader opportunities of influencing the situation in that country than had the United States.
However, the USSR had sought an understanding on that question, since it could not go back on the basic principle of its foreign policy, which was designed to alleviate tensions, to eliminate outstanding problems and to resolve them on a peaceful basis.
The Soviet Government addressed its appeal to the United States on this question because both our countries were major powers and should direct their efforts only to ensuring peace.
The President said he was glad that Mr Gromyko had referred to Laos because he believed that the Soviet policy on that problem was as Mr Gromyko had described it.
So far the Soviet Union had apparently met its obligations just as the United States had met them.
However, a most serious mistake had been made last summer with respect to Cuba.
The United States had not pressed the Cuban problem and had attempted to push it aside although of course a number of people in this country opposed the regime now prevailing in Cuba and there were many refugees coming to this country.
But then last July the USSR, without any communication from Mr Khrushchev to the President, had embarked upon the policy of supplying arms to Cuba.
The President said he did not know the reasons for that shift in Soviet policy, because there was no threat of invasion and he would have been glad to give appropriate assurances to that effect had Mr Khrushchev communicated with him.
Soviet arms supply had had a profound impact in the United States; Ambassador Dobrynin was surely aware of how the American people and the Congress felt on this matter.
The administration had tried to calm this reaction and he, the President, had made a statement that in view of the nature of Soviet assistance to Cuba at this time coolness was required.
Yet, the President said, he wished to stress that Soviet actions were extremely serious and he could find no satisfactory explanation for them.
The Soviet Union was surely aware of United States feelings with regard to Cuba, which was only 90 miles away from the United States.
The President continued that the United States planned no blockade of Cuba; it was only a question of ships taking arms to Cuba not being able to stop in the United States with their return cargo.
The President said he did not know where it was taking us but it was the most dangerous situation since the end of the war.
The United States had taken the Soviet statement concerning the nature of armaments supplied to Cuba at its face value.
He, the President, had attacked last Sunday in Indianapolis a Senator who was advocating invasion, and he had stated that the Cuban problem must be kept in perspective.
Mr Gromyko said that there had already been an invasion, and it was well known how it ended.
It was well known now, both from facts and statements, including the President's own, under what circumstances and by whom that invasion had been organized.
Everyone knew that if the United States had merely lifted its little finger, Cuban emigrees and smaller Caribbean countries which had helped them would not have dared undertake any invasion.
The President interjected that he had discussed with Mr Khrushchev the April 1, 1961, invasion and had said that it was a mistake.
He also pointed out he would have given assurances that there would be no further invasion, either by refugees or by United States forces.
But last July the Soviet Union took certain actions and the situation changed.
Mr Gromyko continued that Cubans and the Cuban Government had before them the vital question of whether they should remain unprepared to resist attack or to take steps to defend their country.
He said he wished to reiterate that the Soviet Union had responded to appeals for assistance only because that assistance pursued the sole objective of giving bread to Cuba and preventing hunger in that country; also, as far as armaments were concerned, Soviet specialists were training Cubans in handling certain types of armaments which were only defensive-and he wished to stress the word defensive— in character, and thus such training could not constitute a threat to the United States.
He reiterated that if it were otherwise the Soviet Union would never have agreed to render such assistance.
Introduction last July of intensive armanents had complicated the situation and created grave danger.
His own actions had been to prevent, unless United States security was endangered, anything from being done that might provoke the danger of war.
The President then read a portion of his September 4 statement on Cuba/5/ and stated that this had been United States position and policy on this question.
He noted that the Attorney General had discussed the Cuban situation with Ambassador Dobrynin so that the latter must be aware of what it was.
The President again recalled his Indianapolis speech of last Sunday and said that we were basing our present attitude on facts as they had been described by Mr Gromyko; our presumption was that the armanents supplied by USSR were defensive.
Editorial Note On October 18, 1962, the Central Intelligence Agency released a ""Joint Evaluation of the Soviet Mission Threat in Cuba,"" based on intelligence obtained as of 9m. that day.
The evaluation, prepared by the Guided Missile and Astronautics Committee, the Joint Atomic Energy Intelligence Committee, and the National Photographic Interpretation Center, was codenamed Iron Bark because it drew upon intelligence material provided by the Central Intelligence Agency's important Soviet source, Colonel Oleg Penkovsky.
It was based on ""relatively complete photo interpretation of U-2 photography"" made on missions of October 14, and two on October 15 and ""very preliminary and incomplete readout"" of coverage of six U-2 missions on October 17.
These mobile missiles had to be considered operational and could be launched within 18 hours after the decision to launch was made.
These sites were probably intended for 2200nm intermediate-range ballistic missiles and could be operational by December 1962.
All missiles were manned by Soviet personnel and were under Soviet control.
The expected warheads for these missiles would weigh 3,000 pounds and have yield in the low megaton range.
The significance of these developments, according to the evaluation, was that the Soviet Union ""intends to develop Cuba into a prime strategic base, rather than as a token show of force.
The mixed force of 1020-and 2200nm missiles posed a common threat to the United States and a large portion of Latin America.
PARTICIPANTS Secretary Rusk Under Secretary Ball Ambassador Thompson Deputy Under Secretary Johnson Assistant Secretary Martin Leonard C Meeker Secretary Dillon Secretary McNamara Deputy Secretary Gilpatric Assistant Secretary Nitze General Taylor Attorney General Kennedy Deputy Attorney General Katzenbach John A McCone Ray S Cline McGeorge Bundy Theodore Sorensen Dean Acheson Secretary Rusk opened the meeting by asking Mr Johnson if he was ready to lay a program before the group.
The papers have not been identified further, but McCone's memorandum is included in the Supplement.
No draft of the speech, dated this early has been found, but an 11 -paragraph synopsis of a speech for October 23 is attached to the paper described in footnote 5 below.
After sketching the advantages and disadvantages of a blockade, it presented a 5-day scenario and predicted the reaction of United States allies, the Soviet Union, and Cuba.
Another paper ""Second Draft, 10/19/62"" on the blockade consisted of a detailed list of the elements in a course of action.
II) a 3-page possible White House statement for the evening of October 22, III) a 1-page paper dealing with an announcement for the morning of October 23, and IV) a 2-page, 1 1 -paragraph synopsis of the President's speech on October 23.
Soviet Reactions to Certain United States Courses of Action on Cuba The Problem To estimate probable Soviet reactions to certain United States courses of action with respect to Cuba.
A major Soviet objective in their military buildup in Cuba is to demonstrate that the world balance of forces has shifted so far in their favor that the United States can no longer prevent the advance of Soviet offensive power even into its own hemisphere.
The public withdrawal of Soviet missiles from Cuba would create serious problems in the USSR's relations with Castro; it would cast doubt on the firmness of the Soviet intention to protect the Castro regime and perhaps on their commitments elsewhere.
If the United States accepts the strategic missile buildup in Cuba, the Soviets would continue the buildup of strategic weapons in Cuba.
We have no basis for estimating the force level which they would wish to reach, but it seems clear already that they intend to go beyond a token capability.
We consider in Annex B/l/ the possible effects of a missile buildup in Cuba upon the overall relationship of strategic military power.
United States acceptance of the strategic missile buildup would provide strong encouragement to Communists, pro-Communists, and the more antiAmerican sectors of opinion in Latin America and elsewhere.
Conversely, anti-Communists and those who relate their own interests to those of the United States would be strongly discouraged.
It seems clear that, especially over the long run, there would be a loss of confidence in United States power and determination and a serious decline of United States influence generally.
If the United States confronts Khrushchev with its knowledge of the MRBM deployment and presses for a withdrawal, we do not believe the Soviets would halt the deployment.
Any warning would of course degrade the element of surprise in a subsequent United States attack.
While the effectiveness of Castro's military machine might be impaired by a total United States blockade, Castro would be certain to tighten internal security and would take ruthless action against any attempts at revolt.
There is no reason to believe that a blockade of itself would bring down the Castro regime.
The Soviets would almost certainly exert strong direct pressures elsewhere to end the blockade.
The attitudes of other states toward a blockade action are not considered in this paper.
It is obvious that the Soviets would heavily exploit all adverse reactions.
Soviet Reaction to Use of Military Force/2/ /2/For a further comment on differences between reaction to a blockade and to United States measures of force against Cuba, see Annex A 9.
If the United States takes direct military action against Cuba, the Soviets would be placed automatically under great pressure to respond in ways which, if they could not save Cuba, would inflict an offsetting injury to United States interests.
This would be true whether the action was limited to an effort to neutralize the strategic missiles, or these missiles plus airfields, surface-to-air missile sites, or cruise missile sites, or in fact an outright invasion designed to destroy the Castro regime.
In reaction to any of the various forms of United States action, the Soviets would be alarmed and agitated, since they have to date estimated that the United States would not take military action in the face of Soviet warnings of the danger of nuclear war.
On the other hand, the Soviets have no public treaty with Cuba and have not acknowledged that Soviet bases are on the island.
We do not believe that the USSR would attack the US, either from Soviet bases or with its missiles in Cuba, even if the latter were operational and not put out of action before they could be readied for firing.
Since the USSR would not dare to resort to general war and could not hope to prevail locally, the Soviets would almost certainly consider retaliatory actions outside Cuba.
The timing and selection of such moves would depend heavily upon the immediate context of events and the USSR's appreciation of United States attitudes.
They might react here with major harassments, interruptions of access to the city or even a blockade, with or without the signing of a separate peace treaty.
We believe that whatever course of retaliation the USSR elected, the Soviet leaders would not deliberately initiate general war or take military measures, which in their calculation, would run the gravest risks of general war 73/ /3/On October 20 this estimate was updated to include a 3-page inventory of the Soviet military buildup in Cuba.
Editorial Note On October 19, 1962, the Central Intelligence Agency released another ""Joint Evaluation of Soviet Missile Threat in Cuba"" for the initial evaluation.
It included Iron Bark material and was based on ""relatively complete photo interpretation"" of four of the six U-2 missions of October 17 and part of the final two missions.
This evaluation discovered an additional regiment of Soviet 1020-nm missiles at two sites east of Havana in the Sagua La Grande area that appeared to be more permanent than the two sites already identified at San Cristobal in western Cuba.
Although there was still no evidence of currently operational nuclear storage facilities in Cuba, there was evidence that a site was under construction near Guanajay.
The evaluation suggested that the assumption that nuclear weapons were already in Cuba still held true.
The evaluation also suggested that the 1020-nm missiles would probably be equipped with 2 to 3 megaton warheads and the 2200-nm IRBM's with 3 to 5 megaton warheads.
Mr Ray Cline of the Central Intelligence Agency summarized the report of the Guided Missile and Astronautics Intelligence Committee, the Joint Atomic Energy Intelligence Committee, and the National Photographic Interpretation Center, dated October 19, 1962 71/ Mr Arthur Lundahl of CIA described the various missile sites and launching pads, displaying enlarged pictures identical to those in the Committee report.
In response to the President's question, Mr Cline stated that there were no U-2 photographic reconnaissance missions over Cuba from August 29th to October 14th.
The gap in photographic coverage was in part due to bad weather and in part to a desire to avoid activating the SAM Air Defense installations which the Russians were hurriedly installing in Cuba during this period.
Information from these missions is not fully processed, but will be available for presentation by Monday.
In summary, the Council was informed that sixteen SS-4 missiles, with a range of 1020 nautical miles were now operational in Cuba and could be fired approximately eighteen hours after a decision to fire was taken.
The President summarized the discussion of the intelligence material as follows.
There is something to destroy in Cuba now and, if it is destroyed, a strategic missile capability would be difficult to restore.
Blockage Track Secretary McNamara explained to the President that there were differences among his advisers which had resulted in the drafting of alternative courses of action.
He added that the military planners are at work on measures to carry out all recommended courses of action in order that, following a Presidential decision, fast action could be taken.
This route is aimed at preventing any addition to the strategic missiles already deployed to Cuba and eventually to eliminate these missiles.
He said to do this we should institute a blockade of Cuba and be prepared to take armed action in specified instances.
One presented a 5-day scenario with anticipated Soviet, allied, and Cuban reaction; the second outlined nine courses of action in the 24 hours before a blockade was instituted; and the third, with ""Third Draft"" typed on it, offered 23 steps that had to be taken before the A hour.
Secretary McNamara concluded by explaining that following the blockade, the United States would negotiate for the removal of the strategic missiles from Cuba.
He said we would have to be prepared to accept the withdrawal of United States strategic missiles from Turkey and Italy and possibly agreement to limit our use of Guantanamo to a specified limited time.
He added that we could obtain the removal of the missiles from Cuba only if we were prepared to offer something in return during negotiations.
He opposed as too risky the suggestion that we should issue an ultimatum to the effect that we would order an air attack on Cuba if the missiles were not removed.
It would take a long time to achieve the objective of eliminating strategic missiles from Cuba.
It avoids any surprise air attack on Cuba, which is contrary to our tradition.
It is the only military course of action compatible with our position as a leader of the free world.
It avoids a sudden military move which might provoke a response from the USSR which could result in escalating actions leading to general war.
The President pointed out that during a blockade, more missiles would become operational, and upon the completion of sites and launching pads, the threat would increase.
He asked General Taylor how many missiles we could destroy by air action on Monday.
General Taylor reported that the Joint Chiefs of Staff favor an air strike on Tuesday when United States forces could be in a state of readiness.
He said he did not share Secretary McNamara's fear that if we used nuclear weapons in Cuba, nuclear weapons would be used against us.
Secretary Rusk asked General Taylor whether we dared to attack operational strategic missile sites in Cuba.
General Taylor responded that the risk of these missiles being used against us was less than if we permitted the missiles to remain there.
The President pointed out that on the basis of the intelligence estimate there would be some fifty strategic missiles operational in mid-December, if we went the blockade route and took no action to destroy the sites being developed.
General Taylor said that the principal argument he wished to make was that now was the time to act because this would be the last chance we would have to destroy these missiles.
If we did not act now, the missiles would be camouflaged in such a way as to make it impossible for us to find them.
Therefore, if they were not destroyed, we would have to live with them with all the consequent problems for the defense of the United States.
The President agreed that the missile threat became worse each day, adding that we might wish, looking back, that we had done earlier what we are now preparing to do.
Secretary Rusk said that a blockade would seriously affect the Cuban missile capability in that the Soviets would be unable to deploy to Cuba any missiles in addition to those now there.
Under Secretary Ball said that if an effective blockade was established, it was possible that our photographic intelligence would reveal that there were no nuclear warheads in Cuba; hence, none of the missiles now there could be made operational.
General Taylor indicated his doubt that it would be possible to prevent the Russians from deploying warheads to Cuba by means of a blockade because of the great difficulty of setting up an effective air blockade.
Secretary McNamara stated that if we knew that a plane was flying nuclear warheads to Cuba, we should immediately shoot it down.
Parenthetically, he pointed out there are now 6000 to 8000 Soviet personnel in Cuba.
The President asked whether the institution of a blockade would appear to the free world as a strong response to the Soviet action.
He is particularly concerned about whether the Latin American countries would think that the blockade was an appropriate response to the Soviet challenge.
The Attorney General returned to the point made by General Taylor,e. that now is the last chance we will have to destroy Castro and the Soviet missiles deployed in Cuba.
Mr Sorensen said he did not agree with the Attorney General or with General Taylor that this was our last chance.
He said a missile buildup would end if, as everyone seemed to agree, the Russians would not use force to penetrate the United States blockade.
Air Strike Route Mr Bundy handed to the President the ""air strike alternative, 75/ which the President read.
General Taylor emphasized the opportunity available now to take out not only all the missiles, but all the Soviet medium bombers which were neatly lined up in the open on airbases in Cuba.
Mr McNamara cautioned that an air strike would not destroy all the missiles and launchers in Cuba, and, at best, we could knock out two-thirds of these missiles.
Those missiles not destroyed could be fired from mobile launchers not destroyed.
General Taylor said he was unable to explain why the IL-28 medium bombers had been left completely exposed on two airfields.
The only way to explain this, he concluded, was on the ground that the Cubans and the Russians did not anticipate United States air strike.
Secretary Rusk said he hesitated to ask the question but he wondered whether these planes were decoys.
He also wondered whether the Russians were trying to entice us into a trap.
Secretary McNamara stated his strong doubt that these planes were decoys.
General Taylor returned to the point he had made earlier, namely, that if we do not destroy the missiles and the bombers, we will have to change our entire military way of dealing with external threats.
The President raised the question of advance warning prior to military action— whether we should give a minimum of two hours notice of an air strike to permit Soviet personnel to leave the area to be attacked.
General Taylor said that the military would be prepared to live with a twenty-four hour advance notice or grace period if such advance notice was worthwhile politically.
The President expressed his doubt that any notice beyond seven hours had any political value.
There was a brief discussion of the usefulness of sending a draft message to Castro, and a copy of such message was circulated.
The President stated flatly that the Soviet planes in Cuba did not concern him particularly.
He said we must be prepared to live with the Soviet threat as represented by Soviet bombers.
However, the existence of strategic missiles in Cuba had an entirely different impact throughout Latin America.
In his view the existence of fifty planes in Cuba did not affect the balance of power, but the missiles already in Cuba were an entirely different matter.
The advantage of proceeding in this way, he added, was that we would get away from the Pearl Harbor surprise attack aspect of the air strike route.
Mr Bundy pointed out that there was a risk that we would act in such a way as to get Khrushchev to commit himself fully to the support of Castro.
Secretary Rusk doubted that a delay of twenty-four hours in initiating an air strike was of any value.
Secretary Dillon mentioned seventy-two hours as the time between instituting the blockade and initiating an air strike in the event we receive no response to our initial action.
Director McCone stated his opposition to an air strike, but admitted that in his view a blockade was not enough.
He argued that we should institute the blockade and tell the Russians that if the missiles were not dismantled within seventy-two hours, the United States would destroy the missiles by air attack.
He called attention to the risk involved in a long drawn-out period during which the Cubans could, at will, launch the missiles against the United States.
Secretary Dillon said that the existence of strategic missiles in Cuba was, in his opinion, not negotiable.
He believed that any effort to negotiate the removal of the missiles would involve a price so high that the United States could not accept it.
If the missiles are not removed or eliminated, he continued, the United States will lose all of its friends in Latin America, who will become convinced that our fear is such that we cannot act.
He admitted that the limited use of force involved in a blockade would make the military task much harder and would involve the great danger of the launching of these missiles by the Cubans.
Deputy Secretary Gilpatric saw the choice as involving the use of limited force or of unlimited force.
He was prepared to face the prospect of an air strike against Cuba later, but he opposed the initial use of all-out military force such as a surprise air attack.
He defined a blockade as being the application of the limited use of force and doubted that such limited use could be combined with an air strike.
General Taylor argued that a blockade would not solve our problem or end the Cuban missile threat.
He said that eventually we would have to use military force and, if we waited, the use of military force would be much more costly.
Such a strike would result in several thousand Russians being killed, chaos in Cuba, and efforts to overthrow the Castro government.
In his view the probability was high that an air strike would lead inevitably to an invasion.
He doubted that the Soviets would take an air strike on Cuba without resorting to a very major response.
In such an event, the United States would lose control of the situation which could escalate to general war.
The President agreed that a United States air strike would lead to a major Soviet response, such as blockading Berlin.
He agreed that at an appropriate time we would have to acknowledge that we were willing to take strategic missiles out of Turkey and Italy if this issue was raised by the Russians.
He felt that implementation of a blockade would also result in Soviet reprisals, possibly the blockade of Berlin.
If we instituted a blockade on Sunday, then by Monday or Tuesday we would know whether the missile development had ceased or whether it was continuing.
Secretary Dillon called attention to the fact that even if the Russians agreed to dismantle the missiles now in Cuba, continuing inspection would be required to ensure that the missiles were not again made ready.
The President said that if it was decided to go the Bundy route, he would favor an air strike which would destroy only missiles.
He repeated this view that we would have to live with the threat arising out of the stationing in Cuba of Soviet bombers.
He did not think we should initiate such a strike because of the risk of escalating actions leading to general war.
He said a sudden air strike had no support in the law or morality, and, therefore, must be ruled out.
Reading from notes, he urged that we start the blockade and only go on to an air attack when we knew the reaction of the Russians and of our allies.
At this point Director McCone acknowledged that we did not know positively that nuclear warheads for the missiles deployed had actually arrived in Cuba.
Although we had evidence of the construction of storage places for nuclear weapons, such weapons may not yet have been sent to Cuba.
The President asked what we would say to those whose reaction to our instituting a blockade now would be to ask why we had not blockaded last July.
Both Mr Sorensen and Mr Ball made the point that we did not institute a blockade in July because we did not then know of the existence of the strategic missiles in Cuba.
Secretary Rusk suggested that our objective was an immediate freeze of the strategic missile capability in Cuba to be inspected by United Nations observation teams stationed at the missile sites.
He referred to our bases in Turkey, Spain and Greece as being involved in any negotiation covering foreign bases.
He said a United Nations group might be sent to Cuba to reassure those who might fear that the United States was planning an invasion.
Ambassador Stevenson stated his flat opposition to a surprise air strike, which he felt would ultimately lead to a United States invasion of Cuba.
He supported the institution of the blockade and predicted that such action would reduce the chance of Soviet retaliation of a nature which would inevitably escalate.
In his view our aim is to end the existing missile threat in Cuba without casualties and without escalation.
He urged that we offer the Russians a settlement involving the withdrawal of our missiles from Turkey and our evacuation of Guantanamo base.
The President sharply rejected the thought of surrendering our base at Guantanamo in the present situation.
He felt that such action would convey to the world that we had been frightened into abandoning our position.
He was not opposed to discussing withdrawal of our missiles from Turkey and Greece, but he was firm in saying we should only make such a proposal in the future.
The Attorney General thought we should convey our firm intentions to the Russians clearly and suggested that we might tell the Russians that we were turning over nuclear weapons and missiles to the West Germans.
Ambassador Thompson stated his view that our first action should be the institution of a blockade.
Following this, he thought we should launch an air strike to destroy the missiles and sites, after giving sufficient warning so that Russian nationals could leave the area to be attacked.
The President said he was ready to go ahead with the blockade and to take actions necessary to put us in a position to undertake an air strike on the missiles and missile sites by Monday or Tuesday.
General Taylor summarized the military actions already under way, including the quiet reinforcement of Guantanamo by infiltrating marines and the positioning of ships to take out United States depend-ents from Guantanamo on extremely short notice.
The Attorney General said we could implement a blockade very quickly and prepare for an air strike to be launched later if we so decided.
The President said he was prepared to authorize the military to take those preparatory actions which they would have to take in anticipation of the military invasion of Cuba.
He suggested that we inform the Turks and the Italians that they should not fire the strategic missiles they have even if attacked.
He agreed that we should move to institute a blockade as quickly as we possibly can.
In response to a question about further photographic surveillance of Cuba, Secretary McNamara recommended, and the President agreed, that no low level photographic reconnaissance should be undertaken now because we have decided to institute a blockade.
Secretary Rusk recommended that a blockade not be instituted before Monday in order to provide time required to consult our allies.
Mr Bundy said the pressure from the press was becoming intense and suggested that one way of dealing with it was to announce shortly that we had obtained photographic evidence of the existence of strategic missiles in Cuba.
This announcement would hold the press until the President made his television speech.
The President acknowledged that the domestic political heat following his television appearance would be terrific.
He said he had opposed an invasion of Cuba but that now we were confronted with the possibility that by December there would be fifty strategic missiles deployed there.
In explanation as to why we have not acted sooner to deal with the threat from Cuba, he pointed out that only now do we have the kind of evidence which we can make available to our allies in order to convince them of the necessity of acting.
It is possible that we may have to make an early strike with or without warning next week.
He stressed again the difference between the conventional military buildup in Cuba and the psychological impact throughout the world of the Russian deployment of strategic missiles to Cuba.
General Taylor repeated his recommendation that any air strike in Cuba included attacks on the MIGs and medium bombers.
The President repeated his view that our world position would be much better if we attack only the missiles.
He directed that air strike plans include only missiles and missile sites, preparations to be ready three days from now.
Under Secretary Ball expressed his view that a blockade should include all shipments of POL to Cuba.
Secretary Rusk thought that POL should not now be included because such a decision would break down the distinction which we want to make between elimination of strategic missiles and the downfall of the Castro government.
The President acknowledged that the issue was whether POL should be included from the beginning or added at a later time.
Secretary Rusk called attention to the problem involved in referring to our action as a blockade.
Parenthetically, the President asked Secretary Rusk to reconsider present policy of refusing to give nuclear weapons assistance to France.
He expressed the view that in light of present circumstances a refusal to help the French was not worthwhile.
He thought that in the days ahead we might be able to gain the needed support of France if we stopped refusing to help them with their nuclear weapons project.
There followed a discussion of several sentences in the ""blockade route"" draft of the President's speech.
Reference to economic pressures on Cuba would not be made in this context.
The President made clear that in the United Nations we should emphasize the subterranean nature of the missile buildup in Cuba.
Only if we were asked would we respond that we were prepared to talk about the withdrawal of missiles from Italy and Turkey.
In such an eventuality, the President pointed out that we would have to make clear to the Italians and the Turks that withdrawing strategic missiles was not a retreat and that we would be prepared to replace these missiles by providing a more effective deterrent, such as the assignment of Polaris submarines.
The President made clear that our emphasis should be on the missile threat from Cuba.
Ambassador Stevenson reiterated his belief that we must be more forthcoming about giving up our missile bases in Turkey and Italy.
He stated again his belief that the present situation required that we offer to give up such bases in order to induce the Russians to remove the strategic missiles from Cuba.
Mr Nitze flatly opposed making any such offer, but said he would not object to discussing this question in the event that negotiations developed from our institution of a blockade.
The President concluded the meeting by stating that we should be ready to meet criticism of our deployment of missiles abroad but we should not initiate negotiations with a base withdrawal proposal.
Noted a briefing by the Director of Central Intelligence, supported by photographic intelligence, establishing the presence in Cuba of Soviet strategic missiles, including mobile launchers and missile sites under construction. ""b.
Following the White House meeting with the President on the afternoon of October 20th, I spoke privately to the Attorney General.
The Attorney General was to meet alone with the President, presumably to discuss policy matters.
I told the AG I was very worried about some of the wording in the second draft of the speech of the President as prepared by Sorensen/1/ and I was most particularly worried about the approach of Governor Stevenson.
I reasoned, as I had repeatedly in meetings over the last 3 or 4 days, that we must not lose sight of the very important objectives of removing the Castro Communist government from Cuba and establishing a climate which would permit the Cuban people to establish a government of their own choice.
In my talk with the AG I pointed out that Stevenson's proposal would not only cause the removal of the Guantanamo Base, which was most undesirable, but it would also place a crown of jewels on the head of Castro and we nor anyone else could do much about it after such a position had been established publicly.
About 9:00 o'clock in the evening the AG called me at my home and said he had discussed my views with the President who concurred and he felt I could rest assured that the situation that worried me would not develop further.
I then mentioned to the AG that numbered paragraph 2 of the speech did not give the President latitude for military action which may be necessary without suffering the indictment of committing a ""surprise attack"" and that I had suggested some different wording to Sorensen.
The AG then asked I call the President to arrange for a briefing of General Eisenhower.
I immediately talked with the President by telephone and arranged to see Eisenhower on Sunday morning and possibly take him to the White House for a direct meeting with the President.
I then expressed my concern at the wording of paragraph 2 of the speech.
The President concurred; said he had made up his mind to pursue the course which I had recommended and he agreed with the views I expressed in the afternoon meeting.
For McCone's record of this meeting, mistakenly noted as occurring at 10m., see the Supplement.
The meeting was held in the Oval Room at the White House and lasted from 11:30m. to approximately 12:30m.
In attendance were the Attorney General, General Taylor, General Sweeney and the Secretary of Defense.
The Secretary of Defense stated that following the start of an air attack, the initial units of the landing force could invade Cuba within 7 days.
The movement of troops in preparation for such an invasion will start at the time of the President's speech.
No mobilization of Reserve forces is required for such an invasion until the start of the air strike.
General LeMay had stated that the transport aircraft, from Reserve and Guard units, which would be required for participation in such an invasion can be fully operational within 24 to 48 hours after the call to active duty.
The Secretary of Defense reported that, based on information which became available during the night, it now appears that there is equipment in Cuba for approximately 40 MRBM or IRBM launchers.
The location of the sites for 36 of these launchers is known. of the 36 known sites appear to have sufficient equipment on them to be included in any air strike directed against Cuba's missile capability.
We believe that 40 launchers would normally be equipped with 80 missiles.
John McCone reported yesterday that a Soviet ship believed to be the vessel in which the Soviets have been sending missiles to Cuba has made a sufficient number of trips to that island within recent weeks to offload approximately 48 missiles.
Therefore, we assume there are approximately that number on the Island today, although we have only located approximately 30 of these.
General Sweeney outlined the following plan of air attack, the object of which would be the destruction of the known Cuban missile capability.
The 5 surface-to-air missile installations in the vicinity of the known missile sites would each be attacked by approximately 8 aircraft; the 3 MIG airfields defending the missile sites would be covered by 12 United States aircraft per field.
Each of the launchers at the 8 or 9 known sites would be attacked by 6 aircraft.
The United States aircraft covering the 3 MIG airfields would attack the MIG's if they became airborne.
General Sweeney strongly recommended attacks on each of the airfields to destroy the MIG aircraft.
General Sweeney stated that he was certain the air strike would be ""successful""; however, even under optimum conditions, it was not likely that all of the known missiles would be destroyed.
General Taylor, General Sweeney and the Secretary of Defense all strongly emphasized that in their opinion the initial air strike must be followed by strikes on subsequent days and that these in turn would lead inevitably to an invasion.
CIA representatives, who joined the discussion at this point, stated that it is probable the missiles which are operational can hold indefinitely a capability for firing with from 2-1/2 to 4 hours' notice.
Included in the notice period is a countdown requiring 20 to 40 minutes.
In relation to the countdown period, the first wave of our attacking aircraft would give 10 minutes of warning; the second wave, 40 minutes of warning; and the third wave a proportionately greater warning.
As noted above, General Sweeney strongly recommended that any air strike include attacks on the MIG aircraft and, in addition, the IL28s.
To accomplish the destruction of these aircraft, the total number of sorties of such an air strike should be increased to 500.
The President agreed that if an air strike is ordered, it should probably include in its objective the destruction of the MIG aircraft and the IL28s.
The President directed that we be prepared to carry out the air strike Monday/1/ morning or any time thereafter during the remainder of the week.
It would lead to unpredictable military responses by the Soviet Union which could be so serious as to lead to general nuclear war.
Mr McCone agreed with the Attorney General, but emphasized he believed we should be prepared for an air strike and thereafter an invasion.
RSMc/2/ /2/McNamara's initials appear in an unidentified hand indicating he signed the original.
Editorial Note At 12:30m. on October 21, 1962, President Kennedy met privately with British Ambassador Ormsby Gore at the White House.
According to the Ambassador's report to London, Kennedy summarized the evidence from the U-2 flights, stated that the United States appeared faced with either an all-out air strike on October 22 to eliminate the missiles or to blockade the island, and asked Ormsby Gore which of these two courses of action he could support.
The President then admitted that he and his principal advisors had come to the same conclusion.
Introduction Intelligence officers summarized new information which had become available since yesterday's meeting.
There was some discussion of the date when positive information as to the existence of strategic missiles in Cuba became available.
The draft was revised to state that such information became available Tuesday morning, October 16th.
The draft speech summarized the number of missiles and the number of sites known to exist in Cuba.
Secretary McNamara recommended, and the President agreed, that specific numbers of missiles and sites be deleted.
The question was raised as to whether the speech should emphasize Soviet responsibility for the missile deployment or Castro's irresponsibility in accepting them.
Secretary Rusk argued that we must hold the USSR responsible because it is important to emphasize the extra-hemispheric aspect of the missile deployment in order to increase support for our contemplated actions.
The President referred to the sentence mentioning the deployment of missiles by the Soviet Union and called attention to our deployment of missiles to Italy.
Secretary Rusk pointed out that our missiles were deployed to NATO countries only after those countries were threatened by deployed Soviet missiles.
The President pointed out that Soviet missiles were in place, aimed at European countries, before we deployed United States missiles to Europe.
Secretary Dillon recalled that we sent United States missiles to Europe because we had so many of them we did not know where to put them.
The President referred to the sentence in the draft speech which states that the USSR secretly transferred weapons to Cuba.
He said we should emphasize the clandestine manner in which the USSR had acted in Cuba.
The Attorney General wanted to be certain that the text as drafted did not preclude us from giving nuclear weapons to Western Germany, West Berlin, and France in the event we decided to do so.
It was agreed that no message would be sent to President Dorticos of Cuba at the present time and the draft speech was so revised.
The question of whether our actions should be described as a blockade or a quarantine was debated.
Although the legal meaning of the two words is identical, Secretary Rusk said he preferred ""quarantine"" for political reasons in that it avoids comparison with the Berlin blockade.
The President agreed to use ""quarantine"" and pointed out that if we so desired we could later institute a total blockade.
Both Secretary Dillon and Director McCone urged that the speech state that we were seeking to prevent all military equipment from reaching Cuba.
They argued that later we might act to prevent all equipment from reaching Cuba even though at present our objective was to block offensive missile equipment.
The President preferred the phrase ""offensive missile equipment"" on the grounds that within forty-eight hours we will know the Soviet reaction.
At such time we will know whether, as is expected, the Soviets turn back their ships rather than submit to inspection.
Initially our objective is to block offensive weapons and later we can extend our blockade to all weapons, if we so decide.
The President parenthetically pointed out that we were not taking action under the Monroe Doctrine.
The President agreed that these words should remain so that he would not be hindered from taking additional meas-ures if we so decide at a later date.
Secretary Rusk commented that our objective was to ""put out the fire"" in Cuba and get United Nations teams to inspect all missile activity in Cuba.
The President felt that a better tactic was for us initially to frighten the United Nations representatives with the prospect of all kinds of actions and then, when a resolution calling for the withdrawal of missiles from Cuba, Turkey and Italy was proposed, we could consider supporting such a resolution.
Ambassador Stevenson said we should take the initiative by calling a United Nations Security Council meeting to demand an immediate missile standstill in Cuba.
Secretary Rusk pointed out that following the President's speech we would either be in the posture of a complainant or of a defendant.
Mr Sorensen said our posture should be to accuse the Soviets of being the aggressors and seek to persuade others to agree with us.
He foresaw that some nations in the United Nations would immediately try to label us as the aggressors because of the actions which we had taken.
He said our United Nations action should be aimed at removing the missile threat while our objective on the OAS would be to persuade other Latin American countries to act with us under the Rio Treaty.
In response to the President's question, Assistant Secretary Martin said that if there were a United Nations action before the OAS acted, the usefulness of the OAS would be seriously affected.
Secretary Rusk felt we should act first in the OAS, then in the United Nations where our action program could be more flexible.
The President agreed that a reference in the draft speech to a Caribbean security force should be dropped.
The President said we should pin the responsibility for the developments in Cuba directly on Khrushchev.
In response to the President's question, Ambassador Thompson agreed— naming Khrushchev would make it harder for him to reverse his actions in Cuba, but such reference to him would be more effective in producing favorable actions.
The President asked that the phrases describing the horrors of war should be deleted.
Ambassador Thompson urged, and the President agreed, that we should use the part of the TASS statement on Cuba which flatly states that the Russians have all the weapons they need and require no more for their defense.
Therefore, the only reason for Soviet deployment of weapons to Cuba is the aim of dominating the Western hemisphere.
The President agreed that the invitation to a summit meeting should be deleted.
Ambassador Stevenson repeated that he favored an early conference with the Russians on terms acceptable to us, to be held in an atmos-phere free of threat.
The President responded that he did not want to appear to be seeking a summit meeting as a result of Khrushchev's actions.
The President added that we should not look toward holding a meeting until it is clear to us what Khrushchev really thinks he will obtain worldwide as a result of his actions in Cuba.
Secretary Rusk said our first objective was to get a fully inspected missile standstill in Cuba before we sit down to talk with the Russians.
Mr McCone was concerned that if we let it be known that we are prepared to talk to the Russians now, it would appear to outsiders that our only response to Khrushchev's challenge was to negotiate.
The Attorney General said that in his view we should anticipate a Soviet reaction involving a movement in Berlin.
Secretary Dillon felt that the Soviet reaction in Berlin would be governed by the actions we would take in response to the Russian missile deployment in Cuba.
Following a discussion of ways in which we could reach the Cuban people through television despite Cuban jamming efforts, the President told Mr Wilson that we should go ahead with the television project involving the relay of signals via instruments aboard a ship at sea for use anywhere.
The Attorney General felt that the paragraphs in the President's draft speech addressed to the Cuban people were not personal enough.
Following discussion of the pressure by the press for information, the President decided that no information on the missile deployment would be given out today.
In response to a Presidential question, General Taylor said an invasion of Cuba could be carried out seven days after the decision to invade had been taken.
Secretary McNamara said the President had asked a question which was difficult to answer precisely.
Present plans called for invasion to follow seven days after an initial air strike.
The timing could be reduced, depending upon whether certain decisions were taken now.
Some actions which were irreversible would have to be taken now in order to reduce the time when forces could be landed.
He promised the President a breakdown of the decisions which he would have to take immediately in order to reduce the seven-day period.
The President said that in three or four days we might have to decide to act in order that we would not have to wait so long prior to the landing of our forces.
As he understood the situation, a decision taken today would mean that an air strike could not be undertaken before seven days, and then seven days later the first forces could be ashore.
General Taylor explained that air action would be necessary to bring the situation under control prior to the dropping of paratroopers.
Secretary McNamara said that planning was being done under two assumptions.
The first called for an air strike, and seven days later, landings would begin.
Twenty-five thousand men would be put ashore the first day, and on the eighteenth day, 90,000 would be ashore.
The second plan provided for the landing of 90,000 men in a twenty-three day period.
The President told General Taylor that he wanted to do those things which would reduce the length of time between a decision to invade and the landing of the first troops.
Secretary Dillon said that in his view a blockade would either inevitably lead to an invasion of Cuba or would result in negotiations, which he believes the Soviets would want very much.
We would break up our alliances and convey to the world that we were impotent in the face of a Soviet challenge.
Unless the Russians stop their missile buildup at once, we will have to invade Cuba in the next week, no matter what they say, if we are to save our world position.
We cannot convey firm intentions to the Russians otherwise and we must not look to the world as if we were backing down.
Secretary McNamara expressed his doubt that an air strike would be necessary within the next week.
Admiral Anderson described, in response to the President's question, the way the blockade would be instituted.
He added that the Navy did not need to call up reserves now to meet the immediate situation.
The Navy knew the positions of twenty-seven to thirty ships en route to Cuba.
Eighteen ships were in Cuban ports, and fifteen were on their way home.
Admiral Anderson described the method to be used in the first interception of a Soviet ship.
It was hoped that a cruiser rather than a destroyer would make this interception.
He favored a twenty-four hour grace period, beginning with the President's speech, during which the Russians could communicate with their ships, giving them instructions as to what to do in the event they were stopped by United States ships.
Secretary McNamara said he would recommend to the President later today which kinds of reserve forces should be called up.
He felt that air reserves would be necessary if it were decided to make an air strike, but probably would not be needed if our action was limited to a blockade.
Admiral Anderson said we had a capability to protect United States ships in the Caribbean.
If the Komar ships took any hostile action, they could be destroyed, thereby creating a new situation.
If a MIG plane takes hostile action, he would like to be in a position to shoot it down, thereby creating again a new situation.
He estimated that the Soviets could not get naval surface ships to the area in less than ten days and Soviet submarines could not get to the area in less than ten to fourteen days.
In response to a question, Admiral Anderson said that if the Navy received information that a Soviet submarine was en route to Havana, he would ask higher authority for permission to attack it.
Secretary McNamara said he favored rules of engagement which would permit responses to hostile actions, including attacks to destroy the source of the hostile action.
The President answered a question as to whether we were to stop all ships, including allied ships by saying that he favored stopping all ships in the expectation that allied ships would soon become discouraged and drop out of the Cuban trade.
Diplomatic Measures Under Secretary Ball summarized a scenario /5/ providing for consultation with our allies.
He said Dean Acheson would brief de Gaulle and the NATO Council, Ambassador Dowling would brief Adenauer, and Ambassador Bruce would brief Macmillan.
Present at such briefings would be technical experts from CIA who could answer questions concerning the photographic intelligence which reveals the missile sites.
The President said we must assume that Khrushchev knows that we know of his missile deployments, and, therefore, he will be ready with a planned response.
He asked that the draft speech emphasize his belief that the greatest danger to the United States in the present situation is doing nothing but acknowledging that in days to come we would be seriously threatened.
Ambassador Stevenson read from a list of problems which he foresaw in the United Nations.
Secretary Rusk said we must decide on tactics for the Security Council meeting.
He repeated his view that the aim of all our actions is to get a standstill of the missile development in Cuba to be inspected by United Nations observers and then be prepared to negotiate other issues.
The President asked Assistant Secretary of Defense Nitze to study the problem of withdrawing United States missiles from Turkey and Italy.
Mr Nitze said such a withdrawal was complicated because we must avoid giving the Europeans the impression that we are prepared to take nuclear weapons of all kinds out of Europe.
Secretary McNamara stated his firm view that the United States could not lift its blockade as long as the Soviet weapons remained in Cuba.
The President asked why we could not start with a demand for the removal or the withdrawal of the missiles and if at a later time we wanted to negotiate for a less favorable settlement, we could then decide to do so.
The Attorney General said we should take the offensive in our presentation to the United Nations.
Our attitude should not be defensive, especially in view of the fact that Soviet leaders had lied to us about the deployment of strategic missiles to Cuba.
The President interjected a directive that we reverse our policy on nuclear assistance to France in the light of the present situation.
Ambassador Stevenson repeated his view that the United States would be forced into a summit meeting and preferred to propose such a meeting.
The President disagreed, saying that we could not accept a neutral Cuba and the withdrawal from Guantanamo without indicating to Khrushchev that we were in a state of panic.
An offer to accept Castro and give up Guantanamo must not be made because it would appear to be completely defensive.
He said we should be clear that we would accept nothing less than the ending of the missile capability now in Cuba, no reinforcement of that capability, and no further construction of missile sites.
Secretary McNamara stated his view that in order to achieve such a result we would have to invade Cuba.
The President said what he was talking about was the dismantlement of missiles now in Cuba.
Ambassador Stevenson thought that we should institute a blockade, and when the Russians rejected our demand for a missile standstill in Cuba, we should defer any air strike until after we had talked to Khrushchev.
Assistant Secretary of State Martin indicated that if we did not use the OAS in preference to the United Nations, we would jeopardize the entire hemispheric alliance.
Under Secretary Ball agreed that we should put primary emphasis on the OAS and he preferred that any inspectors going to Cuba should be OAS inspectors rather than United Nations inspectors.
The President indicated a need for further discussion of this matter and suggested that Secretary Rusk speak to him later about it.
As the meeting concluded, the President asked that the word ""miscalculate"" be taken out of the draft letter prepared for him to send to Khrushchev 76/ He recalled that in Vienna Khrushchev had revealed a misunderstanding of this word when translated into Russian.
He also requested that reference to a meeting with Khrushchev be deleted from the draft letter.
Noted briefing by the Director of Central Intelligence on the latest information about the Soviet strategic missile build-up in Cuba. ""b.
Discussed and revised a draft Presidential speech to be made on October 22, 1962. ""c.
Reviewed military plans to be implemented following the President's speech. ""d.
Following is text of letter to Prime Minister Macmillan to be delivered at 10:00m.
This constitutes a threat to the peace which imperils the security not only of this hemisphere but of the entire free world.
You will recall that last month I stated publicly that the Government of the United States would consider the presence of ground-to-ground missiles in Cuba as an offensive threat.
The foregoing has created a highly critical situation which must be met promptly and fearlessly.
This evening at 1900 hours Washington time I shall be making a public statement of which Ambassador Bruce will be giving you a draft together with this message.
This text is not necessarily final in every detail, but the essentials of the problem, and the means by which I intend to meet it, have already been decided as set forth in the present text.
Ambassador Bruce will also be prepared fully to explain to you the evidence on which we have based our conclusions.
I am also writing to Chairman Khrushchev to bring home to him how perilous is his present course of action, but expressing the hope that we can agree to resume the path of peaceful negotiation.
I am quite clear in my mind that these missiles have got to be withdrawn, and you will see that I intend to state this publicly in my speech as well as telling Chairman Khrushchev this in my letter to him.
The object of the quarantine, which will be put into effect immediately, is to prevent the Soviet Union from introducing additional missiles into Cuba and to lead to the elimination of the missiles that are already in place.
I shall also be sending a personal message to Prime Minister Diefenbaker, General deGaulle, Chairman Adenauer, and Prime Minister Fanfani/2/ and have sent Dean Acheson to Paris assist Ambassador Finletter in briefing the North Atlantic Council shortly before I make my public statement.
However, I wanted you to be the first to be informed of this grave development, in order that we should have the opportunity, should you wish it, to discuss the situation between ourselves by means of our private channel of communication.
This is a solemn moment for our two countries, indeed for the fate of the entire world.
It is essential that the already great dangers before us should not be increased through miscalculation or underestimation by the Soviets of what we intend to do, and are prepared to endure, in the face of the course on which they have so recklessly embarked.
I need not point out to you the possible relation of this secret and dangerous move on the part of Khrushchev to Berlin.
It is a source of great personal satisfaction to me that you and I can keep in close touch with each other by rapid and secure means at a time like this, and I intend to keep you fully informed of my thinking as the situation evolves.
In the meanwhile I am also requesting an urgent meeting of the United Nations Security Council.
I have asked Ambassador Stevenson to present on behalf of the United States a resolution calling for the withdrawal of missile bases and other offensive weapons in Cuba under the supervision of United Nations observers 73/ This would make it possible for the United States to lift its quarantine.
Editorial Note President Kennedy, Attorney General Robert Kennedy, Secretaries McNamara and Rusk, Special Assistant McGeorge Bundy, and Under Secretary George Ball met on October 22, 1962, at 11m. to discuss Cuba.
A tape recording of the conversation is available, but is of poor quality and is punctuated by long periods when apparently material was being read and/or drafted.
The tape, which lasts for 40 minutes and 40 seconds, ends before the meeting does.
The President stressed the need to inform personnel at missile sites in Turkey not to fire if and when they came under Soviet attack.
The group also discussed making clear to Allies that commitments in Berlin would not be compromised, and that the United States needed to protect United States credibility and to maintain the strategic balance.
The group finished with a discussion of the timing of the President's public announcement of the discovery of the missiles.
The tape lasts for 11 minutes and 18 seconds and covers the entire meeting.
The President opened the meeting by asking Secretary Rusk to read the attached message from Prime Minister Macmillan which had just been received./l/ Secretary Rusk observed that for a first reaction to information of our proposed blockade it was not bad.
He added that it was comforting to learn that the British Prime Minister had not thought of anything we hadn't thought of.
What we now need are strong arguments to explain why we have to act as we are acting.
Secretary Rusk stated that the best legal basis for our blockade action was the Rio Treaty.
The use of force would be justified on the ground of support for the principals of the United Nations Charter, not on the basis of Article 51, which might give the Russians a basis for attacking Turkey.
Secretary Rusk commented that if we do not win the support of the OAS, we are not necessarily acting illegally.
He referred to the new situation created by modern weapons and he thought that rules of international law should not be taken as applying literally to a completely new situation.
Secretary Rusk said the Department had decided to hold off calling a Security Council meeting despite the possibility that the Russians might ask one first.
The basis of this decision was that we would have to name Cuba in the documents requesting the Security Council meeting and this we did not wish to do.
Director McCone summarized the latest intelligence information and read from the attached document.
He also mentioned that the London Evening Standard had printed a great deal of information about the existence of Soviet strategic missiles in Cuba.
Ill Apparent reference to notes by McCone for this meeting, October 22.
In response to a suggestion by Mr Bundy, the President outlined the manner in which he expected Council Members to deal with the domestic aspects of the current situation.
He said everyone should sing one song in order to make clear that there was now no difference among his advisers as to the proper course to follow.
He pointed out the importance of fully supporting the course of action chosen which, in his view, represented a reasonable consensus.
Any course is extremely troublesome and, as in the case of the Berlin wall, we are once again confronted with a difficult choice.
If we undertake a tricky and unsatisfactory course, we do not even have the satisfaction of knowing what would have happened if we had acted differently.
He mentioned that former Presidents, Eisenhower, Truman and Hoover had supported his decision during telephone conversations with each of them earlier in the day.
In September we had said we would react if certain actions were taken in Cuba.
We have to carry out commitments which we had made publicly at that time.
The secret deployment by the Russians of strategic missiles to Cuba was such a complete change in their previous policy of not deploying such missiles outside the USSR that if we took no action in this case, we would convey to the Russians an impression that we would never act, no matter what they did anywhere.
Gromyko had left the impression that the Soviets were going to act in Berlin in the next few months.
Therefore, if they acted now in response to our blockade action, we would only have brought on their Berlin squeeze earlier than expected.
The effect in Latin America would be very harmful to our interests if, by our failure to act, we gave the Latinos the impression that the Soviets were increasing their world position while ours was decreasing.
The President concluded by acknowledging the difficulties which he was asking the military to accept because of the necessity of our taking action which warned Cuba of the possibility of an invasion.
Secretary Rusk commented that if anyone thought our response was weak, they were wrong because he believed that a ""flaming crisis"" was immediately ahead of us.
The President read from a list of questions and suggested answers which might be made public.
The response is that we needed more evidence of the exist-ence of Soviet strategic missiles in Cuba.
In addition, if we had acted earlier, we might have jeopardized our position in Berlin because our European Allies would have concluded that our preoccupation with Cuba was such as to reveal our lack of interest in Berlin, thus tempting the Russians to act in Berlin.
Earlier action would undoubtedly have forced us to declare war on Cuba and this action, without the evidence we now have, would have thrown Latin American support to Castro.
There followed a discussion of why evidence of Soviet missiles was lacking.
Information about the strategic missile sites was reported by the refugees but these reports could not be substantiated from aerial photography.
It was not until October 14th that photographic evidence of the sites and missiles was available.
The cloud cover prevented photography for a period of time and the possibility of an attack on an overflying American plane led to a restriction on the number of U-2 flights.
Mr McCone felt that the information given to Senator Keating about the missile sites had come from refugee sources, which he had accepted without further substantiation.
The Attorney General pointed out that even if there had been U-2 flights, construction at the missile sites was not far enough along to have been detected by photography much earlier than October 14.
It was pointed out that all Soviet experts agreed that Khrushchev would not send strategic missiles to Cuba.
Commenting on what should be said publicly about our actions in Cuba, Secretary Rusk cautioned that we should say nothing now which might tie our hands later in the event we wanted to take additional actions.
The President referred again to the question of distinguishing between Soviet missiles in Cuba and United States missiles in Turkey and Italy.
The President thought that it was most important that everyone be fully briefed as to why these situations with respect to the deployment of missiles do not match.
He again called attention to the secret deployment of the weapons and the TASS statement saying that the Russians had no need to position strategic missiles in foreign countries.
Soviet missiles in Cuba have a quite different psychological effect than Soviet missiles positioned in the USSR in that the Soviet action in Cuba may in fact be a probing action to find out what we would be prepared to do in Berlin.
Secretary Rusk added that the threat to the United States from Soviet missiles in Cuba was of worldwide importance because this threat was to a country which in effect provided the sole defense of some forty Free World States.
The President suggested that we should make clear the difference between our Cuban blockade and the Berlin blockade by emphasizing that we were not preventing shipments of food and medicine to Cuba, but only preventing the delivery of offensive military equipment.
The President responded by saying that we should ask the press not to push this line of questioning and to accept our statement that we are taking all precautionary moves in anticipation of any contingency.
Secretary McNamara agreed that we should say that the Defense Department had been ordered to be prepared for any contingency and that we were not now ready to say anything more than was in the President's speech.
In response to a Presidential question, Secretary McNamara said that an information group was working on the problem of voluntary press censorship based on experience during the Korean War.
Secretary McNamara reported that the Defense Department was working on how we would prevent the introduction into Cuba of nuclear weapons by airplanes.
He said some planes could fly non-stop from the Soviet Union if refueled en route.
Present arrangements provided that we would be informed of any plane flying to Cuba and we would then decide what action to take against it.
It was agreed that no reserves would be called today, but that a review would be made tonight as to the necessity of such action.
Acting Secretary Fowler raised several questions involving domestic controls, including gold transfers, foreign exchange controls, and control of the stock market.
He said, in response to the President's question, that another look would be taken the following day before any recommendation would be made as to closing the stock market.
Secretary Rusk said that if we were asked whether our blockade was an act of war, we should say that it was not.
The President asked whether friendly ships would be halted and Admiral Anderson replied in the affirmative, saying that we would challenge all ships.
The President agreed that we should stop all Soviet Bloc and non-Bloc ships when the order to institute the blockade was given.
The President discussed the reasons why he had decided against an air strike now.
First, there was no certainty that an air strike would destroy all missiles now in Cuba.
We would be able to get a large percentage of these missiles, but could not get them all.
In addition we would not know if any of these missiles were operationally ready with their nuclear warheads and we were not certain that our intelligence had discovered all the missiles in Cuba.
Therefore, in attacking the ones we had located, we could not be certain that others unknown to us would not be launched against the United States.
The President said an air strike would involve an action comparable to the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor.
Finally, an air strike would increase the danger of a worldwide nuclear war.
The President said he had given up the thought of making an air strike only yesterday morning.
In summary, he said an air strike had all the disadvantages of Pearl Harbor.
It would not insure the destruction of every strategic missile in Cuba, and would end up eventually in our having to invade.
Mr Bundy added that we should not discuss the fact that we were not able to destroy all the missiles by means of an air strike because at some later time we might wish to make such an attack.
Noted an intelligence summary presented by the Director of Central Intelligence, ""b.
Discussed the domestic aspects of actions to be announced later in the day. ""c.
In addition to the recipients mentioned in the source text, copies were also sent to Ball, Gilpatric, Thompson, Sorensen, Bundy, O'Donnell, Salinger, Wilson, Rostow, and Nitze.
TO The Vice President The Secretary of State The Secretary of Defense The Secretary of the Treasury The Attorney General The Chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff The Director of Central Intelligence SUBJECT Establishment of an Executive Committee of the National Security Council I hereby establish, for the purpose of effective conduct of the operations of the Executive Branch in the current crisis, an Executive Committee of the National Security Council.
This committee will meet, until further notice, daily at 10:00m. in the Cabinet Room.
The first meeting of this committee will be held at the regular hour on Tuesday, October 23rd, at which point further arrangements with respect to its management and operation will be decided.
ATTENDED BY The Leadership, except for Senator Hayden, The President, Rusk, McNamara, McCone and Ambassador Thompson McCone read a summary of the situation, copy of which is attached./l/ This statement had been discussed with the President, Attorney General and Bundy and had been modified to conform to their views.
There were a few questions of a substantive nature, Hickenlooper asked when missiles would be in operational status.
Thompson then indicated it was more probable that Cuba may force a showdown on Berlin.
Secretary Rusk then reviewed his current appraisal of the Soviet Union indicating there had been some radical moves within the USSR which were indicating a tougher line.
It appeared the hard-liners are coming in to ascendancy and the soft co-existent line seems to be disappearing.
The President then reviewed the chronology of the situation, starting on Tuesday, October 16th, when the first information was received from the photographic flight of October 14th.
He stated that he immediately ordered extensive overflights; that McCone briefed President Eisenhower; that we must recognize that these missiles might be operational and therefore military action on our part might cause the firing of many of them with serious consequences to the United States; furthermore the actions taken, and further actions which might be required, might cause the Soviets to react in various areas, most particularly Berlin, which they could easily grab and if they do, our European Allies would lay the blame in our lap.
The President concluded whatever we do involves a risk; however we must make careful calculations and take a chance.
The blockade of Cuba on the importation of offensive weapons was to be undertaken, all ships would be stopped and those containing offensive weapons would not be permitted to proceed.
We must not take a gamble and must not temporize; Khrushchev has once again rattled his missiles; he can become firmer and firmer, and we must react.
He did not specifically say by surprise attack; however he did not advocate warning.
McNamara then described the blockade, indicating that this might lead to some form of military action; that there would be many alternative courses open to us.
The President then reviewed in some detail time required to assemble an invasion force which would involve 90,000 men in the actual landings and a total of about 250,000 men.
He stated this could not be done in 24 or 36 hours but would take a number of days and that many preliminary steps had been taken.
Halleck recalled a recent briefing by Secretary McNamara in which he stated it would take three months to prepare adequately to invade Cuba.
McNamara then reaffirmed the 250,000-man figure, with 90,000 of them actually involved in the landing force.
He stated that he could be ready in 7 days and that the landing would be preceded by substantial air strike.
He also seriously criticized any policy which involved extensive airborne alerts of SAC in the interests of our state of readiness, pointing out that the consequences would be the serious attrition of our SAC forces, most particularly the B-47s, which are now quite old.
McNamara stated that we could carry on an airborne alert indefinitely because preliminary plans had been made, repair parts, etc., secured and were in position.
Vinson then asked if the Joint Chiefs of Staff actually approved the plans for the invasion.
This was the first time anyone has raised doubt as to whether the MRBMs and the IRBMs are offensive missiles.
Senator Saltonstall brought up the question of the legality of the blockade.
A great many Senators expressed concern over the proposed action with the OAS, indicating that they felt the OAS would delay rather than act.
Saltonstall then asked whether a blockade would be legal if the OAS did not support it.
The President answered that it probably would not; however we would proceed anyway.
Fulbright then stated that in his opinion the blockade was the worst of the alternatives open to us and it was a definite affront to Russia and that the moment that we had to damage or sink a Soviet ship because of their failure to recognize or respect the blockade we would be at war with Russia and the war would be caused because of our own initiative.
The time has come for an invasion under the President's statement of February 13th.
The President took issue with Fulbright, stating that he felt that an attack on these bases, which we knew were manned by Soviet personnel, would involve large numbers of Soviet casualties and this would be more provocative than a confrontation with a Soviet ship.
Vinson urged that if we strike, we strike with maximum force and wind the matter up quickly as this would involve the minimum of American losses and insure the maximum support by the Cuban people at large who, he reasoned, would very quickly go over to the side of the winner.
The meeting was concluded at 6:35 to permit the President to prepare for his 7:00 o'clock talk to the nation.
He stated that in his opinion ships which were accosted on the high sea and turned back would be a more humiliating blow to the Soviets and a more serious involvement to their pride than the losing of as many as 5,000 Soviet military personnel illegally and secretly stationed in Cuba.
At 7:41 m. on October 21 the Department of State had sent Ambassador Kohler the first draft of this message.
Subsequent changes and additions resulted in only the second and final paragraphs remaining as originally drafted.
A copy of the statement I am making tonight concerning developments in Cuba and the reaction of my Government thereto has been handed to your Ambassador in Washington./l/ In view of the gravity of the developments to which I refer, I want you to know immediately and accurately the position of my Government in this matter.
Moreover, the Congress adopted a resolution expressing its support of this declared policy 72/ Despite this, the rapid development of long-range missile bases and other offensive weapons systems in Cuba has proceeded.
Sincerely, JFK/3/ /3/Kennedy's initials appear in an unidentified hand presumably indicating he signed the original.
Kennedy refers to it as happening ""one hour"" after Rusk gave Dobrynin the message to Khrushchev, but that would be during the address to the nation.
To allow it to continue would have thrown into question all our statements about Berlin.
It may be necessary to expand blockade to include fuel, lubricants and so forth.
There is no telling what he will do-probably it will be something in Berlin.
We are aware that this action is not complete application of force— does not immediately solve the problem.
These may be necessary but going completely into Cuba now invites him into Berlin.
If we had the force on hand to take Cuba tonight that would be okay, but it would take a week to build up.
It is obvious that he was attempting to face us in November with a bad situation.
The build-up in Cuba, if completed, would double the number of missiles the Soviets could bring to bear on the United States They would also overcome our warning system which does not face south.
Furthermore, the short distance involving short times of flight would tempt them to make a first strike.
It faces Khrushchev with action taken which has unpleasant options for him also.
However, they will be delivered to President de Gaulle's Chef de Cabinet as soon as received.
President de Gaulle read both communications carefully and then remarked that he would welcome further elucidation by Mr Acheson.
Mr Acheson outlined background of present situation in Cuba, reason for President's proposed action, going into considerable detail, emphasizing that maximum buildup had occurred within past week, and saying that he had Mr Sherman Kent with him who was prepared to brief President de Gaulle in more detail.
He continued that President Kennedy wishes to react, and to react now, and certainly France can have no objection to that since it is legal for a country to defend itself when it finds itself in danger.
He then referred to blockade and said that of course there would be no objection on part of France to United States initiating such blockade, but he himself had doubts as to its effectiveness.
He wondered whether it would be sufficiently effective to cause Cubans to remove missiles and their bases.
President de Gaulle then referred to our proposal to consult with other American nations, asked whether that would be effective, and remarked he himself did not know.
With respect to proposed action in Security Council, President de Gaulle remarked that he realized that this was in line with our policy.
There might be much talk, but he doubted whether Security Council would be effective.
In conclusion, President de Gaulle said that he felt blockade was one positive step, and he repeated that France made no objection thereto.
President de Gaulle said he believed that if blockade were initiated USSR would react perhaps in neighborhood of Cuba, but more likely in area where they could act more effectively.
President de Gaulle felt they would choose Berlin since they would want to make West suffer, and this was where they could do so most effectively.
If they choose Berlin, President de Gaulle said, three powers would have to take necessary steps; number of countersteps have been prepared and they would have to be taken.
President de Gaulle continued that perhaps Soviets wished, and perhaps United States also wished to some extent, to intensify international situation somewhat to bring about talks.
President de Gaulle expressed appreciation for having been informed by President.
He said that he realized this had been done after decision had been made, but nevertheless appreciated being informed.
He said he would reply to President's letter as soon as possible, but meanwhile if Mr Acheson saw President please explain de Gaulle's appreciation and tell him he would be replying to his message.
President de Gaulle said that in this serious time it was important that governments keep in close contact.
This would be done in Washington through Ambassador Alphand and through Ambassador Bohlen when he arrives here shortly.
President de Gaulle ruminated that while one never knew what real intentions of Soviets were, he did not think present situation would lead to war.
He thought it might be great maneuver to engage United States in talks on Berlin and on Cuba.
Berlin was the sensitive point and it was there that Soviets no doubt would press.
Perhaps also Khrushchev had in mind impressing other Latin American states by showing them that USSR could establish themselves anywhere in Western hemisphere and could not be moved out.
He repeated he hoped blockade would be effective, but did not think it would be.
At this point Mr Kent was called into room to brief President de Gaulle.
President de Gaulle was obviously very interested in briefing and showed keen interest, asking pertinent questions, which revealed his military background.
In addition to specific technical questions, he inquired as to Cuba's self-sufficiency with respect to food, petroleum, etc.
President de Gaulle inquired what countries were being informed in similar manner.
He appreciated significance of situation rapidly, and obviously found here subject which interested him considerably.
His Chef de Cabinet was extremely cooperative in maintaining secrecy of interview, and we drove to Elysee in Elsyee motorcars and were taken in back door to avoid any leakage to press of Mr Acheson's visit.
Intelligence The meeting began with a briefing by Mr McCone in which, in addition to written material, he emphasized the strength of evidence substantiating the non-participation of Cubans in Soviet missile installations in Cuba.
Unity on the Home Front There was general discussion of the problem of adequate briefing of Members of the Congress and of the press on the way in which the crisis had developed and on the reasons for the decisions which had been taken.
A number of assignments were given to individual members of the Committee for further work on this problem.
Items Presented by the Department of Defense The President approved plans for the issue of the Proclamation of Interdiction of ship delivery of offensive weapons to Cuba.
The President approved and later signed an Executive Order authorizing the extension of tours of duty of certain members of the Armed Forces.
The President approved the following contingency plan for action in the event of an incident affecting U-2 overflights.
The President will be informed through SAC/DOD channels, and it is expected that if there is clear indication that the incident is the result of hostile action, the recommendation will be for immediate retaliation upon the most likely surface-to-air site involved in this action.
It was expected, but not definitely decided, that if hostile actions should continue after such a single incident and single retaliation, it would become necessary to take action to eliminate the effectiveness of surface-to-air missiles in Cuba.
The Secretary reported that he was not ready to make a recommendation on air intercept of Soviet flights to Cuba, that he was maintaining aircraft on alert for prompt reaction against known missile sites, that preparations for invasion were proceeding at full speed, that the quarantine would initially exclude POL, though this decision should be reexamined continuously.
The Attorney General was delegated to check the problem of the legal possibility of permitting foreign flag ships to participate in United States coastwise trade, in order to prevent shipping requirements for an invasion from disrupting United States commerce.
The Secretary of Defense recommended, and the President approved, about six low-level reconnaissance flights for the purpose of obtaining still more persuasive photography of Soviet missile sites.
The President, on hearing these reports, asked whether United States air forces in Southeastern United States were properly deployed against possible hostile reaction, and after discussion he directed that photographs be taken of United States airfields to show their current condition.
There was a brief discussion of possible reactions in Berlin, and the President indicated that he would wish to consider whether additional Soviet inspection of convoys would be acceptable.
After the meeting, the President designated Assistant Secretary Nitze to be Chairman of a Subcommittee of the Executive Committee, for Berlin Contingencies.
The first, chaired by Rostow, was to consider advance planning during the crisis; the second, chaired by Wiesner, dealt with communications.
The President decided that it would be advisable not to make his forthcoming trip to Brazil, and the assignment of diplomatic disengagement was given to the Department of State.
There was discussion of the problem of effective communications and it was agreed that for the present, Dr.
Wiesner will be asked informally to lead an inter-departmental review of this matter and to report on the problem on Wednesday, October 24.
McGeorge Bundy/5/ /5/Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.
The source text is a translation done at the Embassy in Moscow and received in the Department of State at 11:56 m.
Ill Embassy translation follows of Khrushchev's letter of October 23 to President.
I hope that Government of United States will show prudence and renounce actions pursued by you, which would lead to catastrophic consequences for peace throughout world.
Editorial Note At 9m. on October 23, 1962, Secretary of State Rusk addressed a Special Meeting of the Council of the Organization of American States.
After reviewing the steps that had brought the situation to a head, Rusk asked the Council to take all measures necessary to remove the threat to hemispheric security.
The Council continued its deliberations until 5m., when it passed, with one abstention, a resolution along the lines called for by Rusk.
Ambassador Stevenson delivered his opening statement to the specially convened meeting of the United Nations Security Council calling the installation of the missiles in Cuba a profound challenge to the peace.
For text of his statement and the following ones by the Cuban and Soviet representatives, see United Nations doc.
Intelligence There was a preliminary report of low level reconnaissance.
Message to Khrushchev A further message to Khrushchev was agreed in the form later dispatched by the Department of State.
The President requested the Secretary of Defense to give a further review to the process of naval action and engagement under the quarantine.
The Secretary of Defense was requested to consider and recommend appropriate arrangements for the continuation of General Nor-stad as Supreme NATO Commander during the crisis.
Assistant Secretary Pittman reported briefly on civil defense capability and was requested to produce recommendations for a special plan covering the southeastern area of the United States during the period of a possible invasion of Cuba.
The President expected to review these plans at a separate meeting on October 24th.
Assistant Secretary Nitze was confirmed as Chairman of a subcommittee on Berlin preparations of the Executive Committee.
The President invited Mr Nitze to sit regularly with the Executive Committee in this capacity.
Rostow was confirmed as Chairman of a second subcommittee on advance planning.
The President said that he felt that Norstad was so experienced and so capable and his judgment so sound, as evidenced by today's cable,/l/ copy of which I have not seen, that he would take the risk of NATO country criticisms, he did not think that Lemnitzer would be hurt, and he wished Norstad to remain.
I have received your letter of October twenty-third./2/ 1 think you will recognize that the steps which started the current chain of events was the action of your Government in secretly furnishing offensive weapons to Cuba.
I met with Ambassador Dobrynin last evening on the third floor of the Russian Embassy and as you suggested made the following points:/l/ /1/The meeting took place at 9:30m., October 23.
I told him first that I was there on my own and not on the instructions of the President.
When I had met with him some six weeks before, I said, he had told me that the Russians had not placed any long-range missiles in Cuba and had no intention to do so in the future.
He interrupted at that point and confirmed this statement and said he specifically told me they would not put missiles in Cuba which would be able to reach the continental United States.
I said based on that statement which I had related to the President plus independent intelligence information at that time, the President had gone to the American people and assured them that the weapons being furnished by the Communists to Cuba were defensive and that it was not necessary for the United States to blockade or take any military action.
I pointed out that this assurance of Dobrynin to me had been confirmed by the TASS statement and then finally, in substance, by Gromyko when he visited the President on Thursday 72/ I said that based on these assurances the President had taken a different and far less belligerent position than people like Senators Keating and Capehart, and he had assured the American people that there was nothing to be concerned about.
I pointed out, in addition, that the President felt he had a very helpful personal relationship with Mr Khrushchev.
Obviously, they did not agree on many issues, but he did feel that there was a mutual trust and confidence between them on which he could rely.
As an example of this statement I related the time that Mr Khrushchev requested the President to withdraw the troops from Thailand and that step was taken within 24 hours.
I said that with the background of this relationship, plus the specific assurances that had been given to us, and then the statement of Dobrynin from Khrushchev to Ted Sorensen and to me that no incident would occur before the American elections were completed, we felt the action by Khrushchev and the Russians at this time was hypocritical, misleading and false.
Dobrynin's only answer was that he had told me no missiles were in Cuba but that Khrushchev had also given similar assurances through TASS and as far as he knew, there were still no missiles in Cuba.
The one he stressed was why the President did not tell Gromyko the facts on Thursday.
He said this was something they could not understand and that if we had the information at the time why didn't we tell Gromyko.
Number one, there wasn't anything the President could tell Gromyko that Gromyko didn't know already and after all, why didn't Gromyko tell the President this instead of, in fact, denying it.
I said in addition the President was so shocked at Gromyko's presentation and his failure to recite these facts that he felt that any effort to have an intelligent and honest conversation would not be profitable.
Dobrynin went on to say that from his conversations with Gromyko he doesn't believe Gromyko thought there were any missiles in Cuba.
He said he was going to contact his government to find out about this matter.
I expressed surprise that after all that had appeared in the papers, and the President's speech, that he had not had a communication on that question already.
He replied that was their instructions last month and he assumed they had the same instructions at the present time.
He also made the point that although we might have pictures, all we really knew about were the sites and not missiles and that there was a lot of difference between sites and the actual missile itself.
I said I did not have to argue the point-there were missiles in Cuba-we knew that they were there and that I hoped he would inform himself also.
I left around 10:15m. and went to the White House and gave a verbal report to the President.
SUBJECT Soviet Challenge to the Quarantine/1/ /1/Another memorandum from Smith to McCone, October 23, estimating the effect on Cuba of a blockade covering all goods except food and medicines is in the Supplement.
A challenge at sea to the quarantine is unlikely, at least for a day or two.
Thereafter a challenge is likely if the Soviets believe that their political efforts are not succeeding and a heightening of the crisis is required.
Retaliatory actions would follow if the incident itself failed to produce quick political results.
It would be aimed either at a United States ship elsewhere or at access to Berlin; we think the latter somewhat more likely.
Today's TASS statement suggests that the Soviets wish to retain full freedom of action while they consider their initial moves.
There is some intelligence, dating from before the President's speech, indicating that the Soviets had decided to run any United States blockade which might be established.
Nevertheless, we think it likely that, at least for a day or two, they will avoid a challenge at sea while they observe the results of their political efforts to get the quarantine lifted.
If the USSR feels that these efforts are succeeding, the Soviets will probably continue to avoid challenges, lest an incident interrupt this favorable trend.
If and when they decide to permit an incident of this sort, the Soviets would not allow the United States to board a vessel, since this would mean acceptance in principle of quarantine.
Instead, their tactics would probably be to choose a ship carrying a nonmilitary cargo and to allow it to be attacked.
It is possible that the Soviets, in deciding to test the quarantine, would accompany their probe ship with a submarine which would counterattack the United States vessel after the Soviet ship was struck.
We think this unlikely, however, because the Soviets would almost certainly estimate that the United States would respond by tightening the blockade and launching a full-scale effort to seek out and destroy a Soviet submarine in the area of quarantine operations.
After an incident, the Soviets would probably allow a pause while they exploited this incident and observed its effects.
Unless the United States showed signs of quickly yielding, however, we believe that they would then follow with some form of retaliation.
We do not believe that this would take the form of major military action.
Instead, the Soviets would choose between an attack on a United States ship elsewhere or a move on the access routes to Berlin, designed to remind the United States of the vulnerability of its position there.
In most circumstances, they probably would regard a Berlin move as both more effective and easier to control.
The USSR might use a submarine, however, to deliver through the quarantine some particularly critical item and to demonstrate, with a subsequent announcement, its ability to frustrate United States efforts.
Intelligence The Director of Central Intelligence summarized the intelligence briefing.
Defense Operations The Secretary of Defense presented photographs of dispersal of existing United States planes in the southeast U.S., and the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff reported that modifications of readiness were being considered to permit improvement of the situation.
The Secretary of Defense reported the plans for naval interception, noted the presence of a submarine near the more interesting ships, and warned that radio silence might be imposed.
There was discussion of the problem of dealing with such submarines, and it was understood that in the event of intervention by a submarine in the process of interception the submarine might have to be destroyed.
In the middle of the meeting there were reports that certain Soviet ships had appeared to have stopped or turned back, and the President directed that there be no interception of any target for at least another hour while clarifying information was sought.
Wiesner presented an initial briefing on the communications situation and the President directed that most urgent action be taken by State, Defense and CIA to improve communications worldwide, but particularly in the Caribbean area.
After the meeting, the President, in discussion with the Secretary of State and the Secretary of Defense, directed that special responsibilities should be assigned to designated individuals and a plan for this purpose will be presented for approval by State, Defense and White House officers at the next meeting of the Committee.
The President directed that State and USIA should give immediate attention to increasing understanding in Europe of the fact that any Berlin crisis would be fundamentally the result of Soviet ambition and pressure, and that inaction by the United States in the face of the challenge in Cuba would have been more and not less dangerous for Berlin.
The President directed that a senior representative of USIA should regularly be present at meetings of the Executive Committee.
Soviet reaction Cuban quarantine likely involve efforts compare missiles in Cuba with Jupiters in Turkey.
While such comparison refutable, possible that negotiated solution for removal Cuban offensive threat may involve dismantling and removal Jupiters.
Recognize this would create serious politico-military problems for US-Turkish relations and with regard to Turkey's place in NATO Alliance.
Therefore need prepare carefully for such contingency order not harm our relations with this important ally.
Ambassador Finletter also requested comment standpoint NATO aspect problem.
Do not discuss with any foreigners 71/ Rusk /1/At 2:19m. on October 24 the Department of State sent a similar telegram to Rome.
That the Department of Defense intercept, trail, and photograph, but not interfere with, such vessels.
The object is to record the fact of their turnaround and, to the extent possible, the character of their cargo.
That the order to search be determined by the order of their operational availability to our forces; 3.
Should a vessel refuse to comply with orders to stop, we should proceed to execute the terms of the Proclamation with special attention to the minimum use of force, given the likelihood that their cargoes will prove innocent.
Some of the Bloc vessels proceeding towards Cuba appear to have altered course; 2.
Other vessels are proceeding towards Cuba and will be intercepted in accordance with the Proclamation.
On a background basis, it will be explained that those vessels which altered course were those we had reason to believe contained offensive weapons; but that inspection of other vessels is required, now and in the future, until offensive weapons and installations are removed from Cuba, because such vessels could contain essential components for offensive weapons.
We are starting over here a thinking session as to what might be done which will be going on all afternoon.
Bundy-Two tankers are coming on, but six interesting ships have turned back; six may not be a precise figure.
Khrushchev told Lord Russell he thought it would be useful to have a top level meeting.
Also printed in Department of State Bulletin, November 12, 1962, page 740.
On October 25 President Kennedy responded to the Secretary-General reiterating United States statements made in the Security Council and assuring U Thant of his desire to reach a satisfactory solution of the crisis.
U Thant responded to Chairman Khrushchev the same day requesting that Soviet ships en route to Cuba avoid the interception area imposed by the United States quarantine in order to allow time for discussion of an agreement under the United Nations Charter.
In a letter to President Kennedy, also on October 25, U Thant appealed to him to issue instructions to United States ships in the Caribbean to ""do everything possible to avoid direct confrontation with Soviet ships in the next few days in order to minimize the risk of any untoward incident"" and expressed the hope that a settlement could be reached quickly.
A similar but briefer memorandum of a telephone conversation between Bundy and Ball at 8:05m. is in the Supplement.
Bundy-I am getting a little groggy, so many people have different views, but the current situation is this.
Bob thinks that it may well be important to intercept a tanker and to turn him back.
He is going to go down to Flag Plot and look hard and find out what he knows and what anyone knows about where these things will be.
Therefore, the question is really what orders Admiral Innison has for dawn, that they require Presidential action and a meeting of the Committee tonight.
I think we have to leave the question of further discussion in suspense until McNamara has reviewed it and come in and said.
If he comes in and says let's let it go until the meeting tomorrow morning, which we might as well have at 10 as at 8, because we miss dawn in either case.
My position is that since we are not singling out any special ships, then we ought to just take anything that comes on a completely nondiscriminatory basis, and not indulge any presumptions about what any particular kind of vessel mightBundy— I think that you will find that to do that requires a very distinct adjustment in the basic orders to the Navy.
They are not operating on the basis of enforcing a blockade in that sense.
They are enforcing a blockade with instructions from McNamara as to which ship to enforce it upon.
Ricker felt that that was the easiest operational kind of— Bundy-All I'm saying is is that means different orders from what they now have.
Ball-My own view, you may pick out certain ships as we were preparing to do, those ships are not now in the equation; therefore, the thing to do is to take anything that comes and I would feel happier if the first ship that came along was a Belgian or Moroccoan ship, so that we could establish the principle of what we are doing.
Ball-I will probably hear later tonight from Bob after he has been out there and had a look.
Bundy-I would think that when Bob has had a look at Flag Plot, he will call me and I will call you.
A copy of this letter, transmitted in telegram 1070 from Moscow, October 24, arrived in the Department of State at 9:24m.
Lot 66 D 304) Dear Mr President: I have received your letter of October 23/1/ have studied it, and am answering you.
Respectfully, N Khrushchev/2/ /2/Printed from a copy that indicates Khrushchev signed the original.
Khrushchev, he said, is sending us desperate signals to get us to help take him off the hook.
He is sending messages exactly as he did to Eisenhower directly after the U-2 affair.
The signals are the instructions to the Soviet ships to change their course; the message to Bertrand Russell;/1/ his obviously premeditated appearance last night at an American concert in Moscow and his subsequent visit with the American singer.
In view of these signals from Khrushchev, the worst mistake we can possibly make is to get tougher and to escalate.
The best way out is the resolution recommended by Cleveland as Tab C in his memorandum (the defanging resolution) 72/ However, Harriman disagrees with Cleveland's view that we should try to negotiate this resolution.
He thinks we should try to get Ireland to introduce the resolution tomorrow.
Incidentsstopping of ships, etc.— will begin the process of escalation, engage Soviet prestige and reduce the chances of a peaceful resolution.
If we act shrewdly and speedily, we can bail Khrushchev out and discredit the tough guys around him— the ones who sold him the Cuban adventure on the theory that Americans were too liberal to fight.
October 24, 1962"" /2/Presumably a reference to Cleveland's October 24 memorandum to Rusk and Ball.
Ball-The letter from Khrushchev/1/ is garbled, and I am trying to fill it in.
It simply says that the OAS has no authority in these matters; that one has to bide by international law; we are committing an act of piracy; if you were in his place you would take the same view.
I don't think we have any option but to go ahead and test this thing out, in the morning, but at least this is the notice he has given to us.
Pres. -Do you want to call up Bob McNamara because we have got the tanker we talked about stopping.
Ball— I'll talk to Bob about it and I will also get hold of Dean and maybe we had better get back to you.
U Thant has just gotten through speaking, and I am waiting for a call from Stevenson.
Stevenson is kicking like a steer about reply tonight, but I think we have to reply tonight.
Ball— He is concerned primarily about the conditions which we put in that proposed reply because he feels that those are in effect conditions to talking rather than the kind of conditions that might emerge out of talk.
My own feeling is that we have got to be quite specific about them, otherwise we will get ourselves in a hopeless harass, and I don't think we can afford to do it at this point.
Ball-I think he would like to suggest some concessions we are prepared to make.
If it is agreeable to you, I am going to take a very firm line that we have to get this thing back to U Thant tonight even though it isn't published because I think we ought to be very prompt in getting some reply back before the Soviet Union comes in with an acceptance of the U Thant proposal.
I may not be able to hold the line with him and he may insist on talking with you.
Pres. -I think the impression tonight seems to be that the Russians are giving way, which is not quite accurate.
I think that, after you talk to McNamara and the Sec, they ought to have either State and Defense put out the indication that Russian ships are approaching.
In the meantime, I will get hold of Bob and Dean, and we may have to get back to you.
Pres.— To be sure that the Russians./l/ Of course we didn't present them with a way out.
I don't know whether U Thant has presented them with a way out, whether they are interested in a way out.
I suppose there may be a slim chance they may be, we ought to give out a message in a way that gives them enough of an out to stop their shipments without looking like they completely crawled down.
A memorandum of this telephone conversation, which also deals with stopping a tanker, is ibid.
Pres. -In other words just say that we suggest the Russians suspend their shipping, until we have a chance to meet with them.
Just say otherwise, they have got, we can't withdraw shipping, we can't stop.
Ball-This is what the letter said, that you said last night,/2/ because what you said last night was that you hoped that he would not challenge, direct his captains not to challenge the blockade, and that we were talking about these letters in the Security Council.
We can take it late in the afternoon, the question would be if there is any message we would send to U Thant to give them a way out.
Let me just read you what we sent him last night, what you sent him last night.
I don't think there is anything we can say to him that will cause him to change.
Ball-I just have been talking to Stevenson and the trouble with the U Thant proposal is that there is no inspection or verification in it at all.
Stevenson said that he thinks that if we were to accept the principle of some preliminary conversation, in the course of the conversation we could insist upon some kind of verification about when you have to point into the UN; I would not have too much confidence in him or boarding parties in the UN getting on ships and that would give us protection while we were trying to work something out.
BallWhat we could say is that if you will hold up your ships during the 2 or 3 days, we would have some preliminary talks in the UN to see to if there is some solution.
Pres. -I think rather than direct a message to him, we should get ourselves back to U Thant and say that he can request the Soviet Union to hold up their shipping for the next, for the immediate area, that we would be glad to get into conversations about how the situation could be adjusted.
Union, it appears that a confrontation is about to take place, Pres. -And to hold their ships, while we meet with him tomorrow afternoon.
In that case, we could pick up this tanker tomorrow afternoon, instead of tomorrow morning.
The Pres. had the idea that maybe we ought to do with U Thant tonight instead of trying to get a message back to K because there isn't much we can say that we didn't say in that message he sent last night.
Try to get U Thant to make a direct appeal to Mr K to hold off his ships on the ground that there is going to be a confrontation in the morning which could escalate until there is a chance for a discussion on the modalities of negotiation.
The Pres. is very reluctant to face this thing particularly with a tanker involved tomorrow until we make one last try to see if the UN can get itself in between.
I talked to McNamara and what he said they had in mind with regard to the tanker was simply to hail it and ask it what it is carrying, where it was going, and if it answered satisfactory to let it go, not to board it.
If it goes on through, then we have lost the principle of the quarantine, having done that.
On the other hand, we could let this one go but then there will probably be a whole day without stopping a ship, and I am afraid this would be misinterpreted in Moscow, particularly in the light of this letter.
The President's idea, this was a kind of an idea we were developing together was possibly if we could get Thant tonight to make the appeal on the ground that there was going to be a likelihood of a confrontation and ask K to instruct his fellows to talk with ours and see if a negotiation could be gotten under way.
In the meantime, to hold his ships away from Cuba that something might be done.
Sec.-I don't think there is a chance in the world that K would get instructions to this tanker by 2 am.
Ball-In the meantime, we could hold off til, actually we could even change the thing for half a day as far as that goes.
Sec.-I think you might talk to Adlai about this and see if U Thant on his own responsibility will ask Mr K not to send his ships pending modalities.
There really isn't anything much that we can say that hasn't been said.
If we can now get Thant to do something rather than doing it ourselves.
We've had a message from K71/ in which he says in effect that he can't give instructions to his ships to abide by the blockade and that if we violate these rules, that will be our fault and they will be forced to take measures that they deem necessary and adequate to protect their rights, and they have what's necessary to do that.
Implications being knowing that there may be a submarine or two in the waters, that could be an attempt to torpedo one of our ships.
Would U Thant under all the circumstances knowing the possibility of a confrontation tomorrow be prepared to send a message to K along the lines that he is very concerned about possibility of a confrontation in connection with this quarantine, and that he asked K to hold his ships away from Cuban waters on the condition that we will not molest them while there is a discussion of the modalities of a possible negotiation.
Ball-If we could get something out like that tonight, I think we would hold off, because all we've got is a tanker coming through.
Stevenson-I think it would be a lot more helpful for me in trying to get U Thant to do this if I could have a copy of the message that we have from K Ball— I can give you.
Stevenson— Well, if you could put on the wire to me, so that I would have it first thing in the morning a substantial text of it.
Ball-I think it would have to be done tonight if we're going to do it because we've got a time dislocation and things are moving so swiftly.
I am afraid it will be almost impossible to do anything with him tonight.
Stevenson-I could talk to him on the phone and tell him what the burden of this thing is and that I'm going to be around in the morning with a suggestion that he send a message to K saying that he.
Stevenson— See, what he's already said is please hold off on everything.
BallWhat he can say is that he is disturbed about the possibility of a confrontation at sea under the quarantine before further action could be taken toward trying to get this into political channels and he would therefore like an agreement from K that he will hold his ships off on the condition, away from Cuban waters, we won't molest them while the discussion of modalities goes forward.
Stevenson-He says that all concerned should refrain from any actions which may aggravate the situation and bring with it the risk of war.
BallYes, but this is giving specific content to it in terms of what the real danger, an immediate confrontation, may be.
Stevenson— I think if he had some feeling that we were likely to present this thing in general subject or conditions, which he knows about, I think maybe he would send such a message.
Ball-This position, I don't want to misrepresent the President on it, but this position that I have from him is that we could hold off for a while while there is some discussions on the modalities of the thing if they will hold their ships away while we do that.
Ball-There is a ship which was going to be challenged at 2 o'clock tomorrow morning, which is just about 2-1/2 hours from now.
Ball— Yes, and we can continue to hold that one off until we can see if something like this would work.
Stevenson— Although it was not carryingBall-That is on the theory that we stop everything and challenge it and find out what's on board.
We don't want to let ships go through because this discredits our firmness of attention.
What I think, if we could get an agreement from the Russians to hold their ships off while we talk about this, the modalities.
Ball--Yes, I think it would be that long probably before we get something settled.
We won't take any action as long as their ships are held off, that way we avoid a confrontation until we can see if we can get the modalities with negotiation.
Ball-The situation with Stevenson is that he finally got Thant out of bed and Thant has agreed to send a message to K which he probably can't do tonight because of the communications but will do it first thing in the morning.
Ball-He says that first thing in the morning he will send the message to K saying that he, pending some consideration of his proposal, he would hope that K will keep his ships away and prevent a confrontation because he thinks there is a chance the Americans are prepared to discuss the modalities of a negotiation.
Ball-I raised this with Stevenson and in the first place this is not a public thing, this is a privateBundy-It will be public soon enough.
Ball-I asked Stevenson to try to get the thing from him in the morning and shoot it down to us as soon as he can.
I think I would have put it up in tougher terms, but that's the way it went.
Bundy-Yes, I think the main thing is that Adlai should know what he has sent in the morning.
Ball-I asked him to get it from Thant first thing and let us know, and he said he would and I hope Thant doesn't give too much of an impression of our willingness, but in any event it's just Thant giving an impression.
Bundy-Bundy reads reply to K BallThere is only one very minor point, but I think it might be a major one.
I think this language is more precise in the case than we can document to the Chairman.
It takes it out of that dialectical argument as to what's offensive and what isn't.
I don't know George; I have cleared it with everybody else; I think we had better leave it as it is.
Ball-The only thing that concerns me about the Stevenson thing is that he has probably given the impression to U Thant that we will go further than we will go.
Bundy-I don't know how to advise you on that other than to say that we probably will not go further than we will go.
BallIf it indicates a weakness in relation to K that will create another element of miscalculation.
Bundy-It would seem to me that you should say to Adlai that nothing in, from the point of view of us in Washington, any message to K should be inconsistent with that message.
Ball-I think I will get hold of Adlai first thing in the morning and let him go over and talk to Thant.
Bundy— If Adlai knows early in the morning that he must not sign the United States to anything that would make that letter impossible without checking back with us.
A note on the source text indicates it was relayed to McNamara, Lemnitzer, CIA, and Departments of the Treasury and Justice.
Please deliver to highest ranking Soviet official immediately available.
Concern that Soviet vessels may be under instructions to challenge quarantine and thus bring on a confrontation at sea between Soviet ships and Western hemisphere ships which could lead to escalation of violence.
Concern that such confrontation would destroy possibility of talks such as Secretary General has suggested as prelude to political settlement.
Hope that Khrushchev will hold his ships out of interception area for limited time in order to permit discussions of modalities of agreement.
Confidence, on basis that Soviet ships are not proceeding to Cuba, that United States will avoid direct confrontation with them during same period in order to minimize chances of untoward incidence.
While we are quite ready to begin conversations on modalities as suggested by SYG we should not give SYG impression nor encourage him to give Khrushchev impression that we can agree on any interim arrangement for uninspected moratorium or ""voluntary suspension"" without explicit provision for adequate UN observation to ensure against weapons being imported, work on sites continued, or offensive weapons being operational.
In other words White House feels it undesirable to give any impression to SYG that would be inconsistent with draft answer to SYG's proposal that was cleared by President and sent you Wednesday night.
I called special attention to the Belovodsk and reported on page II-5 and the searching of the Cubana airplane by Canadians as reported on page IV-2.
Decision was reached that Navy be instructed to board the next Soviet ship contacted which would be the Graznyy, a tanker, but which was carrying a deck load which might be missile field tanks.
Contact was to be made with the Graznyy as early as possible and that was estimated to be about 8:00 o'clock in the evening, Friday, October 26th.
McNamara recommended several recurring low-level surveillance strikes of multiple aircraft in an operation that would resemble an air strike.
It was the Secretary's opinion that since all of these were indicators of some indecision on the part of the Soviets, that we should pursue low-level surveillance in the interests of gathering intelligence, simulating air attack, demonstrating our intention to watch construction, familiarizing ourselves with camouflage and to determine whether the Soviets are building additional sites.
This recommendation was approved and 8 sorties were ordered immediately to cover the nine missile sites, the IL 28 site, the MIG 21 airfield, and the nuclear storage sites and the KOMAR missile ship sites.
It was decided this reconnaissance should not be announced but, if questioned, we should refer to the President's statement.
The President asked whether Soviet ships bound elsewhere than Cuba had changed course.
Bundy reviewed Khrushchev letter to the President of the 24th of October and the Kennedy reply 72/ McNamara raised the question of accelerating or raising the escalation of the actions we have so far taken, expressing concern over the plateau, indicating determination to meet our ultimate objective of taking out the missile sites.
The President requested Mr McCone to prepare a careful analysis of the present situation inside Cuba, and he asked for further consideration by USIA of the possibility of dropping propaganda leaflets.
The Secretary of Defense reported the current military situation, and on the President's direction instructions were issued for selective investigation and boarding of non-bloc ships, excluding tankers.
The Secretary reported that all armed forces in Cuba have been instructed to fire only in response to attack.
Many installations are so camouflaged as to be in a low state of readiness.
The Secretary recommended a program of low-level reconnaissance for the purpose of improving intelligence, camouflaging the possibility of a later low-level attack, and emphasizing our concern with offensive installations already in Cuba.
The President approved an immediate daylight mission of 8 low-level reconnaissance aircraft to cover missile sites, airfields holding IL28's and MIG's, KOMAR naval vessels, coastal installations, nuclear storage sites, and selected SAM sites.
The President directed that the tanker Bucharest not be intercepted for the present.
Her status as a tanker with no contraband cargo made it desirable to allow her to proceed.
He directed further that the Defense Department be prepared to make an intercept of an appropriate bloc ship on Friday in daylight.
There was preliminary discussion of alternative courses of action in the immediate future, and the President asked the other members of the Committee to make appropriate arrangements for preparing alternative courses of action for discussion with him at a later meeting.
The President approved the recommendation of the Secretary of Defense that missile fuel be added to the list of contraband goods under the Proclamation of Interdiction.
I saw U Thant this morning and conveyed to him suggestions contained in Deptel 1084 71/ He said he would transmit suggestions to Khrushchev in form of confidential message.
Thant told me Zorin asked him at 7:30 last night what Thant appeal in Council was going to say.
Thant replied that it was based on his appeal to Khrushchev and Kennedy.
After Thant explained to Zorin nature of his appeal, Zorin replied that it was very bad proposal, since blockade was wholly illegal and that Thant should be concerned with legality and should not equate lifting quarantine with stopping ships going to Cuba.
Thant replied he was not concerned with legality, but with averting a crisis.
Thant told me that Afro-Asians were putting great pressure on Zorin to accept, but that on basis of Zorin's preliminary reaction Thant expects negative reply.
If both sides accept his suspension proposal this afternoon, he thinks SC should recess pending discussion on modalities.
Director McCone gave an intelligence briefing which contained no major new information.
He listed fifteen ships en route to Cuba, among them the Graznyy, which is one of three oil tankers with deck tanks probably containing ammonia.
Mr McCone noted that a Bloc ship would be entering the Panama Canal on November 2.
It would be searched, as have Bloc ships transiting the Canal during the past seven years.
Mr McCone said he had no information of any unusual developments in Europe.
Secretary Dillon noted that there had been a run on gold in Germany and to a lesser extent in London.
His conclusion was that these gold purchases reflected the fear of the buyers.
Secretary McNamara said that the East German passenger ship Voelker Fruendschaft was at the Cuban barrier.
Secretary McNamara reported that the Lebanese ship which was to have been boarded had turned back before crossing the barrier.
Late information on the Graznyy revealed that it was lying dead in the water.
He said the question was whether we can get Soviet strategic missiles out of Cuba or at least under UN control.
He added that if there was any prospect of success in following a political track, we would have to keep heavy pressure on the Russians.
We must know what is going on at the IRBM sites in Cuba and we need to know whether warheads have actually been delivered to Cuba.
Shortly we must decide if the Soviet signals which they are sending us means they are getting ready to talk or whether they are getting ready to attack us.
Referring to possible UN action, Secretary Rusk said we would probably be able to get only a seven-to-two vote in the Security Council,/2/ but even so, action in the UN General Assembly was a possibility.
He thought that many Latin American States would support this zone, along with many other UN members, and the Soviets would have a difficult time opposing it.
The purpose of these talks is to arrive at a solution of the crisis or, if no solution is possible, to provide a basis for later action, having been unable to negotiate a settlement.
He said that these talks could not go on for two weeks, but must be limited to a very few days because the IRBM sites in Cuba are becoming operational and the IL-28 bombers will soon be able to fly.
Secretary McNamara said all of his actions were taken with a view to applying force gradually.
The ten air reconnaissance missions flown today went well and he recommended that ten more missions be flown tomorrow.
Other military actions being taken would be meaningful to the Russians but would still not force escalation.
Secretary McNamara described night reconnaissance flights which involve dropping flares-[<5 lines of source text not declassified] The Soviet missiles now have an eight-hour countdown.
Low-level reconnaissance could give us intelligence as to whether the Soviet missiles are being placed in position to reduce the length of the countdown.
Secretary Dillon noted that the urgency of the situation was considerably reduced if the Russians do not try to break the quarantine.
If the U Thant proposals were rejected, we could go to the General Assembly where as many as eighty States might support a Latin American denuclearization proposal.
Secretary McNamara said there were many ways of increasing pressure on the Russians by military measures,e. quarantine, inspection at sea, surveillance, the addition of jet fuel to the list of products embargoes, and the holding of all petroleum tankers.
He said we might decide that it was better to knock out the missiles by air attack than to stop a Soviet ship on the high seas.
Secretary Rusk suggested that we might buy the charter and cargo of tramp steamers going to Cuba.
We could pay either the captain or the owner of the ship whatever he asks to defect with his ship.
Such action would step up pressure on the Cubans without further use of military force.
Director McCone agreed that such action would be effective because it would greatly reduce imports into Cuba and also take away from the Cubans their outgoing cargoes.
Secretary McNamara suggested that we might consider harassing all ships heading for Cuba by requiring that they go into United States ports for inspection, which could take up to several weeks.
Secretary McNamara commented that the dropping of flares on the IRBM sites at night would be highly effective.
General Taylor thought that the psychological effect of night reconnaissance would be entirely favorable as well as serving to keep up the pressure and providing more information about the readiness status of the strategic missiles.
Secretary Rusk said that he would seek to define our future political moves later in the evening.
Secretary Dillon stated his support of the idea of a Latin American denuclearized zone.
The Attorney General repeated his question as to whether we really wanted to stop a Soviet ship.
He said he believed the Soviets had turned their ships around because they did not want us to see what was on them.
The tankers, however, continue to move toward Cuba because they have nothing but petroleum.
He said he felt that the measures we take should indicate clearly that we mean business but we should avoid a direct confrontation now.
Secretary McNamara said we should decide tonight to take meas-ures tonight which would put us in a position of being ready to board Bloc ships approaching the barrier.
We could let Soviet tankers through the quarantine and announce later we were putting an embargo on aviation gasoline.
If we were going to board the East German ship we would have to decide tonight.
Both General Taylor and Secretary Dillon pointed out that we could not permit Soviet technicians to go through the quarantine even though technicians are not on the embargo list.
Secretary McNamara recommended that the East German ship not be stopped because it might be necessary for us to shoot at it or to ram it.
The current situation is that the ship has been hailed and a United States destroyer is following it.
If in so doing we injure passengers and then discover there are no strategic missiles aboard, we would be in a very difficult situation.
In addition, our world position would appear weak if we allow Soviet ships through the quarantine but stop an East German ship.
The Voelker Freundschaft will make a landfall tomorrow and a decision must be made by 2:00 AM this morning if we want to stop it outside Cuban territorial waters.
Secretary McNamara reviewed the situation with respect to the Voelker Freundschaft.
He said the East German ship had left Rostov on October 1 1 and Leningrad on October 14.
The destroyer Pierce is following the ship which is still outside the barrier.
Mr Bundy said the East German ship was not covered by U Thant's message.
General Taylor and Director McCone asked Mr McNamara The President said the only argument against stopping the ship is U Thant's request for no incidents for the time being.
Secretary McNamara repeated his earlier statement with respect to the difficulty of stopping a passenger ship.
He preferred to stop the Graznyy tomorrow if Khrushchev did not accept U Thant's proposed mediation effort.
The Attorney General said he wished to describe again the other side of the argument.
Surveillance measures could be taken to keep the pressure on the Russians and provide time for the political measures suggested by Secretary Rusk without appearing to be backing off from a confrontation.
He repeated his view that we may decide that it is better to avoid confronting the Russians by stopping one of their ships and to react by attacking the missiles already in Cuba.
Secretary Dillon said he preferred that the confrontation take place in Cuba rather than on the high seas.
Secretary McNamara reported that there had been no response yesterday or today to our low-level reconnaissance flights.
He recommended that we continue to fly daylight reconnaissance missions and add night reconnaissance not only to gain information, but also to convince the public that we are increasing the pressure on the Russians.
We will let the tanker through the barrier and later add jet fuel to the list of products embargoed.
The Attorney General said that fifteen ships have turned back, which is an impressive action taken by the Russians.
We must be careful that the Russians do not think that we are backing down.
Secretary Rusk called attention to the importance of the first case of our boarding a ship.
If the ship carried deck cargo or dry cargo, the case would be different than a passenger ship which is a bad first case.
Mr Rostow stated the argument for adding petroleum products to the blockade which he said would have a drastic effect on the Cuban economy.
The President again said we should let the East German passenger ship go through and we should seek to avoid any incident in order not to create a bad effect on U Thant's negotiations.
We could decide tomorrow afternoon what more we should do after we know Khrushchev's reply to U Thant.
He said we must act soon because work on the missile sites is still going on and we must back up very soon the firmness we have displayed up to now.
Ambassador Thompson pointed out that we must react very soon to Khrushchev's strong letter.
Secretary Rusk noted that Bloc shipping worldwide was behaving normally except for the ships in Cuban trade.
As the meeting concluded, Mr McCone reported that some of the strategic missiles deployed in Cuba are now operational.
The President had before him at the meeting a folder containing drafts of alternative next major moves (copy attached) 75/ /5/Not found attached.
Lot 65 D 438, Political Actions), ""Scenario for Airstrike Against Offensive Missile Bases and Bombers in Cuba,"" undated , and a paper on the Progressive Economic Blockage.
An earlier version of ""Possible Courses of Action,"" undated, includes a section on the blockade.
Bromley Smith/6/ /6/Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.
I sent you the text of what I said, and I think it was very well accepted.
I made all the points I could, especially the one you gave me about your statement of September 11, and the reception was good— and that was very well received.
We've got a second message from U Thant/1/ which you may be familiar with which says that . . . asks Khrushchev to keep the ships out of there and asks us to avoid a confrontation.
Now we are inclined to— we are sending back a message that if he keeps his ships out of there of course we will avoid a confrontation.
One tanker we stopped; we asked where it was going; it said it was coming from the Black Sea to Cuba and the cargo was oil.
It stopped in Leningrad on its way and it may have 6,000 tons of cargo on it, so we are going to have to stop that, we think.
One is that one of these ships— these selected ships-which Khrushchev continues to have come toward Cuba-on the other hand, we have U Thant— we don't want to sink a ship, and then right in the middle of one, U Thant is supposedly arranging for the Russians to stay out, so we are going to have to let some hours go by, but sooner or later, probably by tomorrow evening, we are going to have to accost one of these and board it.
Now we got a message last night from Mr Khrushchev/2/ which I'll make sure you get, if you haven't gotten it already, which says that this is piratical and their ships are going to go through and not submit to this, and if we do stop them they have the means of action against us.
I have just seen your message to U Thant./l/ It seems to me extremely ingenious and very calm, because you are saying that the-as you say, the real point is that they ought to get rid of these weapons.
And then Ambassador Stevenson will be discussing with U Thant the arrangements.
The second one said that he is asking Khrushchev to keep his ships out of there.
We are therefore going to accept that because it comes further in our direction than his first one, and tell him that if he can keep the ships out of there that's fine, then we won't have the incident.
On the other hand, we do point out in our response to him that some ships still are coming.
Now if these conversations begin we are going to point out— once we get this matter of the ships straightened out, because we still haven't had our first search yet, and that's going to be a very important event because we will then know what the Russians are going to do, but that will come tomorrow.
Now then, if we begin the conversation we are going to begin to point out that work is going on and that work must stop or otherwise we have got to extend this blockade, and consider other action to stop it.
I think the next thing for us to do is to figure out how we will handle this first search in view of the fact that the UN is involved in this now.
In other words, I don't want to have an incident-fight-with a Russian ship tomorrow morning and to search it at a time when it appears that U Thant has gotten the Russians to agree not to continue.
Then ... but if we satisfactorily get through that problem, then when these conversations begin we are going to then begin to emphasize that work on these sites is continuing and that unless it is discontinued we must tighten the blockade and possibly take other actions.
That would probably begin to be emphasized the minute the talks begin, but even if the talks don't begin, we are going to begin to say it on Saturday /3/ anyway.
As I say, the 14 ships that have turned back are obviously the ones that have the sensitive cargo that he doesn't want us to be able to produce.
Turkish PermRep here has consistently made it clear that Turks set great store in Jupiters placed in Turkey.
He makes very clear that Turkey regards these Jupiters as symbol of Alliance's determination to use atomic weapons against Russian attack on Turkey whether by large conventional or nuclear forces, although Turks have been most reluctant admit presence IRBM's publicly.
Fact that Jupiters are obsolescent and vulnerable does not apparently affect present Turkish thinking.
My impression is that symbolic importance represents a fixed GOT view, although of course Hare can comment much better than I on this point.
For above reason any arrangement of kind suggested reftel which would not have received prior complete support by GOT would, it seems to us, be most damaging.
I emphasize prior consultation, and I think it should be an arrangement freely arrived at by them.
My guess is that any arrangement that would not substitute some other considerable kind of atomic capability in Turkey for Jupiters would be rejected by them.
In this connection, would appear preferable, since Cuba is by definition outside NATO area, to offer close down some United States nuclear-capable base outside NATO area rather than making deal involving Turkey or Italy.
Such deal would then be strictly US-USSR trade rather than involving one of our NATO allies in any deal.
As all know, these weapons were put in Europe as result of heads of government decision in 1957 in response to boastful Soviet MRBM threat to Europe, and Alliance might very well conclude that United States was willing weaken nuclear defenses in Europe in order to remove threat in Western hemisphere.
However, cannot discount possibility that some members Alliance might be willing accept Cuba-Turk deal ""to avoid nuclear war"",e., Norwegians, Danes and maybe even British.
Re question of removal Jupiters accompanied by stationing of Polaris submarines in area, doubt whether mere deployment Polaris would be attractive to Turks since they really would have no say in use of Polaris in time of crisis and they turned down similar proposal in April 1961.
Nevertheless, one might argue Turks really have no say over Jupiter use now because of custodial arrangements, but they feel some assurance in having weapons on their territory and somewhat in their hands.
Turkish concern re Polaris substitution might be partially met by consulting them on targeting so as to assure that targets of interest to them are covered by Polaris.
Also could point out that three Polaris submarines in area would effectively more than double coverage presently afforded by obsolete Jupiters.
If such firm suggestion made this should be acceptable arrangement to Turks to compensate for loss of obsolete Jupiters.
Such offer would take form of converting a number of merchant-type vessels to MRBM force, utilizing Polaris A-2 missiles along general lines of United States studies and presentation to NAC by Smith on 22 October.
Although implementation of this type of force could be realized in short period of time, it would be necessary, as interim step before force comes into being, to station Polaris, as suggested reftel, in eastern Mediterranean.
Polaris deployment would then fill gap caused by removal of Jupiters, while Southern Command Multilateral Force was being put together.
At same time, rest of Alliance could be investigating possibility of setting up NATO-wide multilateral seaborne force.
Southern Command MLF might well serve as model for larger force and could be expanded as other allies indicated desirability to join arrangements this type.
To make this whole alternative palatable to Turks and others would require clear United States support to implement multilateral seaborne-type force, and if properly presented to Turks and Italians we could highlight flexibility and greater efficiency this type force over Jupiters.
Our impression here is that Italians more prone to dismantle Jupiters if proper substitute can be found.
Whether or not this would be acceptable to Soviets, the gesture could be made and might well look good in face of world opinion.
Whether or not they accept this type of trade, we believe that in any event strong consideration should be given to withdrawing Jupiters and creating pilot MLF since this would strengthen NATO nuclear capability in eastern Mediterranean.
Although Turks didn't agree to stop Jupiter program in 1961, even when faced with facts Jupiters obsolete, of no military value and good Soviet target, they might be willing now to accept substitute in MLF which more effective from all angles.
He explained in detail the ramifications of removal and how some of them might be met.
INTELLIGENCE NOTE Soviets Continue to Seek Abandonment of Quarantine While Missiles Stay Ships Turning.
Yesterday's pattern of Soviet ships turning off their Cuban courses has continued.
In doing so its reasons are probably the desire to identify the United States as the aggressor, and recognition that if an incident occurs, the USSR will be helpless at the site of the incident and will face the choice of escalation.
Soviet strategy at the moment still is designed to gain time and flexibility for political action, designed to get the quarantine stopped while the missiles stay in Cuba.
By the turn-around of its ships Moscow is, in effect, already complying with the U Thant proposal, although formally it may refuse to do so; it is thus seeking to exert pressure for at least tacit United States abandonment of the quarantine.
For the moment it seems intent on insisting that there can be no restriction on weapons in Cuba and that these weapons are designed solely to defend Cuba against aggression.
It is probably waiting to see how much momentum will develop for a trade involving United States strategic bases, and whether the United States is prepared to exert further force to achieve removal of missiles already in Cuba.
Until it obtains greater certainty on these points, it will probably keep its missiles in place.
The source text is attached to a memorandum from Rostow to Bundy, October 25.
The USSR's first objective in the present stage of the crisis is to retain the bases in Cuba.
Thus the immediate Soviet aim is to deter the United States from more drastic action.
Their diplomatic moves and conduct at sea to date suggest that they fear further United States action may be imminent and wish not to have their prestige further engaged if this should occur.
The primary Soviet tactic will be to draw the United States into negotiations, meanwhile getting a standstill.
The Soviets calculate that, if this can be done, they will have laid heavy inhibitions upon further United States unilateral action and that, with the passage of time, the existing bases will become part of the status quo.
They prefer, of course, that the lifting of the quarantine be made a precondition of negotiations, but they probably will not insist upon this.
They will probably propose or accept any of several forms of negotiation in addition to their own proposal for US-Soviet-Cuban talks.
At the present juncture the Soviets probably view a summit meeting as an appealing proposal to keep open the line of negotiation, especially if a stalemate in the UN approaches which might free the United States to take military action.
With a summit in prospect they would estimate the pressures for the United States to wait would be great.
A summit therefore would buy the Soviets some additional time, offer a forum to make a reasonable case, confuse the issues, and raise the political costs of further United States action.
At the same time, they would not want to be faced at the summit with an ultimatum or an unyielding United States position which if it resulted in further actions would redouble the humiliation to the USSR and Khrushchev personally.
On balance they probably feel that as long as the United States did not appear determined to take action the summit offers more advantages than drawbacks.
Although the Soviets would like to minimize the risks at the present juncture, they find it very difficult to acquiesce in the United States quarantine.
Their reported reaction to U Thant's appeal suggest that they could accept for some time a tacit agreement whereby they refrained from sending patently military cargoes into the quarantine area and the United States allowed other vessels through upon a verbal declaration of cargo.
It is unlikely that the Soviets will submit to boarding, since in doing so they would be accepting the quarantine.
So long as they wish to avoid incidents, therefore, they will be extremely anxious to determine how the United States intends to enforce the quarantine.
The best circumstance would be to lead the United States into attacking a manifestly peaceful vessel.
The time will probably come when the USSR decides that it would be useful to increase tensions by stepping up the element of threat in their pronouncements.
Even in this circumstance, however, they are likely to continue avoiding any further commitment to Cuba so long as they remain uncertain about United States intentions.
With respect to the missiles already in Cuba it seems highly improbable that the USSR will agree to withdraw in the absence of major United States concessions elsewhere.
There is one circumstance, however, in which a break in this Soviet position might occur.
The USSR would regard a successful United States military action against the bases, or against Cuba as a whole, as a very great defeat, which might substantially stiffen Western determination to resist Soviet demands in other confrontations,g.
If, therefore, they believed that United States military action was all but imminent and unavoidable, they might make a last-minute offer to dismantle the bases in return for some Western concession which, while not offsetting their loss, offered some prospect of saving face.
It is difficult to conceive, however, how the Soviets could frame such moves or time them properly.
Thus in this circumstance they might decide to let the United States attack proceed and to recoup as much as possible thereafter through political exploitation and, perhaps, an off-setting injury to United States interests elsewhere.
Bundy-We have boarded the Lebanese/1/ and care/2/ wants to have it got out by Sylvester right away in order to restore our credibility before flag plot leaps.
No prohibited cargo was found and the ship was subsequently allowed to continue to Havana.
Second, we have got this very neat point of how to organize the process of Stevenson's instructions today.
Let's have them at the meeting in order that they were at the meeting and then we better work out-Bob McNamara and the Attorney General are all steamed up about getting a think tank going like the ones we had last week.
And I think they are right about that and they are going to want to borrow space in your Department to do it.
It seems to me that those two things-we will have to generate an instructions working party and maybe it's all one thing— maybe the instructions will lead to what the rest of the problems are.
Ball-I had McCloy in for breakfast this morning, with Cleveland, going over the instructions.
Ball-He is very, very clear in what the objectives have to be and he is very firm and tough.
Ball— I think it is very important that that point be made because what is happening right now is they haven't given him anything to do.
Bundy-Well then he certainly should say to them at each stage and you should emphasize and the President should and you should bring them both to the 10:00 o'clock.
I think the way to handle it is the President just takes it for granted that McCloy is in on all the talks, because he isn't in on anything at the moment.
Ball-Knowing my old friend I can tell you that this has got to be made explicit and the bipartisan way is the way to play it.
I will pass that to the Boss and I will have a word with you before the meeting if there is any difficulty about it.
The record of action of the meeting, prepared by McGeorge Bundy, is in the Supplement.
Mr McCone described the celebration which took place in Havana following the arrival of the tanker Bucharest which had been allowed to pass the quarantine line because it was carrying only oil, which is not now contraband.
He said non-Bloc ships could be used to carry military materials if they had been chartered on a bare boat basis by the Russians.
Mr McCone reported that he had stood down a CIA operation which involved sending into Cuba by submarine ten teams involving fifty people.
The President agreed and asked that the proposal to put ashore the ten teams be discussed by the Special Group today.
The President further suggested that the Mongoose operation be reconstituted, possibly as a subcommittee of the Executive Committee, and oriented toward post-Castro Cuban problems.
The President stressed the importance of tying together all existing groups engaged in covert activities in order to integrate our planning.
Director McCone raised the question of the location of the SS Oxford, a communications [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] ship which is now standing some ten miles off Cuba.
He expressed his concern that this very valuable ship might be destroyed by hostile action.
The President said this was an operational problem, the Navy should have the authority to control this ship, but it should take into account CIA's concern.
Mr Bundy reported that three subcommittees are at work-one on Berlin, chaired by Paul Nitze, one on forward planning, chaired by Walt Rostow, and one on worldwide communications problems, chaired by William Orrick, who is working closely with the Defense Communications Agency.
Mr Bundy called attention to the civil defense problem and obtained agreement that no crash program would be undertaken now, although preliminary measures are to be initiated.
He referred to the amount of sensitive information which has been leaking to the press and urged that information about future actions must be more carefully guarded.
The Defense Department was authorized to release information on the boarding of the Lebanese ship, the Marucla, the first dry cargo ship which had been loaded in a Soviet port.
In the event that comparisons were made between stopping the Lebanese ship and permitting an East German ship to go through the quarantine line, the point will be made that the East German ship carried only passengers.
Secretary McNamara read a list of Bloc ships and their locations and noted that there would be no intercepts at sea today.
The President suggested that if we decide to embargo bomber fuel, we should also mention the fact that we were embargoing fuel which was contributing to the operational capability of the strategic missiles.
Secretary McNamara pointed out that construction on the strategic missile sites in Cuba was continuing.
He asked that public announcement be made of our continuation of air surveillance.
He recommended that daylight reconnaissance measures be flown today and a night mission tonight, including the dropping of flares.
The President directed that we dramatize the fact that the missile buildup in Cuba is continuing.
He authorized daylight reconnaissance measures but decided to delay night flights.
He urged that USIA keep the pressure on the Cuban people and mentioned the dropping of leaflets over Cuba.
Acting Director Wilson requested that better aerial pictures be made available to USIA for distribution.
The President authorized the use of any reconnaissance pictures, including those used by Ambassador Stevenson in his UN speech.
United States Navy ships would stay close to all Cuban ports to ensure that there were no landings unknown to the UN inspectors and no cargoes anywhere which UN inspectors did not see.
Secretary Rusk pointed out that we must make clear to U Thant that the quarantine is related to the Soviet missiles rather than to Soviet military shipments to Cuba.
With respect to the proposed atomic-free zone in Latin America, Secretary Rusk said that Puerto Rico and the Canal Zone would be exempted, but that possibly we might have to accept a ban on the storage of nuclear weapons in the Canal Zone.
Conceivably, the proposal would hinder the transit by air of nuclear weapons in Latin America.
Secretary McNamara said the Joint Chiefs were very cool toward the proposal of a Latin American atomic-free zone, but, personally, he favored the idea if it was conditioned on the elimination of Soviet missiles in Cuba.
General Taylor said the Chiefs had no formal position on the proposal, but they were very sceptical as to its efficacy.
He felt that discussion of this proposal would divert attention from the Soviet missile program.
He was also concerned about its effect on the defense of Panama and on our submarine defense system.
He added that, if, as a result, a proposal was made for an atomic-free zone in Africa, the French would have real problems in connection with their weapons testing program.
Secretary Rusk said this last point could be met by telling the French they could use our nuclear weapons test sites if their African sites were put off bounds.
Mr Sorensen pointed out that if the OAS would support the atomic-free zone proposal, Cuba would be in violation and action could be taken to remove nuclear weapons from Cuba.
Secretary Rusk felt that it was better for us not to participate in such action as would be necessary if it were done by an organization,e. the OAS, to which we belong.
The President noted that the plan proposed by Brazil not only calls for an atomic-free zone in Latin America,/3/ but it also encompasses a guarantee of the territorial integrity on all Latin American States.
Secretary Rusk commented that we are committed not to invade Cuba, having signed the UN Charter and the Rio Treaty.
It was subsequently submitted to the First Committee as draft resolution A/C.l/L/312.
Secretary Rusk read a draft cable which he wished to send to the Brazilian Ambassador in Cuba outlining an approach to Castro,/4/ with a view to persuading him to break with the Russians.
In commenting on the draft cable, Mr Nitze called attention to the importance of getting Soviet missiles out urgently.
Mr McCone expressed his dislike of a situation involving continued control of Cuba by Castro.
Even if the Soviet missiles are removed, Castro, if he is left in control, will be in an excellent position to undertake the Communization of Latin America.
Secretary Rusk said the present position is that Cuba ties to the USSR are not negotiable.
Mr Bundy pointed out, and the President agreed, that our objective was to get the Soviet missiles out of Cuba.
Mr Nitze called attention to the importance of obtaining a guarantee that the nuclear missiles would be disassembled from their launchers.
Bases would be dismantled under United Nations supervision and Castro would pledge not to accept offensive weapons of any kind, ever, in return for United States pledge not to invade Cuba.
I said I didn't know but that perhaps this is something that could be talked about.
He gave me his home telephone number so I could call him tonight, if necessary.
Fomin claimed that Cuban delegate to UN during Security Council debate asked for such no-invasion assurances in return for dismantling but that he got no reply.
I told him I'd followed the UN debate very carefully but could not recall any such remarks on Cuban's part.
Fomin also said Russia had been forced ""to make some concessions"" to Communist China in order to convince them to stop the fighting against India.
But he recalled they hadn't helped the ChiComs with nuclear weapons or conventional weapons in the past, even tanks, and hinted it might be aid in the conventional field.
Drafted by Martin, cleared with U Alexis Johnson, and approved by Rusk.
We believe time has come for representative friendly country to discuss with Castro alone predicament in which Soviet actions have placed him.
We also believe Brazilian Ambassador in Havana is best person to do this and therefore wish you to see Hermes Lima as soon as possible to secure his agreement to instruction to their Ambassador along following lines.
This approach to Castro should be handled in such way as make absolutely clear to Castro it is solely Brazilian initiative.
Naturally we would hope matter could be handled by Brazilians with greatest discretion.
The countries of the Inter-American System have unanimously called for their removal and approved and are participating in the meas-ures being taken to eliminate this Soviet threat to all of them.
The Soviet Union is turning around its cargo ships in face of United States quarantine which the countries of hemisphere have authorized.
Not only is the Soviet Union failing to support Cuba on this matter, but numerous feelers have been put out by high Soviet officials to allied governments for exchanges of their position in Cuba for concessions by the NATO countries in other parts of the world.
Time is very short for Cuba and for Castro to decide whether to devote his great leadership abilities to the service of his Cuban peoples or to serving as a Soviet pawn in their desperately risky struggle for world domination by force and threat of force.
If Castro tries to rationalize the presence of these missiles as due to Cuban fear of a United States invasion, Ambassador Batian should reply that he is confident that the OAS would not accept an invasion of Cuba once the missiles were removed and that the United States would not risk upsetting hemispheric solidarity by invading a Cuba clearly committed to a peaceful course.
The meeting began with a discussion of the considerably-increased activity in the dispatch, and preparation for dispatch, of agent teams.
As a result of this discussion, it was agreed that all plans for dispatch should be suspended pending further examination; instructions were issued during the course of the meeting designed to recall the three teams already on the way.
It was agreed that the first order of business with regard to these teams is to examine in detail the requirements toward which they could contribute.
General Carroll, to examine what military requirements such agents could service; similarly, the State Department for political intelligence requirements; USIA for requirements peculiar to that Agency.
After this examination, it will then be decided what the best use of these agent assets actually should be.
Mr McCone and Mr Harvey said during the course of the discussion on agent teams, that the action taken had represented a unilateral decision by CIA and was not in response to specific military requirements.
CIA had felt that this was within its sphere of responsibility, and particularly with respect to the first three teams had considered that it was a continuation of previously-approved operations.
Mr McCone commented that internal security in Cuba is now far more stringent than it was two weeks ago, thereby making agent operations much more difficult; he felt, therefore, that agent activity on this scale will only be justified if the responsible departments specifically require it for intelligence purposes.
In this connection, General Taylor brought out that the Chiefs had approved the use of submarines for agent dispatch but had not been asked to review the operation in broader context.
The Chiefs had concluded, however, that no revolt should be stimulated unless and until the United States is ready to support it and that the military establishment does not wish to take over sabotage and similar operations at this time, although it should be prepared to do so if an invasion should be mounted.
Mr McCone agreed that it is possible that as the situation develops, CIA Cuban operations might move under military control, but that such action is not indicated at this time.
Mr Harvey made the point that the proposed agent dispatches would not use up all existing assets.
He said that in the event of invasion, a sizable number of Cubans could be trained quickly.
The Attorney General and General Lansdale emphasized that the Cubans are entirely prepared to make the necessary sacrifices if they are in support of an approved plan.
The Cubans do want, however, assurances that such activities are in fact approved at a high level.
Mr Bundy emphasized the importance of planning for the use of Cubans in political and civil activities during and after any military action.
He felt that there should be established within the government some sort of ""Office of Free Cuban Affairs,"" which probably should be placed within the Department of State.
The activities of this office would be distinct from General Lansdale's operations but would be closely related to them.
He pointed out that top priority should be given to selecting a man to head such an office.
Mr Bundy also said that he thought a subcommittee of the NSC Executive Committee should be established to deal with Mongoose affairs.
Mr McNamara thought that Mongoose in the short-term should be considered in the context of providing support for action designed to get rid of the missiles, and support for a possible invasion.
CIA should continue to develop the balloon propaganda facilities, although it was recognized that by the target date of 1 December this capability might no longer be needed because of other methods of delivery.
Establishment of USIA's new 50 KW transmitter in the Florida Keys should be expedited.
It was reiterated that General Lansdale is the focal point for all Mongoose activities, that he is charged with their overall management and that he should be kept informed of all significant plans and activities in connection with the project.
Thomas A Parrott/1/ /1/Printed from a copy that indicates Parrott signed the original.
Drafted by Cleveland and cleared in draft by Rusk, U Alexis Johnson, Chayes, Martin, McCloy, Stevenson, and Nitze.
At beginning of first meeting with SYG you should take occasion restate basic United States position that early removal nuclear missiles and other offensive weapons from Cuba is the essence of the matter.
We understand that the Secretary General is proposing first a discussion of some form of standstill or freeze (covering arms shipments to Cuba, the build up of offensive weapons in Cuba, and our quarantine action), to be followed by broader talks on peaceful settlement of the larger issue created by Soviet introduction of missiles and other offensive weapons into an island just off our shores.
While we are willing to handle matter in two stages, we would emphasize at the start that the build up must stop, and the weapons must be removed before too long and that these things must be done under inspection arrangements that insure against secrecy and cheating.
We would emphasize further that the OAS quarantine action will not be lifted until the threat which provoked it is removed.
Within this framework of policy, following is for your guidance in early discussions with SYG and Soviet delegates.
Security Council has adjourned sine die and all efforts will be focused for next two or three days on US-USSR discussions through or with Thant.
What SYG calls discussion of ""modalities"" is not an attempt to solve basic problem (which from our standpoint is removal of offensive weapons from Cuba) at one stroke, but must at least attempt to achieve a condition which would involve no more offensive arms being delivered to Cuba, no further build-up of missile sites or bomber facilities, and any existing Cuban nuclear strike capability being kept inoperable.
Achievement of such a standstill will require a substantial administrative effort by SYG with assistance of a number of countries, to put UN in position to guarantee that standstill would be effective while negotiations designed to remove threat to Western Hemisphere could be brought to a conclusion.
The problem of ""modalities"" divides naturally into two parts, UN control of shipments to Cuba and UN observation of Cuban compliance with suspension of further build-up with safeguards to ensure inoperability of any nuclear strike capacity.
The United States Fleet would remain approximately as deployed at the present time.
United States Naval Force would maintain surveillance to discover any attempt to off-load or trans-ship at locations other than designated UN ports.
Responsible United States Fleet Commander in the area would report any violation he might observe to Washington which would bring violation to attention of SYG or head of UN observation operation.
It would have to be understood by SYG from the outset that United States surveillance continues and latent force is in background.
On present basis, sea traffic to Cuba consists of one or two ships arriving per day.
A list of ""prohibited material"" presently included in Presidential Proclamation and supplementary orders under it will be provided for your guidance in discussing this point.
UN observers would be stationed in the main military and civilian airfields in Cuba.
Observers would be stationed in adequate numbers to ensure no further construction or improvements of MRBM or IRBM sites, and to ensure that any existing missiles are kept inoperable.
Inspectors to be provided under this procedure must be of such technical competence as to insure that they are able in fact to identify items of offensive military equipment, and to carry out control functions at airports and missile sites.
Not only must inspectors be physically placed to observe what is there, they must also have the authority to observe separation of components of the missile system to ensure that the missiles are inoperable.
While many of the personnel would in practice be performing administrative functions, several dozen well-trained technical people would be required and number of countries from which they could come is limited.
Dependable first-rate personnel for this operation will be essential, and United States should have a strong voice in their selection.
Advance preparation of technical teams would include examination of United States advice as to where to go and what to look for.
Quality and political reliability of inspectors would be key to any inspection system.
Likelihood that Soviets will permit real inspection their site is so remote that it would be unwise to concede on quality and reliability in return for paper agreement on access to site.
Violations or suspected violations of agreed arrangements observed by that UN observer team will be immediately notified to the SYG, and would be passed by him to the parties concerned.
The United States will, of course, retain the right to reactivate quarantine measures or take other necessary action if agreed arrangements are violated.
Legal and parliamentary status in the United Nations of arrangements agreed between the parties directly concerned can only be worked out when it is possible to see what kind of a UN operation would be involved.
Security Council action would probably be useful at least to place at SYG's disposal the resources he would require for any substantial UN operation.
During talks on standstill arrangements we do not think it would be useful to start process of bargaining on such wider issues, or on possible terms of final peaceful settlement.
The original Russian language text, which bears no classification, is ibid.
The source text is a translation done at the Embassy in Moscow, which received the letter at 4:43m.
The first section arrived in the Department of State at 6m. and the last at 9m.
Ill From your letter, I got the feeling that you have some understanding of the situation which has developed and a sense of responsibility.
Moreover, the preservation of world peace should be our joint concern, since if, under contemporary conditions, war should break out, it would be a war not only between the Soviet Union and the United States which have no contentions between them, but a worldwide cruel and destructive war.
The paper went on to note that Fomin asked several times if this message came from high sources and Scali replied that it came from very high places.
The Soviet Counselor then inquired if it would be possible to have United Nations inspectors also check United States bases in Florida and surrounding Caribbean countries.
Stevenson, McCloy, Yost and Plimpton met at 4:30 pm at Secretariat with SYG, Loutfi, Narasimhan and Rikhye.
We pointed out that the real essence of the problem was to get the missiles and the nuclear aircraft out of Cuba.
No further weapons or materiel should be introduced; There should be no further work on the sites; The missiles presently in Cuba should be inoperable; and The suspension of the quarantine.
As to shipping, if it were agreed that no bloc ships or bloc-chartered ships were to approach Cuba, the only remaining problem would be the inspection of other ships.
This inspection could take place at the ports of embarkation, on the assumption that the ship was not calling at a bloc port, or at the landing ports.
Rikhye pointed out that ships declare cargoes at landing ports, which should simplify inspection.
We stated that United States Fleet would continue to be deployed during interim period, not for purpose of interception but to ensure that there was no trans-shipment at sea or landing at uninspected ports.
It was agreed that the problem of inspection would be quite simple if bloc lived up to Khrushchev agreement to keep bloc shipping away from Cuba.
We next raised question of inspection of incoming aircraft at airfields.
It was pointed out that few aircraft come in from the bloc, and that the principal problem might relate to incoming cargo planes from other countries.
We pointed out that they were located at a strictly military field, which had previously been closed up.
As to sites, we said that construction was progressing rapidly through yesterday, and that heavy camouflaging of the sites was being attempted.
We pointed out this was vitally important and urgent problem, which required UN inspectors and constant reports by them.
SYG said he would send appeal to Castro tonight through Inchaustegui to suspend construction of the sites, and would also speak to Zorin about it.
As regards the ultimate dismantling of the sites, SYG said he would insist on a UN team to oversee compliance.
We stated that non-operability of existing missiles was a difficult problem which it was essential to deal with.
Problem related primarily to medium-range missiles since IRBM missile sites were not yet ready and would not be for some time.
We discussed possibility of separating the missiles from the launchers as a guarantee of non-operability.
If missiles close to launchers, only a few hours are required for firing, and we must have guarantee against surprise launching.
Rikhye said he was sure Soviets would not permit inspectors to look at such equipment.
He asked whether UN presence might not give assurance that there would be no attack.
Our aerial surveillance was also mentioned as a possible deterrent and a possible Soviet and Cuban guarantee of no attack.
We pointed out that problem of crucial importance since the Soviet nuclear striking capacity was estimated to be increased 20 per cent by Cuban installations.
SYG again raised question of solving whole problem through assurance by United States that it would not attack Cuba and would prevent others from doing so, with resulting dismantling of all Soviet installations, and reiterated that this should be a starting point.
He suggested the possibility of the President's writing him a letter to the effect that the United States willing to make such a guarantee, if offensive weapons withdrawn, which he would use in negotiations.
We pointed out that the OAS would have to be consulted in any such connection, which the SYG said he understood.
We also referred to problem of what LA states considered Cuban indirect aggression against them.
As regards UN inspection teams in Cuba, SYG said it would be much easier to get Cuba to agree if there were some reciprocity for face-saving purposes, such as UN inspection of Cuban refugee camps to prove no military training, and to ascertain that no evidence of preparations for any invasion of Cuba.
With reference to the constitution of the UN inspection teams, we pointed out that they must include sophisticated experts who understand enough of missiles to know what to look for.
We pointed out that United States ought to be able to designate or nominate people for the team.
SYG said it would be difficult to include nationals of United States and USSR, and that he was sure that teams would have to be composed of neutrals.
It was pointed out that many neutral countries now know quite a bit about missiles as a result of Geneva conferences.
It was agreed that the United States could brief the teams ahead of time to show them what to look for.
Rikhye said that he would be glad to get together with a United States expert on missile matters to discuss the inspection problem as related to missiles.
As regards publication of SYG's recent letters to and from President and to and from Khrushchev, SYG asked Zorin as to publication.
Until agreement to publish was received from Soviet, SYG said publication of such letters should be withheld.
SYG much less concerned with blockade than at earlier meeting with Yost and Plimpton,/l/ and seemed much more aware of site construction and missile operability problems and need for inspection.
He clearly putting principal emphasis in his mind on possibility of United States guarantee to Cuba as short-circuit solution of whole problem.
Since Stevenson was still in Washington, Yost and Plimpton had represented the United States side.
Well, Governor Stevenson saw U Thant this afternoon/1/ and made our proposals about the importation of arms ceasing, and that work on these bases stopping and leading to eventual dismemberment.
There are some reports around, some Russian conversations, but it's rather unofficial and unreliable, about some thought that it's possible they might do something about withdrawing the weapons if they could get a territorial guarantee of Cuba.
But that is so unofficial that I'm not in a position now to know whether there's anything to it or not.
Khrushchev told U Thant that he would keep his ships out of there for the time being, but he wouldn't do it very long.
He isn't giving us very much because actually he's got no ships in the area anyway.
But at least he's made that announcement; he's keeping his ships out of there for the time being.
And I put a statement out this afternoon describing how the build-up is going on, so that unless in the next 48 hours we get some political suggestions as to dismantling the base we're then going to be faced with a problem of what to do about this build-up.
Well as I see it-one idea you just mentioned is that Cuba might be made like Belgium was-an international guarantee of inviolable country which all of us would guarantee its neutrality and inviolability independently.
Well, that is a matter that it seems to me we ought to be thinking about and we will be talking about that in the next 24 hours— as to whether there is any room for a settlement on that basis.
It would leave the Russians perhaps free to ship in a good deal more of defensive equipment and they have shipped in a good deal.
We now find a good many self-propelled armored vehicles, with very sophisticated conventional equipment, and so on.
But it may be a possibility, but I could probably give you more information about that by tomorrow night.
But at least there have been a couple of hints but not enough to go on yet.
Well, another possibility was that U Thant might himself propose to the United Nations, which I believe they would accept, that he should go with the team and insure that these missiles were made inoperable during the period of any conference or discussion.
There would have to be some technical way of determining that these weapons were being made inoperable and that work on the sites was ceasing during these conversations.
I am quite sure that U Thant would have done such a thing, He might suggest to the UN that he would go . . . with a team of experts which would supervise the matter during the talks.
Also they want to inspect some of the refugee camps in Florida and Nicaragua, Guatemala and Swan Island.
I don't think we've got anything going there that would be difficult to inspect.
But this is all part of the political proposals which are now being looked at in view of the Governor's conversation.
So I would sum it up, Prime Minister, by saying that by tomorrow morning or noon we should be in a position of knowing whether there is some political proposal that we could agree to, and whether the Russians are interested in it or not.
In the meanwhile the quarantine stays; he doesn't send ships in; we let a ship pass this afternoon, but there are no other ships within 48 hours or so, so we don't expect any problems on the sea.
The problem that concerns us is the continued build-up, and I issued a statement on that today.
I think I could probably get you a little more precise information on the various political proposals than U Thant's conversation with Stevenson.
I'll send you a report on that tonight and then you will have it in the morning.
If we want to save face, would it be worthwhile our undertaking to keep open eyes on all exiles which are here in England during the same period, during the conference.
Let me put that into the machinery and then I will be in touch with you on that.
President: Good, Prime Minister, let me send that over to the Department.
I think we don't want to have too many dismantlings, but it's possible that that proposal might help.
They might also insist on Turkey and Italy, but I will keep in mind your suggestion here so that if it gets into that that may be advantageous.
I will let Stevenson know that and he will have that in mind in the conversation.
You will send your message tomorrow and we will continue this tomorrow.
I haven't seen the entire conversation, but I think that there may-and the prospect of a trade of these missiles and some guarantees of Cuba is still so vague that I am not really in a position to say that there is any possibility as yet.
Well, we're not going to have any problem at sea because he is keeping his ships out of there, and as I say we let one ship pass today for the very reason that you've named.
On the other hand, if in the end of 48 hours we are getting no place and the missile sites continue to be constructed, then we are going to be faced with some hard decisions.
President: That's correct, and that is really why we have not done more than we have done up until now.
But of course on the other hand if the missile sites continue and get constructed and we don't do anything about it, then I would suppose that it would have quite an effect on Berlin anyway.
I will send you a message concerning them and you will send me U Thant's conversation.
Yes, I'll send you a memorandum based on the copy of the conversation that Stevenson had with U Thant.
I will also keep in touch with you tomorrow at this time if you-or otherwise I'll send you a message tomorrow.
I won't bother to call you tomorrow, because I may be down-I may be away from here tomorrow evening, and I assume you may be too.
But I will send you a message if there is anything new, and in any case I will talk to you on the phone before we do anything of a drastic nature.
Prime Minister, I'm going to send you a note tonight or tomorrow morning about asking if it's agreeable with you if General Norstad stay on until January 1st, that there be an overlap with Lemnitzer's tour of duty; that Lemnitzer go over there and take over the American forces and be there and have that 60-day period to be sort of adjusted to his new responsibilities.
You'll be getting a formal letter, and I didn't want to say anything about it because we haven't been in touch with General de Gaulle as yet, who is very sensitive in these NATO matters.
Well, I'll be in touch in a formal way with you tomorrow on that matter and I'll send you tonight the memorandum on the U Thant conversation-and I hope all goes well.
Thank you very much President: Good, fine, Prime Minister, and I'll be in touch with you very shortly.
SUBJECT Report Number Three of the Planning Subcommittee/ 1/ /l /Reports number one and two are included in the Supplement.
The Planning Subcommittee considered the situation as of Friday morning, October 26, 1962.
To maintain diplomatic and public focus on the continued exist-ence and expansion of offensive installations in Cuba; To increase the degree of our pressure and to build anxiety in all quarters that more decisive action will be required of the United States to eliminate the offensive installations; and To maintain a diplomatic track which holds open the possibility of a peaceful resolution on terms consistent with the President's speech.
Operational and political track involving progressively increased pressure building up to an airstrike against missile installations.
Assessment and recommendations concerning possibilities and dangers in Cuban political situation.
Regular daily reassessment of Soviet intentions and appropriate posture for United States Assessment of Free World political position vis-a-vis the crisis, with recommendations for United States action.
The planning tasks listed in Report Number Two are either going forward or will be consolidated into the tasks listed above.
The source text is attached to an undated memorandum of transmittal to the President and to an October 26 memorandum from Rostow to Rusk, which states that it was prepared in response to a ""direct request"" from Bundy on October 24.
The optimum setting for US-Soviet negotiations, particularly at the Summit, would be one in which Soviet offensive weapons had already been removed from Cuba.
Soviet acceptance of some proposal involving cessation of Soviet site construction and perhaps of Soviet shipping to Cuba; or ascending United States economic and military pressures on Cuba.
The actual situation may include both some diplomatic progress and some increased United States pressure.
To pave the way, if the negotiations fail, for expanded United States economic or military action to remove the weapons.
To use the crisis to reach agreement on other measures that would, in any case, be in our interest.
It is essential to avoid any implication that we are trading off pre-crisis allied or United States interests to secure removal of Soviet offensive weapons from Cuba.
The best way to attain the purposes in para 2 may be through a Summit meeting.
At this level, it may be easier to widen the scope of the negotiations in such a way as to resolve the crisis without an obvious and humiliating Soviet backdown.
Other levels and forums are also available, however, the situation may well develop so as to make these alternatives more feasible and useful.
Assuming that negotiations take place before the Cuban issue is settled, we should make clear that, if negotiations do not succeed, we will take early action to remove Soviet offensive weapons.
We should seek an immediate allied decision in principle to set up the small pilot NATO Southern Command multilateral seaborne force proposed by Ambassador Finletter in Polto 506/1/ and we should make clear our intent to provide interim coverage with Polaris and other external forces.
We should then urge the Turkish and Italian governments to get quietly on the NAC record what we would take to be their intent, in any event, in this circumstance,e., to phase out IRBM's in view of both the prospect of a Southern Command force and the interim Polaris and other United States coverage.
We should make crystal clear, in negotiations, the sharp division between Cuba and other subjects on which we would wish to negotiate regardless of whether there was a Cuban crisis.
In negotiations about Cuba, we should demand early agreement on removal of Soviet offensive weapons, possibly in the context of a Latin American ""nuclear free"" zone, in return for the end of the quarantine.
Safeguards against miscalculations,g., exchange of United States and Soviet military observation teams, direct communication facilities between United States and Soviet national command centers, etc.
Review of key differences of approach in the Geneva Disarmament and Test Ban negotiations, to determine whether any useful new directive can be given to the United States and Soviet negotiators.
We would make clear that the troop issue was non-negotiable, but that we were prepared to reach a ""Solution C"" type agreement, which did not purport to be a final Berlin settlement but which put the matter on ice and allowed East Germans to substitute for the Soviets in access functions.
This could be dressed up in various ways— UN observer, no nuclear arms in Berlin, etc. -for face-saving purposes.
If the Soviets were interested, this matter could be pursued further at the minister level with other interested parties.
We might suggest to the Soviets that feasible aspects of the German question— mixed commissions to increase inter-German contacts, and declarations regarding non-use of force to change the demarcation line and change the external frontiers -might be pursued further at the foreign minister level with other interested parties.
It might be agreed that the heads of the UK and French governments would be invited to meet in a future quadripartite Summit, to review any work done at the foreign minister level in the meantime on Berlin and Germany and to consider new topics,g., NATO and Warsaw Pact non-aggression declarations, which might be more appropriately handled in a more relaxed atmosphere than the present crisis.
Speed is of the essence, since passage of time may make less credible our resolve soon to take action to remove Soviet offensive weapons if negotiations fail.
If we asked her to stop and she did, we would inspect the cargo for contraband and release her if, as expected, she had no prohibited material aboard.
If she refuses to stop, we would stop her by force and sink her if the cargo included prohibited material.
Secretary McNamara recommended, and the President approved, two daylight reconnaissance missions, one in the morning and one in the afternoon.
Under Secretary Ball reported that the Turks would be very difficult about withdrawal of their strategic missiles, but the Italians would be easier to persuade if we chose to withdraw Jupiters from Italy.
Mr Bundy read a draft press statement and Mr Gilpatric read a statement which he had prepared.
Mr Sorensen introduced a draft statement which was read by the group 76/ /6/Not found.
It was not possible to say with certainty whether the Soviet public offer included all NATO basses or referred specifically to Turkey.
The Attorney General expressed his concern as to what our position would be if we talked to the Russians for sixty days and then the Cubans refused to permit UN inspectors to continue to ensure that missiles in Cuba were inoperable.
Message From Chairman Khrushchev to President Kennedy Moscow, October 27, 1962.
A note on the source text indicates a copy was sent to Acting SecretaryGeneral U Thant.
Problems of Communism reports that this message was broadcast over Moscow radio at 5m., the same time the Russian text was delivered to the Embassy.
Respectfully yours, N Khrushchev/2/ Printed from a copy that indicates Khrushchev signed the original.
This study will be provided by the Department of Defense in conjunction with the DOD Comptroller's office.
Mr Schaetzel stressed the dilemma involved in trying to keep the Allies sufficiently informed to carry them with us while at the same time guarding the security of our deliberations and decisions.
He pointed out that it would be highly desirable for the Allies to be kept abreast of the developing situation through official United States channels rather than through the press.
Proposals were made to have Mr Thompson and Mr Nitze give regular briefings to the quadripartite Ambassadors; to have a cable based on these briefings sent to Mr Finletter for briefing the NAC a few hours later; and to have the Finletter cable used by Defense for briefing the Standing Group and Military Committee.
Mr Schaetzel will have a paper on Monday setting forth this proposal in detail.
General Twitchell was asked to put in a paper at the same time on the possibility of supplying screened operational information.
Mr Schaetzel will also look into the question of making similar periodic reports to other nations through our embassies.
Base Trade-Off The subject was discussed and while no firm and formal judgments were reached the sense of the group was that the door should be closed as quickly as possible on the idea of trading the United States position in Turkey for the Soviet position in Cuba.
In connection with the nervousness of the Turks on this score, it was proposed that a special envoy, possibly Mr Livingston Merchant, should be sent to Ankara to consult with the Turkish government and keep them informed of developments in this area.
Khrushchev Letter Mr Nitze summarized the contents of the letter sent by Khrushchev last night/2/ to the President and also referred to a subsequent TASS release which linked the Cuban missiles with those in Turkey 73/ Mr Nitze read a draft of a proposed reply/4/ and there was a brief discussion with particular emphasis on its final paragraph which referred to the security of nations outside the Western Hemisphere.
The sense of the group regarding the need to keep Turkish bases from being linked in any way with the Cuban situation was conveyed to Mr Nitze.
Administrative There will be no meeting on Sunday, October 28, except at the call of the chair.
Stevenson, McCloy, Yost and Plimpton had conference with SYG alone at 11:45 this morning.
We showed SYG Khrushchev's message of last night to the President,/1/ pointing out that it contained no reference to Turkey.
We also pointed out it in effect conceded existence in Cuba of complete nuclear missile capability.
SYG had just seen Reuter despatch regarding Khrushchev's public statement regarding Turkey.
We pointed out that effect of Khrushchev's Turkey proposal was that, as the result of his own clandestine nuclear intrusion into the Western Hemisphere, he gets a guarantee of Cuban integrity and the removal of the Turkey base, whereas all we get is removal of intrusion which he should not have made anyway.
We also pointed out that the Turkey base is not for the defense of Turkey but for the defense of Europe and is part of the whole NATO defensive structure.
We pointed out that these were informal observations and that we had no positive instructions from Washington.
We said the Turkish base might be a proper subject for discussion covering various aspects of the overall disarmament and European situations after the status quo had been restored, and that such restoration requires removal of weapons from Cuba.
Since all NATO partners involved in Turkey base any negotiations as to its removal would require a great deal of time whereas removal of nuclear weapons from Cuba was an immediate essential.
We said it seemed highly probable that the Cuban issue could be very promptly settled on the basis of Khrushchev's first letter, namely, on basis of immediate withdrawal of nuclear weapons as against United States guarantee as to territorial integrity and political independence of Cuba, and we urged SYG to press for such immediate solution and for confining all discussions to Cuba and the exclusion of the Turkish base problem.
SYG said he would keep these points in mind, but that he did not wish to make any remarks on substance of the matter.
He said he hoped the President's reply to Khrushchev would be cooperative and conciliatory in tone, as the SYG does not want the American image tarnished by any public impression that Khrushchev is reasonable and the United States not, and that the reply would evidence willingness to negotiate.
SYG mentioned the great concern all over world as to seriousness of situation.
SYG said he had urged both Castro and Zorin to have work on sites stopped immediately.
Zorin had turned request aside asking how anyone could rely on United States intelligence.
SYG also said that as to inspection of ship cargoes arriving in Cuba, Zorin had said this question should be addressed to Cuban authorities.
While we believe SYG would prefer to confine discussions to Cuba, we have little confidence he will take firm position with Sovs on this point since he shows every evidence of wanting to avoid being caught in middle.
Secretary McNamara reported on today's daylight reconnaissance mission.
There followed a discussion of a draft letter from the President to Khrushchev./l/ The President added to the draft an offer to discuss with the Russians the proposals they had made public/2/ He predicted that Khrushchev would say we had rejected his proposal.
The President asked whether we should call together the represent-atives of NATO to report to them what we had done and were planning to do.
Secretary Rusk then read a Stevenson draft of a letter to Khrushchev 74/ /4/Not found.
Unless the missiles are defused immediately, the Chiefs recommended implementation on Monday/5/ of OP Plan 312,e. a major air strike, and, seven days later, OP Plan 316, which is the invasion plan.
The President directed that our air reconnaissance missions be flown tomorrow without fighter escort.
The President considered a draft message to the Turks about their missile.
The minimum NATO response to Soviet attack on Turkey would be to use United States forces in Turkey to attack, by sea and by air, the Soviet Black Sea fleet.
Regarding the drafting of this message, see Robert F Kennedy, Thirteen Days, 102, and Theodore C Sorensen, Kennedy, 714.
The effect of such a settlement on easing world tensions would enable us to work toward a more general arrangement regarding ""other armaments"", as proposed in your second letter which you made public/2/ 1 would like to say again that the United States is very much interested in reducing tensions and halting the arms race; and if your letter signifies that you are prepared to discuss a detente affecting NATO and the Warsaw Pact, we are quite prepared to consider with our allies any useful proposals.
For this reason I hope we can quickly agree along the lines outlined in this letter and in your letter of October 26. /s/ John F Kennedy"" Rusk 96.
At the request of Secretary Rusk, I telephoned Ambassador Dobrynin at approximately 7:15m. on Saturday, October 27th.
I said a letter had just been transmitted to the Soviet Embassy which stated in substance that the missile bases should be dismantled and all offensive weapons should be removed from Cuba./l/ In return, if Cuba and Castro and the Communists ended their subversive activities in other Central and Latin American countries, we would agree to keep peace in the Caribbean and not permit an invasion from American soil.
The call up of the air reserve squadrons is necessary to the invasion plan and will also serve to keep the pressure on the Russians.
He said mobilization of private United States shipping should be initiated tomorrow in order to have sufficient ships available for an invasion.
The President said that if our reconnaissance planes are fired on tomorrow, and if we know the results of U Thant's talks with the Russians, then we should take out the SAM sites in Cuba by air action.
With respect to the Soviet tanker Graznyy approaching the quarantine zone, the Attorney General recommended that we take no action against it.
The President agreed that if the tanker crosses the barrier, we should let it through, but thereafter no Bloc ships would be allowed to cross into the zone.
Secretary Rusk agreed, adding that the actions we had taken already had created sufficient pressure on the Russians for today.
The President said that tomorrow we could consider increasing the pressure by adding POL to the list of prohibited goods and by publicly announcing the mobilization of United States shipping.
The President read aloud the message from General Norstad concerning the tactics to be followed in a meeting of the North Atlantic Council./l/ The message included a list of questions to be answered and ended with a recommendation to reject Khrushchev's offer to trade European missiles for United States missiles in Turkey.
There followed consideration of a draft cable to Ambassador Finletter in Paris instructing him as to how the NATO meeting should be handled.
Secretary Rusk recommended that we not state our preferred position first but present the various alternatives to the NATO members and oblige them to state their preference.
We would make clear that we must stand unified with the NATO countries.
The President agreed that our posture should be that of consulting the NATO countries-not pushing for only one course of action.
The Attorney General recommended that we should not take our final position for a few more hours.
In the NATO meeting we would do no more than recite the facts and express our objective of trying to keep the situation limited to the Western Hemisphere.
We would report the following day to NATO and hold off one more day a decision on accepting the Turkish/Cuban missile trade offer of the Russians.
The President agreed to delete from the message the section on our preferred course of action.
The NATO meeting tomorrow is to be a briefing and a request for their views.
Ambassador Finletter is not to bring up the question of the possible withdrawal of the Jupiters from Turkey.
The President did not approve a draft message to Khrushchev dealing with the shooting down of a United States plane.
The President agreed that Ambassador Hare would not raise with the Turks the question of withdrawing the Jupiters, but that the State Department would inform Ambassador Hare, for his information, of what we are considering.
Personal letters to de Gaulle and Adenauer were given to the President for signature.
The President asked the group to meet the following morning at 1 1:00 o'clock.
If these planes were attacked, the attacking planes would be fired upon.
In response to your request, there follows an analysis, prepared jointly by ONE-OCI, of the two Soviet letters to the United States of 26 and 27 October.
The likeliest explanation of Soviet behavior in addressing two inconsistent letters to the President in such short succession is that, some time after dispatching the first, the Soviet leaders came to believe that the United States intended firm or even radical action against the Cuban bases at a fairly early date.
They evidently felt it imperative to send and publicize a second letter, containing a more specific proposal, but one still involving substantial Soviet concessions, in an effort to generate pressures which would head off this United States action or, if this failed, to make it as costly as possible in political terms.
The Soviets can, if they choose, repeat their Cuba-Turkey offer and complain that United States preconditions amount to an unacceptable ultimatum, but they probably now recognize that this may not deflect the United States from its insist-ence that the sites be immediately dismantled.
Or they can alter tactics radically, going over to a threatening line in their statements and buttressing this with a deliberate maritime incident in the Caribbean and moves to globalize the crisis,g., some action against Berlin.
Their tactics to date, however, and their apparent belief that the United States is determined on further actions, argue strongly against this latter course.
A third course would be to accept some of the conditions stated by the United States today and to continue the search for negotiations which would lay inhibitions on further United States unilateral moves.
Already, in return for a removal of weapons from Turkey, calculated to raise doubts in that country and in NATO as a whole concerning the United States commitment, the Soviets have now offered substantial concessions.
In the process, the Soviets have gone far to acknowledge the truth of the President's original charges.
As another result, they have made statements which must seriously undermine Castro's confidence in Soviet support, and even Soviet intentions.
Thus the next Soviet position may be less demanding than the Cuba-Turkey swap.
We think that they might limit their demands to a United States undertaking not to pursue Castro's overthrow.
In return, they might agree to cease work on those sites which are not yet operational and to discuss means of ""rendering the weapons inoperable,"" and to move toward some form of international inspection.
Editorial Note In March 1987 former Secretary of State Dean Rusk shed new light on the question of whether the United States would have been prepared ultimately to consider the removal of the Jupiter missiles in Turkey in return for a Soviet agreement to withdraw the missiles in Cuba and defuse the crisis.
Rusk's letter was read to the conference of former officials and scholars of the crisis by McGeorge Bundy.
Bundy added that Cordier was asked to stand by with the contingency plan the night of October 27.
The proposal, he noted, intentionally bypassed the United States Mission at the United Nations.
The intention was to make it appear to be a United Nations proposal, rather than one that originated in Washington.
Drafted by Bundy and U Alexis Johnson, cleared by EUR and NEA, and approved by U Alexis Johnson.
You can report that message from Khrushchev to President received night October 26 (being repeated Finletter, Paris and London only), while full of polemics, seemed to offer real hope solution could be found within framework supervised withdrawal offensive weapons from Cuba in exchange for commitment by United States not invade Cuba.
Khrushchev's message to U Thant agreeing keep Soviet vessels temporarily outside quarantine area also seemed favorable sign.
These hopes have been diminished by subsequent public letter from Khrushchev to the President linking Cuban settlement to withdrawal of NATO Jupiters from Turkey, but we continue to press for solution in Cuban framework alone.
The situation as we see it is increasingly serious and time is growing shorter.
The United States remains determined to insure removal of offensive installations in Cuba.
We are combining reasonable diplomatic offers and military pressure in even balance to this end.
But construction on the missile sites continues and there is every indication that more of the missiles are becoming operationally ready.
Moreover, unarmed United States military aircraft which today were conducting publicly announced surveillance over Cuba were exposed to intensive ground fire and one of these aircraft is missing.
At the present rate of speed the first vessel will reach the quarantine area during daylight Sunday and an incident may occur.
You should say that while the United States holds to the position that this matter should be settled within framework of the Western Hemisphere, we have taken note of the Soviet public message to President of October 27th in which a connection is made between NATO defenses and Soviet action in Cuba.
In these circumstances the United States feels it essential to inform its allies and to consult with them on the general situation.
It is of the utmost importance that nothing in your discussion should hint of any readiness to meet Soviet Jupiter exchange proposal, but it is equally important that you should allow free expression of European views, whatever they may be.
In stimulating free response, you should strongly press the point that United States action in Cuba-if it becomes essential— will be directed at a potential threat to the total strategic balance endangering other NATO countries at least as much as the United States.
Began by saying this extremely important and sensitive diplomatic initiative being made under direct instructions of Secretary and requiring utmost secrecy, with perhaps vital bearing on peace.
Then gave him Portuguese translation eight numbered points, typed on plain paper.
Hermes felt that new suggestion was a perfectly natural supplement to what they had been doing and said he would undertake it.
I pointed out certain essential differences, notably effort to appeal personally to Fidel to divorce himself from Soviet control, referring to our previous talks with Dantas and to evidences some months back of friction between Fidel and Russians.
I emphasized that Khrushchev speech Saturday should be final proof to Fidel that Soviets interested only in using Cuba to pursue own security interests, while creating new dangers for Cuba.
According to a footnote in the Bulletin this message was broadcast over Moscow radio at 5m. and a copy delivered to the Embassy in Moscow at 5:10.
I have received your message of October 27./1/ 1 express my satisfaction and thank you for the sense of proportion you have displayed and for realization of the responsibility which now devolves on you for the preservation of the peace of the world.
If we do take practical steps and proclaim the dismantling and evacuation of the means in question from Cuba, in so doing we, at the same time, want the Cuban people to be certain that we are with them and are not absolving ourselves of responsibility for rendering assistance to the Cuban people.
A still more dangerous case occurred on 28 October, when one of your reconnasissance planes intruded over Soviet borders in the Chukotka Peninsula area in the north and flew over our territory.
An account of the meeting as dictated by Walter Elder, based on a debriefing of McCone, is reproduced ibid., 347.
I, Meetings 6-10) The full TASS text of the Khrushchev reply/1/ to the President offering to withdraw Soviet offensive weapons from Cuba under UN supervision had been read by all prior to the opening of the meeting.
Secretary Rusk began by making general comments to the effect that everyone present had helped to bring about the highly advantageous resolution of the Cuban missile crisis.
Mr Bundy interrupted to say that everyone knew who were hawks and who were doves, but that today was the doves' day.
Secretary McNamara said we would not have to face a decision on halting a Bloc ship today because the Soviet tanker Graznyy was lying dead in the water outside the quarantine zone and no other Bloc ships, if they continued toward Cuba, would be reaching the barrier.
Secretary McNamara and Secretary Rusk recommended, and the President agreed, that no air reconnaissance missions be flown today.
The President asked what we would substitute for our air surveillance of Cuba.
Secretary McNamara said this surveillance might be by the UN or a joint inspection of United States /UN inspectors in a neutral plane, flown by Brazilians or Canadians.
He said our objective should be to have reconnaissance carried out by the UN tomorrow.
Technically, this could be arranged, but we do not know whether the UN would undertake the task.
The President suggested that we tell the UN they must carry out reconnaissance or else we will.
The purpose of the release of this information on Soviet armaments in Cuba was to facilitate the inspection task which we expected the UN to promptly undertake.
The President called attention to the IL-28 bombers which he said we should ask the Russians to withdraw by making a private approach to Khrushchev.
The President agreed, but added that he did not want to get into a position where we would appear to be going back on our part of the deal.
Admittedly, we would face the problem of Soviet armaments in Cuba if the Russians continued to build up their defensive capability there.
At this time Dobrynin told the Attorney General that Khrushchev had agreed to dismantle and withdraw the missiles.
He directed that comments by everyone on the Soviet statement be reserved.
Our posture is to be one of welcoming the Soviet offer to take out the offensive weapons under UN inspection, but attention should be called to the many problems we would encounter in the implementation of Khrushchev's offer.
We should point out that we were under no illusion that the problem of Soviet weapons in Cuba is solved.
In addition, he said we should make clear that we can draw no general conclusions about how the Russians will act in the future in areas other than Cuba.
He made specific mention of the problem of Communist subversion in Latin America and asked that we refer to this problem either in our letter to Khrushchev or in U Thant's letter to Khrushchev.
He directed that Ambassador Stevenson be asked to talk to UN officials about this aspect of the Cuban problem.
Drafted by Thompson and Ball, cleared by McGeorge Bundy, and approved by Rusk.
Am seriously disturbed at apparent lack of interest on part Secretariat in great importance of aerial photographic surveillance in carrying out task in Cuba.
While we have made available to the Secretariat fullest information on characteristics and locations of weapons as of forty-eight hours or more ago, this by no means is necessarily a complete inventory of offensive weapons in Cuba or their locations as of the time UN begins its operations.
While aerial photography does not guarantee one hundred percent knowledge of situation nevertheless it is vastly superior, more thorough, more efficient and economical than Nineteenth Century approach based entirely on observation on the ground confined to previously established weapon sites.
This is particularly true where weapons concerned are of mobile field type not requiring elaborate fixed bases.
Thus we consider it essential that every effort be made to impress on Secretariat importance of aerial photography as an essential supplement to ground observation in carrying out its task of verification.
As you know, we stand prepared immediately assist UN in any way agreeable to it and have made substantial preparations that would permit UN begin this mission tomorrow including possibility of flying UN marked planes carrying UN observer.
If even with this assistance UN unwilling or unable undertake mission tomorrow, we must assert position that we have preserved our freedom of action and will undertake mission ourselves, recognizing however that this politically less desirable than UN mission and physically more dangerous.
Only in this manner can we carry out obligation to forestall any chance trickery endangering our national security.
Of course results such mission would be made available to UN to assist it in its task.
If UN does not intend undertake aerial reconnaissance United States may find it necessary in its own protection continue reconnaissance.
Department of State, Secretary's Memoranda of Conversation: Lot 65 D 330.
A memorandum of a similar conversation with Alphand earlier in the afternoon is in the Supplement.
SUBJECT Cuba PARTICIPANTS The Secretary Sir David Ormsby Gore, British Ambassador Mr William R Tyler, Assistant Secretary for European Affairs The British Ambassador told the Secretary how gratified HMG was by the present course of events.
His Government thought that it was important to consider what might be done next, and in what forum.
The Secretary said he first wished to make it very clear that there had been no ""cozy deals"" in connection with the change in the Soviet position.
The only thing that Khrushchev was getting for his present attitude was that the United States would not intervene militarily in Cuba so long as the offensive weapons were removed under conditions of proper inspection and verification.
He added that we were not going to guarantee the Castro Government, and that the Rio Pact still holds.
The British Ambassador said he thought that there might be some value in making the United States guarantee dependent on Khrushchev's behavior with regard to Berlin; perhaps Khrushchev could be brought to giving some assurances in this respect.
The Secretary agreed that if developments continued on their present course, this would require a major consideration of a lot of problems.
The British Ambassador said that Khrushchev would doubtless try to salvage his position by assuming the posture of ""a man of peace"" who was leading the world in the direction of solutions of problems of disarmament and nuclear testing, etc.
The Secretary agreed and said it was important not to ""crow"" about the strengthened Western position.
The Secretary said that the prompt and full support of the British Government, as well as that of our other NATO Allies,/2/ have been a powerful factor in strengthening our position and in bringing home to Khrushchev the danger and the price of continuing on the course he had taken.
However, we were not out of the woods yet, and it was not excluded that we would have to face unpleasant surprises tomorrow.
Ill A report on the North Atlantic Council discussion of the Cuban situation on October 28, is in Polto circular 12, October 28.
The British Ambassador said he agreed, but that he felt that the chances were all in favor of the West emerging from the present crisis in a greatly strengthened position, and that it was important and urgent to consider how this could be turned to even greater advantage.
At mtg with U Thant this evening Stevenson received SYG's message to President in regard to his negots with Castro and delivered President's reply ./l/ Stevenson pointed out reference to attitude other American states toward assurances against invasion of Cuba was based on our understanding their position and should not be understood as committing other govts whose attitude would presumably be relected in early OAS mtg.
SYG said it would be extremely helpful to him in working out desired arrangements with Castro if Pres could publicly suspend quarantine on Oct 30.
He pointed out that he is constantly being belabored by Sovs and Cubans with claim they have complied with his appeal of Oct 25 and that United States has not.
He felt that United States naval units could be left at present stations but would simply not exercise right of search during SYG's two-day visit to Havana.
On other hand if his report was favorable and satisfactory verification arrangements established, suspension would become definitive.
It was also suggested that, without any public announcement, United States reconnaissance flights over Cuba might be suspended during his visit there.
It was pointed out that any incident caused by such flights during his visit would be extremely embarrassing to him.
In reply to our insistence that verification arrangements must be approved and in place before blockade suspended, SYG said that he simply did not believe there was any likelihood that Sovs would launch missiles on United States during next two or three days.
He felt it would obviously be suicidal for them and for Cubans if this were done.
He expressed grave concern at call-up yesterday of Air Force Reserves and, without explicitly saying so, left impression he thought some of United States actions have been excessive.
In reply we explained in considerable detail very grave and important character of threat with which we had been confronted.
Stevenson mentioned possibility of Castro as useful gesture of good will restoring body of U-2 pilot.
Stevenson also suggested SYG might, if opportunity occurred, sound out Castro on ceasing his subversive activities in other countries.
Stevenson emphasized however that this should not be connected in any way with present situation, which it would undoubtedly complicate but might simply be broached as an important matter to be dealt with in future.
Narasimhan expressed view that Castro would almost certainly raise question of United States subversion in Cuba and this would give SYG opportunity to respond in manner Stevenson suggested.
Stevenson urged again that all of these matters be firmly excluded from present negot since their introduction into it might cause serious delay and complication.
Director McCone summarized current intelligence, including evidence that all Cuban military forces have been ordered not to fire at United States planes unless fired upon.
The President read and approved the announcement of the creation of a Coordinating Committee which will handle all matters involved in the conclusion of the Cuban crisis. /l/ /1/Not printed.
The President agreed that we could wait today, but that we did face the longer range problem of how we continue surveillance of Cuba, recognizing that we cannot rely on the UN to undertake adequate surveillance.
Under Secretary of the Air Force Charyk reported on a conversation last night with UN officials.
He said he had offered them RC-130 planes, which they were prepared to use, but they did not want these planes flown by United States crews.
Mr Charyk said the Canadians, South Africans and Indonesians have crews which could fly these planes.
Mr Charyk said the UN official, Mr Rikhye, who would be organizing the UN aerial reconnaissance, acknowledged that the UN could not make arrangements to fly reconnaissance missions today, but the UN observers could be on the ground in Cuba by Wednesday morning.
The UN official said the UN did not want United States reconnaissance planes overflying Cuba during the Secretary General's visit there on Tuesday and Wednesday 72/ /2/October 30 and 31.
Pictures taken would reveal suspicious locations to which ground observers could be promptly dispatched.
Mr Charyk said there had been no discussion yesterday of United States reconnaissance flights today, but UN officials had asked for our voluntary suspension of the blockade on Tuesday and Wednesday, leaving, however, the United States ships on station.
UN inspectors would be in all ports and would report to us on incoming and outgoing cargo.
We would make available film to the UN reconnaissance missions if they would provide us with copies of the exposed films.
Secretary McNamara recommended that we send reconnaissance missions this afternoon after notice is given to the Cubans and to Kuznetsov.
He recommended that United States ships remain on station, challenge all ships entering the quarantine zone, and let such ships through because their cargo would be inspected by the UN observers in Cuban ports.
Secretary Rusk emphasized that we must maintain the quarantine until arrangements for UN inspection of offensive weapons in Cuba are completed.
He agreed that the United States ships should stay on station, but that we should leave ambiguous for the next twenty-four hours whether or not we will maintain the quarantine.
He said we should not say that the quarantine was off pending installation of a UN inspection system.
Secretary McNamara urged that the new Coordinating Committee work immediately on the question of Communist covert aggression in Latin America which would be based in Cuba.
The President said he had talked to Ambassador Stevenson yesterday /3/ whose view was that the phrase ""peace in the Caribbean"" covers subversion.
The President said Ambassador Stevenson had discussed this question with U Thant and would try to get back into the formulation of the settlement some specific reference to subversion.
General Taylor urged that we be prepared to fly six to eight low-level missions today, but no high-level missions.
He recommended that we announce in advance we were conducting low-level reconnaissance pending satisfactory and effective UN reconnaissance arrangements.
He turned again to the question of what we would do on the surveillance problem for the long run.
Secretary Rusk noted that Khrushchev expressed his wish that reconnaissance cease, but he had not made it a condition to withdrawal of offensive weapons.
The President decided that no public announcement of the aerial reconnaissance would be made, but that if we decided to fly these missions, we will notify the Cubans and Kuznetsov immediately prior to the overflights.
General Taylor restated the requirement for the reconnaissance missions if we are to know whether the Soviets are actually dismantling the missile sites or whether they are continuing to work on the missile complexes.
Secretary McNamara noted that U Thant believes that the UN observers arriving in Cuba on Wednesday will see no missiles.
The President, saying that we would need aerial pictures on Wednesday, asked the group to consider how this should be done.
Aerial missions today are not crucial, but this week we must have aerial pictures of the missile sites.
Secretary McNamara expressed his doubt that we can get the UN to fly reconnaissance missions.
The Planning Subcommittee reviewed the situation as of Monday morning, October 29, 1962.
It was agreed that the Soviet adventure in Cuba in part reflected a high degree of anxiety concerning the nuclear balance.
The most likely assumption is that, having failed in the Cuban ploy, they will consider other methods for retrieving or appearing to retrieve their position in the nuclear arms race; for example, a radically accelerated ICBM program, the positioning of weapons in space, etc.
This task was assigned to DOD in consultation with other appropriate parts of the Government.
The group chaired by Mr Harvey will continue to explore these implications and propose courses of United States action.
The situation inside Cuba, in the wake of the Russian defection, may open to us possibilities of change in the character of the Cuban government or its policy which, evidently, should be fully explored.
It was judged possible that there are certain lessons to be drawn from the recent confrontation over Cuba for our Berlin contingency planning.
Mr Rowen and Mr Kitchen will seek to formulate these in consultation with Mr Nitze and his committee.
Although it is probable that the Soviet Union will be extremely sensitive to any further pressures we may mount against the Communist position in the wake of this crisis, it was judged appropriate to consider what political and other measures may be considered to induce or force the Soviet Union to honor its pledge given at Geneva that infiltration into South Viet Nam via Laos would end after the Laos settlement.
With confidence strengthened in the credibility of the United States deterrent, it was judged time to make a major push in the Atlantic partnership.
There is an urgent need to improve the machinery of political consultation; to press on with various trade, currency and aid problems within the orbit of the OECD; and to look to a multilateral resolution of the nuclear problem at an earlier date than might have otherwise been envisaged.
In the wake of the crisis, it was judged essential that we seek to consolidate the new unity and confidence of the OAS; press forward vigorously with the Alliance for Progress; and exploit the crisis to weaken the Communists; to reduce the fear of Communists in Latin America; and to draw leftist and neutralist groups away from the Communists and towards the center.
It was noted that, in the face of United States strength, there was a danger that right wing groups might now assume that reform and development were less urgent than previously.
Two observations emerged on the subject of negotiation with the Soviet Union.
Historically, the instinctive reaction of the USSR to an international setback is to regroup, to consolidate, and to avoid, for a time, fresh initiatives.
If that is their reaction on the present occasion, they may use it merely as an occasion to hold to firm previous positions.
On the other hand, it is conceivable that Khrushchev himself may wish to move forward towards a detente on Berlin and to leave behind him some achievement in the field of arms control and disarmament.
There is as yet no basis for a judgment as to the course Moscow will, in fact, follow.
In the light of these alternatives, we should be prepared, should a summit take place, with an array of proposals, ranging from a mere reaffirmation of the status quo through limited to quite radical steps forward; and use the occasion of such negotiations as a means of assessing the policy and intention of the Soviet Union.
Courses of action designed to strengthen our position vis-a-vis these countries have to be designed on a case-by-case basis.
The crisis bears on future disarmament negotiations and meas-ures in two specific respects.
First, the Soviet performance in Cuba dram-atizes beyond any doubt the case for inspection.
In addition, we should explore ways of consolidating the de facto precedent of our unilateral inspection of Cuban bases and the OAS ruling that secrecy is inappropriate in this Hemisphere.
It was universally agreed that such a paper, if it were decided to issue one, should be factual with no elaborate effort to draw lessons for propaganda purposes.
The question of whether such a paper should be organized to provide a full record of what now can be made public, both for our own people and for the world, as well as the terms of reference for such a paper, were referred to Mr U Alexis Johnson and Mr Edward Martin.
SUBJECT Turkish Missiles and the Cuban Crisis PARTICIPANTS Ambassador Turgut Menemencioglu, Turkish Ambassador William R Tyler, Assistant Secretary, EUR Irwin M Tobin, Deputy Director, RPM GTIWilliam A Helseth The Turkish Ambassador, acting on the urgent instructions of his Government, called on Mr Tyler on October 29.
First, he said, he wished to extend the thanks and gratitude of his Government for President Kennedy's refusal of any ""deal"" with the Soviet Union regarding the missile bases in Turkey.
At this special session, the Turkish permanent representative would review the events which led up to the IRBM's being stationed in Turkey and would emphasize that the IRBM's were placed in Turkey not merely for Turkey's defense but for NATO defense.
The Turkish permanent representative would state that the Turkish Government regretted that, when dangers subsequently appeared, some seemed to regard Turkey as at fault.
Mr Tyler stated his appreciation for the advance information the Ambassador had given us and said he wished to repeat and to reinforce what the Ambassador had said regarding the circumstances that led to the placing of the missiles on Turkish soil.
These missiles were for the defense of the NATO area and that defense was indivisible.
The United States viewed our commitments in all areas of NATO as being equal.
Furthermore, he hoped that Ankara would not pay too much attention to our own press comment which had ranged far and wide.
Even we, he said, wondered at times whether a given article had been inspired, was a trial balloon or what.
Ambassador Menemencioglu interrupted to say that he recognized the freedom of our press but had noticed that it was disciplined when the facts were known and mentioned particularly that the line taken by the press today (October 29) was a very good one.
Mr Tyler said that the Secretary had recently talked with the press on a background basis.
Mr Tyler stated that the Cuban crisis was not yet settled and that we would know tonight if work on the bases had been stopped.
Mr Tyler stated that he wished to reassure the Ambassador again that there had been no ""deal"" regarding Turkey.
He remarked upon the audacity of Khrushchev in drawing a parallel between Turkey and Cuba.
Mr Tyler said that there was nothing in the arrangement with the Soviets which implied a guarantee of the Castro regime.
The Soviet position on inspection, as stated by Kuznetsov, is that the Russians are willing to have the International Red Cross officials inspect all cargoes going to Cuba to ensure that no arms at all are taken to Cuba.
The Russians would not permit on-site inspection until all Soviet missiles are removed.
Secretary Rusk said that if there was to be no inspection on the ground, air reconnaissance became crucial.
He said that U Thant had asked Stevenson how long we wanted the inspection to go on.
Permanent inspection would be difficult, but inspection limited to a period of weeks would be easier.
The President said he approved of the plan to have Red Cross officials inspect all ships from Bloc ports.
He also agreed to suspend the quarantine for two days during the visit of the Acting Secretary General to Havana.
Admiral Anderson wanted to stop this ship, but it had been decided not to stop it.
General Taylor commented that what we are asking the Russians to do is to dismantle their missiles immediately.
Mr Bundy added that our request did not include dismantling the SAM sites.
He agreed that surveillance should be done in the least provocative way, but we must continue to maintain surveillance until a satisfactory UN system is in place.
He agreed that no reconnaissance flights would be flown tomorrow or Wednesday.
Secretary McNamara said that if we were to have no on-site inspection in Cuba, we must have highand low-level reconnaissance.
The President asked whether it would be possible for us to obtain pictures of the outgoing Soviet ships.
Secretary Rusk commented that the political situation, as it had developed during the day, appeared to support the belief that Khrushchev's deal is still on, but if pictures from today's reconnaissance mission reveal that the nose cones are on the missiles in Cuba, then we will face a most difficult decision.
McCloy had called Rusk to report on the meeting described in this telegram.
Latter commenced by saying USSR had complied with SYG's appeals by suspending arms shipments and avoiding confrontation at sea but there had been no United States response.
Thant replied response is that United States will suspend blockade when verification established.
Thant had suggested to Zorin two days ago that Sov ships submit to verification.
Kuznetzov added his govt would prefer Red Cross personnel undertaking task should be from neutral nations.
Red Cross could board Sov vessels either from neutral ships or Sov ships at sea.
When SYG mentioned inspection at Cuban ports Kuznetzov replied he had no objection but this would depend on Cuba.
SYG expressed to United States personal doubts that Red Cross would undertake this duty, though UN had had offer from high Red Cross official several days ago to help in Cuban crisis.
If they did accept he supposed they would fly people from Geneva to some spot near Cuba where they would embark on neutral ships to accost Sov ships.
Obviously inspection in Cuban ports if Castro accepts would be far simpler.
SYG expressed view Sovs would not submit even to Red Cross inspection if they had any intention of shipping arms and that they would therefore be very unlikely to do so at least during immediate future.
As to sites and missiles, Kuznetzov mentioned reference in Khrushchev's second letter to SC involvement.
When dismantling has been completed Sovs will report to SC and propose UN team be sent to verify dismantling.
Kuznetzov did not estimate duration of dismantling but SYG got impression it would be no longer than week or two.
He is therefore thinking of SC mtg early next week after he has had opportunity for further round of consultations with US, USSR and Cuba following his return.
Stevenson made clear it is imperative that United States have assurance that dismantling is going on.
SYG expressed hope Sovs might be ready to send teams as early as next Monday.
He was not inclined to press Sovs too hard since he could not imagine they would set off rockets at United States during next few days.
Cubans had refused to state their views on verification until he arrives in Havana but it is clear that Sovs control missile sites, are presumably engaged in rapid dismantling and will not permit verification until dismantling completed.
Narasimhan pointed out this would probably be the case while weapons are actually being removed but that verification on the spot might well be permitted in second stage while launching pads and emplacements are being destroyed.
Stevenson made clear that our intense and urgent preoccupation is with weapons being rendered immediately inoperable and with this fact being verified.
He was worried at implications of word ""continuation"" and feared this meant United States expected UN to continue inspection of Cuba for indefinite period.
If this were the case he felt it certain that Castro would make counter-demand for inspection of what SYG called ""CIA training camps for exiles"" in United States and certain Caribbean countries.
We disabused him of idea that inspection for an indefinite period is contemplated.
Stevenson and McCloy again referred to necessity of inspection during immediate interim period.
If inspection on the spot cannot be obtained, aerial inspection becomes all the more important.
SYG said he saw no objection to aerial inspection during interim period if Cuban Govt agrees.
McCloy indicated that until UN aerial observation set up United States has to reserve right to maintain observation itself.
McCloy also indicated we could give no assurances concerning lifting of quarantine until verification established.
Discussion ensued whether quarantine linked only with imports of arms into Cuba or with elimination of offensive weapons from Cuba with UN side maintaining former and United States side latter.
It was eventually agreed that for immediate purpose of SYG's visit most desirable handling would be issuance by United States of simple statement to effect that at SYG's request quarantine being temporarily suspended for the duration of his visit.
He also mentioned that expression in Pres's letter to Khrushchev that he was confident other Western Hemisphere nations would also give assurances against invasion of Cuba was of course merely expression of United States conviction and not commitment on behalf other American Republics.
Drafted by Cleveland, cleared with the Department of Defense, approved by U Alexis Johnson.
We understand from telcons that Khrushchev has proposed that International Red Cross assume function of monitoring shipments into Cuba to make sure that no arms are coming in from Soviet Union to Cuba.
This inspection to be in port of entering if Cuba agrees or at sea if preferred.
If at sea, Red Cross personnel should board from neutral or Soviet ships, not American vessels.
Red Cross personnel should be citizens of neutral or non-aligned countries.
If possible, we would prefer that ICRC operate in some fashion as executive agent of the SYG, in manner analogous work of League of Red Cross Societies in refugee field.
Some continuing reconnaissance from the air seems essential, during period of dismantling and withdrawal of missiles and other major weapons.
This will be especially true if no on-site inspection of missile sites can be arranged until dismantling completed.
If possible, we would still prefer a technically competent reconnaissance done by UN itself.
Therefore important to pursue Canadian offer of pilots for RF-lOls, or other possibilities accomplishing same purpose.
One of United States planes on today's reconnaissance was fired on by Cubans.
Pending examination results of today's reconnaissance, no decision yet on whether to suspend United States aerial reconnaissance during period SYGs visit to Cuba.
It will be important to have assurance, including if possible photographs, of missiles being packed up and actually leaving on ships.
Perhaps as part of monitoring operation in ports, ICRC could likewise monitor export of major weapons.
Director McCone reported that incomplete interpretation of pictures from yesterday's reconnaissance mission did not reveal whether work on the missile sites had halted or whether dismantlement of the missiles had begun.
Secretary McNamara called attention to the reported activities of Alpha 66.
The President stated that insofar as we had any control over the actions of Alpha 66, we should try to keep them from doing something that might upset the deal with the Russians.
The President noted that anti-Castro groups did have a stake in continuing the struggle, and, therefore, might make an effort to cause difficulties during the period when it appeared we would be reaching some kind of a solution with the Russians.
The President authorized a public statement to the effect that it was too early to judge whether the missiles were being dismantled and construction at missile sites halted.
Secretary McNamara said he had directed that no U-2 planes fly anywhere until he was satisfied that a system had been developed to safeguard against navigational errors resulting in overflights of Soviet territory.
The President agreed that no air reconnaissance missions would be flown over Cuba today or tomorrow, but he directed that every effort be made to get UN surveillance under way as soon as possible.
Secretary McNamara said that there were ten or twelve issues connected with the Cuban crisis which were being reviewed and would be ready for Presidential consideration tomorrow.
Turning to the question of guidance for the press, the President directed that no one on the Executive Committee should personally see any reporter and that nobody in the group should say anything except Mr Bundy, Mr Salinger, and Mr Sorensen, who were authorized to talk to reporters.
The President said we were not dealing with a finished episode, and, therefore, information going to the press needed to reflect the solidity of the Committee.
Mr Salinger said that three sanitized versions of the crisis, all of them to be approved by the President, were being prepared by Defense, State, and White House press officers.
The President agreed not to issue the draft Executive Order covering ships engaged in the Cuba trade, but requested the State Department to explain to reporters that the reason for not issuing the order was because it was aimed at a situation which had been radically altered by the discovery of Soviet strategic missiles in Cuba.
Acting Director of USIA Wilson reported that Cuban exiles were seeking to buy time on United States radio stations.
It was expected that if they succeeded, they would make inflammatory statements about present United States policy toward Cuba.
The President authorized Mr Wilson to talk to the Chairman of the Federal Communications Commission about some way of blocking these broadcasts without appearing to be imposing censorship of the radio stations.
During courtesy call on Gromyko at 4:00m. today, he introduced subject of Cuba, saying that Soviet Government wished as quickly as possible to reach agreement pursuant to KennedyKhrushchev exchange of letters.
Agreement should ""codify"" obligations of both sides,e., United States obligations to refrain from attack on Cuba and to rescind blockade, ""which you call quarantine, but which we regard as inadmissible arbitrary act in peace-time""; Soviet obligation to remove weapons ""which President called offensive""; and Cuban obligations.
Soviet Government expects United States will take steps to bring negotiations quickly to satisfactory end.
Gromyko said he did not want to enter upon substantive discussion this matter now, just wanted to mention it in passing.
President regards exchange of letters with Khrushchev as constituting agreement on basic principles involved, on basis of which question was prompt execution of obligations.
So far as speed of negotiations was concerned, the faster the better, but talk should not delay action.
There will be a meeting without the President in the Conference Room of the Under Secretary of State at 6:00 m. this evening,/l/ at which time Mr Ball will lead discussion of some of the outstanding issues.
It will be helpful if members can find a little time to think about them beforehand.
At lunch with Kuznetsov today we discussed Cuba and he was very pleased that we would accept Red Cross inspection of the incoming ships.
He assured me emphatically that the weapons would be dismantled and removed and that we could count on it, and then have whatever verification at the end of the process we wanted.
He found it hard to believe that we would doubt their word in present circumstances, when I explained that surveillance during the interval to confirm compliance was necessary.
Then he asked if we could not fly our high-level reconnaissance planes along the coast outside Cuban territorial waters and get good enough pictures.
I said I doubted if that would be adequate, and suggested that reconnaissance planes could be transferred to the UN, painted and marked appropriately, and manned by neutrals if available, or even by combined Russian, Cuban and American crews.
He was noncommittal, but clearly worried about Cuban objections to over-flights, although they did not appear to bother him.
He did, however, say something about compromise of Russian prestige by this evidence of our skepticism.
As to time involved to complete dismantling and removal process, he said Khrushchev had told him before he left Moscow that it would probably take two or three weeks.
He seemed to be especially eager to discuss disarmament and other bases and to explore any other possibilities for talks on broader basis.
He plans to stay here as long as he can do anything, see people, and talk usefully about our mutual problems.
He asked why he and I should not discuss the whole range of problems and added that as peoples we get along very much better than on official level, and that just now relations were badly strained.
He feels our positions are now so close that we should be able to reach agreement.
In response to my suggestion that agreement on above-ground testing could now be reached quickly, he pressed me on why we insisted on underground inspection and why we seemed to want to make more underground tests when we had made far more tests than they, to our great advantage.
Moreover, he felt confident that our scientists could really detect and identify everything.
After the usual explanations that all underground tests could not be identified and that there were means to prevent any real danger of espionage, he was noncommittal and proposed a toast to disarmament and that we should talk some more.
Mtg was extremely cordial, and we also talked about previous mtgs and my writings on the Soviet Union with which he was familiar.
He discussed with great candor the agricultural problem and the slow development of the virgin lands project, where they are consolidating and mechanizing and not increasing acreage.
Arthur Dean is seeing him this afternoon with regard to the disarmament negotiation.
Riki reported that the first session which has terminated went very badly.
Castro says no intrusion or inspection whatsoever on Cuban soil by anybody.
They will do some work on him tonight and might break him down by tomorrow morning.
He asked that further reconnaissance by us be held off for another day so that it would not screw the thing up.
He thinks if they don't get results tomorrow and he runs in this stone wall he will come back and call a Security Council meeting Thursday to ask for further instructions.
The Cubans have refused Riki any access to inspect the sites and he has no clue as to what has transpired.
Kuznetsov seemed alarmed today/1/ about the attitude of the Cubans, but so far as the Russians are concerned, he was confident of progress, but we would have to take a look so far as the Cubans are concerned and we would have to run some high level overflights unless we get a breakthrough.
The Security Council thing will be awkward because the absence of an agreement of that kind would, of course, only increase the offense to the Cubans.
If this is the only way out we had better have a talk with Kuznetsov and see if we can reach some sort of secret agreement and then go ahead with the Security Council agreement and confer with the Soviets.
The Secretary suggested possibly the Cubans and Stevenson asked do we want to do that.
Stevenson is not clear in his mind who it would possibly be-perhaps Mexico.
The Secretary said he would report this to the group meeting now/2/ and see where we come out after the session ends.
Stevenson said they were having a Delegation meeting tomorrow and he will caution them on any statements.
Drafted by Sisco, cleared with Hilsman and Ball, and approved by Cleveland.
Before he left for Havana SYG requested information on results United States aerial surveillance October 29.
SYG should be informed results of October 29 surveillance inconclusive.
Moreover, since aerial observation not conducted October 28, pictures resulting from October 29 surveillance merely establish the initial base from which subsequent series of photographs must be made and evaluated.
Importance of making sure Soviets are complying with their own commitments will probably make urgent the resumption of air reconnaissance by Thursday, November 1.
The source text bears no classification or indication who made the translation.
PRESIDENT, I want to convey to you confidentially some considerations which, if you agree with them, could serve, in my opinion, our common cause, that is, prompt elimination of the remnants of the dangerous crisis which you and we have in the main liquidated.
This would help to finalize the settlement more quickly so that life would resume its normal pace.
First of all, I would like to express a wish that you already now remove the quarantine without waiting for the procedure for the inspection of ships on which an agreement has been reached to be put into effect.
You yourself realize that the quarantine will in fact accomplish nothing since those ships that are now heading for Cuba naturally, after we have agreed on the removal of our missiles from Cuba, do not carry not only any offensive weapons, but, as I have already stated it publicly and informed you confidentially, any weapons at all.
It would be appreciated both by us and world public opinion as a major step to speed up liquidation of the after effects of the crisis.
For all practical purposes the quarantine is of no use to you, but being a manifestation of the crisis, it continues to poison relations among states, relations between you and us and Cuba and produces a depressing effect on world public which would like to see a complete relaxation.
You would lose nothing but you would score a gain as far as public opinion is concerned.
On the other hand, immediate lift of the quarantine would give us an opportunity to use our ships that are approaching Cuba to take out the weapons which are being dismantled now and, I think, have been already dismantled.
After the ships are unloaded the dismantled weapons could be loaded on them and shipped to the Soviet Union.
Naturally, after the elimination of the crisis it is impossible to continue the blockade and discrimination in trade and communications.
But you, as we know, undertook measures and put pressure on your allies and other countries so that even flights of civilian passenger planes be not permitted.
All this is being done not to ensure security, but as pinpricks and cannot but cause irritation and worsening of our relations.
It serves only the aggressive forces to strain nerves and thus to reach their goal which is to push the world into the abyss of thermonuclear war.
Therefore I believe, that you, Mr President, will understand me correctly and will draw appropriate conclusions aimed at clearing the way for bettering the relations between our states.
I do not know what you will think about it but if you were prepared already now to proclaim the liquidation of your base in Guantanamo, this would be an act which would give world public opinion real satisfaction and would contribute to the easing of tension.
I think that you yourself realize what significance the base in Guantanamo may have now after your statement that you do not pursue the aim of invading Cuba.
And everybody realizes that the functions of the base in Guantanamo-and this is in fact the case-are aggressive, not defensive.
We are against military bases in general and that's why we liquidated those our bases that we had in Finland and China and we think that we acted rightly.
That was an act that manifested our good intentions in ensuring peaceful coexistence.
By that we did not diminish our defensive capability but raised our moral prestige among the peoples of all the world.
The more true it is now when there are perfect means of war the range and destructive power of which are so great that no bases could in any degree replace them.
This would be a good preparation to an agreement between you and us on the liquidation of all military bases in general since military bases have lost now their importance.
I think, you yourself said and even stated it publicly that you want to reduce the number of your military bases.
My colleagues and I consider that both sides have displayed restraint and wisdom in liquidating the military conflict which might have resulted in a world thermonuclear war.
I take the liberty to think that you evidently held to a restraining position with regard to those forces which suffered from militaristic itching.
I don't know, perhaps I am wrong, but in this letter I am making the conclusion on the basis that in your country the situation is such that the decisive word rests with the President and if he took an extreme stand there would be no one to restrain him and war would be unleashed.
But as this did not happen and we found a reasonable compromise having made mutual concessions to each other and on this basis eliminated the crisis which could explode in the catastrophe of a thermonuclear war, then, evidently, your role here was restraining.
Our systems are different and my role was simpler than yours because there were no people around me who wanted to unleash war.
My efforts aimed at eliminating the conflict were supported by both our military men and my colleagues in the leadership of the party and government.
Mr President, we have now conditions ripe for finalizing the agreement on signing a treaty on cessation of tests of thermonuclear weapons.
We fully agree with regard to three types of tests or, so to say, tests in three environments.
In this respect we are of the same opinion and we are ready to sign an agreement.
But there are still some differences with regard to underground explosions.
Therefore it would be good if you gave instructions to find a compromise in the decision on the underground test ban, but without inspection.
We shall not accept inspection, this I say to you unequivocally and frankly.
Of course, if one aims at delaying or torpedoing an agreement then there is sense in insisting on the inspection of underground explosions.
We do not carry on underground tests, we did it but once and we are not going to do it anymore.
Maybe such a necessity will arise sometime in future, but in any case I do not envisage it.
It would be very useful to agree on ending tests after such strain when people lived through great anxiety.
It would be a great reward for the nervous strain suffered by the peoples of all countries.
I think that your people felt as much anxiety as all other peoples expecting that thermonuclear war would break out any moment.
That is why it would be good to give satisfaction to the public opinion.
We appreciate it very much that you took the initiative and in such a moment of crisis stated your readiness to conduct negotiations with the purpose of signing a non-aggression treaty between the two military blocs.
We are prepared to come to an agreement on this question confidentially or through diplomatic channels and then make it public and start negotiations.
The world public would learn with satisfaction that in the moment of crisis not only declarative statements were made but certain commitments with signatures affixed were taken as well.
But the best thing to do would be— I do not know how you will look upon it—to disband all military blocs.
We are not coming up with this now though we spoke of this before; however we believe now too that this would be most reasonable.
But if you and your allies are not ready yet for that we are not pressing.
However I must say that in the interests of the same elimination of tension this would be greatly useful.
But in order to foresee and forestall appearance of a new crisis in future which might be impossible to cope with everything in our relations capable of generating a new crisis should be erased now.
It would seem that now when we possess thermonuclear weapons, rocket weapons, submarine fleet and other means the situation obliges all states, every state to adhere to such norms of conduct which would not generate conflicts, to say nothing of wars.
This would be a big step forward at a time when we in effect have not yet disarmed.
I think that this would be not a loss but a gain for the supporters of peaceful coexistence, a mutual benefit which the peoples of the United States and other countries participating in military blocs would enjoy.
It can also be said with confidence that this would be highly appreciated by all peoples and would give great reassurance and satisfaction to people interested in securing peace.
More efforts should be made already now to solve the problem of disarmament.
To do it with regard not to one stage but to a real solution of the whole problem.
In our proposals on general and complete disarmament which we have made we have taken into consideration your wishes as well.
In those proposals of ours adjustments were made to take into account your wishes.
And of course, Mr President, I am again reminding you of the necessity to solve the German question because next crisis, possibly of no lesser danger, can be caused by the German question.
And the main thing is that that crisis will be foolish as all crises are.
There was war, two German states emerged, or actually three states, which are in existence since the end of World War EL Specific relations among them have already developed.
But these relations-economic and political— exist because the German Democratic Republic regulates traffic through its territory on the basis of some substitutes for treaties though in reality, in daily life, in practice such treaties are already operative.
Besides, we and you, our Foreign Minister and your Secretary of State, have agreed on all questions.
And the only question which remains unsolved is that of the presence of troops in West Berlin and in effect not even of the troops but under what flag those troops will be and of what states, naturally within certain period of time.
This is not in our or your interests, and not in the interests of our or your allies.
This is only-and I repeat again— in the interests of revanchist forces who do not want to recognize the borders and conditions emerged as a result of the defeat of the Hitlerite Germany.
Who expresses such policy nowAdenauer or somebody else-that is of no particular importance to me or to you.
But if one takes a realistic view, if you, Mr President, analyze the situation then you in your heart will undoubtedly agree with me.
But that comes not from how you personally understand the situation but, so to say, from political expedience, from desire ""not to offend"" your ally.
However it would be better to be guided by a desire not to offend the public opinion and to give satisfaction to it, to give satisfaction to all peoples, the American people included-to eliminate the hotbed of international tension in the center of Europe.
If you and we come to an agreement on this question-and we do want it— this would be a great joy for all peoples because this would mean consolidation of peace.
There would remain many unsettled matters in the world but the main thing after that-and I would like to tell you about it-is the question of China.
It is anomalous that China is not having her seat in the United Nations Similar anomalies already existed in history and were overwhelmed by life.
When the Revolution broke out and won in America the Russian Emperor showed stubbornness and did not recognize America for 26 years.
But then the United States realized that it was unwise, and your great President Roosevelt took the courage and responsibility and displayed wisdom.
You would greatly raise your prestige, personal and that of your country, in the eyes of the peoples if you take an attitude facilitating China taking its lawful seat in the United Nations This is possible only if it is understood that there cannot be two Chinas.
No state which respects itself can agree to a part of its territory, a part of its population being cut off, it applies even more strongly to a great power.
This is an internal question of China and let the Chinese decide it among themselves.
When China participated in the creation of the United Nations and when it was made a permanent member of the Security Council, then it was one China.
If China occupies again its lawful seat in the U.N., if you understand the necessity of it-and I think that you do understand it-then it would be good, it would be a great contribution to the cause of peace.
There are countries with population of half a million and even less which are members of the United Nations and have voice in this international organization.
We have respect for the people of Iceland and their will as well as for all peoples.
But from the point of view of ensuring peace-even if there seems to be a contradiction here-the contribution of a given people and that of another people, the real contribution to the cause of ensuring peace may be different.
Therefore it would be proper to solve the question of the restoration of China's rights in the U.N.; the peoples are waiting for it.
Therefore in order not to prolong this time, if you understood now the necessity for such a step, then, it would in effect be possible to solve this problem at the present session of General Assembly.
What satisfaction it would give to the world public opinion, you would see from the expression of feelings of all peoples because it would be a real step, indeed, towards stabilization and strengthening of peace all over the world.
We, the Soviet people and the peoples of Asian and European countries saw war.
America participated in the two wars but it suffered very small losses in those wars.
Of course, it was monopolists who benefited but workers, working people got something out of it, too.
The American people did not experience destruction, sufferings, they only received notifications about deaths of their kin.
I want to tell you that in this crisis, as our saying goes, there is no evil without good.
The good is that now people have felt more tangibly the breathing of the burning flames of thermonuclear war and have a more clear realization of the threat looming over them if arms race is not stopped.
And I would say that what has just happened will serve especially good the American people.
Mr President, I believe that you as a military man, and your military people understand that we were not preparing for war when we delivered means of defense to Cuba.
Those means were not meant against the U.S., but were the means to ensure the security of Cuba.
For Cuba is no good as a bridgehead for a big war and it cannot be used for those purposes and, of course, nobody ever contemplated that.
Those were the means for deterring aggressor, to use the language of the late Dulles.
It is our opinion that the crisis has been eliminated on the compromise basis through reciprocal concessions.
We also appreciate your cooperation in the elimination of the crisis and your understanding of the necessity for reciprocal concessions and compromise so that the conflict be prevented from going beyond the limits that might really break into a thermonuclear war.
All the peoples of the world, the peoples of the United States and the Soviet Union as well as the peoples of all other countries, are interested in eliminating this conflict.
In particular, I think, it will be highly appreciated by the people of Cuba who have now been assured that their borders will be respected and there will be no threat of invasion of their land on the part of stronger states.
In other words, the Cuban people will have the long-awaited opportunity to enjoy the benefits of their labor and they will have the guarantee of their independence on the basis of the United Nations Charter, which provides for non-interference into internal affairs of other states and respect for sovereignty and integrity of states.
These are the considerations, Mr President, which I wanted to express to you.
Therefore, if we started after breakfast we would not have finished solving them before dinner.
And the more we delay the solution of these questions, the more of unknown will appear which can prove to be fatal in a future crisis.
Therefore, the sooner we clear away the roadblock, the windfallen wood, which has piled up in the international relations, and make clear the roads to correct mutual understanding the better it would be.
Indeed, from the point of view of the legal standards your claims had no grounds whatsoever.
We still believed, however, that you might have difficulties too since how could it be that you could not know that the unjustified demands of the USA exposed the world to the hazards of catastrophe.
However, we decided to make a compromise proposal which would suit both you and us.
We received your assurances that you would not invade Cuba and would not permit others to do it and on this condition we withdraw the weapons which you called offensive.
As a result, there has been practically achieved the purpose which had been intended to be achieved through the shipments of means of defense.
Now this question is solved on these compromise and reciprocal concessions.
But you know that we also have these means and they are of a different nature than those that were in Cuba.
Our means were brought to the state of combat readiness, they were of a more serious nature and they were pointed at the USA and your allies.
Apparently, there will be such scribblers who will engage in hair-splitting over our agreement, will be digging as to who made greater concessions to whom.
As for me, I would say that we both made a concession to reason and found a reasonable solution which enabled us to ensure peace for all including those who will be trying to dig up something.
I would like to sum up the above said and express in conclusion the following considerations on the questions touched upon in this letter.
I think it would be possible to pick up from the questions listed by me those which are more ripe and which should, perhaps, be prepared for taking decisions on them.
Then it would be possible to meet, maybe, at the United Nations or maybe at a specially arranged meeting.
I repeat, I have in mind a meeting in case questions are prepared for taking decisions on them so that the appropriate agreements could be signed during the meeting.
Therefore I would like to know your considerations as to whether you believe that some or other of the questions raised by me are ripe for decision.
If you do not consider them ripe, then there should be no meeting because a meeting in such conditions would not only fail to justify hopes of the peoples, but would distress them./l/ /1/On October 29 Dobrynin had given Robert Kennedy a different unsigned letter from Khrushchev to the President which spelled out the basis for agreement on Cuba.
The Attorney General studied the letter over night before asking Dobrynin to come to his office on October 30 and take it back because it involved a quid pro quo.
For an account of this incident, see Arthur M Schlesinger, Jr., Robert Kennedy and His Times, 546.
Sincerely, N Khrushchev/2/ /2/Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.
The source text notes that a copy of the telegram was passed to the White House on October 31.
Gromyko initiative on Cuba yesterday /1/ appears corroborate estimate of Soviet intentions salvage as much as possible of their position in Cuba.
Western colleagues incline to view ""heads must roll"" as result set-back, though neither they nor we are able to identify source of any differences in leadership.
In any event, we believe Khrushchev personally convinced situation was critically dangerous and had to be liquidated.
Factors producing dramatic decision withdraw included not only striking display United States determination and unity Western alliances when chips are down, but distaste Soviet populace for Cuban adventures.
Sense of relief here following publication exchanges of letters unmistakable.
Mr Bundy devoted most of the meeting to securing ideas on what might come up at the President's press conference tomorrow, and on what ought to be the appropriate responses to these matters.
The status of dismantling is sure to arise, but the answers are unlikely to be sufficiently ""hard"" by tomorrow afternoon for a categorical answer.
The chances are that the President will say this Government is satisfied that construction has stopped, hoping that the reporters will understand that this judgment rests only partially on hard photographic evidence, the other part being the exercise of a political judgment.
I mentioned that the wolves had already begun to howl about intelligence shortcomings during the period prior to the crisis.
The President's answer to this almost-certain question will probably be based on the multiplicity of indicators that must be evaluated, etc., -i.e., more or less a standard Intelligence Officer's answer.
Someone will probably ask the President whether the United States means to guarantee the continuance of the Castro regime.
The answer to this will in part refer to the President's statements of September 4 and 13/1/ and in part refer in general terms to the fact that the United States and the OAS are permanently committed to resist aggression in the Hemisphere.
Any question about the Cuban refugees will be extremely tough to answer.
Bundy said that the fact of the matter was that these refugee organizations had been under restraint by United States ""law enforcement agencies"" during the past week or so, but of course this is just about the last thing the President would want to say at the conference.
A few individuals around the table thought that the President might say a few words in a very optimistic vein about the future of world peace, but the consensus was that it would be best at this time to fuzz this over at least or maybe even stay away from it altogether.
A rather abstract discussion on the role of force in international affairs thereupon ensued.
Nothing much came out of it except general agreement that the President in his opening statement should steer clear of any discussion of the role of force, concentrating instead on how our Allies and other friends rallied to the cause.
Director McCone stated that aerial photographs taken on October 29 did not conclusively prove that the missile buildup and construction at missile sites in Cuba had halted./l/ The Russians in Cuba had received their orders to withdraw the missiles only on Sunday.
He explained this failure in part by referring to a September 19, 1962 National Intelligence Estimate /2/ which stated all the reasons why we did not think the Russians would deploy nuclear weapons to countries outside their borders.
This estimate, in effect, prompted evaluators to downgrade the fragmentary reports which we received during the latter part of September and early October.
Secretary Rusk reported that the Russians apparently are prepared to go along with the general inspection procedures which we think are necessary.
However, Castro, during the conversation yesterday with Acting Secretary General U Thant, flatly refused to accept on-site UN inspection.
Secretary Rusk said this meant that we must continue to obtain aerial pictures of Cuba.
He asked the President to call off his press conference in view of Castro's position.
The President agreed to call off his press conference and inform the press, on a background basis; that Castro's opposition to acceptable inspection procedures created a situation about which he did not wish to speak publicly at this time.
The President felt the cancellation of the press conference would have a healthy effect on both the Cubans and on U Thant.
Under Secretary Ball presented draft instructions to Ambassador Stevenson covering negotiations with the Russians and with U Thant on inspection procedures we would accept.
Secretary Rusk said that on Thursday /4/ we must fly U-2 and low-level reconnaissance missions over Cuba if Castro remains adamant in his opposition to on-site inspection.
He also suggested that Mr McCloy tell Kuznetsov that we have encountered real difficulties as a result of Castro's refusal to accept on-site inspection procedures.
He might even propose a bilateral arrangement with the Russians for air reconnaissance in view of the fact that UN arrangements did not appear to be possible.
He noted that if U Thant extends his stay in Havana, we will be in difficulty because of the UN request not to fly reconnaissance missions during the time U Thant is there.
The President agreed that reconnaissance missions should be flown tomorrow unless significant progress was made by U Thant in his negotiations with Castro.
If agreement appeared likely, we might postpone further flights until Friday.
Secretary Rusk pointed out that the International Red Cross will participate in inspection measures only if Castro approves.
If Castro will not approve, then we must reestablish our United States quarantine.
Ambassador Thompson mentioned the possibility that the Soviets might go along with our air reconnaissance if we did not reimpose the quarantine.
Secretary Rusk said we might ask the Red Cross to inspect at sea ships bound for Cuba, but he predicted that the Red Cross would not agree to do so in view of Castro's opposition.
The Attorney General said that we must keep our ability to put pressure on the Cubans by means of a blockade.
He said the Russians could tell the Cubans that unless they accepted adequate inspection procedures, the United States would resume the blockade and expand it to include POL cargoes.
Secretary McNamara reported that all Soviet ships near the quarantine line were now lying dead in the water, but that non-Bloc ships were proceeding toward Cuban ports.
Secretary Rusk suggested that one way of putting pressure on Castro would be to ask free world states to tell the Cubans that Cuba must comply with UN inspection procedures or else they would break diplomatic relations with the Cuban government.
The President said we should consider broadening the blockade because otherwise we would be in the position of stopping only non-Soviet ships.
If U Thant stays in Cuba longer than planned, we must decide what we will do then.
One proposal would call for hailing all Russian ships but allowing them to proceed.
Non-Bloc ships carrying cargoes consisting of goods included on an enlarged prohibited list would be stopped.
The President called attention to the importance of keeping the Organization of American States geared up so that if firmer action were required, the Latin Americans would support us.
We must keep information about Castro's attitude flowing to OAS members.
When Khrushchev said to Kennedy on Sunday/1/ morning that he was going to dismantle, Castro had not been consulted.
He immediately stated five points three hours after Khrushchev's letter to Kennedy 72/ He made it purposely in order to complicate the situation for the Russians.
Sooner or later there will be a show-down and that is the reason, of course, for Mikoyan's arrival.
He wants everyone to respect our integrity. . . . outside agency to inspect on Cuban soil.
They don't even know when the construction started of the sites, or when the dismantling started.
Today U Thant asked the Soviet Ambassador to come in and asked him two questions.
The United States is concerned about the launchings of the missiles and want urgent dismantling.
The Soviet Ambassador's answer was that he would have to refer the question to the military and ask Moscow.
This morning, before the second meeting with Castro, the Soviet Ambassador telephoned him.
Then he arrived at U Thant's place with the General in charge of the dismantling at 2:30 this afternoon and made the following answer to the question.
With regard to Khrushchev's order to dismantle on Sunday ""we received it between 1 and 3m.
It will be all over by tomorrow night, and by the latest on Friday ,/3/ when we will have finished the bulldozing of the sites by Friday night.
But the equipment will be in the ports Thursday night or Friday morning.
Although they were not very specific as to whether or they have interrogated them about aircraft.
As to the aircraft, the Russians assured them that the Cubans had not been trained to fly them.
Anti-aircraft manned by all the anti-aircraft, both SAM and conventional is manned by the Cubans.
Castro says all anti-aircraft commanded by Cubans will stay, including the SAM sites, they assume.
Castro was apparently ranting most of the time and pretty sarcastic and kept screaming no inspection would be permitted under any circumstances, either ... but that they must go through the blockade.
My notes say that since the Soviet guarantee we can inspect on the high seas.
They are using only Russian labor, only Russian equipment, like bulldozers, etc.
Castro talked a lot about aerial reconnaissance, even by the United Nations, as a violation of Cuban integrity, soil, airspace, etc., as an intolerable offense.
There are no foodstuffs, no meat-all of this confirmed by the Legations there.
We should be satisfied with these assurances; that the Red Cross inspection on the seas of incoming vessels.
Castro is frustrated, intense, psychotic, infuriated by the United States radio constantly stating that the United States was coming to inspect instead of the SYG arriving with a large team to inspect.
He said they would fight to the last man, wanted everybody to inspect their soil, their integrity, etc.
They would discuss the future of Cuba only on the basis of the five points, and he distinguished in the future— not the present problem.
If the SC, in other words, discusses the Cuban problem, it can only be on the basis of the five points.
He said the Soviets have done this whole thing on Cuban soil; but the future of the UN should be involved but only on the basis of the five points.
It is his impression that the Soviets don't want to stay a single hour; that the General said that he was going at once and that he was glad to leave.
There is thought there will be a show-down some time between the Cubans and the Russians.
He said the Brazilian would confirm all this in two or three days— after he got back to Rio.
He can't suggest what we should do but implied that maybe we should verify on Friday, after the bulldozing has been completed.
The blockade, if it continues, will make the Cubans more and more angry.
I told him that we had already instituted a pass on incoming ships not to in any way interrupt the shipping to get the stuff out of there.
There is so much they don't want to know what to do with it-machines, anti-aircraft, etc.
Then as I left the room with Jack McCloy Rikhye stopped me at the door and sort of whispered to me as a final concluding remark which the SYG apparently never felt it was appropriate to say.
I don't know what time; I should think it will probably be after they have had a good night's sleep-possibly 10 o'clock.
In spite of Kuznetsov's eagerness to discuss disarmament, bases, and other broader questions /1/ the present negotiation should not include issues beyond immediate objective, which is verified dismantling and removal of Soviet offensive weapons in Cuba at earliest possible date.
Your purpose will be to reach straightforward realistic solutions to practical problems along lines indicated below.
We assume that in line with established Soviet doctrine, Kuznetsov's insistence on no physical inspection of dismantling and removal Soviet weapons is essentially non-negotiable.
It is probable, therefore, that we shall have to rely on aerial surveillance and port-removal inspection to satisfy ourselves that missile bases are dismantled and weapons are removed from Cuba or destroyed.
While you should strive for as much pre-removal ground inspection as possible, the formula of post-removal ground inspection together with high and low aerial surveillance during both the dismantling period and the post-evacuation period should, if efficiently carried out, provide adequate evidence of removal and destruction and so could be accepted.
Surface-to-surface missiles; bomber aircraft; bombs, airtosurface rockets and guided missiles; warheads for any of the above weapons; mechanical or electronic equipment to support or operate the above items.
Note that the definition includes short-range surface-to-surface missiles and surface-to-surface missiles designed for use at sea.
Notice also that mechanical and electronic equipment to operate surface-to-surface missiles includes a wide variety of communications, supply and missile-launching equipment, including Komar class motor torpedo boats.
Suggest you start with wider definition, including supplement to Presidential Proclamation.
Fall back position, on which we would insist, would be categories enumerated in Proclamation.
However, we should assume on basis Khrushchev letter of October 26/3/ that ""the necessity for the presence of /4/ military specialists in Cuba would disappear"" along with the offensive weapons they are manning and protecting.
Also not included within the definition are fighter aircraft, and surface-to-air missiles.
Also not included are storage sites or any petroleum products other than missile propellants.
It would be desirable to have these items destroyed or removed as well, but the USG is not willing to pay a price to have them destroyed or removed.
First Phase— This phase should begin immediately and would cover the period up to the Soviet report to the SC that they have dismantled and withdrawn proscribed weapons.
Since the Communists will undoubtedly prove chary of UN observation of weapons withdrawal, as Kuznetsov has already indicated, we assume they are unlikely to accept on-site inspection during the period when weapons are being withdrawn.
Therefore we probably will need to rely in practice, during the first stage, on United States and UN aerial reconnaissance and UN/ICRC inspection of incoming shipments.
Second Phase-This phase would begin when the SC convened to receive the Soviet report on compliance and to authorize establishment of a UN on-site inspection system.
This phase would end when the SC has accepted the report of the SYG that offensive weapons have been removed from Cuba.
Aerial Reconnaissance Systematic high and low aerial reconnaissance is essential.
This is so particularly if surface inspection is limited or non-existent.
Our only insistence is that a job be done which is adequate to provide the USG with information sufficient to convince United States that compliance is taking place.
We recognize that UN will wish to overfly Cuba only after explicit clearance by Cuban authorities.
United States would of course need access to photos resulting from UN reconnaissance.
Two types of air surveillance should be considered— photographic and visual monitoring by holding the aircraft in a pattern so as to maintain continuous air surveillance of missile transport movements.
The Canadian Government has offered to have Canadian pilots fly Canadian supplied RF-101 aircraft.
USG endorses use of Canadians and RF-lOls but recognizes that SYG will be reluctant to accept.
Canada and Indonesia already have competent crews which would take only brief period to check out.
There are four C-130 aircraft with the UN markings and high quality photographic equipment in Georgia now available to UN on request.
In addition, we have sold C-130 aircraft to Australia and are currently in the midst of completing negotiation on providing C-130 aircraft to Argentina and Chile.
The UN has been informed that USG prepared provide rapid transportation for C-130 crews politically acceptable to the UN from anywhere in the world.
Another highly attractive possibility would be for Mexico or Argentina to volunteer squadron of T-l Is and crews which DOD believes would be fully capable to do kind of job we want.
It is understood that they have a number such aircraft fully equipped with photographic equipment.
Processing unit with United States equipment could be readily provided to operate in Havana or at whatever place UN would wish to use as base of operations.
You should therefore reaffirm all this to SYG, strongly urging him develop a UN reconnaissance capability.
Support of UN surveillance, however, should not be tied to United States cessation of surveillance.
Statements that ""the United States will reconsider its surveillance requirements based upon the effectiveness of UN operations"" can be made, but we should do nothing to suggest that United States determination to conduct air surveillance is necessarily limited by UN operations.
It should go without saying that to the extent no adequate substitute has been developed by the UN, the United States high and low surveillance will continue throughout entire dismantling and withdrawal operation and as long thereafter as necessary to satisfy us that offensive weapons have been fully removed from Cuba.
Incoming Cargoes As indicated Deptel 1136,/5/ we prepared accept ICRC inspection incoming cargoes on all ships, of whatever flag, embarked from bloc ports.
According to our projection, ships now in transit or scheduled depart bloc ports shortly to arrive in Cuba during next three or four weeks.
Number Red Cross inspectors required to do job will depend on whether inspection at sea or on shore.
This would permit close inspection of vessels, one after another, without transit time required to shuttle between vessels at sea.
We expect thorough inspection, including at least selective examination of cargoes abroad to assure that no weapons we consider offensive will enter Cuba.
Inspection should provide for masters of incoming ships to notify their cargoes to UN inspectors well in advance of arrival at port.
This would expedite checking and clearance and help make entire inspection process more effective.
We believe inspection of incoming cargoes should continue until entire verification process completed (i.e., through end of Phase Two), in order to give us assurance all offensive weapons withdrawn and related facilities dismantled.
During this period, enforcement of quarantine would be suspended, but United States ships would remain on duty stations.
Incoming ships would not be stopped or searched by US, but we would keep a watching brief on all traffic, noting outbound missile-carrying ships and assisting UN inspectors in assuring they informed of all incoming traffic.
United States would thus be in position to renew immediately the enforcement of the quarantine if circumstances required such action.
Verification of Removal of Offensive Weapons When Soviets prepared to say they have removed from Cuba the ""weapons United States considers offensive"", a Security Council meeting would be called to authorize the Acting Secretary General to establish arrangements for verification.
Executive organization operating in Cuba for this purpose is here referred to as UN/Cuba.
UN/Cuba UN teams should inspect on spot, after dismantling, those sites which identified by United States as missile bases as any Cuban airport which could accommodate bombers, and any other area where we have reason to believe there may have been concealment of offensive weapons, including storage sites for nuclear warheads.
Such teams should have unrestricted confidential communication facilities with their headquarters units, and free access to areas required for the performance of their duties.
United States will furnish to UN comprehensive list of locations to be covered.
Number of Observers The number of observers required to do job satisfactorily will depend on length of time permitted to accomplish task and on the extent of mobility.
United States would prefer to see such verification accomplished quickly.
Assuming for political reasons Communists would prefer keep number UN inspectors relatively small, suggest UN consider possibility utilizing number of helicopters or small planes to permit rapid transit inspection teams maximum number sites in minimum time.
It appears to us that team of 50 or 60 men with adequate air transport could accomplish verification job within a week or two.
Moreover, any UN aerial observers should participate in verification process.
Composition While we assume that probably only citizens of certain types of countries will be acceptable to Communists as sources of UN ground observers, it is important from our standpoint that eligibility be restricted to technically trained personnel of genuinely reliable nations who have demonstrated a reasonable objectivity during crisis.
For example, we would wish to exclude UAR and Ghana citizens in light of distinctly ""unneutral"" statements made by their Delegates in Security Council meetings on Cuba.
On criteria indicated, we would prefer nationals from Sweden, Switzerland, Austria, Nigeria, India and Ireland.
When it comes to UN air reconnaissance, it is probably not so important to have neutral personnel; Canadians and Argentines, for example, might prove acceptable.
We understand ICRC has operated in similar capacity at UN request in checking compliance with Geneva Convention in United States POW camps in Korea.
ICRC has acted also as executive agent for High Commissioner for Refugees in Congo.
We believe financing all verification measures should come under $2,000,000 provision in regular UN budget for small-scale peace and security operations.
If total cost likely to exceed one million dollars, financing problem will need to be reviewed in the light of the then United States position on financing UN peace-and-security operations 76/ /6/Following a telephone conversation later in the day between officials at the Department of State and the Mission at the United Nations changes were made in sections 3-6 of this instruction.
The Planning Subcommittee reviewed the situation as of late Wednesday afternoon, October 31, 1962.
The Soviets evidently have a problem with Castro; but it was judged likely that they would seek to salvage the Communist revolution in Cuba, with or without Castro; and that Mikoyan's mission was designed, by means of stick and carrot, to achieve a reconciliation of their commitment to remove the missile bases with this longer run objective.
It was judged urgent that we resume a posture of pressure unless there was a radical break in the diplomatic situation, including reconnaissance and maintenance of the blockade.
On a contingency basis preparations for putting increased pressure on Castro by extending the blockade to POL were judged urgent.
Such measures might be introduced in the first instance by increments, through low-level, informal action.
Such measures of increased pressure on Castro might be executed with the knowledge and even connivance of the Soviet Union, if it found Castro too difficult to deal with; although we should refuse any substantial price for Soviet collaboration in this exercise.
In the light of Soviet tactics, including Kuznetsov's invitation to Stevenson to widen soon the area of discussion, it was felt more important than ever that we separate all other matters from the three central issues; that is, the removal of offensive missiles, the lifting of the blockade, and a form of assurance that we would not invade, consistent with our OAS commitments and the President's September 13 press conference.
As counterpoint to UN negotiations, the OAS should be active on several fronts, including the review of latest evidence on Cuban indirect aggression in Latin America.
If discussions with Soviet officials were to go beyond Cuban problems, the first issue that ought to be raised is the question of the enforcement of the Laos agreement.
The eleven tasks listed under 3 a-j in Report Number Five were reviewed./l/ All are in motion.
With respect to task 3 a , it was noted that among the options open to the Soviet Union was a stepped up missile defense system, the possibilities for which should be included in that task, along with other measures for correcting what Moscow evidently regards as the dangerous Soviet nuclear imbalance.
In addition, the CIA representative undertook to generate a speculative paper which would attempt roughly to cost out alternative Soviet methods for correcting the nuclear imbalance.
One of the most likely possibilities was judged to be that the Soviet Union would undertake, as after Stalin's death, a prolonged and serious re-evaluation of its military and foreign policy in the light not merely of their Cuban misadventure but the frustration of many lines of policy which they have been pursuing since, roughly, 1957.
The decisions at which they finally arrive in this likely reassessment will depend, in part, on our posture and our policy from the present forward, as they perceive it, just as Stalin's policy was shaped after 1945 by his assessment of our strengths and vulnerabilities, and Khrushchev's after 1957, by his assessment as of that time.
The cast of our total military and foreign policy in coming months is thus one critical variable in the making of new Soviet dispositions.
The implications of this possible interconnection and recommended courses of action and signals to Moscow, designed to produce new Soviet dispositions most in our interest, is a new task assigned to the group chaired by Mr Harvey.
Mr McCone noted that on an open line between Moscow and Havana, Suslov, speaking for Gromyko, had talked to Abramovich, the Soviet Ambassador in Havana, giving urgent instructions.
Secretary Rusk gave a preliminary report on U Thant's failure to persuade Castro to accept UN inspection procedures in Cuba.
The President directed that all government officials talking to the Russian officials should talk only about Cuba and the removal of offensive weapons.
The Russians should be told that when the Cuban crisis is settled, we will talk about other matters.
Our policy is to listen to whatever the Russians have to say on other matters but make no response until the Cuban situation has been resolved.
Secretary McNamara reported that U-2 flights had produced no pictures because of bad weather and that there existed a requirement for low-level flights.
Secretary Rusk said the time had come for us to build up pressure on our side.
Secretary McNamara recommended that the quarantine be reinstituted for dawn tomorrow.
If they reply, giving their name, port of origin, and cargo, they will be allowed to proceed to port.
If their reply is unsatisfactory, the United States Navy ship will report to Washington.
No ship would be boarded without specific authorization by the President, which the Secretary of Defense will obtain after consulting the Secretary of State.
With reference to low-level flights, Secretary McNamara said that he favored ten or twelve sorties, General Taylor favored eighteen, and General LeMay recommended thirty.
The President directed that fourteen low-level sorties be made with no more than one pass over each target.
Missile sites and roads were acceptable targets, but no ports are to be included.
Returning to the decision on reinstituting the quarantine, the President said a final decision would be made after Secretary Rusk reported to him later this evening on the U Thant/Castro talks.
If the quarantine was reinstituted, we would make a public announcement.
In response to a request by USIA Acting Director Wilson for guidance with respect to official radio broadcasts to Cuba, the President recommended no verbal attacks on Cuba via this media for this week.
He asked that emphasis be given to the fact that the OAS decision is the basis for our aerial surveillance of Cuba and that the issue is not United States vs.
Mr Wilson read the themes which are being used by USIA on its broadcasts.
The President asked Mr Wilson to get from others, including foreign diplomatic officials in Cuba, their impression of our radio broadcasts.
The President asked that Kuznetsov be informed of the arrest at sea of anti-Castro Cubans heading toward Cuba.
The President also asked that McCloy be informed of planned sabotage in Venezuela.
The President commented that we should make known that we are anxious to stop our air surveillance of Cuba if the UN comes up with a satisfactory substitute.
However, we must continue surveillance in our own national interests until a satisfactory substitute is found.
In absence international inspection personnel, such as ICRC, United States prepared make gesture re quarantine.
While quarantine in full will start tomorrow, we prepared let ships pass on hail-and-pass basis, as in case Sov tanker Bucharest,e., no inspection on board vessels would be involved.
We prepared use this procedure for a few days until more solid basis for inspection of ships is developed.
Re aerial surveillance, United States believes it would be good for everybody if evidence were obtained that dismantling of relevant facilities has started,e., if we could show to world pictures attesting to that fact.
We hope USSR would do everything to avoid incidents in connection our overflights, because any such incident would create gravest situation and would again put us face to face.
Kuznetsov appreciated information, but with respect to second point stated USSR could not do anything because anti-aircraft defense was in Cuban hands.
United States was facing Kuznetsov with problem where he could do nothing because problem related to Cuban territory and sovereignty.
Akalovsky observed USSR could use its influence with Cuba in order prevent incidents fraught with gravest danger.
Kuznetsov replied he could not add anything to what he had already said.
McCloy had one hour mtg with Kuznetsov today./l/ After exchange of pleasantries, McCloy noted U Thant and his entire party leaving Havana 4:30m. today, and according our info there were difficulties with Castro.
While we understood Sov reluctance admit inspection on ground before weapons removed, which might reveal secret technology, United States would have to continue aerial surveillance starting tomorrow, and until verification by UN arranged.
Most dangerous situation would arise if our planes were to be shot at or downed.
We prepared to turn aerial surveillance over to UN, but so long as no adequate UN verification existed United States would continue its own flights.
Our photographs of day before yesterday did not indicate any marked progress in dismantling, indeed indicated some further construction, although we realized not all sites may have received appropriate orders.
FRC 71 A 2896, Verification of US-USSR Agreements re Cuba, Gilpatric Notes.
McCloy reiterated most dangerous situation would arise as result United States surveillance planes being shot at or downed.
Kuznetsov then said President and Khrushchev had committed themselves to certain steps and it was his and McCloy's job see that arrangements be made for carrying out those steps.
Dismantling of relevant facilities would be finished in couple of days, probably by Nov 2 or 3, although he not familiar with details.
As to time required for removal of what United States called offensive weapons, that would depend on number of ships available, which in turn depended on United States position re quarantine, because if no Sov ships were able go to Havana, removal would obviously be protracted.
McCloy observed he believed Sovs would have no difficulty getting enough ships to Havana for purpose of removal offensive weapons.
Kuznetsov continued verification arrangements must be worked out with Castro; as to USSR, it prepared fulfill its obligations.
Kuznetsov then said that number other problems must be discussed so as to create a situation precluding recurrence of what happened this time.
Suggested McCloy think about them so as to have discussion those problems at later date.
Kuznetsov said under U Thant proposal, USSR had fulfilled its part,e., it refrained from sending ships to quarantine area and from sending arms to Cuba.
On other hand, U Thant's proposal also provided for lifting quarantine, but so far United States Govt had agreed to suspend quarantine only for two days.
Another problem was that of assurances to Cuba that no invasion would be launched from United States or Latin American countries, that no preparations for invasion would take place in territory of United States or LA's and that no organization of subversive activities by refugees against Cuba would take place in United States or LA's.
Important make clear that Cuban people could live in security and peace.
President-Khrushchev exchange indicated some assurances should be given to Cuba against subversion and interference in its internal affairs.
McCloy responded he could not tell definitely United States attitude on these points; however, Kuznetsov's statement of problems welcome and we would express our views on them at appropriate time.
Problem of exiles ticklish, since they anxious make Cuba free so that it could do what it wanted do and be free of pressures by Castro.
Organizing refugees into units was one thing, but control of their thoughts was a different matter.
We could not get into a position of guaranteeing support for Castro, particularly in view Cuba now center of infection of subversive and sabotage activities against Latin American countries as demonstrated by recent events in Venezuela.
McCloy then stressed main problem at this time was removal of offensive weapons from Cuba.
When this done atmosphere for discussion other problems, including test ban and disarmament, would be much better.
Kuznetsov agreed but commented it difficult define defensive and offensive weapons since United States called its weapons at foreign bases defensive, although those weapons were same as weapons USSR had placed in Cuba.
Suggested however that discussion this subject would serve no useful purpose at this time and that McCloy and he deal with practical matters before them to make arrangements which would preclude recurrence present situation.
Re Kuznetsov's remark USSR had done something under U Thant proposal, McCloy pointed out it had been USSR who had created this situation in first place by introducing offensive weapons Cuba and pointing them at our hearts.
It impossible negotiate while gun was on table and therefore removal those weapons was primary problem.
As to definition offensive weapons, United States had made clear what it meant and Sovs knew it.
Kuznetsov then inquired re United States views on what if any UN presence would be required after removal of relevant weapons completed.
President's message to Khrushchev contained two points relating to this problem, which needed clarification.
McCloy replied he had not given much thought to what would be required after removal completed, but he did not think that any interminable UN presence would be needed.
Kuznetsov suggested thought be given to procedure for handling Cuban item in Security Council.
Noting USSR had no fixed views on this point as yet, wondered whether might not be possible have a joint US/USSR statement or separate statements by two Govts with Security Council taking note of such statement or statements and appealing to all states to facilitate implementation arrangements.
His own function was merely to coordinate United States policy on Cuban problem.
McCloy expressed hope Castro would be less recalcitrant and observed United States and Sovs might find themselves united vis-a-vis Castro.
At one point early in conversation Kuznetsov said Mikoyan arriving NY 2 or 3m.
Mikoyan would like meet with McCloy and extended invitation to dinner Nov 1.
McCloy said he would of course make himself available for meeting with Mikoyan, but not quite sure whether he had any prior engagement for tomorrow night.
Would give definite reply first thing tomorrow morning after checking calendar.
Subsequently, after talking with Secretary, McCloy confirmed he would be available for dinner.
Mr McCone added that the Russians may be using Castro's obstructionism to serve Soviet interests in connection with on-site inspection.
He said the Soviets, in talks with United Nations and United States officials, are forthcoming on questions of on-site inspection.
Secretary Rusk said the most important question to be decided is whether we should make low-level flights over Cuba today.
He recommended that if we fly and if we lose a reconnaissance plane, we should not retaliate today.
The President noted that we could expect nothing more from Castro until Mikoyan arrives in Havana.
The Soviets are reported to have told U Thant that the missile sites in Cuba would be bulldozed beginning tomorrow.
Secretary McNamara said personally he thought we ought to fly low-level missions today.
The Russians have not so far complied with their agreement to withdraw the missiles and the United States public needs to be reassured that we know what is going on in Cuba.
He urged that flights be authorized today because Mikoyan would be arriving in Cuba tomorrow.
He doubted that there would be any Soviet or Cuban reaction to our flights.
General Taylor stated that we cannot appear to be stopped by Castro's threat to shoot down our reconnaissance planes.
He recommended that fourteen flights be authorized over missile sites and Cuban ports.
If a reconnaissance plane was shot down, he recommended that we reinstitute the blockade.
The President said he did not favor reinstituting the blockade because we would have to stop Soviet ships.
He thought that we could carry out low-level reconnaissance missions because our best guess is that there would be no reaction to such flights.
He asked how we could deal with the shooting down of one of our planes if the pictures revealed that the Soviet missiles were being dismantled.
Secretary McNamara recommended that there be two flights of two planes each, one over the airfield where the IL-28 planes are based, and the other over the three MRBM sites.
The purpose of overflying the IL-28 airfield would be to make clear that we consider these bombers ""offensive weapons,"" to be removed by the Russians.
The President asked that Kuznetsov be told that we are making low-level flights.
It should be made clear to the Russians that the Cubans are preventing us from establishing inspection procedures accepted by the Russians, and, therefore, we must continue our aerial surveillance.
The Attorney General suggested that we talk to UN officials and get from them a promise to institute a UN inspection system.
The President wanted the Defense Department to provide him with the proposed flight patterns and the time over target of each flight.
Assistant Secretary Nitze said that the IL-28 bombers had been given to the Cubans, and, therefore, if we overflew the bomber bases, we should expect to be fired upon.
In addition, he noted that we do not intend to include the SAM sites in our discussion of weapons to be withdrawn from Cuba.
Secretary McNamara restated his view that we should get pictures of the IL-28 base, but that no flights need be flown over the Isle of Pines.
In his view it is essential that the IL-28 bombers be included among Soviet weapons to be withdrawn, hence, we should have the latest information as to whether they are being dismantled.
The President authorized low-level flights of six planes over the IL-28 base and of several MRBM sites.
If a United States plane is shot down, no military reprisal will be taken today.
The President asked for consideration of a longer range surveillance plan.
He suggested that we tell the Soviets that if they refuse to take out the IL-28 bombers, we will insist upon on-site inspection.
Secretary Dillon noted that the OAS would support our demand in view of the fact that the Russians have now admitted that their forces are in Cuba.
He urged that we make no commitment about not invading Cuba if we do not get satisfactory aerial surveillance and an acceptable inspection system.
We would not announce our intention to make low-level flights, but we would announce the return of our planes after they are back.
Director McCone presented the intelligence summary covering developments in Cuba, as well as brief reports on situations in other areas.
In response to a question, he said the admittedly confused evidence pointed to the conclusion that SAM sites in Cuba are under Russian control.
There followed a discussion of whether aerial reconnaissance should be carried out over Cuba today.
The President authorized low-level flights of six planes over the airbase where the IL-28 planes are stationed and over certain MRBM sites.
The major reason for overflying the IL-28 base is to make clear that we consider these planes ""offensive weapons"" to be removed by the Russians, and, therefore, we must know whether they are being dismantled.
The President asked that Mr McCloy make clear to Mikoyan during a conversation later today that we must carry out aerial reconnaissance over Cuba because the Cubans are preventing the implementation of the Soviet agreement to UN inspection of the removal of the missiles.
Following a discussion of reprisals to be taken if a United States reconnaissance plane is shot down over Cuba, the President decided that no retaliation would take place today.
General Taylor was assured that the full photographic coverage of Cuba planned for a later time-after the reported date of the removal of Soviet missiles from existing sites-would be authorized.
Kennedy-Khrushchev understanding based on assumption that Sovs would and could deliver on Khrushchev commitment to remove all offensive weapons systems in Cuba and through UN verification satisfy United States and other OAS countries.
Although four days have now passed since understanding reached that U Thant has made best efforts, all we have so far is verbal assurances by Sov reps in NY and Cuba to United States and UN without element of verification which in view history of this affair United States regards as essential.
United States has acted expeditiously and in good faith, promptly accepting Soviet proposal that ICRC act as UN agent for inspection incoming vessels.
United States also promptly responded SYG request suspend quarantine and recon flights during period his Havana visit.
Also as Sovs aware USG has close watch to prevent anti-Castro Cubans from any action which would upset execution of agreement,g. arrest of group with boat in Florida yesterday.
On question verification USG has expressed willingness accept wide range of possible UN arrangements but there does not yet appear likelihood even any one of these can be implemented.
President's responsibility for United States security demands that in absence UN verification, United States undertake whatever steps it can to provide verification.
Subordinate to this overriding consideration but nevertheless important is assurance to United States and LA publics.
Thus, although much less satisfactory than UN verification on the ground and from the air with cooperation Sovs and Cuba, United States must in elemental interests of safety continue aerial surveillance.
This surveillance is being carried out in as unprovocative a manner and on as limited a scale as possible by unarmed aircraft.
While United States accepts that some conventional anti-aircraft guns may be under Cuban control, it cannot accept that sophisticated weapons and control systems, including SAM's, do not require participation of Sov technicians and thus are not or could not be made subject to Soviet control.
If United States reconnaissance aircraft fired on or destroyed, serious question appropriate means protect United States aircraft will arise.
We might thus face a cycle of action and reaction which would put us back where we were last week.
Thus of utmost importance Sovs immediately take measures to assure reconnaissance aircraft not fired on.
This covers not only systems under Soviet control but also those allegedly under Cuban control.
You should seek to elicit a clear confirmation that the IL28's are included and are being dismantled for removal from Cuba.
In addition, you should point out that if Sov missiles and bombers are being removed, there seems no need for Soviets to leave in Cuba equipment and military technicians brought to Cuba primarily to protect the offensive weapons.
President's undertaking against invasion is adequate assurance that these weapons are not needed.
The President particularly desires that there should be no discussion of wider issue from our side until the offensive weapons in Cuba are clearly on their way home.
You must therefore avoid any exploration of tempting fields like Berlin and disarmament, making it plain that while we look forward to such discussion later, we cannot get anywhere on anything else until we have successfully put in operation the Kennedy-Khrushchev agreement on this present matter.
McCloy, Stevenson and Akalovsky met with Mikoyan, Kuznetsov, Zorin, Dobrynin, Menshikov and Zhukov from 7 to 1 1 pm Thursday/1/ night.
Mikoyan started in aggressive mood, insisting on suspending quarantine now, saying that was U Thant's intention.
We repeated that the agreement was embodied in the correspondence between Chairman Khrushchev and President Kennedy and left no uncertainty that the hail and pass quarantine could not be suspended until the Red Cross inspection was in effect.
This seemed to bother Mikoyan considerably, but after some further discussion he dropped the matter.
When asked how far away the nearest Soviet ships were, he replied four or five days.
We pointed out that in that event, if Red Cross inspection was established quickly, few if any Soviet ships would have to pass the present quarantine.
He said Thant had agreed with him that the United States should suspend quarantine during the interval.
Mikoyan then asked if we were working now to formalize the agreement between us.
Red Cross inspection, inspection and verification of removal of weapons, and the guarantee to Cuba; and saw only one difficulty in reaching an agreement, namely Castro's rejection of verification.
Mikoyan made long speech insisting on linking Castro's five points with Soviet-US agreement and charged United States with drawing attention to only ""temporary"" questions while overlooking ""cardinal"" questions.
He said we obviously did not want to hear about interests of others and were only concerned with our own interests.
He went on to suggest certain reports should be made to United Nations and that a formal document or protocol should be executed, and that he wanted negotiations to commence formally on basis of the letters, including Castro's five points,/2/ between the US, Soviet and U Thant.
Later he asked if Cuba should not be included in the discussions, repeating again and again that we must discuss Guantanamo and the other points relating to normalizing the situation in the Caribbean with UN presences in Cuba, in the United States and in other parts of the area, to see that agreement adhered to.
Castro, he said, was Prime Minister of independent state and we can't evade assurances of non-aggression against Cuba, that we were withdrawing from our commitments and must discuss everything, that they must know the United States position in order to tell Castro.
We repeated over and over that we must stick to this problem and this problem only and could consider no other questions.
We added that Castro could raise any questions he pleased and that they would be dealt with at the right time and that we were concerned with one question only and that was between the United States and Soviet Union.
He went back again and again to his insistence that we were by-passing the other side, including lifting the blockade and normalizing the situation, that the whole understanding would have to be formalized in documents registered with the United Nations and approved by the Security Council, and that we can't disregard the demands of Castro.
Following our insistence that we can negotiate only one problem and that any discussion of Guantanamo in connection with it was out of the question, he remarked that the Soviet Union had never raised Guantanamo, which was a Cuba-US problem, but that the United States should discuss the other four points.
We explained to him that we needed no documents except the declarations of USSR, United States and SYG before Security Council after transaction completed.
For that purpose Cuba was not a necessary party, especially if it refused any United Nations inspection as Khrushchev had promised.
Mikoyan was at pains to say that this meeting was not a final negotiation, but merely an exploration to see what everyone had in mind.
We said that we felt time was of the essence and that we could agree upon modalities of the Red Cross inspection directly or through our deputies almost at once, on basis of Thant's proposals.
We added that we could see no necessity for documentary agreement on aerial inspection, but wanted assurances from him that our planes would not be fired on if that was the only form of inspection and verification available to us.
They replied they could not guarantee that the guns would not shoot, because Cuba was an independent country over which they had no control, and adverted again to fact that we should consider everything, but that at least this talk had served to expose our differences.
When we tried to get down to details of the Red Cross and aerial inspection Mikoyan said he was not specialist and these were details, that he had brought a General and Colonel to help Kuznetsov, repeating again and again that he could give us no guarantee regarding the security of our over-flights.
We reminded him Khrushchev had agreed to UN inspection and that we understood his difficulties if Cuba refused, in view of its independence, and were trying reach accommodation for quick and satisfactory results.
He reverted again to argument that if we insisted on UN inspection in Cuba, it had a right to insist on inspection of refugee camps and training activities anywhere.
He was assured that there were no such camps any longer and that United States was not engaged in such activities.
Likewise we tried reassure him about training of Cuban citizens in the army and that United States wanted to regularize relations in Caribbean for protection of others as well as Castro, but that this was a separate matter that had nothing to do with this question.
Mikoyan quickly asked if we were referring to possible restoration economic and diplomatic ties with Cuba, and we explained regional arrangements in this hemisphere through OAS and that such matters were not excluded from future consideration if other aggravations could be relieved, but that we must get the one question before us promptly resolved.
Meeting became more cordial and friendly as it proceeded and was exclusively dominated by Mikoyan.
Their estimate of time to complete removal was ten to fifteen days, including the IL-28's.
At one point he repeated Khrushchev's statement that what we call offensive weapons had been given to Cuba to deter United States aggression, but that if non-aggression was guaranteed they would be withdrawn and that they would ship no more weapons.
In summarizing our conclusions, we reviewed the procedure before the Security Council and they suggested we exchange drafts of declarations, which seemed to us to indicate acceptance of this procedure.
On the whole our feeling was that we had left no doubt the five points and weapons transaction could not be linked and that he will meet Castro with a clear impression of our position, and understand we will insist on interim inspection by our means if an agreement for UN presence cannot be reached.
It is our intention to proceed as promptly as possible with Kuznetsov and his deputy Morozov to try complete modalities on Red Cross inspection pending Mikoyan's return.
He directed that all copies of the letter be returned to the State Department.
He added that apparently a copy of the letter had gone to an allied embassy in Washington.
He reaffirmed an earlier instruction that the only sources of information on the Cuban situation are Mr Bundy and Mr Sorensen.
He indicated his unhappiness with the amount of information which had been given to the press without authorization.
He directed that all aerial reconnaissance information be kept out of the Top Secret CIA Bulletin until after he had seen it.
He would then decide what circulation within the government was to be given the reconnaissance information.
He restated his view that we must make information available to the press in our own way rather than have it leak out.
So far there have been fifty Soviet tests, including one yesterday of an estimated 1 . megatons, at an altitude of fifty nautical miles.
He repeatedly attempted to tie Castro's five points/5/ to the agreement between President Kennedy and Khrushchev.
He proposed that there be a formal exchange of documents which would conclude the Cuban missile negotiations.
There was a discussion of some UN presence in the form of a peace commission.
One of the Russians said that the Cubans might agree to the dismantlement of the SAM sites in return for our promise to stop overflights.
The Russians said repeatedly that they could not force Castro to accept on-site inspection.
There was no decision on how inspection will be carried out after the missiles have been withdrawn.
Mikoyan did not ask us not to overfly, but he did admit that he could not get Castro to accept ground inspection.
Deputy Secretary Gilpatric urged that we insist upon UN inspection as promised by Khrushchev.
He noted that KOMAR missiles have been given to the Cubans and recommended that we keep our quarantine until a satisfactory substitute was in place.
The President decided that in view of the unsatisfactory discussions with the Cubans and the Russians, he would cancel his planned press conference in order not to be obliged to reply to questions about what guarantees we have that Russian missiles had been withdrawn from Cuba.
Under Secretary Ball read a six-point statement which he recommended the President issue in lieu of a press conference.
Secretary Rusk suggested that we not call attention to the IL-28 bombers at this point because we may want to retaliate against these planes if one of our reconnaissance planes is shot down.
The President directed that a statement be prepared for issuance by the White House or the State Department.
It should include what the Russians have agreed to and what we have agreed to.
Deputy Secretary Gilpatric reported that UN officials have given up on a UN surveillance system because Castro won't accept it.
The President asked how we were going to check on Soviet missiles being withdrawn.
Secretary Rusk said we could ask the in Cuba check on Soviet equipment there, and where it was being moved to in Cuba.
The President noted that inspection of incoming material could be achieved, but we must develop some way of inspecting outgoing Soviet missiles.
The President asked that instructions to McCloy be prepared which would lay down the line he is to follow for the next three days.
The President also instructed Stevenson and McCloy to stress that it was the Soviet responsibility to provide acceptable verification, that Soviet cargo ships should not seek to enter the quarantine area until ICRC inspection procedures were in effect unless they were prepared to accept United States inspection, and that after removal of weapons, continuing arrangements would be required to assure against reintroduction.
Secretary McNamara recommended that we continue limited but daily overflights.
He asked authorization for two flights of two planes each to cover different areas than were photographed yesterday.
He opposed high altitude flights until we are certain that the Soviets do control the SAM sites.
In answer to a question, he said we could use a drone for overflights, but the Air Force was opposed because of the possible loss and compromise of the highly classified drone.
In answer to a question, Director McCone said it was conceivable but improbable that missiles fired from SAM sites in Cuba could reach the United States The President authorized the release to the press of the pictures of the missile sites taken yesterday, but not the pictures of the IL-28 bombers.
He agreed that the quarantine should be continued until a satisfactory substitute was found.
Secretary McNamara reported on the current shipping situation and recommended that our ships hail all Bloc ships crossing the quarantine line but board none of them.
He said Admiral Dennison had asked permission to board a Soviet ship, but had been denied this authority.
The President again called attention to the necessity of inspecting Soviet ships leaving Cuba with Soviet missiles as cargo.
This inspection must be carried out either by the International Red Cross or by the United States The President then turned to a discussion of atomic testing.
He asked that consideration be given to what we will say publicly when our current test series ends and what we should say about our plans for future tests.
He asked whether we should announce that we were prepared to halt tests until there was a test ban agreement.
He said he opposed any pledge to refrain from testing for an indefinite period.
The President asked that he be provided an evaluation of these unmanned seismic stations as a means of monitoring an atomic test ban.
Acting USIA Director Wilson asked the President for guidance for USIA during the next few days.
The President instructed that USIA emphasize that Castro was obstructing peace in the Caribbean by blocking UN inspection measures.
For the time being, USIA should not use the theme that Castro is a Soviet stooge.
The President asked for a report on the fighting between the Indians and the Communist Chinese, along with an estimate of what we thought would develop in this area.
McCone's record indicated that ""it was decided that a drone should be flown promptly"" over the objections of McNamara and the Air Force.
Referring to a newspaper story giving alleged details of Premier Khrushchev's October 26th letter, the President said the White House had issued a denial that the United States government believed it was written by an agitated or overwrought man.
He instructed that henceforth information obtained from aerial reconnaissance of Cuba should not be released within the Government until after it had been presented to him for decision as to whom it would be made available.
He reemphasized the importance of preventing unauthorized release to the press of information about the Cuban situation.
Director McCone summarized the intelligence memorandum, emphasizing the sensitive nature of information in our possession which convinces us that Soviet officers control the air defense system established in Cuba.
He also reported on the Soviet nuclear test series, including yesterday's test of a 1. megaton weapon at 50 nautical miles.
It was decided that, in lieu of a press conference, a White House statement would be prepared for release today summarizing where we are in the Cuban situation.
The President authorized two aerial reconnaissance missions consisting of our planes, the first over Cuban ports and the second over the IL-28 airfield.
The President authorized the release to the press of pictures of the missile sites taken yesterday.
Following a discussion of the current status of the quarantine, the President instructed that until further orders United States naval ships should not board Bloc ships, but United States ships should continue to hail all vessels entering the quarantine zone.
The President asked that draft instructions to Mr McCloy covering the negotiations for the next few days be prepared for his approval.
These instructions would make clear that we want the IL-28s removed, that our quarantine must be maintained until a satisfactory substitute is provided, and that ships coming from the USSR to take the Soviet missiles out of Cuba must be inspected by the United States or by the International Red Cross.
The President asked that consideration be given to what we will say publicly about the ending of our test series and about our policy toward future nuclear tests.
He also asked for an evaluation of unmanned seismic stations as a means of inspecting an atomic test agreement.
In response to a request for guidance, the President instructed USIA, for the time being, to emphasize Castro's obstruction to UN inspection and to measures necessary to restore peace to the Caribbean rather than to depict Castro as a Soviet puppet.
The President asked for a full report on Indian-Chinese fighting and an estimate of future developments.
Director McCone presented the intelligence summary, emphasizing reports about the construction of a submarine base in Cuba.
He called attention to the increasing number of reports of missiles being stored in Cuban caves./l/ /1/McCone prepared an account of this meeting in which he described his presentation in more detail.
Secretary McNamara reported that a peripheral flight of a U-2 about five miles off the west coast of Cuba had been authorized by the President.
The Joint Chiefs of Staff have stated a requirement for fourteen low-level sorties, covering harbors, roads, storage areas, the IL-28 air base, and Banes, which is suspect as a possible submarine base site.
Mr McCone predicted that it would take from two weeks to a month to get the Soviet missiles out of Cuba.
The President, commenting on the recommended low-level flight over the port of Havana, said he thought this target would be a day off and deferred authorizing this reconnaissance mission.
Secretary Rusk called attention to the presence in Havana of Mikoyan and stated his view that the port of Havana was not a good target for today.
The President authorized three low-level sorties of two planes each, one over the IL-28 base, the second over the Banes area, and the third over the San Julian port area.
General Taylor asked that the President authorize a major aerial reconnaissance mission Sunday or Monday/2/ in order to see what had been moved in Cuba.
He said we need pictures of the ports in order to know what was being loaded on outgoing ships and pictures of assembly areas where Soviet equipment is being moved prior to being shipped out.
The President said that he wanted by Sunday or Monday a recommendation on the future use of U-2 planes.
Secretary Rusk said daily pictures of the IL-28 planes are most important.
Secretary Rusk referred to a preliminary draft of inspection arrangements 73/ Certain measures can be taken if Cuba agrees, but other meas-ures will have to be taken if Cuba refuses to accept inspection arrangements satisfactory to us.
He noted that there was no real resistance from anywhere except Cuba to the continuance of overflights.
Inspection Arrangements,"" for use by the Executive Committee and submitted for consideration at this meeting.
FRC 71 A 2896, Verification of US-USSR Agreements re Cuba) Text in the Supplement.
He said he believed we would have to work out some way of counting the outgoing missiles in order to be certain that all were removed.
He asked that we work out what arrangements we think we must have and what we think the Soviets would accept.
Deputy Under Secretary Johnson suggested that the International Red Cross inspectors might look at cargo being loaded on outgoing Soviet ships to be certain that it had been properly identified on the ships' manifests.
Director McCone said we had seen thirty missiles in Cuba and we estimate that forty-eight were brought in.
He agreed that we must work out some way of counting the outgoing missiles.
Secretary Rusk said one major problem was how to inspect armaments in Cuba after the strategic missiles had been removed.
One way to do this would be to propose an atom-free zone in Latin America.
Treaty inspectors could go to Cuba to ensure that no nuclear weapons remained on the island or were introduced.
The President requested a paper stating exactly how we understand the agreement we have reached with the Russians.
He wanted for his consideration the instructions to be sent to McCloy to govern McCloy's talk with Kuznetsov.
He suggested that we raise with the Russians the question of Cuban caves as an illustration of the need for an inspection procedure which would reassure us that the missiles were removed, even if we did not inspect each missile.
He wanted to hold Khrushchev to every single one of the points he had agreed to.
He felt that we should insist on the general demilitarization of Cuba and he emphasized again the serious situation which would arise if there were an incident involving one of our U-2 planes and the SAM sites in Cuba.
Secretary Rusk commented that we must have acceptable inspection on the ground in Cuba before we make any commitment about our not invading the island.
Mr McCone noted that evidence to date indicates the missiles are being dismantled, but apparently everything else is being built up, including communication complexes and possibly even a submarine base.
The President said he wanted to see detailed instructions covering the negotiations on inspection.
He thought that we should give the Russians the impression that because the missiles are mobile and can be put back in place, we will have to insist on demilitarization of Cuba.
Ambassador Thompson suggested that we ask the Russians if they intend to keep a military base in Cuba.
A draft announcement of the ending of our current nuclear test series was read and discussed.
Seaborg said that the Commission tests in 1963 would be for the purpose of exploiting the Ripple development.
He thought that by May we would be in a position to resume tests above ground.
He acknowledged that weapons development would be possible if testing were limited to underground shots.
Secretary Rusk opposed stating in the announcement a time limit on our suspension of testing.
He did not want us to tie our hands because at a later time we might have to resume tests in order to keep pressure on the Russians.
The President commented that we had a greater capability than the Russians to conduct useful underground tests.
He felt that we would not lose if the Russians did not conduct atmospheric tests and we continued our underground testing.
The draft release was revised and approved, it being understood that underground tests would continue.
Editorial Note On November 3, 1962, John Scali of the American Broadcasting Corporation met with Alexander S Fomin, Counselor of the Soviet Embassy in Washington and reputedly head of Soviet intelligence in Washington.
First, the United States must be patient with Soviet efforts to moderate Castro; second, the Soviet Union required reciprocal concessions; third, as Castro was adamantly opposed to inspection, the United States and Soviet Union should resolve the issue themselves, by inspection of Soviet ships at sea in international waters; fourth, the Soviet Union could not withdraw its surface-to-air missiles from Cuba for fear of leaving Castro defenseless; and fifth, the Soviet Union planned to leave some technicians in Cuba to train Cubans in the operation of defensive weapons.
Although original records of certain other Scali-Fomin conversations have been found, none for November 3 has been discovered.
Salinger notes that Scali's reports were regularly transmitted to members of the Executive Committee and that President Kennedy jokingly suggested that Scali should attend the sessions.
Prior to the reading of a summary of the latest intelligence on Cuba by Director McCone, Secretary Rusk said we may be experiencing the greatest deception in our history if the Russians are not removing their strategic missiles from Cuba.
The President suggested that the summary be sanitized and given to Mr McCloy to use in his conversations with Soviet representative Kuznetsov.
The President then read the attached instruction to all officials concerned with the present negotiations with the Russians on Cuba.
Ambassador Stevenson read a list of questions which he hoped would be answered.
Red Cross inspectors aboard neutral ships would go alongside the Soviet ships, board them and inspect them.
It was hoped that the Russians would accept this sea inspection system.
Ambassador Stevenson reported efforts to set up a verification system on the ground in Cuba.
The Russians are prepared to have UN inspectors look at the missile sites after the removal of the missiles and the destruction of the sites.
We have insisted on inspection in the interim during the time the missiles are being dismantled and the sites destroyed.
Castro may well refuse to accept arrangements agreeable to the Russians.
Examination of cargo at sea is very difficult and reading ship manifests in ports is not very helpful.
One suggestion is that we ask the Soviets for the list of weapons and missiles they sent to Cuba.
If we cannot arrange an inspection system at the docks in Cuba, we will have to work out some kind of inspection system at sea.
Secretary Rusk commented that the Soviets are under an obligation to see that the offer they made to us is implemented.
Ambassador Stevenson said there was little difficulty in seeing the missiles, but seeing the equipment is considerably more difficult.
He felt that we should try to get an ex poste facto inspection of all of Cuba.
Our last resort position would be to seek inspection at the home port of the Soviet ships taking the missiles from Cuba.
General Taylor suggested that we should ask the Russians for their withdrawal plan.
Ambassador Stevenson replied that we had no difficulty on this point with the Russians, but the Cubans were being recalcitrant.
He believed that we would eventually have to accept an inspection at sea or inspection at the debarkation port.
With reference to our overflights, Ambassador Stevenson said the Russian position was that they could not agree because the Cubans refuse to permit overflights.
The Russians say Cuba is an independent country which they cannot force to accept actions which are an invasion of their sovereign air space.
It may be necessary for us to drop back to inspection at sea or at debarkation ports.
Mr McCone noted that the SAM sites appeared to be under Soviet control.
The President asked whether we could obtain a sampling of outgoing cargoes by UN inspectors on docks at each of five ports.
However, this procedure does not provide permanent safeguards against reintroduction of strategic missiles.
Ambassador Stevenson suggested that one way to deal with the future would be to support the nuclear-free zone for Latin America.
Cuba might accept inspectors enforcing a nuclear-free zone treaty because inspectors would be visiting all Latin American countries.
Ambassador Stevenson commented that he believed the IL-28s would be removed, possibly by air.
Mr McCloy raised the question of whether the President should see Mikoyan.
Ambassador Stevenson predicted that the Cubans and the Russians would insist on a Security Council meeting.
Secretary Rusk commented that we were in no position to give assurances against an invasion of Cuba because no procedures had yet been worked out for the inspection of the withdrawal of the strategic missiles.
The President said he wanted any wording of a non-invasion guarantee to be approved by him before being discussed.
He preferred that we limit any commitment to that included in our letter to Khrushchev/4/ rather than making a reference to our obligations under the UN charter.
He pointed out that our commitment would refer only to invasion and not exclude use of the threat of force.
He asked for a paper which would summarize what we expect the Cubans to agree to, what we expect the Russians to agree to, and what we ourselves are prepared to agree to.
Secretary Rusk referred to reports of sabotage in Venezuela apparently instigated by a pro-Castro group or Cubans.
The President said we should be as tough as we can in dealing with such situations.
He said he thought we should force the Russians to answer whether they intended to withdraw the bombers.
Until the Russians answer on this point, he recommended that we reach no agreement of any kind.
We have seen nine on the ground and additional planes still in their crates.
The President said he was willing to talk to Mikoyan if Mikoyan's attitude was reasonable in his discussions with McCloy.
He felt that our attitude should be one of vigilance and watchful waiting.
We should publicly make clear that we were insisting on implementation of all of the deal made by Khrushchev.
So far, Khrushchev has not denied the position we have taken in the letter to him.
The President raised the question of what we should say about the IL-28s.
He believed we should say publicly that we considered bombers as part of the deal,e. weapons offensive to us which would be withdrawn from Cuba.
He agreed that we should delay announcing our public position on the bombers until tomorrow 75/ /5/McGeorge Bundy prepared a record of action dated November 3 for this meeting.
At the conclusion of the meeting, the President revised and approved an announcement to be made tomorrow upon the conclusion of our current nuclear test series.
SUBJECT Meeting of the Executive Committee of NSC-Saturday, November 3, 1962—4:30m.
McCone then read a November 3rd memorandum summarizing intelligence information-copy attached.
The memorandum reported that the whereabouts of missiles and equipment that had been removed was still unknown, and that uncrating and assembling of IL-28 bombers at San Julien was continuing.
The President then read a draft of his instructions to all concerned with present negotiations in Cuba, a November 3rd copy of which is attached.
There followed a long discussion of various means of verification, the importance of ground inspection, the dangers of deception and the difficult question of verifying that this operation would not be repeated at some future time.
Included in these discussions were the disposition of the IL 28s, the manning and ultimate disposition of the SAM sites, the MIG 21 problem and most particularly the responsibilities to the OAS countries to make suitable arrangements for their protection against continuation of subversion, insurgency, sabotage, etc. stemming out of Cuba.
Preparation for the McCloy/Kuznetsov meeting on November 4th/4/-CIA arranged sanitized versions of a number of points covered in the attached memorandum of 3 November.
This information was developed over night and on Sunday morning early Mr Sheldon and others visited Mr McCloy in Stanford, Connecticut and briefed him thoroughly on all subjects.
At about 1 1 o'clock McCone talked with McCloy who expressed appreciation for the briefing and seemed satisfied that he was armed with all necessary information to carry on his talks with Kuznetsov.
In the evening, Rusk called McCone, stating that Kuznetsov had indicated a willingness to have us look at the crates of the large missiles and that there were 42 missiles in Cuba.
He asked that CIA study all pertinent data in the interests of verifying this figure.
It will be recalled that CIA estimate had run to a probable 48 missiles in Cuba.
In the discussion with McCloy, McCone was advised that Kuznetsov would agree that we could inspect and photograph a number of crates on board ships as they departed from Havana; the crates would be dock loaded so that they would be readily visual from a ship pulling alongside, or from the air; however we would not be permitted to board the ships.
Apparently Kuznetsov did not feel he could arrange on-site inspection within Cuba.
Apparently Kuznetsov confirmed that there were a total of 40 launchers and that 24 launchers were operational at the time the whole matter was surfaced.
McCloy stated that Kuznetsov was non-responsive with respect to the operation of the SAM sites, to the withdrawal of the SAM sites; withdrawal of the IL 28s and the MIGs were not mentioned.
It estimated how long it would take to make a MRBM site operational and how soon United States reconnaissance could discover them.
Letter From President Kennedy to Chairman Khrushchev Washington, November 3, 1962.
With respect to the quarantine on shipments to Cuba, I am hopeful that arrangements can be worked out quickly by the United Nations which would permit its removal.
We were happy to agree to your suggestion that the International Committee of the Red Cross undertake responsibility for inspection.
You are, of course, aware that Premier Castro has announced his opposition to measures of verification on the territory of Cuba.
So far as incoming shipments are concerned, I understand that efforts are being made to have the International Red Cross carry out the necessary measures at sea and I hope that these will be successful.
In the meantime, perhaps the existence of the quarantine can be of assistance to Mr Mikoyan in his negotiations with Premier Castro.
I am hopeful we can dispose of this pressing matter quickly so that we can go on in a better atmosphere to the broader questions.
Sincerely, John F Kennedy/2/ /2/Printed from a copy that indicates President Kennedy signed the original.
Drafted by McGeorge Bundy, cleared by Rusk, and approved by U Alexis Johnson.
We have good evidence that the Russians are dismantling the missile bases.
There is some evidence of an intent to establish a submarine-tending facility.
This crisis is likely to move in one of two major directions in the next few weeks.
On the one hand, we may be able to make arrangements which will in fact ensure the verified removal of all Soviet offensive weapons systems from Cuba and establish reliable safeguards against their reintroduction.
Chairman Khrushchev's message of 28 October/2/ contained an explicit undertaking to dismantle, crate and return to the Soviet Union v the weapons which you describe as ""offensive""' under UN verification.
This requirement means removal of all offensive missiles and supporting equipment, and of all bombers and their equipment.
These items and associated equipment are generally described in my statement of September 13 and in my address of October 22; they are clearly defined in my Proclamation of October 2373/ All Americans should stick firmly to this position.
We should add that a submarine base is equally unacceptable-as Chairman Khrushchev has acknowledged by clear inference in his assurances on the fishing facility.
In blunt summary, we want no offensive weapons and no Soviet military base in Cuba, and that is how we understand the agreements of October 27 and 28.
We also have an obligation to work with other Western Hemisphere countries to get them to take a similar position.
This commitment in no way derogates from our Hemispheric obligations to deal with aggressive or subversive activities by the present regime in Cuba.
It is one with which all who have negotiated with the Soviet Government in the past are familiar.
It is a course in which bargains are fudged, secrecy prevents verification, agreements are reinterpreted, and by one means or another the Soviet Government seeks to sustain and advance the very policy which it has apparently undertaken to give up.
There is much evidence to support the conclusion that this is what is now beginning.
This second line of Soviet conduct is unacceptable to the United States.
We must have adequate arrangements for verification and inspection to be sure both that offensive weapons are removed and that no more are introduced.
Without them, both surveillance and the quarantine must be continued and both may need to be extended.
All the offensive weapons systems, including anything related to a submarine base, must be removed, or we shall have to consider further action of our own to remove them.
Finally, and most generally, the undertaking of the United States against invasion cannot take effect in any atmosphere of ambiguity or uncertainty such that the American Government or the American people would lack proper assurance against the existence in Cuba now, or at any future time, of any Soviet military base or offensive weapons.
The Soviet Government must recognize that the events of the last three weeks have made it impossible for opinion in this Hemisphere to be satisfied with Soviet assurances alone.
Verification is essential if the Governments of the Western Hemisphere are to be able to live with this situation without further action.
I repeat that this statement of policy should be taken as binding guidance by all who are engaged in the framing of instructions or the conduct of negotiations on this matter.
In this situation the Soviet Government has a clear choice between verified removal of all offensive weapons systems and renewed action by the United States.
It has no middle choice, and we believe its own interests should lead it to accept the honest and full execution of the Kennedy-Khrushchev agreement, and to see to it that Castro provides the necessary cooperation.
Detailed guidance in support of this general policy has been provided in approved instructions to USUN earlier this week.
The basic messages are 1147 of October 31,/4/ as amended, 1159 of November 1,151 1166 of November 1/6/ and 1177 of November 2/7/ A codification of this guidance is planned.
My only addition at present is that I now believe we should not be satisfied, as 1147 suggests, with aerial surveillance and post-removal ground inspection for departing offensive weapons.
We must also have some way of verifying the reexport of the missiles, and the best practicable way seems to be to count them on departing ships.
En famille, most informal, no other officials or any translator present.
McCloy started out with a resume of our aerial surveillance of yesterday of Cuba again expressing great concern over the evidence of the assembly of the IL-28's.
The buildup of these planes was in sharp contrast to the dismantling of the sites and largely nullified the good impression we were getting from the rapidity with which the missile sites were being dismantled.
K said that this had been something of a new subject to him and had been recently notified of it.
He said he had notified Moscow of the importance we placed on it and that he had doubted that these were properly classified as offensive weapons but this was only his opinion.
McCloy told him that the President had refrained from publicly referring to the buildup of the IL-28's as he was sure there would be a sharp reaction if it were made public.
McCloy also stated that there could be no doubt of the inclusion of these bombers in the list of offensive weapons and if any documentation were needed it would be easy to provide it.
Mc gave him our position on verification following the lines of 1 189/1/ stating we had been deceived by assurances given our officials in respect to the weapons introduced in Cuba and it was impossible for us now to act merely on a gentlemen's agreement.
McCloy said he was seriously troubled by the problem of verification as it seemed as if the Soviet Union would not be able to make good on their Chairman's commitment for UN observation of dismantling and removal although Mc felt certain that they could get Fidel's compliance if they really set about it.
Mc repeated we could not be satisfied with our reconnaissance alone and we would not be satisfied with the mere inspection of the abandoned missile sites.
We had to have evidence of the disposition and the removal of the weapons.
Mc referred to the stories about weapons in caves and said such stories were bound to arise if we did not have opportunity for inspection on the ground.
We had to have evidence which would convince us as practical men that the commitments to remove these weapons had been carried out.
K said they had been giving thought to this matter and the Chairman himself had been preoccupied with it as he was fully aware of his commitments and he wished to negotiate this thing honestly both in what he called the short run and the long run.
K referred to a suggestion that Mc had made regarding manifests that they had followed up.
He said manifests of what was going out would not be any good unless it was known what had come in, but in order to give us reasonable and practical assurance of their determination to fulfill their commitment and on instructions directly from the Chairman he wanted to submit the figures.
There were as of October 22, 24 completed sites and 16 in incomplete form, or a total of 40, and they had introduced a total of 42 missiles into Cuba.
All of these sites had been dismantled and rendered inoperable by November 2.
They would give us their schedule of removal to the ports and shipping schedules.
He said that we could bring our own vessels along side the Soviet ships which were taking the missiles out in such a way as to enable us to see and count the missiles.
Mc pointed out that the commitment to remove the missiles would include launching pads, trucks and other paraphernalia that goes with the missile and K said that he would assume this to be so.
Mc asked him whether as an alternative they would permit inspection in Soviet ports of the off-loading.
K thought this might involve complications and from all points of view it seemed better to do it at sea where we could be sure the ships had just come from Cuba.
He wanted us to know that what they had done and what they were prepared to do was not a result of weaknesssimply a desire to do all possible to maintain and consolidate the peace.
The balance would remain the same as it was before but he repeated that the Soviet Government wants honestly to negotiate this matter of the removal of the weapons at once.
They want the quarantine lifted as it is a wartime rather than a peacetime measure.
K gave Mc a rough translation of a message from the Chairman/2/ to the effect that the Soviet Union seriously and sincerely sought to find a solution and make an effort to solve all the questions quickly on a basis of mutual conciliation and on the conditions which were stated in the letters of the President and the Chairman; and the Soviet Union expected that the United States will cooperate completely and promptly and lift the quarantine.
The United States should not doubt the full sincerity of the Soviet's statement regarding the dismantling and shipping out of the offensive weapons.
K indicated that if Castro gave his consent to an on-site inspection they might be willing to accept verification of the shipment at the docks in Cuba, but he said it was necessary to plan for other eventualities.
He repeated that the whole job of dismantling and preparation for removal could be effected by November 10 and presumably the shipping schedule would begin then.
There were other questions in addition to this matter of verification, particularly the one as to the form of the protocol or the declaration giving the United States guaranties.
Those guaranties would have to be clearly expressed against invasion by the United States, in accordance with the President's letter or permitting the mounting of an attack from the soil of the United States together with the use of the good offices of the United States to induce other Latin American countries to adopt the same attitude.
K said there should also be some guaranties given against subversive activities against Cuba, at which point Mc interposed that this would be very difficult indeed to comply with inasmuch as Cuba was a hotbed of subversion itself and that we would and could do nothing which could be interpreted as support of Castro or his regime.
K also mentioned Guantanamo and Mc told him that it was out of the question that the United States would permit Guantanamo to be in any way related to the solution of the present Cuban problem.
K rather pressed for a commitment on the part of the United States to be willing to discuss the subject at sometime in the future but Mc told him that no joining of the Guantanamo question with this incident was feasible.
As to the form of the United States guaranty, K said he was not particularly concerned as to whether it was by protocol or by declaration although Zorin felt very strongly about this.
Mc brought up the question of submarines and possible submarine bases and K said that this was something he was familiar with and he felt sure, particularly since the Chairman himself had given assurances on this subject, that the port was presently a fishing port with no intention of making it a submarine port.
Mc referred to the presence of submarines in the area and stated that we were quite concerned about this as they seemed to be appearing in conjunction with the whole weapons buildup.
Mc said he must realize what we object to is the establishment of a Soviet military base in Cuba— that defensive weapons can be supplied to the Cubans if they want to but they must be in the hands of Cubans and not Soviet troops or technicians.
At this point K made quite an argument about our characterization of weapons in Turkey as defensive that we were calling offensive in Cuba.
Mc said that we would be glad to talk to him about our bases abroad at some other time.
Mc also referred to the SAM sites and repeated that we could not give any credit to the statement that this weapons system was manned and operated by Cubans rather than Soviet technicians.
Mc stated the evidence was conclusive of Soviet operations and that it was apparent that the whole complex was part and parcel of the buildup of the missile sites.
In regard to the President's requirement that there should be some safeguards against the re-introduction of these weapons beyond a mere undertaking by the Soviet Union, he made reference to U Thant's idea of a UN presence in the Caribbean on a reciprocal basis which should include UN observers in some sections of the United States.
Mc told him that he hadn't come to any conclusions in this regard although this might be dealt with in some way by a declaration of nuclear free zones, a thought to which K had previously referred.
K again came back to the question of subversion and a guaranty against subversion.
Mc again repeated that we could not take any steps which would mean support of Castro or establishment of a safe haven for Castro's subversive activities against the rest of the hemisphere.
Mc also told him that his representative, Morozov, in working out the Red Cross deal seemed to be rather sticky in regard to ships from which Red Cross personnel could inspect incoming vessels as well as in some other matters.
Mc told him that K should be prepared to induce the Bloc ships to agree to the same procedures that the Soviet ships would agree to.
Talk then turned to the type of ship which would be used by the Red Cross personnel.
Mc urged him to accept a United States ship rather than a neutral ship as a United States ship would cost less and could be put into operation more expeditiously.
K immediately countered with a Soviet ship stating that one could probably be made available just as rapidly from Havana as any United States ship.
Mc told him that he could not tell him whether a Soviet ship would be acceptable and argued in favor of a United States ship such as a hospital ship or any other United States ship utilizing a tender bearing a Red Cross or UN flag which tender would actually serve as the means by which incoming ships were boarded.
K then brought up the hail and pass formula and said that he understood that all the Red Cross would do would be to hail and pass.
Mc disabused him of this and said that there would be no sense in having Red Cross personnel if this were all that was to be done.
The hail and pass formula had been intended as a temporary measure to permit Soviet ships for a brief interval to enter Cuban ports carrying food or other innocent cargo until the Red Cross operation could be put into effect provided this could be done reasonably promptly.
Finally K registered an objection to our constant reference to the deception that the officials of this country had been exposed.
There had been no obligation to tell us of the character of weapons they were introducing into the Island of Cuba.
Mc said that this was probably so but there was an obligation among the friendly countries to respond truthfully to an inquiry when so much was at stake.
At the end K asked Mc what his reaction was to his earlier proposal to which Mc replied that it showed evidence of their effort to try to meet the problem of their inability to obtain the on-the-ground inspection to which the Soviet Union had been committed, but he could not say more until after Mc again had consulted his Government.
K said we must take this as the basis for other long range negotiations because it is clear we should not risk the danger involved in another such confrontation.
Mc refrained from asking what these long range negotiations might cover for fear of having them complicate the immediate problem, but he agreed as to the necessity of eventual long range discussions and hoped that the constructive solution of the present difficulty would lead to them.
Director McCone presented the intelligence summary ./l/ He then compared our figures on strategic missiles in Cuba with the Russian figures which Kuznetsov gave to McCloy yesterday 72/ Kuznetsov says the Russians sent forty-two missiles to Cuba.
We had estimated that there were forty-eight Soviet missiles in Cuba, thirty-three of which we have actually seen.
November 5, in which the lack of agreement between the Soviet Union and Cuba on inspection in Cuba and verification of the removal of Soviet missiles was highlighted.
Secretary McNamara reported on the aerial reconnaissance missions of yesterday.
Secretary Rusk reported on the McCloy/Kuznetsov conversation yesterday.
The Russians are prepared to give us an actual missile inventory, including the shipping schedules, so that we can count the missiles on their way out.
Secretary Rusk said he continued to believe that we must have inspection arrangements on the ground in Cuba.
We need a UN presence in Cuba, plus a Latin American atom-free treaty zone, if Castro will accept such.
If not, we must refuse to give a commitment not to invade and we must continue aerial reconnaissance missions and our present intelligence efforts on the ground in Cuba.
We are unable to put forward an inspection plan until we know what Mikoyan has proposed to the Cubans and what Castro has agreed to accept.
The President recalled that Zorin wanted a protocol covering the agreement on the withdrawal of the Soviet missiles.
Secretary Rusk called attention to the difficulty of legislating on Communist subversion in the hemisphere.
How we would get a guarantee that no Soviet submarine base would be built in Cuba.
What was our position if a demand were made that UN observers inspect refugee camps in the United States and in other areas where Cuban nationalists might receive military training.
The President's basic question was how much should we give for a permanent UN presence in Cuba.
He believed that we should keep open the question of accepting UN observers in the United States until we knew exactly what we would get in return.
Secretary Rusk emphasized that all arrangements arising out of the current situation must focus on Cuba.
As to future assurances, we want a permanent UN presence in Cuba for which we would guarantee that we would not invade.
For us, the UN presence would be a guarantee against the reintroduction of strategic missiles.
We should think about overflights of Cuba and the United States and about a UN presence in Florida as well as in Cuba.
Mr Bundy said that the UN route to the demilitarization of Cuba would lead to a realignment of our relations with Castro.
Secretary Rusk said we must under all circumstances continue to overfly Cuba.
The President asked how we would continue to overfly as long as the SAM sites were operational.
Secretary Rusk replied that our overflights would continue by tacit agreement of the Cubans and the Russians.
The President asked whether a group was at work on what to tell McCloy in answer to questions raised by Kuznetsov.
He believed that if Mikoyan asks Kuznetsov about our future assurances with respect to Cuba, McCloy should be in a position to respond.
Secretary Rusk preferred to delay sending our final position to McCloy until after we knew what took place in Havana.
The President agreed that no release should be made to the press of pictures which reveal Soviet activity yesterday in Cuban ports.
He added that we might have the International Red Cross inspect incoming ships and we would look at ships leaving Cuba.
He agreed that we could delay reaching a final position on the permanent arrangements, but we should not discuss any arrangements for the time being with Mikoyan.
It summarized the decisions and major points of the discussion and noted that a cable would be sent to McCloy which would give answers to the questions posed by Kuznetsov on November 4.
Dobrynin asked earlier this morning if I could see him and I made arrangements to have him come to the office at 12 o'clock Noon.
He delivered another letter from Mr Khrushchev ./l/ I read it and found that it concerned our list of offensive weapons that Stevenson had submitted.
I explained to Dobrynin that from the first it had been made clear by the Soviet Union that they would get rid of any weapons which we considered offensive and certainly it was very clear that the bombers, the IL 28's, had to go.
Dobrynin replied that he was not familiar with that position and also did not know what was on the list that Khrushchev mentioned in his letter.
I told him I would get a copy of it; that it was basically the same list of weapons that had been listed in the President's Quarantine Proclamation.
During the middle of the conversation the President called and said that he had just received some preliminary information which indicated that several of our planes over Cuba had been fired upon.
In ending my conversation with Dobrynin, therefore, I stressed the fact that any arrangements that were made were dependent upon there not being any incidents in the air above Cuba.
According to Problems of Communism the Russian text was transmitted by the Soviet Foreign Ministry to the Soviet Embassy in Washington on November 4.
In such a move, I will say frankly, I see a wish to complicate the situation, because it is impossible indeed to place into the category of ""offensive"" weapons such types of weapons which have always been referred to as defensive weapons even by a man uneducated militarily— by a common soldier, not to say of an officer.
It is hard for us to understand what aim is being pursued by the introduction of that list, by setting forth such a demand-in any case it must be some other aim, but not a desire for a speediest clearing of the atmosphere.
And it is being done at a moment when we have already agreed with you on the main questions and when we on our part have already fulfilled what we agreed upon-have dismantled rocket weapons, are loading them now on ships and these weapons will be soon shipped from Cuba.
That is why I feel greatly concerned with the advancing of such demand by the American side, concerned with its possible consequences, if necessary reasonableness is not displayed.
The demand which has been set forth is evidently pursuing, as I have already said, some other aims and that-I would wish, Mr President, that you understand me correctly-can lead not to the betterment of our relations but, on the contrary, to their new aggravation.
We should understand the position each side is in and take it into consideration but not overburden, not complicate our relations, especially at such an important moment when measures are being taken to eliminate the acute tension and bring these relations to a normal state.
That is why I would ask you, Mr President, to meet our anxiety with understanding, to take measures on your side in order not to complicate the situation and to give your representatives a directive to eliminate the existing tension on the basis upon which both of us have agreed by having exchanged public messages.
You spoke to the effect that missiles which you called offensive should be removed from Cuba.
You in your turn gave assurances that the so-called ""quarantine"" would be promptly removed and that no invasion of Cuba would be made, not only by the United States but by other countries of the Western hemisphere either.
Let us then bring the achieved understanding to a completion, so that we could consider that each side has fulfilled its pledges and the question has been settled.
If, however, additional demands are made, then that means only one thing-the danger that the difficulties on the way to eliminating tension created around Cuba will not be removed.
For you and I will evidently have to deal not only with elimination of the remnants of the present tension-there lies ahead for you and me a great, serious talk on other questions.
May be there exist some considerations, but they are beyond our comprehension.
As for us, we view the introduction of additional demands as a wish to bring our relations back again into a heated state in which they were but several days ago.
SUBJECT Discussion with Mr Bundy at 1:45 this date I commented on Governor Stevenson's report #1630, November 4th, midnight,/l/ summarizing the McCloy/Kuznetsov meeting.
I stated that we felt that the meeting was constructive, stating McCloy had adhered to policy but pointed out that the examination of missile cases on ships would not necessarily constitute convincing proof that missiles were actually exported; that no arrangement has been agreed on IL 28s, and that no form of verification short of a combination of aerial and on-site inspection would give us final answer.
Bundy gave me a copy of draft of President Kennedy's cable to Stevenson and McCloy, November 5, copy attached.
In addition I stated that it seemed to me that we were going too far in assuming that we would have to grant reciprocal rights if we insisted on UN on-site inspection, of which my point was that the Kennedy /Khrushchev agreement provided for inspection of the dismantling, removal and continuing absence of offensive weapons and this agreement in no way referred to inspection of United States territory.
Therefore it seems to me that the effect of the negotiation is to set up a situation in which we will have to submit to a situation not anticipated in the agreement if we are going to force the other sides to fulfill their obligations.
I advised Bundy that the building of the expensive SAM installation and the large number of operators required were the principal reasons that I suspected installation of offensive missiles.
I was now equally disturbed at the Soviet's insistence that the SAMs remain in being and operational and their obvious deception in claiming they are operated by Cubans and not by Soviet personnel.
I explained that I now feel that the SAMs are being left there to shield the reintroduction of missiles at some future time or the emplacement of missiles which are secretly detained on the Island.
The SAMs are useless as a defense against our military action as our attacking planes can come up in low undetected and destroy them instantly.
We will be in complete ignorance of their activities and the reintroduction of weapons at a future time is a distinct possibility.
In later conversation with the AG I made both of these points very emphatically.
He will be given Soviet assurances and economic assistance to permit him to ""ride through"" the recent fiasco.
He therefore has more for his own defense and to pass out to insurgent groups throughout the hemisphere.
He will have a maritime capacity against Central America and the northern tier of Latin American by the utilization of 6 Khronstad and 18 Komar vessels.
He will have an air strike capability against this same area with IL 28s.
By retaining the SAMs, he will provide a shield against aerial inspection and therefore can arrange with the Soviets for the re-introduction of MRBMs and IRBMs with reasonable safety as the SAMs will protect him against our U-2 photography.
This was the original purpose of the installation of the SAMs and there can be no question but that their retention is for no other purpose than to provide this same protection for the installation of MRBMs in the future.
Sophisticated communication equipment will give him an improved capability to communicate with Moscow and also to broadcast instructions to his agents and operators throughout the Hemisphere.
Your conversation with Kuznetsov/1/ shows progress on one important point but raises a number of questions on which I wish to comment.
If we can see and count for ourselves departing missiles and associated equipment, that will be an important forward step and we see promise in the procedures Kuznetsov proposed as long as it is clear that reliable observation, not Soviet photography alone, is essential.
One serious gap in Kuznetsov's proposal respecting missiles is the absence of any reference to nuclear warheads.
Our interest in their absence is intense, and you should emphasize to all Soviets that since Khrushchev spoke to Knox of the presence of such warheads in Cuba, we need assurances on warheads as much as on missiles themselves.
Moreover, we need to know about possible warheads for IL28's and even MIG 21's.
This warhead problem highlights the general importance of post-removal verification in Cuba itself.
Forty-two missiles is a plausible number and not inconsistent with our own reports, but Soviet figures, while genuinely useful, are not a wholly reliable basis for action.
In this connection you should not hesitate to press home with Kuznetsov the fact that past Soviet deception remains a major element in our reaction to this whole episode.
It may be true, as Kuznetsov argues, that the Soviets had no obligation to tell us exactly what they were doing in a country like Cuba, but what actually happened in this case was that they repeatedly gave us assurances of what they were not doing.
These assurances came from highest levels, and proved absolutely false.
Your insistence on the removal of IL28's, the unacceptability of any submarine support facility, and obvious Soviet involvement in SAM complex are all correct and worth repeating insistently.
You are also right to resist guarantees on subversion and to keep Guantanamo out of it.
No long-term arrangements can be settled until after we have reached clear understanding on verified removal of offensive weapons systems, including IL28's.
OAS-approved right of surveillance will be kept intact and is important to both sides as last week's flights showed.
In this connection you should report to Kuznetsov that today one of our low-level flights was harassed by MIG's apparently manned by Soviets.
No damage was done, and it is not clear that MIG's fired, but episode provides good basis for you to drive home our view of critical importance of unimpeded surveillance unless and until better arrangements can be made.
You should remind Kuznetsov that surveillance must and will continue, and that further interference will be sure to bring prompt reaction including armed action if necessary.
We do not wholly exclude some form of international inspection involving Caribbean areas outside Cuba, at a later stage.
Ours is an open society, and the principle of reciprocal inspection is one of high value to us if it can be established in the right circumstances.
You should emphasize that such reciprocal inspection can only be considered in return for permanently verified absence of any significant Soviet military presence in Cuba.
You might try out the notion of removal of SAM sites in this connection.
In discussing these procedures, Stevenson and McCloy were to stress that the United States still insisted on UN inspection in Cuba to guard against hidden or reintroduced offensive weapons.
This time they may prepare themselves for action on the sea in the Cuban area.
Does Admiral Anderson think they could build up a secret subterranean base which will put them on a near parity with us if we should once again blockade.
John F Kennedy/ 1/ /1/Printed from a copy that indicates President Kennedy signed the original.
This message was ostensibly from Bromley Smith, but it was sent apparently at the instruction of the President.
Deliver immediately to Executive Secretariat for Ball and Alexis Johnson.
As I have communicated to General Wheeler, through General Clifton, the plans for X/l/ seem thin.
Considering the size of the problem, the equipment that is involved on the other side, the nationalistic fervor which may be engendered, it seems to me we could end up bogged down.
The range of circumstances in which this plan would be implemented ranged from support of a widespread rebellion of the Cuban population to military action to divert Castro from military adventure against Guantanamo.
The concept called for airborne assault in the vicinity of Havana by two airborne divisions, followed as quickly as possible by an amphibious assault by the 2d Marine Division/Wing Team over beaches to the east of Havana.
Depending upon the amount of time for build-up, additional forces would be committed incrementally until approximately five full divisions, with necessary supporting troops, would be engaged.
I think we should plan to use them and call up any guard divisions we have available.
