Overview and Map Major Events The Cold War was a long period of open, yet restrained, tension between the democracies of the western world and the Event Image Description Date/s Fact communist countries of the east.
The democratic west was led by the United States, whilst the communist east was led by the Soviet Union – the two world superpowers at the time.
Whilst the two superpowers never directly declared war on one The ‘Big Three’ –Stalin, Roosevelt and Churchill met at Yalta in Roosevelt and Ukraine, known as the Yalta Conference.
They agreed that Stalin 4th – 11th Stalin got on well, another, they fought indirectly via proxy wars, an arms race, and the space race, in order to gain dominance.
The map below shows the extent of their alliances in 1980, towards the end of the Cold War.
Yalta Conference would join the war against Japan, countries liberated from February but Churchill was occupation would be allowed to choose their government and wary of the 1945 Soviet leader.
The Big Three met again in Potsdam, near Berlin, after The USA had Germany’s defeat.
Although the press spoke of co-operation, 17th July – tested the atomic Potsdam relations were tenser than at Yalta.
President 2nd August Conference there was less pressure to show a united front.
Soviet forces Truman took controlled most of Eastern Europe and the USA had also tested 1945 Stalin to one side the atomic bomb. to tell him.
In March 1946, 5th March first to call the Curtain Speech he made a speech that some historians believe marked the start 1946 divide in Europe the ‘Iron Curtain’. of the Cold War.
Via the ‘Berlin May 1949 blockade in May Airlift’, Allied planes delivered vital supplies to Berliners.49.
As a result of the Cold War, Korea had split into two states, with both claiming to be the sole legitimate government of all of As no peace 25th June treaty was signed, Korea.
The 1950 – 27th the countries are Key People war eventually ended in stalemate.
George Marshall – George Marshall Joseph Stalin – was the Communist On 2am on Sunday 13 August 1961, East German soldiers erected 13th In 1961, United States and was an American soldier and statesman.
After the a barrier along the border between east and west Berlin, ending August Soviet tanks an aid programme of $17 billion was needed to rebuild death of the Communist Leader Lenin, Stalin won a faced each other Europe.
At first the United States Congress was reluctant to agree, vicious grapple for power before eventually The Berlin Wall free movement.
Guards kept a 1961 – 9th at the wall for 16 look out for anyone trying to cross the barrier.
They had orders to November hours – coming but when communists banned all other political parties establishing himself as a totalitarian dictator.
After World War II, Stalin 1989 close to war. minds and approved the plan in April 1948.
The USA put missiles in Italy and Turkey, whilst The USA wanted to create new markets for United States goods to prevent creating a buffer between the democratic West.
It is considered the point at which Florida in the another worldwide depression in the wake of war. domination is seen as one of the predominant factors in starting the Cold War came closest to nuclear war.62 USA. the Cold War.
Vietnam was split – the North and South 1st Images of John F Kennedy – Commonly known Nikita Khrushchev – Nikita engaged in a war lasting over 19 years.
It also napalm-burnt as JFK, John F Kennedy was the 35th President of the Khrushchev was the successor to Joseph Stalin, who led sprouted the Laotian and Cambodian Civil Wars, and resulted in November villagers turned United States, who served between 1961-1963 at the the Soviet Union between 1953 and 1964 – the tensest The Vietnam War all 3 states becoming Communist.
It was a deadly war, with 1955 – 30th public opinion height of the Cold War.
He was more liberal than his around 2 million innocent civilians believed to have perished.
April 1975 against the war in involved managing relations with the Soviet Union.
He predecessor in domestic policy, and also cut Soviet the USA. authorized the failed Bay of Pigs invasion, but subsequently forces.
In 1964, Soviet forces were bogged down for ten years fighting in an December Muslim Afghan failure.
The Afghanistan people disliked extremely difficult terrain against a formidable enemy backed 1979 – 15th assassinated in 1963.
After ten years of Communism February because it was an Sir Winston Churchill – was a Fidel Castro – Fidel Castro was a fighting and 70,000 Soviet casualties, the USSR withdrew. 1989 atheist ideology.
British politician who served as the Prime Minister Cuban communist, revolutionary, and politician, who between 1940 and 1945 and again from 1951 to 1955. helped to lead the Communist revolution in Cuba.
He He took over after a disastrous start to the war in was allied with the Soviet Union, and caused grave The Berlin Wall had separated communist eastern section of Berlin Germany from west Berlin since 1961.
However, the Soviet On October 3, which Nazi Germany conquered much of Europe.
The concern to the United States as communism was now in the 9th 1990 Germany Fall of the Berlin Union was beginning to collapse, and was struggling to hold onto manner in which he forged crucial alliances with countries like the Americas.
The CIA took charge of trying to overthrow Castro’s November was officially US and Russia undoubtedly aided the Allies victory.
After the war, government, using Cuban exiles, but got their strategy disastrously Wall East Germany.
In November 1989, the Central Committee of East reunified into a Germany opened up free movement across the wall.
In In doing 1989 single country. he was one of the first public figures to hypothesise about the wrong in the Bay of Pigs invasion.
Castro became a hero for his significant dangers of an ‘Iron Curtain’ descending across Europe. victory, and stayed in power right up until 2011. so, one of the major symbols of the Cold War itself was abolished.
