AN ILLUSTRATED HISTORY OF THE ny aap — Longman AN ILLUSTRATED HISTORY OF THE USA Pearson Education Limited, Edinburgh Gate, Harlow, Essex CM20 2JE, England and Associated Companies throughout the world. www.longman.com © Longman Group UK Limited 1990 Alll rights reserved; no part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise, without the prior written permission of the Publishers.
Ferris, Archives of 76, Bay Village, Ohio; 20 From History of the English Speaking Peoples.
Gift of Mrs Russell Sage, 1909; 28 Gift of Bela J Ward and H Judd Ward.
Courtesy of the Missouri Historical Society ; 49 The Underground Railroad, by Charles T, Webber, Cincinnati Art Museum; 50 Bettmann/Hulton Picture Company; 52.
His aim was to open up a shorter trade route between the two continents.
In Asia, he intended to load his three small ships with silks, spices and gold, and sail back to Europe a rich man.
Then he turned west across the unknown waters of the mid-Atlantic Ocean.
Ten weeks after leaving Spain, on the morning of October 12, he stepped hore on the beach of a low sandy island.
It was not the edge of Asia that he had reached, but islands off the shores ofa new continent, Europeans would soon name the new continent America, but for many years they went on calling its inhabitants Indians.
Only recently have these first Americans been described more accurately as “native Americans” or Amerindians.
Their ancestors had already been living there for maybe 50,000 years when Columbus stepped on to the beach in San Salvador.
We say “maybe” because nobody is completely sure, Scientists believe that the distant ancestors of the Amerindians came ta America from Asia.
This happened, they say, during the earth’s last ice age, long before people began to make written records.
At that time a bridge of ice joined Asia to America across what is now the Bering Strait.
From Alaska the hunters moved south and east across America, following herds of caribou and buffalo as the animals went from one feeding ground to the next.
Maybe 12,000 years ago, descendants of these first Americans were crossing the isthmus of Panama into 1 THe First AMERICANS South America.
About 5,000 years later their camp fires were burning on the frozen southern tip of the continent, now called Tierra del Fuego—the Land of Fire.
People living in highland areas of what grass with tiny seeds that were good to eat.
They cultivated the wild grass with great care to make its seeds larger.
By 5000 nc Amerindians in Mi and eating beans, squash and pepper wandering huntet snow Mexico found a wild co were growing ‘The Pueblo people of present day Arizona and New Mexico were the best organized of the Amerindian They lived in g farming peoples roups of villages, or in towns which were built for safety on the sides and tops of cliffs.
The Pueblo made clothing and blankets from cotton which grew wild in the surrounding deserts.
On their feet they wore boot-shaped leather moccasins to protect their legs against the sharp rocks and cactus plants of the desert.
Long Europeans came to America the Pucblo were building networks of canals across the deserts to bring water to their fields.
In one desert valley modern archacologists have traced canals and ditches which enabled the Pueblo to irrigate 250,000 acres of farmland. befor A people called the Apache were the neighbors of the Pueblo.
They wandered the deserts nd mountains in small bands, hunting deer and gathering wild plants, nuts and roots.
They also obtained food by raiding their Pueblo neighbors and stealing it.
The Apache were fierce and warlike, and they were much feared by the Pueblo, The Buffalo Hunt by Charles M Russell, Amerindians hunting buffalo.
A New Worip The Iroquois were a group of tribes—a “nation” — who lived far away from the Pueblo and the Apache in the thick woods of northeastern North Americ Like the Pueblo, the Iroquois were skilled farmers fields cleared from the forest they worked together growing beans, squash and twelve different varieties of maize, They were also hunters and fishermen.
They used birch bark canoes to carry them swiftly along the rivers and lakes of their forest homeland.
The Iroquois lived in permanent villages, in long, wooden huts with barrel-shaped roofs.
These huts were made from a framework of saplings covered by sheets of elm bark.
They were as feared by their neighbors as the Apache of the western deserts were feared by theirs.
Around their huts they built strong wooden stockades to protect their villages from enemies.
Eager to win glory for their tribe and fame and honor for themselves, they often fought one another.
From boyhood on, male Iroquois were taught to fear neither pain nor death, Bravery in battle was the surest way for a warrior to win respect and a high position in his tribe.
Many miles to the west, on the vast plains of grass that stretched from the M ppi River to the Rocky Mountains, there was another warrior nation.
But they were better known by the name which other Amerindians gave to them which means “‘enemi The Sioux grew no crops and built no houses.
For food, for shelter and for clothing they depended upon the buffalo, Millions of these large, slow-moving animals wandered across the western grasslands in vast herds.
The buffalo never remained on one pasture for long, so everything the Sioux owned designed to be carried easily, Within hours they could take down the tepees, the conical buffalo-skin tents that were their homes, pack their belongings in lightweight leather bags—“‘parfleches""—and move off after the buffalo.
A hot ember would be sealed inside a buffalo horn filled with rotted wood.
There it would smolder for days, ready to bring warmth from the old village to the new.
The story says that one morning long ago a lone man awoke, face to the sun, emerging from the soil.
There was nothing but soft and quaking mud, for the earth itself was still young.
Up and up the man drew himself until he freed his body from the clinging soil.
At last he stood upon the earth, but it was not solid, and his first few steps were slow and uncertain.
But the sun shone and the man kept his face turned toward it, In time the rays of the sun hardened the face of the earth and strengthened the man and he ran and leaped about, a free and joyous creature, From this man sprang the Dakota nation and, so far as we know, our people have been born and have died upon this plain; and no people have shared it with us until the coming of the European.
This large cone-shaped tent was invented by the buffalo hunters of the w grasslands.
It was built round a framework of about twelve slim, wooden poles approximately twenty feet long.
The thin ends of the poles were tied together with strips of buffalo hide and the poles were raised and spread until their bottom ends formed a circle about fifteen feet in diameter.
As many as forty buffalo hides were sewn together then spread over the frame, their ends fastened to the ground by pegs.
A doorway covered with a flap of skin was left in the side and an opening at the top acted as a chimney.
The outside of the tepee was decorated with painted designs that had religious or historical meanings. ern.
The lifestyle of the people of North America’s northwest c ast was different again.
They gathered nuts and berries from the forests, but their main food pecially the salmon of the rivers and the ocean.
Potlatches The “potlatch” was a popular ceremony amongst the wealthy Pacific coast tribes of North America.
A modern potlatch is a kind of party at which guests are given gifts, but the original potlatch ceremonies went much further.
A few months’ work during this season provided the people of the Pacific coast with enough food to last a whole year.
This abundance of food gave the tribes of the Pacific coast time for feasting, for carving and for building.
Tribes like the Haida lived in large houses built of wooden planks with elaborately carved gables and doorposts.
These were specially decorated tri trunks which some tribes placed in front of their houses, but which the Haida made part of the house i If.
The carvings on the totem pole were a record of the history of the family that lived in the house.
The Amerindian peoples of North America developed widely varied ways of life.
All suited the natural environments in which the tribes lived, and they lasted for many centuries.
But the arrival of Europeans with their guns, their discases and their hunger for land would eventually destroy them all. away everything that he owned to show how wealthy he was and gain respect.
To avoid disgrace, the person receiving the gifts had to give back even more.
We have seen that the Asian ancestors of the Amerindians arrived in America long before Columbus.
In the centuries after 1492 stories and legends grew up about other adventurous seamen having reached the New World long before Columbus.
One legend tells how a Buddhist monk named Hoei-Shin sailed from China to Mexico in ap 459.
Another claims that an Irish monk named Brendan the Bold landed in America in Ap 551.
Yet another says that the first suropean to reach the New World was Leif Ericson, Lucky Leif,” a Viking sailor from Iceland.
And as recently as 1953 a plaque was set up at Mobile Bay in Beal Leif Ericson sighting America.
An impression by a nineteenth-century artist. 8 the modern American state of Alabama which reads “In memory of Prince Madoc, a Welsh explorer who landed on the shores of Mobile Bay in 1170 and left behind, with the Indians, the Welsh language,” All these stories have their supporters.
But only in the case of the Vikings have modern scholars found idence to support the old legends.
In the 1960s firme archaeologists uncovered traces of Viking settlements in both Newfoundland and New England.
In Newfoundland the archaeologists found the foundations of huts built in Viking style.
These objects were important pieces of evidence that the Vikings had indeed reached 2 EXPLORERS FROM EUROPE An Aztec dr Spanish conques America, Until the arrival of Europeans none of the Amerindian tribes knew how to make iron.
And the spindle whorl was exactly like those used in known Viking lands such as Iceland.
The Vikings were a sea-going people from Scandinavia in northern Europe.
They were proud of their warriors and explorers and told stories called “sagas” about them.
The saga of Leif Ericson tells how he sailed from Greenland to the eastern coast of North America in about the year ap 1000.
The hostility of the local Amerindians and the dangers of the northern seas combined to make them give up their attempt to colonize Vinland.
The Vikings sailed away and their discovery of Vinland was forgotten except by their storytellers.
It was the Spanish who began the lasting European occupation of America.
When Columbus returned to Spain he took back with him some jewelry that he had obtained in America.
The reason is that to the end of his life Columbus believed that his discoveries were part of Asia.
The man who did most to correct this mistaken idea was Amerigo Vespucci.
During the late 1490s he wrote some letters in which he described two voyages of exploration that he had made along the coasts of South America.
Some years later Vespucci’s letters were read by a German scholar who was revising an old geography of the world.
The letters convinced the scholar that Vespucci was correct, and that the lands beyond the Atlantic were a new continent.
To honor Vespucci the scholar named them America, using the feminine form of Vespucci’s first name as the other continents had female names.
A New Wortp The Fountain of Youth To sixteenth century Europeans America was a land of marvels, a place where nothing was impossible.
Some even believed that there they might discover a way to regain their lost youth.
Ponce de Leén was a Spanish conquistador who came to the New World with Columbus on the explorer’s second voyage.
The Amerindian people of Puerto Rico told de Leon that to the north lay a land rich in gold.
This northern land, they said, also had an even more precious treasure—a fountain whose waters gave everlasting youth to all those who drank from it.
In the spring of 1513 de Leén set off in search of the magic fountain, He landed in present day Florida and sailed all round its coast searching for the miraculous waters.
Augustine there, the first permanent European settlement on the mainland of North America. adventurers crossed the Atlantic Ocean to search for more of the precious metal.
It was a lust for gold that led Hernan Cortés to conquer the Aztecs in the 1520s.
The Aztecs were a wealthy, city-building Amerindian people who lived in what is today Mexico.
In the 1530s the same lust for gold caused Francisco Pizarro to attack the equally wealthy empire of the Incas of Peru.
A stream of looted treasure began to flow across the Atlantic to Spain from a new empire built up by such conquerors — “conquistadores”’—in Central and South Ameri In the years that followed, other Spanish conquistadores took the search for gold to North America.
Between 1539 and 1543 Hernando de Soto and Francisco Coronado, working separately, explored much of the southern part of what is now the United States.
He led his expedition westward, discovering the Mississippi River and traveling beyond it into Texas and Oklahoma.
Coronado traveled north from Mexico, searching for the “Seven Cities of Gold” that Amerindian legends said lay hidden somewhere in the desert.
But he and his men became the first Europeans to see the Grand Canyon of the Colorado River and they journeyed as far cast as Kansas before returning to Mexico.
Discovery of the Mississippi, a romanticized nineteenth-century painting by William H Powell.
De Soto and his followers are shown displaying their cannon and 4 c70s5 10 a group of frightened Amerindians.
The journeys of men such as de Soto and Coronado gave Spain a claim to a large amount of land in North America.
They also led to the founding of some of the earliest permanent European settlements there.
In 1497 King Henry VII of England hired an Italian seaman named John Cabot to explore the new lands and to look again for a passage to Asia.
This time he sailed south along the coast of North America as far as Chesapeake Bay.
In later years English governments used them to support their claims to own most of the east coast of North America.
In 1524 the French king, Francis I, sent an Italian sailor named Giovanni Verrazano for the same purpose as Columbus and Cabot~to find lands rich in gold and anew sea route to Asia.
Verrazano sailed the full length of the east coast of America, but found neither.
Today a bridge which carries his name, the Verrazano Narrows Bridge, is one of the city’s most impressive sights.
Ten years later another French explorer, a fisherman from Normandy named Jacques Cartier, discovered the St.
He returned to France and reported that the forests lining the river’s shores were full of fur-bearing animals and that its waters were full of fish.
The next year he sailed further up the river, reaching the site of the present-day city of Montreal.
Cartier failed to find the way to Asia that he was looking for, but he gave France a claim to what would later become Canada.
Europeans could only do this by establishing settlements of their own people.
By the seventeenth century plenty of people in Europe were ready to settle in America.
In the hundred years after 1600, Europeans set up many colonies in North America for reasons like these.
Replicas of the ships that carried the first settlers to Jamestown in 1617.
For hours the frightened sailors struggled with wet ropes and snapping canvas sails.
Atlast, as dawn colored the eastern skic the storm came to an end, Men dropped to the decks, exhausted.
A few weeks later, on May 20, the sailors tied their ships to trees on the banks ofa broad and deep river.
They named the river the ames, in honor of James |, king of England, the country from which they had set sail five long months before.
On the swampy banks they began cutting down bushes and trees and building rough shelters for themselves.
But their litle group of huts became the first lasting English settlement in America.
And although their English homeland was many miles away across a dangerous occan, they failed to grow enough food to feed themsely They were too busy dreaming of gold.
The settlers had been sent to Jamestown by a group of rich London investors.
The Company's purpose was to set up colonies along the Adantic coast of North America, between 34° and 38° north latitude.
It was a joint stock company -—thatis, the investors paid the costs of its expeditions and in return were given the right to divide up any profits it made.
Most of all, they hoped that the colonists would find gold, as the Spanish conquistadores had done in Mexico. ny.
The Company’s directors hoped The colonists eagerly obeyed the Company’s orders toscarch for gold.
There was “no talk, no hope nor work, but dig gold, wash gold, load gold”, wrote one of their leaders, Captain John Smith.
And then the colonists began to die~in ones, in twos, finally in dozens.
Jamestown r 1609-1610, Of the settlement in October 1609, only sixty were still alive st point in the winter of (00 colonists living in the in March 1610.
Stories reached England about settlers who were so desperate for food that they dug up and ate the body ofan Amerindian they had killed during an attack.
The Virginia Company gathered homeless children from the streets of London and sent them out to the colony.
The Spanish ambassador in London told of three condemned criminals who were given the choice of being hanged or sent to Virginia.
For many English people these carly years of the seventeenth century were a time of hunger and suffering.
Incomes were low, but the prices of food and clothing climbed higher every year.
And i the crops failed, ome English people decided that it ing the possibility of hardships in Virginia to escape from the certainty of them at home.
This seemed more important than the reports of disease, starvation and cannibalism there.
In they starved was worth ris Virginia a poor man could hope for a farm of his own to feed his family.
VIRGINIAN BEGINNINGS The captain and the princess s the most able of the Captain John Smith w original Jamestown settlers.
An energetic 27-yearold soldier and explorer, he had already had a life full of action when he landed there in 1607.
It was he who organized the first Jamestown colonists and forced them to work.
If he had not done that, the infant settlement would probably have collapsed.
When food supplies ran out Smith set off into the forests to buy corn from the Amerindians.
According to a story that he told later (which not everyone believed), the Amerindians were going to beat his brains out when Pocahontas, the twelve-year-old daughter of the chief, Powhatan, saved his life by shielding his body with her own.
Pocahontas went on to play an important part in Virginia's survival, bringing food to the starving settlers.
In 1609 Smith was badly injured in a gunpowder explosion and was sent back to England.
Five years later, in 1614, Pocahontas married the tobacco planter John Rolfe.
Pocahontas died of smallpox in 1617 while waiting to board a ship to carry her back to Virginia with her newborn son.
Many Virginians today claim to be descended from him and so from Pocahontas.
A New Worip Brides for sale Very few women settled in carly Virginia, so in 1619 the Virginia Company shipped over a group of ninety young women as wives for its settlers.
The price must have scemed reasonable, for within a very short time all the young women were married. i Fora number of years after 1611, military governors ran Virginia like a prison camp.
Earlier visitors to America, like Sir Walter Raleigh, had brought the first dried leaves of tobacco to England.
Its popularity had been growing ever since, for smoking, for taking as snuff, even for brewing into a drink.
In Virginia a young settler named John Rolfe discovered how to dry, or “‘cure,” the leaves in a new way, to make them milder.
They cleared new land along the rivers and ploughed up the streets of Jamestown itself to plant more.
The price ofa good horse in Virginia, for example, was sixteen pounds of top quality tobacco.
The possibility of becoming rich by growing tobacco brought wealthy 14 A label from Wills tobacco, Wills was one of the most famous English tobacco companies. men to Virginia.
They obtained large stretches of land and brought workers from England to clear trees and plant tobacco.
Soon the houses and barns of their estates, or “plantations,” could be seen through the trees along the banks of the James river.
Most of the workers on these early plantations were “indentured servants” from England.
They promised to work for an employer for an agreed number of years—about seven was average-in exchange for food and clothes.
Luckier ones were given a small piece of land to start a farm of their own -if they were still alive.
Life in Virginia Martin's Hundred, an’ early English settlement on the Jamel river.
A modem artist impression, based on archaeological evidence 3 VircINnian B continued to be hard.
Diseases like malaria and wars against the Amerindians continued to kill hundreds of settlers.
Between 1619 and 1621 about 3,560 people left England to settle in Virginia.
Virginia’s affairs had been controlled so far by governors sent over by the Virginia Company.
Now the Company allowed a body called the House of Burgesses to be set up.
The burgesses were clected representatives from the various small settlements along Virginia’s rivers.
Though few realized it at the time, the Virginia House of Burgesses was the start of an important tradition in American life—that people should have a say in decisions about matters that concern them.
The blacks were set to work in the tobacco fields with white indentured servants from England.
But there was a very serious difference between their position and that of the whites working beside them, White servants were indentured for a fixed number of years.
Their masters might treat them badly, but they knew that one day they would be free.
In fact they were slaves—although it was years before their masters openly admitted the fact.
The English government put an end to the Company and made itself responsible for the Virginia colonists.
There were still very few of them, Fierce Amerindian attacks in 1622 had destroyed several settlements and killed over 350. colonists.
Out of nearly 10,000 settlers sent out since 1607, a 1624 census showed only 1,275 survivors.
Building a new homeland in the steamy river valleys of Virginia had proved harder and taken longer than anyone had expected.
But this first society of English people overseas had put down living roots into the American soil.
Other struggles lay ahead, but by 1624 one thing was clear— Virginia would survive.
The lost colony The Jamestown settlers were not the first English people to visit Virginia.
Twenty years carlier the adventurer Sir Walter Raleigh had sent ships to find land in the New World where English people might settle.
He named the land they visited Virginia, in honor of Elizabeth, England’s unmarried Queen.
They built houses and a fort, planted crops and searched— without success — for gold.
But they ran out of food and made enemies of the local Amerindian inhabitants.
The colonists were led by an artist and mapmaker named John White, who had been a member of the 1585 expedition.
On August 18th the couple became the parents of Virginia Dare, the first English child to be born in America.
When his ships reached Roanoke in August 1590, he found the settlement deserted.
There was no sign of what had happened to its people except a word carved on a tree—“*Croaton,” the home of a friendly Indian chief, fifty miles to the south.
Some believe that the Roanoke settlers were carried off by Spanish soldiers from Florida.
Others think that they may have decided to go to live with friendly Indians on the mainland.
PuRITAN New ENGLAND “Pilgrims” are people who make a journey for religious reasons.
To them it means a small group of English men and women who sailed across the Atlantic Ocean in the year 1620, The group’s members came to be called the Pilgrims because they went to America to find religious freedom.
This is because they see them as the most important of the founders of the future United States of America.
The Europe that the Pilgrims left behind them was torn by religious quarrels.
For more than a thousand years Roman Catholic Christianity had been the religion of most of its people.
By the sixteenth century, however, some Europeans had begun to doubt the teachings of the Catholic Church.
They were also growing angry at the wealth and worldly pride of its leaders. ly in the century a German monk named Martin Luther quarreled with these leaders.
He claimed that individual human beings did not need the Pope or the priests of the Catholic Church to enable them to speak to God.
A few years later a French lawyer named John Calvin put forward similar ideas.
Calvin claimed that each individual was directly and personally responsible to God.
In most countries people were expected to have the same religion as their ruler.
In the 1530s the English king, Henry VIII, formed a national church with himself as its head.
In the later years of the sixteenth century many English people believed that this Church of England was still too much like the Catholic Church.
They disliked its elaborate ceremonies and the rich decorations of its churches.
When James I became King of England in 1603 he warned the Puritans that he would drive them from the land if they did not accept his ideas on religion.
To escape this persecution, a small group of them left England and went to Holland.
Holland was the only country in Europe whose government allowed religious freedom at this time.
The people of Holland welcomed the little group of exiles, But the Puritans never felt at home there.
Here they persuaded the Virginia Company to allow them to settle in the northern part of its American lands.
On September 16, 1620, the Pilgrims left the English The Mayflower Compact When the Pilgrims arrived off the coast of America they faced many dangers and difficulties.
They did not want to put themselves in further danger by quarreling with one another.
Before Janding at Plymouth, therefore, they wrote out an agreement, In this document they agreed to work together for the good of all.
In the Compact the Plymouth settlers agreed to set up a government~a “‘civil body politic’ —to make “just and equal laws’ for their new settlement.
All of them, Pilgrims and Strangers alike, promised that they would obey these laws.
In the difficult years which followed, the Mayflower Compact served the colonists well.
It is remembered today as one of the first important documents in the history of democratic government in America.
For years the Mayflower had carried wine across the narrow seas between France and England.
For sixty-five days the Mayflower battled through the rolling waves of the north Atlantic Ocean.
At last, on November 9, 1620, it reached Cape Cod, a sandy hook of land in what is now the state of Massachusetts.
Cape Cod is far to the north of the land granted to the Pilgrims by the Virginia Company.
But the Pilgrims did not have enough food and water, and many were sick.
On December 21, 1620, they rowed ashore and set up camp ata place they named Plymouth.
The frozen ground and the deep snow made it difficult for them to build houses.
Before spring came, half of the little group of a hundred settlers were dead.
Friendly Amerindians gave them seed corn and showed them how to plant it.
It was not the end of their hardships, but when a ship arrived in Plymouth in 1622 and offered to take passengers back to England, not one of the Pilgrims accepted.
Ten years later a much larger group of almost a thousand colonists settled nearby in what became the Boston area.
These people left England to escape the rule of a new king, Charles I Charles was even less tolerant than his father James had been of people who disagreed with his policies in religion and government.
Its population grew quickly as more and more Puritans left England to escape persecution.
Many years later, in 1691, it combined with the Plymouth colony under the name of Massachusetts.
The ideas of the Massachusetts Puritans had a lasting influence on American society.
One of their first leaders, John Winthrop, said that they should build an ideal community for the rest of mankind to learn from.
To this day many Americans continue to see their country in this way, as a model for other nations to copy.
The Puritans of Massachusetts believed that governments had a duty to make people obey God's will.
They passed laws to force people to attend church and laws to punish drunks and adulterers.
Roger Williams, a Puritan minister in a settlement called Salem, believed that it was wrong to run the affairs of Massachusetts in this way.
He objected particularly to the fact that the same men controlled both the church and the government.
Williams believed that church and state should be separate and that neither should interfere with the other.
In 1535 they sent men to arrest him, But Williams escaped and went south, where he was joined by other discontented people from Massachusetts.
On the shores of Narragansett Bay Williams and his followers set up a new colony called Rhode Island.
Rhode Island promised its citizens complete religious freedom and separation of church and state.
The leaders of Massachusctts could not forgive the people of Rhode Island for thinking so differently from themselves.
Plymouth Puritans going to church 18 William Penn signing a treaty with the Amerindians By the end of the seventeenth century a string of English colonies stretched along the east coast of North America.
Under a charter from the English king, Charles Il, Penn was the proprictor, or owner, of Pennsylvania.
Penn belonged to a religious group, the Society of Friends, commonly called Quakers.
These customs had helped to make them very unpopular with English governments.
When Penn promised his fellow Quakers that in Pennsylvania they would be free to follow their own ways, many of them emigrated there.
Penn's promise of religious freedom, together with his reputation for dealing fairly with people, brought settlers from other European countries to Pennsylvania.
From Ireland came settlers who made new farms in the western forests of the colony.
Most were members of small religious groups who had left Germany to escape persecution.
A few years later, in 1670, the English founded the new colonies of North and South ‘arolina.
The last English colony to be founded in North America was Georgia, settled in 1733.
In November, 1621, they sat down to eat together and to give thanks to God for enabling them to survive the hardships of their first year in America.
The Wampanoag and Pequamid people of the nearby forests had shared corn with the Pilgrims and shown them the best places to catch fish.
Later the Amerindians had given seed corn to the English settlers and shown them how to plant crops that would grow well in the American soil.
Minuit buys Manhattan In the 1620s settlers from Holland founded a colony they called New Netherlands along the banks of the Hudson River.
An Amerindian people called the Shinnecock used the island for hunting and fishing, although they did not live on it.
In 1626 Peter Minuit, the first Dutch governor of the New Netherlands, “bought’” Manhattan from the Shinnecock.
He paid them about twenty-four dollars’ worth of cloth, beads and other trade goods.
Like all Amerindians, the Shinnecock believed that land belonged to all men.
They thought that what they were selling to the Dutch was the right to share Manhattan with themselves.
But the Dutch, like other Europeans, believed that buying land made it theirs alone.
These different beliefs about land ownership were to be a major cause of conflict between Europeans and Amerindians for many years to come.
And the bargain price that Peter Minuit paid for Manhattan Island became part of American folklore.
The colonies stretched from New Hampshire in the north to Georgia in the south.
Colonial Settlement 1650-1770 In the far north was the New England group, centered on Massachusetts.
Since the time of the Pilgrims the people of New England had spread inland and along the coast.
In these they sailed to catch cod or to trade with England and the West Indices.
But important towns had grown up whose people earned their living by trade and manufacturing.
The size of Philadelphia was not the only thing that impressed visitors.
Long before most English cities, its streets were paved with brick and strect lamps were lit every night.
All three towns owed much of their prosperity to the profits of the transatlantic trade that they carried on with England.
Their ships exported furs, timber, tobacco, and cotton, and brought back fashionable clothes, fine furniture, and other manufactured goods.
The Shuth East Pioyectiof Me Ci Pl pli ved ter Cooper sy 5 Coroniat Lire 1n AMERICA The people of the Middle Colonies were usually more tolerant of religious and other differences than the New Englanders.
Many of them also had German, Dutch or Swedish ancestors rather than English ones.
In their hot and fertile river valleys wealthy landowners farmed large plantations.
They lived in fine houses, with wide, cool verandahs from which they could look out over their fields of tobacco or cotton.
But the prosperity of the plantation-owning southerners was already beginning to depend upon it.
Close by stood groups of smaller, more simple buildings—stables, washhouses, blacksmiths’ shops and the little huts in which the black slaves lived.
And almost always a river flowed nearby, with a wharf where sea-going ships could be loaded to carry the plantation’s crops to England.
In all three groups of colonies most people still lived less than fifty miles from the coast.
Those people furthest inland had traveled up tidal rivers like the James and the Hudson, clearing the trees and setting up farms along their banks.
During the fifty years after 1733 settlers moved deeper into the continent.
They traveled west into A New Wortp central Pennsylvania, cutting down forests of oak trees to make hilly farms.
The settlers cleared the land of trees, then cut the trees into logs and planks.
They then ploughed between the tree stumps, sowed their seeds, and four months later harvested the crops of corn and wheat.
But if the soil was rocky, or poor in plant foods, life could be hard and disappointing.
Scttlers with poor soil often left their farms and moved westward, to try again on more fertile land.
As they traveled inland they passed fewer and fewer farms and villages.
This area, where European settlement came to an end and the forest homelands of the Amerindians began, was called the frontier.
Fresh waves of settlers pushed the frontier steadily westwards in their search for fertile soil.
Because of this, frontier farms and villages were often separated by miles of unsettled land.
For such reasons the people of frontier communities had to rely upon themselves for almost everything they needed.
They developed their own kinds of music, entertainment, art and forms of religious worship.
Yet they also needed to work together, helping each other with such tasks as clearing land and building houses and barns.
The combination of these two ideas—a strong belief that individuals had to help themselves and a need for them to cooperate with one another—strengthened the feeling that people were equal and that nobody should have special rights and privileges.
The frontier way of life helped democratic ideas to flourish in America.
Today’s Americans like to think that many of the best values and attitudes of the modern United States can be traced back to the frontier experiences of their pioneer ancestors.
This thickly forested mountain range runs roughly parallel to the Atlantic coast of North America and stretches for hundreds of miles.
When settlers reached the foothills of the Appalachians they found waterfalls and rapids blocking the rivers they had been following westwards.
In 1775 a hunter and explorer named Daniel Boone led a party of settlers into the mountains.
With a party of thirty axmen he cut a track called the Wilderness Road through the forested Cumberland Gap, a natural pass in the Appalachians.
In the years which followed, Boone’s Wilderness Road enabled thousands of settlers to move with horses, wagons, and cattle into these fertile lands.
This means that in all of them people had a say in how they were governed.
At the head of this government was a governor, chosen in most cases by the English king.
To rule effectively, these governors depended upon the cooperation of assemblies elected by the colonists.
In most of the colonies all white males who owned some land had the right to vote.
Since so many colonists owned land, this meant that far more people had the vote in America than in England itself—or in any other European country at this time.
Lawrence River and south towards the frontier areas of the English colonics on the Atlantic coast.
Louisiana, named for the French king, Louis XIV, stretched across the center of the continent.
It included all the lands drained by the Mississippi River and its tributaries.
In the middle of the cightcenth century most of the forests and plains of both of these vast areas were still unexplored by Europeans.
The French claim to own them was based upon journeys made in the previous century by two famous explorers.
From 1603 onwards, Champlain explored the lands on both sides of the St.
The two most important of these posts later grew into the cities of Quebec and Montreal.
The other French explorer was René La Salle, La Salle was a fur trader, explorer and empire builder all in one.
At last he reached the Gulf of Mexico, where the great river empties into the sea.
The French claim that Louisiana belonged to them worried both the British government and the American colonists.
They would be able to keep the colonists to the east of the Appalachian Mountains and stop them from moving westwards.
After several wars earlier in the eighteenth century, in 1756 Britain and France began fighting the Seven Years War.
Led by their forceful Prime Minister, William Pitt the Elder, the British sent money and soldiers to North America.
In 1758 British and colonial forces captured the French strongholds of Louisburg on the Gulf of St.
In 1760 Montreal fell to them, The war was ended by the Peace of Paris. which was signed in 1763.
France gave up its claim to Canada and to all of North America east of the Mississippi River.
Even before the final defeat of the French, colonists in search of better land began to move over the Appalachian Mountains into the Ohio valley.
To prevent war with the Amerindian tribes who lived in the area, the English king, George III, issued a proclamation in 1763.
It forbade colonists to settle west of the Appalachians until proper treaties had been made with the Amerindians.
They became angrier still when the British government told them that they must pay new taxes on imports of sugar, coffee, textiles, and other goods.
The government also told them that they must feed and find shelter for British soldiers it planned to keep in the colonies.
It had cost British taxpayers a lot of money to defend the colonies during the French and Indian War.
Trade laws and “‘sleeping dogs”’ Until the 1760s most Americans seemed quite content to be ruled by Britain.
An important reason for this was the presence of the French in North America.
So long as France held Canada and Louisiana, the colonists felt that they needed the British navy and soldiers to protect them.
Another reason the colonists accepted British rule was that the British government rarely interfered in colonial affairs.
A century earlier the British Parliament had passed some laws called Navigation Acts.
These listed certain products called “enumerated commodities” that the colonies were forbidden to export to any country except England.
The colonists did not care much cither about import taxes, or duties, that they were supposed to pay on goods from abroad.
Ships could unload their cargoes on hundreds of lonely wharves without customs officers knowing.
He knew the independent spirit of the British colonists in America and wanted no trouble with them.
Merchants believed that the new import taxes would r it more difficult for them to trade ata profit.
Other colonists believed that the taxes would raise their costs of living.
They also feared that if British troops stayed in America they might be used to force them to obey the British government.
This last objection was an early ample of a belief that became an important tradition in American political life—that people © should not allow governments to become too powerful.
A New Wortp A cartoon showing the burial ofthe Stamp Act In 1765 the British Parliament passed another new law called the Stamp Act.
This too was intended to raise moncy to pay for the defense of the colonies.
It said that the colonists had to buy special tax stamps and attach them to newspapers, licenses, and legal papers such as wills and mortgages.
Ever since the early years of the Virginia settlement Americans had claimed the right to clect representatives to decide the taxes they paid.
Now they insisted that as “frecborn Englishmen” they could be taxed only by their own colonial assemblies.
All over the colonies merchants and shopkeepers refused to sell British goods until the Act was withdrawn.
In Boston and other cities angry mobs attacked government officials selling the stamps.
In articles and speeches he attacked the British government’s claim that it had the right to tax the colonists.
On March 5, 1770, a Boston mob began to shout insults at a group of British soldiers.
One of the crowd tried to take a soldier’s gun and the soldier shot him.
Without any order from the officer in charge, more shots were fired and three more members of the crowd fell dead.
Samuel Adams used this “Boston Massacre” to stir up American opinion against the British.
He wrote a letter which inaccurately described the happening as an unprovoked attack on a peacefull group of citizens.
To make his account more All this opposition forced the British government to withdraw the Stamp Act.
But it was determined to show the colonists that it had the right to tax them.
In 1767 the British placed new taxes on tea, paper, paint, and various other goods that the colonies imported from abroad.
A special customs office was sct up in Boston to collect the new duties.
It was not until 1770, when the British removed all the duties except for the one on tea, that there was less trouble.
But some colonists in Massachusetts were determined to keep the quarrel going.
In December 1773, a group of them disguised themselves as Mohawk Amerindians.
Adams’ letter and Revere’s picture were seen by thousands of people throughout the colonics.
Together they did a great deal to strengthen opposition to British rule.
The powers of the colonial assembly of Massachusetts were greatly reduced.
On June 1, 1774, British warships took up position at the mouth of Boston harbor to make sure that no ships sailed in or out.
A few months later, in September 1774, a group of colonial leaders came together in Philadelphia.
They formed the First Continental Congress to oppose what they saw as British oppression.
But it called upon all Americans to support the people of Massachusetts by refusing to buy British goods.
They began to organize themselves into groups of part-time soldiers, or “militias,” and to gather together weapons and ammunition.
Their orders were to .seize weapons and ammunition that rebellious colonists had stored in Concord, a nearby town.
Signal lights were hung from the spire of Boston’s tallest church anid two fast riders, Paul Revere and William Dawes, jumped into their saddles and galloped off with the news.
In the village of Lexington the British found seventy American militiamen, farmers and tradesmen, barring their way.
These part-time soldiers were known as ““Minutemen.”-This was because they had promised to take up arms immediately —in a minute— whenever they were needed.
The first shots had been fired in what was to become the American War of Independence.
The British soldiers reached Concord a few hours later and destroyed some of the weapons and gunpowder there.
But by the time they set off to return to Boston hundreds more Minutemen had gathered.
The next month, May 1775, a second Continental Congress met in Philadelphia and began te act as an American national government.
It set up an army of 17,000 men under the command of George Washington.
Washington was a Virginia landowner and surveyor with experience of fighting in the French and Indian War.
The Continental Congress also sent representatives to seek aid from friendly European nations — especially from France, Britain's old enemy.
On July 2, 1776, the Continental Congress finally took the step that many Americans believed was inevitable.
The Declaration of Independence is the most important document in American history.
It was written by ‘Thomas Jefferson, a landowner and lawyer from Virginia.
After repeating that the colonies were now “free and independent states.” it officially named them the United States of America.
One of the first members of the Continental Congress to sign the Declaration of Independence was 7 FIGHTING FOR INDEPENDENCE John Hancock of Massachusetts.
Hancock picked up the pen and wrote his name in large, clear letters— “large enough,” he said, “for King George to read without his spectacles.
The Declaration of Independence was more than a statement that the colonies were a new nation.
Ideas such as these were a central part of the political traditions that the colonists’ ancestors had brought with them from England.
Colonial leaders had also studied them in the writings of an English political thinker named John Locke.
Men like Jefferson combined Locke’s ideas with their own experience of 29 A New Wortp Thomas Paine, the voice of revolution One of the most influential voices calling for American independence was that of an Englishman.
He was a Republican named Thomas Paine, who immigrated to America in 1774.
Two years later, in a brilliantly written pamphlet called Common Sense, Paine became one of the first to persuade Americans to make a complete break with Britain.
It had an enormous effect on American opinion and prepared people’s minds for independence.
Officers life in America to produce a new definition of democratic government.
This new definition said that governments should consist of representatives elected by the people.
It also said that the main reason that governments existed was to protect the rights of individual read parts of it to their troops.
Later in 1776, as Washington’s discouraged army retreated from the advancing British, Paine rallied the Americans with a new pamphlet called The Crisis.
Its words are still remembered in times of difficulty by Americans today.
In one of the darkest hours of the war Paine’s words helped to save Washington’s armies from melting away and inspired new supporters to join the American cause.
After some early successes, the Americans did badly in the war against the British.
Washington’s army was more of an armed mob than an effective fighting force.
Few of the men had any military training and many obeyed only those orders that suited them.
Officers quarreled constantly over their rank and American general Nathan Heard reading the Declaration of Independence to his troops.
Washington set to work to train his men and turn them into disciplined soldiers.
But this took time, and meanwhile the Americans suffered defeat after defeat.
Washington wrote to his brother that he feared that the Americans were very close to losing the war.
The British commander was cut off from his supplies and his men were facing starvation.
Here, after swearing never again to fight against the Americans, the prisoners were put on board ships and sent back to England.
Benjamin Franklin, the American ambassador to France, was delighted when he received the news of the victory at Saratoga.
He used it to persuade the French government to join in the struggle against Britain.
In February 1778, the French king, Louis XVI, signed an alliance with the Americans.
French ships, soldiers and money were soon playing an important part in the war.
From 1778 onwards most of the fighting took place in the southern colonies.
In September 1781, George Washington, leading a combined American and French army, surrounded 8,000 British troops under General Cornwallis at Yorktown, on the coast of Virginia, Cotnwallis was worried, but he expected British ships to arrive and rescue or reinforce his army.
When the news reached London the British Prime Minister, Lord North, threw up his hands in despair.
The British started to withdraw their forces from America and British and American representatives began to discuss peace terms.
In the Treaty of Paris, which was signed in September 1783, Britain officially recognized her former colonies as an independent nation.
The treaty granted the new United States all of North America from Canada in the north to Florida in the south, and from the Atlantic coast to the Mississippi River.
The Marquis de Lafayette In 1777 the Marquis de Lafayette, a twenty-yearold French aristocrat, landed in America.
But he came also to avenge the death of his father, who had died fighting the British in the French and Indian War.
Lafayette served without pay in the American army and became a major-general on the staff of George Washington.
In the next four years he fought in many battles, proving himself to be a brave and determined soldier.
He won Washington’s respect and friendship and played a part in the final defeat of the British at Yorktown in 1781.
When the war ended Lafayette returned to France, ‘There he continued to support American interests, When the French revolution broke out in 1789, political opponents had Lafayette imprisoned and took away his estates.
A few years later it granted him land in Louisiana, In 1824 the now aging Lafayette returned to visit the United States.
The American people greeted him as a hero, a living symbol of the birth of their nation, The Marquis de Lafayette.
In 1783 most Americans felt more loyalty to their own state than to the new United States.
Miss Liberty holds the new flag and places the laurel wreath of victory on George Washington’s head.
It made its own laws and its own decisions about how to run its affairs.
The first big problem that faced the new United States was how to join together these sometimes quarrelsome little countries into one united nation.
During the War of Independence the states had agreed to work together in a national Congress to which each state sent representatives.
The agreement that sct up this plan for the states to cooperate with one another was called the Articles of Confederation, It had begun to operate in 1781.
Under the Articles of Confederation the central government of the United States was very weak.
It was given certain rights, but it had no power to make those rights effective.
Congress could vote to set up a United States army and navy, but it could only obtain soldiers and sailors by asking the states for them.
It could vote to spend money, but it had no power to collect taxes to raise the money.
When, for example, Congress needed money to pay debts owed to France, some states refused to pay.
When the War of Independence was over, individual states began to behave more and more like independent nations.
In some places states even began fighting one another to decide the ownership of particular pieces of frontier land.
The weakness of its government made it difficult for the new United States to win the respect or the help of foreign nations.
The British felt that the American government was so weak that it was not worth dealing with.
George III was sure that the Americans would soon be begging to rejoin the British Empire.
Thomas Jefferson, now the American representative in France, wrote home sadly that the United States was the least important and least respected of all the nations with embassies in Paris.
Tt was clear that for the United States to survive there would have to be changes in the Articles of Confederation.
In February 1787, Congress asked each state to send delegates to a meeting or “convention,” in Philadelphia to talk about such changes.
The smallest state, Rhode Island, refused, but the other twelve agreed.
The delegates to the Constitutional Convention disagreed about the changes that were needed.
At the same time most wanted a stronger THE LEGISLATIVE central government.
They believed that a stronger central government would protect their property and business interests.
The original purpose of the Constitutional Convention was simply to revise the Articles of Confederation.
They set out the plan for this government in a document called the Constitution of the United States.
The Constitution gave the United States a “federal” system of government.
A central, or federal, authority has some of it and the rest is in the hands of local authorities in the separate regions that make up the country.
The new Constitution still left the individual state governments with a wide range of powers.
It gave it the power to collect taxes, to organize armed forces, to make treaties with foreign countries and to control trade of all kinds.
The Constitution made arrangements for the election ofa national leader called the President to take charge of the federal government.
It would be his job to run the country’s everyday affairs and to sce that people obeyed the laws.
The rules and arrangements for Ligee THE PEOPLE [Elect The structure of the new government. the Government of the U.S.A. shown here are laid down in the Constitution.
When the ceremony came to an end he officially took control of the nation’s government.
He said later that it was “the interest and duty of a wise people to discourage” them.
Even so, he favored a strong federal government, so he tended to govern in a Federalist manner.
The way that he dealt with the “Whiskey Rebellion” of 1794 was an example of this.
Some of this they made The law-making, or “legislative,” powers of the federal government were given to a Congress.
Congress was to consist of two parts, the Senate and the House of Representatives.
In the Senate each state would be equally represented, with two members, whatever the size of its population.
The number of representatives a state had in the House of OF into whiskey, which they then sold.
When the federal government placed a tax on the whiskey the Pennsylvania farmers refused to pay it.
They burned down the houses of the federal tax collectors, or “revenue agents,’’ who tried to make them pay.
Washington sent an army of 15,000 men to support the rights of the federal government.
The soldiers arrested a few of the leaders, but later the President pardoned them.
After this there was no more organized resistance to paying the whiskey tax.
They made it in stills hidden away in the woods, in places that reyenue agents could not find.
Such illegal “moonshine” whiskey —so called because it was often made at night—continues to be made to this day.
President Washington reviewing the troops at Fort Cumberland, Maryland during the Whiskey Rebellion.
Finally, the Constitution set up a Supreme Court to control the “judicial” part of the nation’s government.
The job of the Supreme Court was to make decisions in any disagreements about the meaning of the laws and the Constitution.
To each branch it gave powers that the other two did not have; cach had ways of stopping wrongful actions by either of the other two.
This was to make sure that no one person or group could become powerfull enough to take complete control of the nation’s government.
The American people had rebelled against being ruled in an undemocratic fashion by Britain.
They did not want to replace the unrepresentative rule of the king and parliament in London with the rule of a tyrannical central government in the United States itself.
This was that the federal government might try to weaken the power of the states to run their own individual affairs.
To remove this danger the Constitution said exactly what powers the federal government should have and what powers should be reserved for the states.
It said that the states would be allowed to run their internal affairs as they wished, provided that they kept to the rules of the Constitution.
Before the new system of government sct out in the Constitution could begin, it had to be approved by a majority of the citizens in at least nine of the thirteen states.
People made speeches and wrote newspaper articles both for and against the Constitution. ally, those in favor won the argument.
In June 1788, the assembly of the state of New Hampshire voted to accept, or “ratify,” the Constitution.
The Constitution went into effect in March 1789, But it was still not really complete.
The reason for the Bill of Rights was that the original Constitution had said nothing about the rights and freedoms of individual citizens.
In 1801 John Adams, who in 1797 had succeeded George Washington as President of the United States, appointed a new head of the Supreme Court.
The Court's new Chief Justice, to give him his official title, was John Marshall.
Marshall was a 46-year-old lawyer and politician who had fought in the American army during the War of Independence.
Marshall was to be Chief Justice of the Supreme Court for thirty-five years.
But he made his most important decision as a judge only two years after he was appointed.
In an 1803 legal case known as Marbury Madison, Marshall stated that the Supreme Court has the power to decide whether particular American laws are according to the Constitution.
If the Supreme Court decides that any law is “repugnant to the Constitution” —that is, does not agree with it—the Court can declare the law illegal, or “void,” and so prevent it from being enforced.
In claiming it, Marshall established firmly the most important ba dea in American constitutional law.
This is, that the Supreme Court is the final authority in deciding the meaning of the Constitution, Ifits Justices decide that any law is “unconstitutional,” that law can no longer be enforced.
The first political parties The Constitution and the Bill of Rights illustrated two different sides of American political life.
On the one hand people saw that the country needed a strong and efficient central authority.
On the other hand they wanted to protect individual rights and freedoms.
Differing ideas about the importance of these issues gave birth to the first political parties in the United States.
For this reason it appealed to richer people, who believed that a strong central government would make their property safer.
To people such as small farmers and craftsmen this seemed likely to make it easier for people like themselves to control government actions. —— 9 ——— YEARS OF GROWTH Iroquois warriors attacking settlers.
Land was becoming scarcer and more expensive in the American colonies by the time they quarreled with Britain.
After 1783 more and more people set off for the new territories between the Appalachian Mountains and the Mississippi River that the Treaty of Paris had granted to the United States.
Armed only with axes, guns, and plenty of self-confidence, they journeyed across the mountains to make new farms and settlements out of the wilderness.
Amerindians who already lived on these lands saw the settlers as thieves who had come to steal their hunting grounds.
The settlers struck back, sometimes destroying entire Amcrindian villages.
The new government of the United States tried at first to keep the peace by making treaties with the Amerindians.
By 1817 President James Monroe was writing that their hunting way of life “requires a greater extent of territory than is compatible with the progress of civilized life and must yield to it.
Monroe believed that there was only one way for the Amerindians to survive.
They would have to be moved from lands that white settlers wanted to other lands, further west.
There, undisturbed by settlers, they would be free either to continue their old ways of life or to adopt those of white Americans.
In 1830 the United States government passed a law called the Indian Removal Act to put this policy into practice.
The law said that all Indians living east of the Mississippi River would be moved west to a place called Indian Territory.
This was an area beyond the Mississippi that was thought to be unsuitable for white farmers.
Some people claimed that the Indian Removal Act was a way of saving the Amerindians.
But most saw it simply as a way to get rid of them and seize their land.
The Cherokees were an Amerindian people who suffered greatly from the Indian Removal policy.
Their lands lay between the state of Georgia and the Mississippi River.
By the early nineteenth century the Cherokees had changed themselves from a stone age tribe into a civilized community.
Old Hickory The first six Presidents of the United States were all from rich families.
Also, all of them came from long-settled states along the Atlantic coast.
His name was Andrew Jackson and he had been born into a poor family on the western frontier.
Jackson had commanded the American army at the Battle of New Orleans in 1814.
Hickory is a particularly tough kind of wood that grows in American forests.
It was the votes of such people that made him President in 1828 and then again in 1832.
And what they wanted above all were three things—cheap money, cheap manufactured goods and cheap land.
Jackson provided cheap money by encouraging banks to make loans at low rates of interest.
And he provided cheap land by forcing the Cherokees and other eastern Amerindians to move west of the Mississippi.
Some believe that he was concerned only about winning popularity and the power that went with it.
But others say that his policies of giving voters what they wanted—“Jacksonian democracy”— were an important landmark in making the United States a more genuinely democratic country.
They had become Christians and attended church and sent their children to school.
They had a written language and published their own newspaper in both Cherokee and English.
They even wrote for themselves a Constitution modeled on that of the United States.
Congress declared that their lands belonged to the state of Georgia and they were divided up for sale to white settlers.
The Cherokees were driven from their homes and forced to march hundreds of miles averland to what is now the state of Oklahoma.
In bitterly cold winter weather American soldiers gathered thousands of Cherokee men, women, and children, and drove them west.
By the time it was over, 4,000 of the Amerindians—a quarter of the whole Cherokee nation —were dead.
Long before the Indian Removal Act the federal government had begun to organize the new western lands for settlement.
As each township was surveyed and marked out in sections the land was sold by auction.
They usually sold the land later, at a higher price, to settlers arriving from the E; Every year more settlers moved in.
They used the river as a road to carry themselves, their goods and their animals into the new lands.
Others moved west along routes like the Wilderness Road that Daniel Boone’s axmen had cut through the Cumberland Gap in the Appalachians.
Such roads were simply rough tracks, just wide enough for a wagon and full of holes, rocks and tree stumps.
The average speed at which travelers could move along them was about two miles an hour.
It earned its living by selling food and raw materials to other countries.
During the eighteenth century an Industrial Reyolution had come to Britain.
New machines driven by water and steam power had made possible great increases in production.
In 1789 an English mechanic named Samuel Slater took the Industrial Revolution across the Atlantic to America.
Before leaying England, Slater memorized the details of the latest English cotton spinning machines, He carried them in his memory because it was against the law to take plans of the machines out of England.
In the United States Slater went into partnership with a businessman named Moses Brown.
Together they opened a mill, or factory, to spin cotton at Pawtucket, Rhode Island.
In time that process turned the northeast of the nation into its first important manufacturing region.
For purposes of government the federal authorities divided the lands between the Appalachians and the Mississippi into two.
The area south of the Ohio was called the Southwest Territory and that to the north the Northwest Territory.
As the number of people living in them increased, each of these two big territories was divided again into smaller ones.
Ohio, Indiana, Illinois, Michigan, and Wisconsin were eventually made out of the Northwest Territory.
As each was formed it was placed under the rule ofa governor appointed by Congress.
When the number of white males living in a territory reached 5,000 it could elect its own lawing body.
It could also send a representative to The War of 1812 Between 1803 and 1815 Britain and France were at war.
They stopped American merchant ships and sometimes seized their cargoes.
They were especially angry at the British because the British took seamen off American ships and forced them to serve in the British navy.
In the early months of this War of 1812 American ships won a number of fights at sea.
But the much stronger British navy soon gained complete control of the coastal waters of the United States and blockaded American ports.
American attempts to invade British-ruled Canada ended in disaster, Even more humiliating for the Americans, British forces captured and burned Washington, their new capital city.
In December 1814, the United States and Britain signed a treaty of peace in Europe.
Two weeks later, before the news reached America, British forces attacked the city of New Orleans.
Tn many ways the whole of the War of 1812 was as pointless as this last battle.
The British nayy’s wartime 9 Years oF GROWTH give its point of view in Congress.
When the population of a territory reached 60,000 it became a new state, with the same rights and powers as the original thirteen states.
The plan that the Ordinance laid down for controlling the growth of the United States has been followed ever since, The importance of the plan is that it made sure that the original thirteen states were not able to control for their own benefit lands that were settled later.
This meant that as the United States grew bigger it went on being a democratic union of equals.
This forced Americans to begin making goods of their own and so gave a start to American manufacturing industry.
Thomas Jefferson was one of many people who had been against the growth of industry in the United States.
Now he saw how important it was to the future safety and prosperity of the country.
Wrasse sue IP ACTEIC CEDED BY GREAT BRITAIN The growth of the U In 1800 the western boundary of the United States was the Mississippi River.
Beyond its wide and muddy waters there were great areas of land through which few white people had traveled.
The ruler of France at this time was Napoleon, who would soon become the country’s emperor.
Americans feared that Napoleon might send French soldiers and settlers to Louisiana and so block the further westward growth of the United States.
Even before this Jefferson had been planning to send an expedition to explore Louisiana.
He was a keen amateur scientist and wanted to know more about the geography, the people, the animals and the plants of the lands to the west of the United States.
He also hoped that the explorers might find an casy way across North America to the Pacific Ocean.
Sometimes they had to wade shoulder-deep in the river, pulling the boats forward against fast and dangerous currents.
When the Missouri became too shallow to follow any further, they marched for ten weeks across the Rocky Mountains, killing their horses for food and with only melted snow to drink.
They had been away for two anda half years and had traveled almost 4,000 miles.
They had failed to find an easy overland route to the Pacific, but they had shown that the journey was possible.
They had also brought back much useful information about both Louisiana and the western lands that lay beyond it.
They stretched from Alaska in the north to California in the south and inland through the Rocky Anmerindians discovering Lewis and Clarke Mountains to the undefined borders of Louisiana.
In 1805 four countries claimed to own Oregon— Russia, Spain, Britain and the United States.
But in Oregon the British and the Americans were in the strongest position.
Both already had trading posts scattered along Oregon’s coasts and rivers.
At these posts traders bought beaver and other animal furs from Amerindian and European trappers.
Such trappers were called “mountain-men”’ because they spent their lives wandering the mountains of Oregon and California in search of furs.
By the 1830s the British had more settlements and trading posts in Oregon than the Americans.
American political leaders began to fear that Britain would soon gain complete control of the area.
To prevent this they made great efforts to persuade more Americans to start farms in Oregon.
They sailed from the cast coast ports of the United States, around South America and up the long Pacific coast.
They usually set out from Independence, 41 A New Nation Zebulon Pike and the Great American Desert While Lewis and Clark were crossing the plains and mountains of the American Northwest, another expedition was exploring those of the Southwest.
The leader of the expedition was a young lieutenant in the American army named Zebulon M Pike.
In November 1806, Pike and his men reached the Rocky Mountains near where the city of Pueblo, Colorado, now stands.
The following spring Pike traveled further into the mountains, into lands that were then ruled by Spain.
Although the Spaniards treated him with courtesy, they took away his notes and papers and sent him back to the United States.
One is Pikes Peak, a high mountain in Colorado which he first sighted on November 15, 1806, and which is named after him.
By the 1870s improved seeds and better methods of cultivation were making it possible for farmers to turn these lands into one of the richest grain-growing areas in the world.
From Independence they followed a twisting trail of about 2,000 miles across plains and mountains to the mouth of the Columbia River.
This overland route to the Pacific coast became known as the Oregon Trail.
It was more a collection of trails, all heading in the same general direction across western North America and meeting occasionally at river-crossing points and passes through the mountains.
Floods and blizzards, prairie fires and accidents, disease and starvation ~—all these took many lives.
But, in spite of the dangers, settlers continued to make the long journey.
People left their worn-out farms in the East, packed their possessions on wagons and set off for the West.
This was a claim that it was the clear intention of fate that the territory of the United States should stretch across North America from the Atlantic to the Pacific.
Supporters of manifest destiny demanded that the United States should take the whole of Oregon, all the way north to the boundary with Alaska at latitude 54 degrees 40 minutes.
They began using the slogan “Fifty four forty or fight” and threatened the British with war.
But by the summer of 1846 the United States was already at war with Mexico.
In June Polk agreed to divide Oregon with Britain in two almost equal sections.
The dividing line was the 49th parallel of latitude, which already formed the boundary between the United States and Canada to the cast of the Rocky Mountains.
The 1846 war with Mexico had grown out of events that had been taking place in Texas.
Thousands of Americans had settled in Texas, but up to the 1830s it was ruled by Mexico.
Led by General Sam Houston, they defeated a much larger Mexican army in 1836 at the Battle of San Jacinto and made Texas an independent republic.
Eventually the two countries reached an agreement about this and in 1845 Texas became part of the United States.
In April 1846, there was fighting between American and Mexican soldiers along the border between Texas and Mexico.
President Polk saw an opportunity to take land from Mexico and he declared war.
By September 1847, they had occupied Mexico City, the country’s capital.
The treaty forced Mexico to hand over enormous stretches of its territory to the United States.
Today these lands form the American states of California, Arizona, Nevada, Utah, New Mexico and Colorado.
The annexation of these Mexican lands completed the “manifest destiny” of the United States.
It now stretched across the North American continent from ocean to ocean.
In little more than halfa century it had grown from a small nation on the shores of the Atlantic into one of the largest countries in the world.
Wagon trains Most of the settlers who traveled to Oregon made the journey in four-wheeled wagons.
A wagon train usually consisted of about twenty-five wagons, each with a canvas cover to protect its contents from the weather.
Scen from a distance, these covers made the wagons look like ships sailing across a sea of grass.
Each wagon could carry a load of between 2 and 2¥ tons and was pulled by a team of either mules or oxen.
Others argued that oxen were stronger than mules and easier to control.
For this reason oxen were used more than any other animals to pull the wagons that traveled the Oregon Trail.
A wagon train crossing the prairie. a3) si 11 NorTH AND SOUTH Slaves preparing the ground to plant cotton on a southern plantation.
For 1. million of these people the words of the Declaration of Independence “that all men are created equal” were far from true.
Thomas Jefferson, who wrote the Declaration of Independence, owned slaves himself.
So did George Washington and other leaders of the movement for American independence and freedom.
But other big landowners in southern states such as Virginia defended slavery.
Many were abolitionists —that is, people who wanted to end or abolish slavery by law.
By the carly nineteenth century many northern states had passed laws abolishing slavery inside their own boundaries.
In 1808 they also persuaded Congress to make it illegal for ships to bring any new slaves from Africa into the United States.
By the 1820s southern and northern politicians were arguing fiercely about whether slavery should be permitted in the new territories that were then being settled in the West.
The argument centered on the 11 Nortu anp Soutu Missouri territory, which was part of the Louisiana Purchase.
Southerners argued that slave labor should be allowed in Missouri and all the other lands that formed part of the Louisiana Purchase.
Northern farmers moving west did not want to find themselves competing for land against southerners who had slaves to do their work for them, Eventually the two sides agreed ona compromise.
Slavery would be permitted in the Missouri and Arkansas territories but banned in lands to the west and north of Missouri.
The Missouri Compromise, as it was called, did not end the disputes between North and South.
Northern states favored such duties because they protected their young industries against the competition of foreign manufactured goods.
Southern states opposed them because southerners relied upon foreign manufacturers for both necessities and luxuries of many kinds.
During the argument about import duties a southern political leader named John C Calhoun raised a much more serious question.
He claimed that a state had the right to disobey any federal law if the state believed that the law would harm its interests.
Calhoun’s claim was strongly denied by Senator Daniel Webster of Massachusetts.
The power to decide whether the federal authorities were acting rightly or wrongly belonged to the Supreme Court, said Webster, not to individual states.
If states were given the right to disobey the federal government, he said, it would become “‘a mere rope of sand” and lose its power to hold the country together.
Webster's speech was a warning to Americans that the states’ rights doctrine could become a serious threat fo the unity of the United States.
California was admitted to the United States as a free state, while people who lived in Utah and New Mexico were given the right to decide for themselves whether or not to allow slavery.
A 46 New Nation Eli Whitney and the cotton gin In 1793 a young school teacher named Eli Whitney was visiting friends in the southern state of Georgia.
However, the mills could not use Georgia’s cotton until its growers removed the many seeds that were tangled among its fibers.
Until a way could be found to do it more quickly, the amount of cotton that planters grew was limited to the amount that their workers could pick the sceds from.
He solved the planters’ problem by inventing the cotton “engine” —or “gin” for short.
This was a machine that quickly separated the seeds and the fiber of the raw cotton.
Using Whitney’s gin, one worker could remove the seeds from more than four hundred pounds of cotton in the same time that it had taken previously to remove them from two pounds.
Whitney’s invention made possible a huge increase in the amount of cotton grown by southern planters.
By the year 1820 the output of their plantations and farms was cight thousand times higher than in 1791.
The increase was achieved by bringing in more slaves to plough and hoe the land and pick the cotton.
The prosperity of the planters came to depend more every year on slavery being allowed to continue.
This fact, more perhaps than any other, explains why southerners broke away from the rest of the United States.
They did so in order to try to save slavery—their “peculiar institution’’ as they called it—and with it their prosperity and way of life.
This was a law to make it easier for southerners to recapture slaves who escaped from their masters and fled for safety to free states.
Slave owners had long offered rewards, or “bounties,” for the return of runaway slaves.
These men made their living by hunting down fugitive slaves in order to collect the rewards on them.
With the support of the new law, bounty hunters now began searching free states for escaped slaves.
The Fugitive Slave Act angered many northerners who had not so far given much thought to the rights and wrongs of slavery.
They mapped out escape routes and moved runaway slaves by night from one secret hiding place to another.
The final stop on these escape routes was Canada, where fugitives could be followed by neither American laws nor bounty hunters.
Many conductors on the Underground Railroad were former slaves themselves.
Often they traveled deep into slave states to make contact with runaways.
As the number of fugitive slaves increased, gunfights between bounty hunters and conductors became more and more common.
In 1854 a Senator named Stephen Douglas persuaded Congress to end the Missouri Compromise.
West of Missouri, on land that was supposed to be closed to slavery, was a western territory called Kansas.
In 1854 Congress voted to let its people decide for themselves whether to permit slavery there.
William Lloyd Garrison and the abolitionists Some Americans opposed to slavery were prepared to wait for it to come to an end gradually and by agreement with the slave owners.
The best known spokesman of the people in this , second group was a Boston writer named William Lloyd Garrison.
On January 1, 1831, Garrison produced the first issue of Ihe Liberator, a newspaper dedicated to the abolition of slavery.
He became wellknown for the extreme way in which he expressed his views.
He printed, and sometimes invented, sensational stories about how cruelly black slaves were treated.
He attacked slave owners as evil monsters, about whom nothing good could be said.
In 1835 an angry mob showed its dislike of his opinions by parading him through the streets of Boston with a rope around his neck.
His bloodthirsty calls for action and sensational stories continued to offend both the supporters of slavery and those who wanted to bring it to an end peacefully.
But they convinced many other people that slavery was evil and that it must be abolished at once—eyen if the only way to do this was by war.
Pro-slavery immigrants poured in from the South and antislavery immigrants from the North.
In reply, a halfmad abolitionist named John Brown led a raid in which a number of supporters of slavery were killed.
Because of the trouble there, Congress delayed its admission to the United States.
A slave named Dred Scott had been taken by his owner to live ina free state.
Scott asked the Supreme Court to declare that this had made him legally free.
It added also that Congress had gone beyond its constitutional powers in claiming the right to prohibit slavery in the western territories.
The Supreme Court seemed to be saying that free states had no right to forbid slavery within their boundaries and that slave owners could put their slaves to work anywhere.
Ina series of public debates with Douglas, Lincoln said that the spread of slavery must be stopped.
He was willing to accept slavery in the states where it existed already, but that was all.
Looking to the future of the United States he gave his listeners a warning.
In 1860 the Republicans chose him as their candidate in that year’s presidential election.
In 1859 the same John Brown who had fought in “bleeding Kansas” had tried to start a slave rebellion in Virginia.
The attack failed and Brown was captured, tried for treason and hanged.
Many northerners claimed that he was a martyr in the struggle against slavery.
They believed that it was a sign that the North was preparing to use force to end slavery in the South.
In the presidential election of 1860 the southerners put forward a candidate of their own to oppose Lincoln.
They threatened that the South would break away, or “secede,” from the United States if Lincoln became President.
In every southern state a majority of the citizens voted against Lincoln.
A few weeks later, in December 1860, the state of South Carolina voted to secede from the United States.
In February 1861, these eleven states announced that they were now an independent nation, the Confederate States of America, often known as the Confederacy.
The nineteenth century’s bloodiest war, the American Civil War, was about to begin.
She was born in 1821 and grew up as a slave on a plantation in Maryland.
In 1849 she escaped to Philadelphia and joined the Underground Railroad.
Although she could neither read nor write, Harriet Tubman had great abilities as an organizer.
When the Fugitive Slave Act of 1850 made those cities unsafe, she led the people in her care to Canada.
During the Civil War Harriet Tubman worked as a nurse, a cook and a laundress with the Union armies fighting in the South.
It is also said that she tisked her life by traveling behind Confederate lines as a spy.
Here she worked to help children and old people, using the profits she earned from her autobiography to pay for her work.
When she died in 1913, she had already become a legend. 49 eo THE Civit War On March 4, 1861, Abraham Lincoln took the oath of office as President of the United States.
In his inaugural address as President, Lincoln appealed to the southern states to stay in the Union.
But he warned that he would not allow them to break up the United States by seceding.
On April 12 Confederate guns opened fire on Fort Sumter, a fortress in the harbor of Charleston, South Carolina, that was occupied by United States troops.
Jefferson Davis, the newly elected President of the Confederate States, made a similar appeal for men to fight for the Confederacy.
Some people found it difficult and painful to decide which side to support.
The son of the commander of the Confederate navy was killed fighting in a Union ship.
And three of President Lincoln’s own brothers-in-law died fighting for the Confederacy.
From the first months of the war Union warships blockaded the ports of the South.
They did this to prevent the Confederacy from selling its cotton abroad and from obtaining foreign supplies.
In both men and material resources the North was much stronger than the South.
The South had only nine million people and 3. million of them were The North grew more food crops than the ‘ It also had more than five times the manufacturing, capacity, including most of the country’s weapon factories.
So the North not only had more fighting men than the South, it could also keep them better supplied with weapons, clothing, food and everything else they needed.
The only way it could win the war was to invade the South and occupy its land.
Allit had to do was to hold out until the people of the North grew tired of fighting.
Many of the best officers in the pre-war army of the United States were southerners.
Most of the recruits led by these officers had grown up on farms and were expert riders and marksmen.
Most important of all, the fact that almost all the war’s fighting took place in the South meant that Confederate soldiers were defending their own 12 Tue Crvit War homes.
The South was fighting for its independence from the North, they said, just as their grandfathers had fought for independence from.
The war was fought in two main areas—in Virginia and the other east coast states of the Confederacy, and in the Mississippi valley.
In Virginia the Union armies suffered one defeat after another in the first year of the war.
Again and again they tried to capture Richmond, the Confederate h time they were thrown back with heavy ‘The Confederate forces in Virginia had two great advantages.
The first was that many rivers cut across the roads leading south to Richmond and so made the city easier to defend.
Two Confederate generals in particular, Robert E Lee and Thomas J Jackson, showed much more skill than the generals leading the Union army at this time.
Jackson got his nickname “Stonewall” because he stood firm against advancing Union troops.
Fortunately for the North, Union forces in the Mississippi valley had more success.
In April 1862, a naval officer named David Farragut sailed Union ships into the mouth of the river and captured New Orleans, the largest city in the Confederacy.
At the same time other Union forces were fighting their way down the Mississippi from the north.
By spring 1863, the Union armies were closing in on an important Confederate stronghold on the Mississippi called Vicksburg.
On July 4, after much bloody fighting and a siege lasting six weeks, Vicksburg surrendered to a Union army led by General Ulysses S Grant.
It became impossible for western Confederate states like Texas to send any more men and supplies to the east.
General Lee, the Confederate commander, believed that ifhis army could win a decisive victory on northern soil, popular opinion there might force the Union government to make peace.
In the last week of June 1863, Lee marched his army north into Pennsylvania.
The battle which followed was the biggest that has ever been fought in the United States.
In three days of fierce fighting more than 50,000 men were killed or wounded, On the fourth day Lee broke off the battle and led his men back into the South, The Confederate army had suffered a defeat from which it would never recover.
The Emancipation Proclamation By the summer of 1862 President Lincoln realized that the North would only win the war if he could arouse more enthusiasm for its cause.
This Proclamation declared that from January 1, 1863, all slaves were to be made free—but only if they lived in areas that were part of the Confederacy.
From a struggle to preserve the Union, it became a struggle both to preserve the Union and to abolish slavery.
But after the Emancipation Proclamation everyone knew that it was only a matter of time now before slavery was ended everywhere in the United States.
As fall colored the trees of the eastern woods, the Union armies moved in to end the war.
In November 1864, a Union army led by General William T Sherman began to march through the Confederate state of Georgia.
They tore up railroad tracks, burned crops and ‘buildings, drove off cattle.
He marched through the Carolinas, burning and destroying again as he made for Richmond.
The Confederate capital was already in danger from another Union army led by General Grant.
By March 1865, Grant had almost encircled the city and on April 2 Lee was forced to abandon it to save his army from being trapped.
He marched south, hoping to fight on from a strong position in the mountains.
But Grant followed close behind and other Union soldiers blocked Lee’s way forward.
On April 9, 1865, he met Grant in a house in a tiny village called Appomattox and surrendered his army.
After they had given up their weapons and promised never again to fight against the United States, he allowed them to go home.
As Lee rode away, Grant stood in the doorway chewing a piece of tobacco and told his men; ‘The war is over.
In 1865 this was abolished everywhere in the United States by the 13th Amendment to the Constitution.
And it decided finally that the United States was one nation, whose parts could not be separated. ame an independent nation.
The United States fought other wars later, but all were outside its own boundaries.
And more Americans died in this war than in any other, before or since.
By the time Lee surrendered to Grant at Appomattox, the dead on both sides totaled 635,000.
The Gettysburg Address Gettysburg in Pennsylvania is remembered for two things.
The second is the Gettysburg address, a speech that Abraham Lincoln made there a few months later.
On November 19, 1863, Lincoln traveled to Gettysburg to dedicate part of the battlefield as a national war cemetery.
Now we are engaged in a great civil war, testing whether that nation can long endure, We are met on a great battlefield of that war.
We have come to dedicate a portion of that field as a final resting-place for those who here gave their lives, that that nation might live.
Grant sits at the table behind Lee in this contemporary painting sense, we can not dedicate, we can not consecrate this ground, The brave men, living and dead, who struggled here, have consecrated it, far above our poor power.
Lincoln’s speech at Gettysburg became even more famous than the battle.
At the time it was seen as a statement of what the North was fighting for.
Tn later years it came to be n as a moving expression of faith in the basic principles of democratic government.
On the night of April 13, 1865, crowds of people moved through the brightly lit streets of Washington to celebrate Lee’s surrender at Appomattox.
Once Lincoln was safely in his seat, his bodyguards moved away to watch the play themselves from seats in the gallery.
Atexactly 10:13, when the play was part way through, a pistol shot rang through the darkened theater.
He waved a gun in the air and shouted “Sic semper tyrannis” [Thus always to tyrants] and then ran out of the theater.
It was discovered later that the gunman was an actor named John Wilkes Booth.
He was captured a few days later, hiding in a barn in the Virginia countryside.
Lincoln was succeeded as President by his Vice President, Andrew Johnson.
The biggest problem the new President faced was how to deal with the defeated South.
Only a few weeks before his death he had begun his second term of office as President.
In his inaugural address he had asked the American people to help him to “bind up the nation’s wounds” and rebuild their war-battered homeland.
Lincoln blamed individual southern leaders for the war, rather than the people of the seceding states whole.
He intended to punish only those guilty individuals and to let the rest of the South’s people play a full part in the nation’s life again.
He began to introduce plans to reunite the South with the rest of the nation.
He said that as soon as the citizens of the seceded states promised to be loyal to the government of the United States they could clect new state assemblies to run their affairs.
When a state voted to accept the 13th Amendment to the Constitution (the one that completely abolished slavery) Johnson intended that it should be accepted back into the Union as a full and equal member.
But white southerners were determined to resist any changes that threatened their power to control the life of the South.
They were especially horrified at the idea of giving equal rights to their former black slaves.
Walt Whitman is perhaps the most famous American poet of the nineteenth century.
During the Civil War he worked in military hospitals, helping to take care of wounded soldiers.
O the bleeding drops of red, Where on the deck my Captain lics, Fallen cold and dead.
All their assemblies passed laws to keep blacks in an inferior position.
Such laws were called “Black Cod made the blacks free, but the ruling whites intended » “Federal bayonets” might have them to remain unskilled, uneducated and landless, with no legal protection or rights of their own.
Black Codes refused blacks the vote, said that they could not serve on juries, forbade them to give evidence in court against a white man.
In Louisiana they had to agree to work for one employer for a whole year and could be imprisoned and made to do forced labor if they refused.
With no land, no money and no protection from the law, it was almost as if blacks were still slaves. his grief at the death of the President by writing this poem.
The “fearful trip” in the opening line is the Civil War, the “Captain” is Abraham Lincoln, the “ship” is the United States and the “prize” is peace and national unity.
But I with mournful tread, Walk the deck my Captain lies, Fallen cold and dead.
A group there called Radical Republicans believed that the most important reason for fighting the Civil War had been to free the blacks.
Having won the war, they were determined that neither they nor the blacks were now going to be cheated.
They said that President Johnson was treating the defeated white southerners too kindly and that the southerners were 55 A New NATION taking advantage of this.
In July 1866, despite opposition from the President, Congress passed a Civil Rights Act.
Both these measures were intended to ensure that blacks in the South were not cheated of their rights.
The 14th Amendment gave blacks full rights of citizenship, including the right to vote.
All the former Confederate states except Tennessee refused to accept the 14th Amendment, In March 1867, Congress replied by passing the Reconstruction Act.
This dismissed the white governments of the southern states and placed them ‘under military rule.
They were told that they could again have elected governments when they accepted the 14th Amendment and gave all black men the vote.
Most were made up of blacks, a few white southerners who were willing to work with them and white men from the North.
The name came from the large, cheap bags made of carpeting material in which some of the northerners carried their belongings.
The word “scalawag”’ still means scoundrel, or rogue, in the English language today.
These southern Democrats claimed that the Reconstruction governments were incompetent and dishonest.
Many of the new black members of the state assemblies were inexperienced and poorly educated.
In Louisiana, for example, one carpetbagger official was accused of stealing 100,000 dollars from state funds in his first year of office.
But Reconstruction governments also contained honest men who tricd to improve the South.
None of these improvements stopped southern whites from hating Reconstruction.
This was not because of the incompetence or dishonesty of its governments.
It was because Reconstruction aimed to give blacks the same rights that whites had.
They organized terrorist groups to make white men the masters once more.
The main aim of these groups was to threaten and frighten black people and prevent them from claiming their rights.
The largest and most feared terrorist group was a secret socicty called the Ku Klux Klan.
Its members dressed themselves in white sheets and wore hoods to hide their faces.
They rode by night through the southern countryside, beating and killing any blacks who tried to improve their position.
Their sign was a burning wooden cross, which they placed outside the homes of their intended victims.
By 1876 Republican supporters of Reconstruction held power in only three southern 13 RECONSTRUCTION The Ku Klux Klan in 1915. states.
When Congress withdrew federal troops from the South in 1877, white Democrats won control of these, too.
Some southern states prevented blacks from voting by saying that only people who paid a tax on voters— a poll tax—could do so.
They then made the tax so high that most blacks could not afford to pay it.
If blacks did try to pay, the tax collectors often refused to take their money.
These claus or rules, allowed the yote only to people whose grandfathers had been qualified to vote in 1865.
Most blacks had only obtained the vote in 1866 so the grandfather clauses automatically took away their voting rights.
The effects of grandfather clauses could be seen in the state of Louisiana.
Any black who dared to break these segregation laws was likely to,end up cither in prison or dead.
It seemed that the improvements the Civil War and Reconstruction had brought black people were lost for ever.
It had been the boldest attempt so far to achieve racial justice in the United States.
Plessy Ferguson In 1896 the Supreme Court announced its decision in a case called Plessy vy.
It ruled that the Constitution allowed separate facilities and services to be provided for black and white people, so long as the facilities and services were of equal quality.
The Plessy Ferguson decision made racial segregation a legal part of the American way of life for more than half a century.
Southern states immediately began making sepa ate but unequal provision for blacks.
They passed laws to enforce segregation in* every possible aspect of life—public transportation, theaters, hotels, eating places, parks, schools.
The “separate but equal’ decision reached in Plessy Ferguson was at last overturned by another Supreme Court decision in 1954.
In the case of Brown Topeka, the Supreme Court ruled that it was impossible for black children to receive an equal education in segregated schools.
It ordered that all public schools in the United States should be opened to children of all races.
This 1954 decision to abandon Plessy Ferguson was a landmark in the black Civil Rights movement of the 1950s.
It marked the beginning of a campaign to end all forms of legally enforced segregation in American life.
YEARS OF GROWTH Miners, RAILROADS AND CATTLEMEN In March 1848, a group of workmen was building a sawmill beside a stream in California for a landowner named John Sutter.
One day the foreman in charge of the workers saw golden specks glittering in the water, Picking up a handful of black gravel from the bed of the stream, he looked more closely.
The governor of California reported to Washington that “mills are lying idle, fields of wheat are open to cattle and horses, houses vacant and farms going to waste” as men and women from all Panning for gold in California. 58 over the territory hurried to the gold fields to make themselves rich.
By the spring of 1849, people from all over the world were rushing to California to look for gold.
Others traveled overland, enduring the same kind of hardships that faced settlers on the way to Oregon.
In the next twenty years gold discoveries attracted fortune-seckers to other parts of the far West.
By the late 1850s they were mining in the mountains of Nevada and Colorado, by the 1860s they had moved into Montana and Wyoming and by the 1870s they were digging in the Black Hills of the Dakota country.
The first mining settlements were just untidy collections of tents and huts, scattered along rough tracks that were muddy in winter and dusty in summer.
The present city of Denver, the capital of Colorado, began life in this way.
Thousands of miles separated these western mining settlements from the rest of the United States.
Look ata map of the country at the end of the Civil War in 1865, You will see that white settlement in the East stops a little to the west of the Mississippi and Missouri rivers.
Beyond these last farms, thousands of miles of flat or gently rolling land covered with tall grass stretched west to the foothills of the Rocky Mountains.
Early travelers who passed through this region described it as a “sea of grass,” for hardly any trees or bushes grew there.
Geographers call these grasslands the Great Plains, or the Prairies, of North America.
Rainfall ranges from about forty inches a ycar on the wetter, eastern edge, to less than eighteen inches a year in the western parts.
Summer rain often pours down in fierce thunderstorms and can bring sudden and destructive floods.
These long, dry periods bring the danger of prairie fires, which race across the grasslands and burn everything in their path.
Temperatures drop as low as —40° Fahrenheit and violent, windy snowstorms sweep across the flat, open land.
In the middle of the nineteenth century the Great Plains were the home of wandering Amerindian hunters such as the Sioux.
The lives of these people depended upon the vast herds of buffalo that grazed on the sea of grass.
They also stretched its skin over poles to make the tepees they lived in.
In the 1840s and 1850s thousands of white people crossed the Great Plains to reach the farms of Oregon and the gold fields of California.
To them the region was not somewhere to settle and make new homes but a place to pass through as quickly as possible.
They saw it as unwelcoming and dangerous, and were happy to leave it to the Amerindians.
They agreed with the mapmakers of the time, who wrote the name “Great American Desert” across the whole area, Yet within twenty-five years of the end of the Civil War, practically all of the Great Plains had been divided into states and territories.
Ranchers were feeding large herds of cattle on the “sea of grass,” farmers were ploughing the “Great American Desert” to grow wheat, sheepherders were grazing their flocks on the foothills of the Rocky Mountains.
By 1890 the separate areas of settlement on the Pacific Coast and along the Mississippi River had moved together.
The frontier, that moving boundary of white settlement that had been one of the most important factors in American life ever since the time of the Pilgrims, had disappeared.
During the Civil War, Congress had become anxious to join the gold-rich settlements along the Pacific Coast more closely to the rest of the United States.
In 1862 it granted land and money to A poster advertising the opening of the railroad. the Union Pacific Railroad Company to build a railroad west from the Mississippi towards the Pacific.
At the same time it gave a similar grant to the Central Pacific Railroad Company to build eastwards from California.
Throughout the 1860s gangs of workmen labored with picks, shovels and gunpowder to build the two lines.
Most of the workers on the Union Pacific were Irishmen or other recent immigrants from Europe.
The railroad workers’ progress depended mainly on the land over which they had.to build.
On the flat Great Plains they could move forward quickly, building up to six miles of railroad in a day.
Among the rocks and cliffs of the Sierra Nevada mountains their progress was slower.
Sometimes it would take days of difficult and dangerous tunneling to move forward a few yards.
Years Or Growru The whole country watched with growing excitement as the two lines gradually approached one another.
Both moved forward as fast as they could, for the grants of land and money that each company received from the government depended upon how many miles of railroad track it built.
Finally, on May 10, 1869, the Central Pacific and the Union Pacific lines met at Promontory Point in Utah.
By 1884 four more major lines had crossed the continent to link the Mississippi valley with the Pacific Coast.
These transcontinental railroads reduced the time that it took to travel across the United States from weeks to days.
As the railroads pushed west, cattle ranchers in Texas saw a way to make money.
They could feed cattle cheaply on the grasslands between the Mississippi and the Rockies.
The golden spike ceremony at Promontory Point, Utah, in 1869 marks the completion of the first transcontinental railroad.
In the years after the Civil War, Texas cattle owners hired men called “drovers” or “cowboys” to drive their half-wild longhom cattle north to the railroads, The cowboy’s life was one of exhausting work, poor food and low pay.
Many cowboys were former Confederate soldiers who had moved west after the Civil War.
Others were boys from farms in the east who wanted a life with more adventure than farming could offer them.
But as they came closer to the railroad they slowed down, traveling only about twelve miles a day.
This was to give the cattle plenty of time to graze, so that they would be as heavy as possible when they were sold.
In 1867, cowboys drove 36,000 cattle there along the Chisholm Trail from ‘Texas.
The best known was Dodge City, which reached the height of its fame between 1875 and 1885.
In this period of ten ycars a quarter of a million Texas cattle traveled the trail to Dodge City.
From there they went by rail to the slaughter houses of Chicago and Kansas City.
Such cities grew rich from killing western cattle and preparing their meat for eating.
On the trail 14 Miners, RAILROADS AND CATTLEMEN Very soon meat from the Great Plains was feeding people in Europe as well as the castern United States.
The grass of the Great Plains was earning the United States as much money as the gold mines of its western mountains.
The Stampede by Frederic Remington, A cowboy trying to control his herd of cattle which has been stampeded by lightning George Duffield was a cowboy.
Swam our cattle and horses and built raft and rafted our provisions and blankets and so on over.
Lost most of our kitchen. furniture, such as camp kettles, coffee pot, cups, ete.
Made them leave, but fear they have gone for others. 61 ee FARMING THE GREAT PLAINS In 1862 Union and Confederate armies were fighting some of the bloodiest battles of the Civil War.
But that same year Congress found time to pass a law that had nothing to do with the war.
The Homestead Act offered free farms in the West to families of settlers.
All that homesteaders had to do was to move onto a piece of public land—that is, land owned by the government-—live on it for five years and the land became theirs.
Ifa family wanted to own its homestead more quickly than this it could buy the land after only six months for a very low price of $1.25 an acre.
These companies had been given land beside their tracks by the government.
To increase their profits they were keen for people to begin farming this land so they advertised for settlers.
They did this not only in the eastern United States, but as far away as Europe.
They shipped immigrants across the Atlantic, gave them free railroad transport to the West and often helped them to start their farms and communities.
East of the Mississippi, small family farms were the usual way of cultivating the land.
From the 1870s onwards farms of this sort began to spread over the Great Plains.
As a boy, Hamlin Garland was taken to live on the Plains by his parents.
They had to do this themselves, for there was no one else to do it for them.
No trees grew on the plains, only mile after mile of long, waving grass.
They cut thick pieces of earth and grass roots—“‘sods” —from the dry ground and used them as building bricks.
These same tangled grass roots also gave homesteaders a lot of trouble.
The roots of its grasses formed a tangled mat at least four inches thick.
Lack of water was another problem, The Great Plains had few streams and the rainfall was so low and unreliable that farmers often watched their crops shrivel up and dic in the dry ground.
A lightning flash, or even a small spark, could start a fire that would race across the prairie faster than a horse could gallop.
In some years plagues of insects caused even more destruction than fire.
Between 1874 and 1877 grasshoppers swarmed across the plains in millions, eating everything they found—crops, leather boots, clothing, wooden door frames.
In one place they stopped a railroad engine by covering the track until the rails became too slippery for the engine to move.
Gradually they began to overcome their carly difficulties, Ploughs with steel blades enabled them to cut through the prairie sod and cultivate the soil beneath.
Mechanical reapers made it possible to harvest wheat crops ten times faster than before.
Pumps driven by the prairie winds raised life-giving water from hundreds of fect below the dry surface of the land.
Barbed wire fences stopped straying cattle from trampling crops into the ground.
The railroads Homesteaders and cattlemen The first homesteaders often quarreled with cattlemen.
The different ways in which the two groups used the land made trouble between them almost certain, Cattle ranchers and cowboys complained that homesteaders were blocking the cattle trails and said that their ploughed fields were a waste of good grazing land.
Homesteaders became angry when their crops were eaten or trampled upon by the ranchers’ cattle.
This made the cattlemen even more angry, especially if the land that was fenced off included a stream that their cattle depended upon for drinking water.
They would plant a crop alongside the trail and plow a furrow around it for a fence, and then when the cattle got into their wheat or their garden patch, they would come out cussing and waving a shotgun and yelling for damages.
In some places people were killed in “range wars” as both cattlemen and homesteaders used guns to protect their interests.
It took years for the two groups to learn to live peacefully side by side.
The invention of barbed wire and the fencing of the prairies threatened the life of the cowboy 63 Years Or GROWTH Joseph Glidden’s barbed wire In 1874 an Illinois farmer named Joseph Glidden patented an invention.
His invention provided prairie farmers with something that, in a land without trees, they desperately needed—a cheap and efficient fencing material.
Barbed wire consists of two strands of plain wire twisted around one another, with short, sharp wire spikes held between them.
Barbed wire fences meant that prairie farmers could plant crops knowing that straying cattle would not trample and eat the growing plants.
By the end of the century thousands of miles of barbed wire fences had divided the open prairie into a patchwork of separate farms and fields. also carried away the farmers’ crops.
This made it possible for the farmers to sell their produce in faraway places.
Before the end of the nineteenth century wheat grown on the Great Plains of North America was feeding millions of people, not only in the United States but thousands of miles away in Europe.
The Homestead Act gave them land, but it failed to give them a sure living.
On the rain-starved Great Plains no farmer could make a living from a farm of that size.
But if the rains failed, the sun burned up their crops and the prairic winds blew away their dusty top soil, leaving the 64 land poorer and less productive.
Even when enough rain fell for the crops to grow well, farmers could still be in trouble.
In such years the land produced so much wheat that the prices for which individual farmers were able to sell it were too low to give them a decent living.
In the last thirty years of the nineteenth century such “over-production” became a big problem for American farmers.
Improved agricultural machines were also making their farms more productive every year.
Giant machines called “combine harvesters” cut and threshed wheat in one operation.
Farmers formed political action groups to try to improve their position.
These laws set up government bodies to control railroad freight charges and to look after farmers’ interests in other matters.
Some of these cooperatives failed because the farmers who ran them lacked business experience.
In many western farming communities cooperative organizations still compete with privately owned firms both to supply the farmer's needs and to buy his produce.
It became a habit with Americans to use natural resources carelessly and wastefully.
As settlers spread across America, all of them— farmers, miners, ranchers, lumberjacks—robbed the land and destroyed its resources.
Vast buffalo herds were almost entirely destroyed, as were many other wild animals, including wolves, sea otters and fur seals.
They demanded that the government and people of the United States should conserve the nation’s natural heritage.
Muir, who had been born in Scotland, trayeled about the American West studying and describing its natural wonders.
He worked hard to persuade people to protect these wonders for the benefit of future generations.
Largely because of Muir’s efforts, big areas of Yellowstone National Park.
The heart of Yosemite is a beautiful valley surrounded by cliffs and mountain peaks.
In 1890 Yosemite became a national park—that is, a park belonging to the whole nation.
This is a 3,458 square-mile area of volcanic rocks and forest in the Rocky Mountains and it became a national park in 1872.
Bears, mountain sheep, buffalo, moose and more than two hundred kinds of birds make their homes there.
When Theodore Roosevelt became President in 1901 he set up more big national parks and forests. established the National Parks Service to look after them.
The American system of national parks became one of the most admired in the world.
When the cowboys and homesteaders arrived on the Great Plains, Amerindian peoples like the Sioux had been roaming across them for hundreds of years.
In the early part of the nineteenth century an estimated twelve million of these gentle, heavy animals wandered the Great Plains.
Sometimes these herds were so big that they stretched as far as the eye could see.
The buffalo provided the Sioux with everything that they needed—food, clothing, tools, homes.
In the 1840s wagon trains heading for Oregon and California began to cross the Great Plains.
The railroads carried white people who stayed on the prairics and began to plough them.
At first the Amerindians tried to drive the newcomers away from thcir hunting grounds.
So they made treaties with the government in Washington, giving up large pieces of their land for white farmers to settle upon.
In 1851 the Pawnee people signed away an area that today forms most of the state of Nebraska.
In the 1860s the Comanche and the Kiowa gave up lands in Kansas, Colorado and Texas.
In return for such agreements the government promised to leave the Amerindians in peace on the lands that remained theirs.
In this treaty the government declared that large areas between the Missouri River and the Rocky Mountains belonged to the Sioux.
Six years later, however, American soldiers found gold in the Black Hills of South Dakota.
The Black Hills were sacred to the Sioux and when the government tried to buy them, the Sioux refused to sell.
It broke the Fort Laramie treaty and allowed prospectors and miners to enter the Black Hills.
By this time the Amerindian peoples of the Great Plains were facing another serious problem.
More and more of the land that the big animals needed to graze upon was being taken by ranchers and farmers.
Worse still, white hunters were shooting down the buffalo in thousands.
They killed them for their hides or for sport and left their flesh to rot.
In just two ycars between 1872 and 1874 the hunters almost completely destroyed the great herds.
General Sheridan, the officer who commanded the army in the West, saw the extermination of the buffalo as a way to end Amerindian resistance to the occupation of their land.
As more settlers claimed homesteads in the West the American government needed more land for them.
To obtain this it decided to force the Amerindians to give up their wandering way of life.
These reservations were areas of land that were usually so dry or rocky that the government thought white settlers were never likely to want them.
They won their best known victory at the Battle of the Little Big Horn in June 1876.
The Battle of the Little Big Horn was also the last stand for the Amerindians.
The American government and people were angry at the defeat of their soldiers.
With the buffalo gone, more of their people were dying every day of starvation and disease.
The Sioux surrendered and the soldiers marched them away to the reservations.
By 1890 most of the American West, from the Mississippi River to the Pacific Ocean, was occupied by cattle ranchers, farmers, or miners.
The United States government said that it would help and protect the reservation Amerindians.
It 67 Years Or Growtu Ghost Dancers. promised them food, materials to build homes, tools to cultivate the land.
In 1890 a religious prophet told the Sioux to dance a special dance called the Ghost Dance.
Their dead warriors would come back to life, the buffalo would return and all the white men would be swept away by a great flood.
So did the fact that some of them waved rifles above their heads as they danced.
Led by a chief named Big Foot, they set off to join another group nearby for safety.
Buta party of soldiers stopped them on the way and marched them to an army post at Wounded Knee Creek.
Take pity on us, Father, We are dancing as you wished Because you commanded us.
We dance hard, we dance long — Have pity, Father, help us You are close by in the dark Hear us and help us.
Take away the white men Send back the buffalo We are poor and weak We can do nothing alone Help us to be what we once were— Happy hunters of buffalo.
The soldiers began shooting down the Sioux women and children as well as the men.
Many of the wounded who crawled away died later in a blizzard that swept over the camp.
But whatever the events at Wounded Knee are called, one thing is certain.
For the Sioux they marked the end of all hope ofa return to their old way of life But the Sioux, like other Amerindians, survived.
This recognized Amerindians as full citizens of the United States and gave them the right to vote.
In 1934 the Indian Reorganization Act encouraged them to set up their own councils to run the affairs of their reservations.
In spite of such improvements, Amerindians remained far behind most other Americans in health, wealth, and education.
The unemployment rate among Amerindians was 39 percent, more than five times the figure for the population as a whole.
Almost 25 percent of Amerindian families were living on incomes too low to buy the food, clothing, and housing they needed to keep in good health.
Discases like diabetes, pneumonia, influenza, and alcohol addiction were killing twice as many Amerindians as other Ameri ‘ans.
In the 1970s Amerindians from all over the United States joined together to try to improve their position.
The next year a group armed with rifles occupied the small South Dakota village that now stands on the site of the Battle of Wounded Knee.
Their aim was to draw attention to their demand for the return of lands unjustly taken away from their ancestors.
The courts decided in their favor and awarded them $122. million in compensation for the loss of their land.
When [ook back now from this high hill of my old age, I can still see the butchered women and children lying heaped and scattered all along the crooked gulch as plain as when I saw them with eyes still young.
And I can see that something else died there in the bloody mud, and was buried in the blizzard.
The story of Sitting Bull In the year 1831 a baby boy was born in a tepee village on the Dakota grasslands.
He did not take part in the fighting at the 1876 Battle of the Little Big Horn.
After their victory at the Little Big Horn the Amerindians were pursued by the army.
In 1877 Sitting Bull led some of his followers to safety across the border in Canada, but in 1881 he returned to the United States.
Sitting Bull continued to fight for the rights of his people in other ways.
He criticized the American government for neglecting and cheating the Amerindians on the reservations.
In 1885 the famous showman Buffalo Bill Cody offered Sitting Bull a job.
He wanted the old leader to become one of the attractions of his traveling Wild West Show.
The reservation authorities were glad to be rid of Sitting Bull and 16 Tur Amerinpians’ Last Stand Sitting Bull. quickly gave him permission to go.
The following year Cody again asked Sitting Bull to join him, this time on a tour of Europe.
When the Ghost Dance movement began the government accused Sitting Bull of being its leader.
As Sitting Bull stepped out of the door of his cabin on the reservation one of the policemen shot him dead.
It had been organized to celebrate the United States’ hundredth birthday as an independent nation by 's achievements. showing some o} ‘The main attraction of the Centennial Exposition was the Machinery Hall.
Inside it visitors could see such recent American inventions as the typewriter and the telephone as well as machines for countless other uses—for sewing, grinding, screwing, printing, drilling, pumping, hammering. ident Grant and Emperor Dom Pedro II of Br Centennial Engine in Machinery Hall.
Even the normally patronizing British newspaper The Times was impressed.
At the time of the Centennial Exposition, the United States was still mainly a farming country.
These were the most important industrial raw materials in the nineteenth century.
In a range of low hills at the western end of Lake Superior, for example, some brothers named Merritt found the great Mesabi iron deposits.
The Merritts made their discovery in 1887 and the Mesabi soon became one of the largest producers of iron ore in the world.
It was cheap, easy to mine, and remarkably free of chemical impurities.
Before long Mesabi ore was being processed into high quality steel at only one tenth of the previous cost.
By 1900 ten times more coal was being produced in the United States than in 1860.
These increases were both a cause and a result of a rapid growth of American manufacturing industries in these years. roads were very important in this growth of facturing.
Vast amounts of coal and iron were used to make steel for their rails, locomotives, freight wagons and passenger cars.
Without them big new centers of industry like Pittsburgh and Chicago could not have developed.
It was the railroads that carried cattle to Chicago from the Great Plains to keep its huge slaughter houses and meat processing plants busy.
It was the railroads, too, that took reapers, windmills and barbed wire from Chicago’s farm equipment factories to homesteaders on the prairies.
During the nineteenth century they developed thousands of products to make life easicr, safer or more enjoyable for people.
Up to the middle of the ninetcenth century the inventors of such products often had little scientific knowledge.
Many later developments, however, called for an understanding of basic scientific principles in, for example, clectricity, magnetism and chemistry.
One man above all others showed an ability to use such knowledge to solve everyday problems.
His name was Thomas Alva Edison. ison was born in 1847 and died in 1931.
Edison’s laboratory contained every material and chemical that was then known, Wearing a long, white chemist’s coat, his fingers stained by chemils and his hair dirty with oil and dust, he would work for days without cating or sleeping when he was close to solving a problem. ca Some of Edison’s sayings became almost as well known as his inventions.
On the day he got married, for example, he forgot his bride and spent the night working in his laboratory.
Edison had his greatest success in making practical use of electricity.
He had a clear commercial aim—to capture from gas the huge market for lighting homes, streets and places of work.
By 1890 the industries of the United States were earning the country more than its farmlands.
In the twenty years that followed, industrial output went on growing, faster and faster.
By 1913 more than one third of the whole world’s industrial production was pouring from the mines and factories of the United States.
The problem was to find a suitable material for the filament of the bulb.
What was needed was a filament that would glow brightly when the current of electricity passed through it, but without burning out.
Some glowed for minutes, some for hours, but none for long enough to satisfy him.
When he gave a public demonstration of his light bulb the value of shares in the Edison Electric Light Company rose from $100 to $3,000 cach.
Edison then built complete electrical generating systems to provide his bulbs with power.
Soon electricit would not only light ‘streets, but heat hous. power machines, drive railroad engines.
It would become what it has remained ever world’s chief source of energy. nce—the The growth of American industry was organized and controlled by businessmen who found the money to pay for it.
By a mixture of hard work and ability, and by ignoring the rights of others, they made themselves wealthy and powerful.
Their critics called them “robber barons’ —or wor Andrew Carnegie was one of the best known of these men.
Carnegie was born in Scotland in 1835, but immigrated to America at the age of thirteen, He began his life there working for one dollar twenty cents a week ina Pittsburgh cotton mill.
From there he moved to a job ina telegraph office, then to one on the Pennsylvania Railroad, By the time he was thirty he already had an income of over forty thousand dollars a year from far-sighted investments, Carnegie concentrated his investments in the iron and steel business.
By the 1860s he controlled companies making bridges, rails, and locomotives for the railroads.
In the 1870s he built the biggest steel mill in America on the Monongahela River in Pennsylvania.
He also bought coal and iron ore mines, a fleet of steamships to carry ore across the Great Lakes from Mesabi to a port he owned on Lake Eric, and a railroad to connect the port to his steel works in Pennsylvania.
Nothing like Camegie’s wealth and industrial power had ever before been seen in America.
By 1900, as 74 owner of half the shares in the giant Carnegie Steel Corporation, his annual income was estimated to be over twenty-three million dollars—this was about twenty thousand times more than the income of the average American of the The great wealth of men like Carnegie came partly from their success in swallowing up rival firms or driving them out of business.
Businessmen like Carnegie and John D Rockefeller, the “king” of the growing oil industry, realized that they could greatly increase their profits by doing this.
They could reduce the costs of running their companies, and with no competitors to challenge their position they could raise the prices of their products to whatever level they wished, Eli Whitney and the American system Eli Whitney, the man who invented the cotton gin, neyer made much money from it.
Too many people copied his original machine without paying him anything.
Each gun was individually made, entirely by one man and a part from one gun would notnecessarily fit another.
At a factory he opened in Newhaven, Connecticut, he began to use machines to make guns.
His machines made individual parts for guns i arate Operations and in large numbers.
Most important of all, they made parts that were exactly alike, so that any part would fit any gun.
This made it possible for guns to be put together in stages, with different workers each carrying out one particular task.
Whitney’s way of working meant that guns could now be made by men without enough skill to make a complete gun.
Without it the standard of living of today’s United States, and that of the entire industrialized world, would not be possible.
One day in 1903 he was talking to a friend about the best way to do this.
Ford tried out his idea with an automobile called the Model T Like Whitney’s guns, every Model 'T was put together or “assembled” from exactly the same parts.
It does this by positioning workers in a factory in one place and taking work to them.
By the early twentieth century trusts controlled large parts of American industry.
One trust controlled the steel industry, another the oil industry, another the meat-packing industry, and there were many more.
By their wealth and power—and especially their power to decide wages and prices—they controlled the lives of millions of people.
The United States was a land that was supposed to offer equal opportunities to everyone.
Yet now it seemed that the country was coming under the control of a handful of rich and powerful men who were able to do more or less anything they wished.
Some bribed politicians to pass laws which Ford first used an assembly line to make magnetos for his Model Ts.
By the old method one man on his own did this job from start to finish.
The change reduced the time taken to put together a magneto from twenty minutes to five.
In 1913 Ford started to use assembly-line methods to make the complete Model T As the cars moved along on a conveyor, dozens of workmen each carried out a single operation—tightening certain nuts or fixing certain parts.
It was filled up with gasoline and driven off ready for the road, Making a car in this new way took 1 hour and 33 minutes.
By combining standardization and the assembly line Ford showed manufacturers of all kinds how to produce goods cheaply and in large quantities.
Because of this he is seen as the father of twentieth-century mass production. favored them.
Others hired private armies to crush any attempt by their workers to obtain better conditions.
Their attitude to the rights of other people was summed up ina famous remark of the railroad “king” William H Vanderbilt.
Vanderbilt was asked whether he thought that railroads should be run in the public interest.
It strengthened the feeling that something ought to be done to limit such men’s growing power over the nation’s life.
Many people came to sce this matter as the most important problem facing the United States in the early years of the twentieth century.
Unless done about it, th d, the United States would become a nation whose life was something v controlled by a handful of rich businessmen 75 THE GOLDEN Door The unveiling of the Statue of Liberty.
She is the Statue of Liberty, one of the best-known landmarks in the world.
It was given by the people of France to mark the hundredth anniversary of the War of Independence.
For millions of immigrants the Statue of Liberty has been their first sight of America.
Give me your tired, your poor, Your huddled masses yearning to breathe free The wretched refuse of your teeming shore Send these, the homeless tempest-tossed to me, Lift my lamp beside the golden door.
More than 75 percent of all the people in history who have ever left their homelands to live in another country have moved to the United States.
In the course of its history it has taken in more people from other lands than any other country in the world.
Since the founding of Jamestown in 1607 more than fifty million people from other lands have made new homes there.
Poor crops, hunger and political unrest caused an estimated five million Europeans a year to leave the lands of their birth at this time.
For five years after 1845 these became diseased and rotted in the fields.
During the Civil War in the 1860s the federal government encouraged more emigration from Europe.
It did this by offering land to immigrants who would serve as soldiers in the Union armies.
By 1865 about one in five of the soldiers in the armies of the North was a wartime immigrant.
Until about 1880 most immigrants to the United States came from these regions.
More emigrants from lands in the south and east of Europe began to arrive—Italians, Poles, Grecks, Russians, Hungarians, Czechs.
By 1896 more than half of all the immigrants entering the United States were from eastern or southern Europe.
Immigrants sailing to America Many Jewish people came to the United States at this time.
He was just getting by, making a living working twelve to fourteen hours a day.
Lint got down the throat and into the lungs and caused the same coughing, the same diseases, the same sickness as dust.
Remember, he had come from a place where, if you were Jewish, you didn’t count as a human being and you had no rights at all.
In America they gave my father the vote, they allowed him a place to live, and they let his children 18 THe Gotpen Door grow up as Americans.
Between 1880 and 1925 about two million Jews entered the United States.
Today there are about 5. million Jewish Americans and they make up about 2. percent of the total population of the United States.
In certain states along the Atlantic coast the percentage of Jews is higher.
So many immigrants wanted to enter the United States in the late 1800s that the government found it difficult to keep check on them.
All intending immigrants were examined there before they were allowed to enter the United States.
During its busiest times it dealt with almost 2,000 immigrants a da Between its opening and 1954, when it closed its Leaving home Leon Stein’s mother was born in a small village in Lithuania.
I was excited a little bit, but mostly rather miserable and frightened.
As the cart got to the end of the village street I could see the group of villagers who were waving us goodby was getting smaller and smaller, but I kept my cyes fixed on my mother in the front of that little group.
I didn’t take my eyes off her .., Then, just before the cart turned the corner and I lost sight of them, I saw my mother faint and fall ro the ground crying and weeping, and I saw the rest of the group bend over her to pick her up, and I tried to get out of the cart and run back to her and stay with her.
Immigration officers asked these people questions to find out if they were criminals or mentally abnormal.
A letter chalked on their clothing—H for heart disease or E for eye di could end their hopes of a new life in Ame But most passed the examinations.
Almost half of all present-day Americans have ancestors who entered the United States by way of Ellis Island.
One day in the 1970s he stood in Ellis Island’s echoing, empty Great Hall and spoke quictly of the way that it made him fe “My parents came through this place at the turn of the century.
I think if you become really quiet you can actually hear all the crying, all the feeling, all the impatience, all the misunderstanding that went on in this hall.
Being born again is not an casy thing and the people who came through here were being, born again.
They worked hard because they wanted to make a success of their new life.
Often they could Only the hardest and lowest paid jobs were open to them.
Like Leon Stein’s father, they had to work for long hours in dangerous conditions and to live in overcrowded slums that were breeding places of discase and misery. not even speak its languag Yet bad as conditions were, they often seemed preferable to those the immigrants had left behind in Europe.
In the United States they were free from religious and political persecution.
They were often better dressed and better fed than they had ever been before.
By 1910 it was estimated that 14. percent of the people then living in the United States had been born in other countries.
They accused immigrants of taking jobs away from American-born workers, of lowering standards of health and education, and of threatening the country’s traditions and way of life by bringing in “un-American” political ideas like anarchism and communism.
The Cliff Dwellers—a painting that shows the slum conditions in which many immigrants lived.
The hero, a refugee from persecution in Czarist Russia, escapes to the United States.
This was perhaps because many in the audiences who came to see it found its message reassuring.
At a time when poor and uneducated immigrants from Europe were flooding into the United States in millions, it was comforting for Americans to be told that their country could turn the newcomers into Americans like themselves In fact this never really happeneed, at least not completely.
The United States turned out to be more of a salad bowl than a melting pot.
Groups from similar national and ethnic backgrounds often stayed together, keeping alive their old identities and many of their old customs.
They lived in “Chinatowns” or “Little Italys,”” areas populated almost entirely by Americans of similar ethnic origins.
Americans from different immigrant backgrounds do mix together in time.
It has been estimated, for example, that about 80 percent of the great-grandchildren of early-twenticth-century European immigrants marry outsidé their own ethnic groups.
Yet such third generation Americans often cling with pride to important elements of their ethnic heritage.
So do many Americans whose immigrant origins are even further in the past.
In the 1860s, Chinese workers had been brought to California to build the railroads.
The fact that Chinese laborers were willing to work for less pay caused American workers to dislike them.
Chinese communities in the West were attacked and their buildings were burned down.
Japanese and other Asian immigrants were refused entry as well and by 1924 no Asian immigrants were permitted into the United States.
The one which had most effect was the Reed—Johnson Immigration Act of 1924.
Th was an answer to the law ars and the prejudices of Americans who were descendants of arlicr north European immigrants.
It said that in the future no more than 150,000 immigrants a year would be let into the United States.
Each country which sent as given a “quota” which was based on the number of its people already living in the United States.
The 1924 system was designed mainly to reduce immigration from southern and eastern Europe.
Onee it began, 87 percent of the immigration permits went to immigrants from Britain, Ireland, Germany and Scandinavia—the countries from which the ancestors of most 1920s Americans had come.
By 1900 the United States was the richest and most productive industrial country in the world.
It produced 31. percent of the world’s coal, 34. percent of its iron and 36. percent ofits steel.
About twenty million ofits seventy-four million people earned a living from jobs in industry.
Men, women and children labored for long hours in factories, mines and workshops.
Many lived in cities, for growing industrial centers like Pittsburgh and Chicago needed more and more workers.
Years later the son of immigrants from an Italian village remembered his mother’s unhappiness.
In 1900 the average industrial worker was paid nine dollars for working fifty-nine hours a week.
In cotton spinning mills the usual working week was sixty-two hours for wages of ten cents an hour.
In one plant belonging to the United States Steel Corporation forty-six men were killed in 1906—by 80 burns, explosions, electric shocks, suffocation, falling objects or by being crushed.
If workers were killed or injured like this, neither they nor their families received compensation.
Workers tried to form trade, or labor, unions to improve the conditions of their lives.
One reason for this was the competition for jobs between American-born and immigrant workers.
Ifa worker’s name appeared on one of these lists, other employers would refuse to give him a job.
Employers were determined to allow neither their workers nor anyone else to interfere in the way they ran their businesses.
Sometimes they persuaded politicians to send soldiers to break up strikes.
At other times they hired their own private armies to control their workers.
This happened when workers at Andrew Carnegie’s Homestead Steel Mill in Pennsylvania went on strike in 1892.
The A.F.L. was formed in 1886. by Samuel Gompers, a leader of the Cigarmakers’ Union.
Gompers believed that unions of skilled workers were the only ones with a real chance of success.
The A.F.L. grew steadily as it brought more and more of these skilled workers together—carpenters, printers, iron molders, glassmakers.
By 1904 it had 1.75 million members and was the United States’ biggest labor organization.
At this time many workers in Europe were joining revolutionary labor movements.
These European clashes between the detectives and the strikers, twenty people were killed.
Employers and the government were not the only enemics labor unions faced.
Americans had always seen their country as a land where individuals should be free to improve their lives by their own efforts.
Millions more dreamed of the day when they too would own a farm or a business of their own.
People such as these were unlikely to favor organizations which aimed to limit businessmen’s freedom of action and opportunities.
In the early years of the twentieth century a stream of books and magazine articles drew people’s attention to a large number of national problems.
Some dealt with conditions of life in the slums of the great cities, some with bribery and corruption in government, others with the dishonesty of wealthy businessmen.
This caused some people to describe their authors with contempt as “muckrakers.”” movements called for the overthrow of capitalism — that is, the private ownership of factories, mines and other means of production—and its replacement by a new socialist economic system.
They were not interested in destroying the existing economic system; they simply wanted to'make it work more effectively for their benefit.
What they wanted was a bigger share of the wealth they helped to produce.
He believed that unions should concern themselves with the day-to-day welfare of their members, not with politics.
But practical demands for higher wages, shorter working hours and safer working conditions would.
This gave a horrifying description of life among immigrant workers in the slaughter houses of Chicago.
The Jungle revealed to many middle-class Americans a side of their nation’s life that they hardly knew existed.
They were shocked to learn what went into their breakfast sausages shocked when government investigators said that what Sinclair had written was correct.
The meat companies begged the government to inspect their premises in order to convince people that their products were fit to eat.
This pressure brought about an important change in American economic and political life.
Before 1900 most Americans had believed in “laissez faire’’—the idea that governments should interfere with business, and with people's lives in general, as little as possible.
A Progressive was someone who believed that, where necessary, the government should take action to deal with the problems of society.
He wanted to allow businessmen enough freedom of action to make their firms efficient and prosperous, but at the same time to prevent them from taking unfair advantage of 82 The Strike by Robert Koehler. other people.
Anthracite coal miners went on strike to obtain better wages and working conditions.
He said that unless they agreed to negotiate with their workers, the federal government would take control of the coal mines.
Roosevelt forced the big railroad companies to charge all their customers fair rates, instead of allowing large customers like the oil and meat-packing trusts to pay less than farmers and small businessmen.
He also supported laws which 19 REFORMERS AND PROGRESSIVES compelled manufacturers of foods and medicines to make sure that their products were pure and harmless before selling them.
Although Roosevelt and Wilson belonged to different political parties, some of their ideas were very similar, Wilson, too, supported the Progressive movement.
As Governor of the state of New Jersey he had fought successfully to make sure that the state was run for the benefit ofits people.
He had reduced bribery and corruption there, and he had introduced reforms such as laws to give workers compensation for injurics at work.
In March 1913, Wilson stood before the Capitol building in Washington, the home of the United States Congress.
One of these “human costs,” Wilson believed, had been the near destruction for many ordinary Americans of a fair chance to get on in life.
Workers, farmers, owners of small businesses—people such as these had seen their opportunities steadily shrinking in recent years owing to the continuing growth of the power of “big business” over the nation’s economic life.
Despite Theodore Roosevelt’s attempts to bring the trusts under control, they were even more powerful in 1913 than they had been in 1900.
Real equality of opportunity seemed in danger of disappearing in the United States.
Wilson believed that only action by the federal government could halt this process.
One of Wilson’s first steps was to reduce customs duties in order to encourage trade between the United States and other countries.
Then he reformed the banking system and introduced a system of federal taxes on high incomes.
Other laws reduced the powers of the trusts, gave more rights to labor unions and made it easier for farmers to borrow money from the federal government to develop their land.
They forbade factories to employ children, introduced secret voting, improved safety at work, and protected their natural resources.
For example, the Senate refused to pass a law giving the federal authorities more control over the buying and selling of business shares.
Another law, stopping child labor in factories everywhere, was declared to be unconstitutional by the Supreme Court.
The Progressive movement changed and improved American life in many ways.
But many people still distrusted too much government “interference” in the nation’s life.
Theodore Roosevelt and conservation Perhaps Theodore Roosevelt's most important service to his country was to persuade Congress to pass a number of conservation laws.
These were laws to save the country’s natural resources from being used up carelessly and greedily.
Roosevelt pointed out that unless action were taken to slow down the destruction of the country’s forests, mineral resources and soil fertility, Americans would soon discover that much of the natural wealth of the United States had been destroyed for ever.
It passed conservation laws under which millions of acres of Jand were protected and their forest and mineral wealth preserved for the use of future generations.
A war was being fought in Cuba at this time and the Maine had been sent to Havana as a demonstration of American power.
Three weeks later, on the night of February 15, a huge explosion shook the city.
To this day, the cause of the explosion that destroyed the Maine remains a mystery.
Some believe that it was set off by an accidental spark in the ship’s magazine, or ammunition store.
At the time, however, many Americans believed that the explosion had been caused by an enemy mine.
The man who made this claim most loudly was a newspaper owner named William Randolph Hearst.
The story which followed made it clear that to Hearst the “enemy” in the headline was Spain.
Apart from this it had brought no additional land under its rule since gaining control of California and the Southwest in the Mexican War of 1846 to 1848.
In the 1890s, however, a new spirit started to enter American foreign policy.
These were years when Britain, France and Germany were busy claiming colonies, foreign lands which they could rule and exploit.
Many Americans agreed with Platt, Politicians, businessmen, newspapers and missionaries joined together to claim that “the Anglo-Saxon race” — by which they meant Americans as well as North Europeans~—had a right and a duty to bring western civilization to the peoples of Asia, Africa and Latin Monroe’s Doctrine In the early nineteenth century most of Central and South America, or Latin America, was ruled by Spain.
The Spanish government asked the great powers of Europe to help it to defeat the rebels.
They did not want the armies and navies of powerful European nations in their part of the world.
Americans felt that it was important to their country’s safety to make sure that no foreign enemies gained influence in them.
In 1823 President Monroe warned European nations not to interfere in Latin American affairs.
From 1895 onwards feelings of this kind were focused more and more upon Cuba, which lay only ninety miles from the American coast.
Many Americans had invested money in sugar and tobacco plantations there.
In 1895 the people of Cuba rose in rebellion against their Spanish rulers.
The rebels raided and burned villages, sugar plantations and railroad depots.
To cut off the rebels’ supplies, Spanish soldiers moved thousands of Cuban civilians into prison camps.
Hearst and another American newspaper owner named Joseph Pulitzer published sensational accounts 20 AN American Empire of the struggle in Cuba.
Day after day millions of Americans read how, according to Hearst and Pulitzer, Cubans were being badly treated by the Spaniards.
By 1898 many Americans felt that the United States should do something to help the Cubans.
It was to show its sympathy for the rebels that the American government sent the Maine to Havana.
In April President McKinley demanded that Spain should withdraw from Cuba, and a few days later Spain and the United States went to war.
The Philippines was another big Spanish colony near the coast of Southeast Asia.
It was said that President McKinley had to search a globe to find out exactly where it was.
But he saw that the islands would be useful for the United States to control.
From bases in the Philippines American soldiers and sailors would be able to protect the growing number of American traders in China. — And Roosevelt’s Corollary The original Monroe Doctrine told Europeans not to interfere in Latin America.
In 1904 President Theodore Roosevelt made an addition, or “corollary’’ to it.
He said that the United States would intervene there whenever it thought necessary.
Roosevelt believed that by doing this the United States would be able to ensure the internal stability of its Latin American neighbors and so remove any excuse for Europeans to interfere in their affairs.
In the next twenty years American governments often acted upon Roosevelt’s Corollary.
American soldicrs landed in countries like Nicaragua, Haiti and the Dominican Republic, and took over their governments for years at a time.
Often the Americans made big improvements—paying off debts, draining swamps, building roads.
But this did not stop Latin Americans from resenting their interference.
Years Or GRowTH ‘The first battle of the Spanish— Amcrican War was fought in the Philippines.
A few weeks later American soldiers occupied Manila, the chief city in the Philippines, and Spanish resistance came to anend.
Other American soldiers occupied Puerto Rico, another Spanish-owned island close to Cuba.
When peace was signed, Spain gave most of its overseas empire to the United States—Cuba, the Philippines, Puerto Rico and a small Pacific island called Guam.
Before this it had been independent, but Americans owned profitable sugar and pineapple plantations there.
In less than a year the United States had become a colonial power, with millions ofnon-Americans under its rule.
In rebelling against British rule they had claimed that colonial peoples should be free to rule themselves.
Filipinos who had fought for independence from Spain were soon fighting against American occupation troops.
Most Americans answered this question by claiming that they were preparing underdeveloped nations for civilization and democracy.
The Americans built schools and hospitals, constructed roads, provided pure water supplies and put an end to killer diseases like malaria and yellow fever in the lands they now ruled.
They continued to rule most of them until the middle years of the century.
In 1953 Puerto Rico became self-governing, but continued to be closely tied to the United States.
When Congress declared war on Spain in 1898 it said that it was only doing so to help the Cuban people to win independence.
Before the Americans took away their soldiers in 1902 they made the Cuban government give them land at Guantanamo Bay on the Cuban coast.
This said that the United States 20 AN AMERICAN EMPIRE could send troops to take control of Cuba any time it believed that American interests were in danger—in other words, whenever it wanted.
In 1906, for example, President Theodore Roosevelt set up an American military government in Cuba to stop a revolution.
In 1912, 1917 and 1921 American marines were again sent to stop revolutions in Cuba.
For many years the country continued to be little more than a protectorate of the United States.
Dollar Diplomacy In economic and business affairs the United States has long been strongly internationalist.
American foreign policy has often tried to proyide businessmen with fresh opportunities.
In the carly years of the twentieth century, for example, the industrial nations of Europe were dividing the trade of China between them.
The close relationship between American foreign policy and American business interests has shown itself in other ways.
Political leaders have sometimes encouraged American businesses to invest abroad as a way of strengthening the political position of the United States.
This cncouraged Americans to invest in areas that were strategically important to the United States, such as Latin America.
American firms which have established themselves in other countries have often received a mixed welcome.
Their critics accuse them of using their economic power to influence foreign governments to follow policies that serve the political and economic interests of the United States rather than those of the country in which they are working.
They see such investment as a way of obtaining new jobs and new technology, and so of improving their countries’ living standards.
The isthmus is the neck of land that joins North and South America and separates the Caribbean Sea from the Pacific Ocean.
Building a canal across it would mean that American ships could travel quickly between the east and west coasts of the United States instead of having to make a long sea journey around South America.
The main problem was that the United States did not own the isthmus; a Latin American country called Colombia did.
In 1903, when the Colombian government was slow to give the Americans permission to build the canal, President Theodore Roosevelt sent warships to Panama.
The warships helped a small group of Panamanian businessmen to rebel against the Colombian government.
A few days later they gave the Americans control over a ten-and-a-halfmilewide strip of land called the Canal Zone across their new country.
They began digging in 1904 and the first ships steamed through the completed canal in 1914.
Most Latin Americans thought that the Panama tebellion had been organized by Roosevelt.
It was the beginning of a struggle that lasted for more than four years, brought death to millions of people and changed the history of the world.
On the other side the main 88 countries were Germany and Austria, who were called the Central Powers.
When President Wilson said that they should be “impartial in thought as well as in action,” most people were ready to agree with him.
In the first days of the war the German government sent its armies marching into neutral Belgium.
They were even more shocked when newspapers printed reports — often false or exaggerated—of German cruelty towards Belgian civilians.
From the very beginning of the war the strong British navy prevented German ships from trading with the United States.
By 1915 American factories were making vast quantities of weapons and munitions and selling them to Britain and France.
German leaders were determined to stop this flow of armaments to their enemies.
They announced in February 1915, that they would sink all Allied merchant ships in the seas around the British Isles.
Ona hazy afternoon in May, a big British passenger ship called the Lusitania was nearing the end of its voyage from the United States to Britain.
Suddenly, without any warning, it was hit by a torpedo from a German submarine.
Some began to think that Germany would do 21 A War AND A PEACE anything to win the war.
In the autumn of 1916 American voters re-elected Wilson as President, mainly because he had kept them out of the war.
Germany’s war leaders feared that, unless the flow of supplies was stopped, their country would be defeated.
Only nine days after Wilson’s speech they again ordered their submarines to begin sinking ships sailing towards Allied ports.
A poster recruiting soldiers to fight for “Uncle t few weeks German submarines sank five American ships.
With German torpedoes sending American sailors to their deaths in the grey waters of the Atlantic, Wilson felt that he had no choice.
The Zimmermann telegram At the beginning of 1917 many Americans were still strongly against becoming involved in the First World War.
To people on the Great Plains, in Texas or in California, Europe seemed very far away.
The story claimed that Arthur Zimmermann, the German Foreign Secretary, had tried to persuade Mexico and Japan to attack the United States.
Zimmermann had sent a secret telegram to the German ambassador in Mexico.
The telegram told the ambassador to invite the Mexican government to sign an alliance with Germany.
The idea was that if the United States went to war with Germany, the Mexicans should attack the Americans from the south.
Mexico's reward would be the return of all the lands it had lost to the United States in 1848.
Zimmermann also wanted Mexico to invite Japan to join the anti-American alliance.
On February 24, when Americans were already angry at Germany for starting submarine attacks again, the British gave Wilson a copy of the telegram.
People who wanted to keep the United States out of the war, and those who favored Germany, said that the telegram was a forgery, a British trick.
The Zimmermann telegram turned American opinion more strongly in favor of the Allies.
This was especially true in the previously uninterested western parts of the country.
These were the very areas that would have been threatened most if Zimmermann’s plan had worked.
He saw the war as a great crusade to ensure the future peace of the world.
When the United States declared war on Germany the American army was a small force of only 200,000 soldiers.
Millions more men had to be recruited, trained, equipped and shipped across the Atlantic to Europe.
A full year passed before many American soldiers were available to help the European Allies.
In the spring of 1918 the German armies began a last desperate offensive against the French and the British.
Their aim was to win the war before the new American army was ready to fight.
They placed all their armies under one commander, the French general Foch.
Luckily for Foch, American soldiers began to arrive at the battlefront to strengthen his forces.
Soon over a million of them had joined in the battles against the Germans.
On November 11, 1918, German and Allied leaders signed an armistice, an agreement to stop fighting.
The bloodiest and most destructive war the world had ever known was over.
But when Wilson met other Allied leaders to work. out the details of the treaty, the welcome became less friendly.
The French leader, Georges Clemenceau, thought that Wilson lacked experience in international affairs.
Both Wilson and Clemenceau wanted to make sure that a war like the First World War never happened again.
Wilson wanted to do this by writing a treaty that did not leave the Germans with lots of grievances.
He believed that if the Germans thought they had not been treated fairly, they might one day start a war of revenge.
The Germans had to be made so weak that they would never have the strength to fight again.
After much arguing, and without consulting the Germans, the Allied leaders agreed on a peace treaty.
They called it the Versailles Treaty, after the palace near Paris where it was signed in May 1919.
The Versailles Treaty was harder in its treatment of the Germans than Wilson had wanted.
It also made them agree to pay for all the damage that the war had caused.
This was a scheme that he believed could still make his dream ofa world without war come true.
The League of Nations was to be an organization where representatives of the world’s nations would meet and settle their differences by discussion instead of war.
It had taken Wilson months of hard bargaining to persuade the other Allicd leaders to accept this plan.
Now he faced a battle to persuade Congress and the American people to accept it, too.
Many Americans were against their country becoming permanently involved in the problems of Europe.
But as the months passed it began to seem that he was failing to do so.
But he boarded a special train and set off ona speaking tour of the western United States to plead for the League.
In March 1920, the Senate voted against the United States joining the League of Nations, and the idea was dropped.
From his inyalid’s armchair in the White House a sick and disappointed Wilson spoke the last words on the subject.
Wilson’s Fourteen Points President Wilson always insisted that the United States was fighting the First World War not against the German people but against their warlike leaders.
In January 1918, he outlined his ideas for a just and lasting peace in a speech to the United States Senate.
Among other things, Wilson’s Fourteen Points required nations to stop making secret agreements, to reduce their military forces and armaments, to trade frecly with one another and to draw up new national boundaries that would allow the separate peoples of Europe to rule themselves.
It was in the Fourteen Points, also, that Wilson first suggested the League of Nations.
When the German government asked for peace in October 1918, it hoped that the Allies would base their terms on the Fourteen Points.
But other Allicd leaders regarded some of Wilson’s ideas as idealistic nonsense.
The French leader, Clemenceau, compared the Fourteen Points sarcastically to the Christian religion's Ten Commandments.
In the end the Fourteen Points had much less influence on the terms of the Versailles Treaty than Wilson had hoped for.
They say that the post-war world would have been a better and a safer place if the Fourteen Points had been followed more closcly.
These are some of the pictures that come into people’s minds when they think of the United States in the 1920s.
Because of the First World War, other countries owed it a lot of money.
Its national income—the total earnings ofall its citizens—was much higher, than that of Britain, France, Germany and Japan put together.
Between 1922 and 1927, the number of cars on the roads rose from under eleven million to over twenty million.
It 92 made hundreds of thousands of refrigerators, vacuum cleaners, stoves and radios.
The United States became the first nation in history to build its way of life on selling vast quantities of goods that gave ordinary people easier and more enjoyable lives.
These “‘consumer goods” poured off the assembly lines of big new factories.
Between 1919 and 1929 such mass-production factories doubled their output.
Thousands invested money in successful firms so that they could share in their profits.
Their motto was “Live now, pay tomorrow”’—a tomorrow which most were convinced would be like today only better, with even more money swelling their wallets.
Men like Henry Ford were widely admired as the creators of the nation’s prosperity.
Coolidge’s words help to explain the policies of American governments in the 1920s.
Republicans believed that if the government looked after the interests of the businessman, everybody would become richer.
Businessmen. whose firms were doing well, they claimed, would take on more workers and pay more wages.
To help businessmen Congress placed high import taxes on goods from abroad.
The aim was to make imported goods more expensive, so that American manufacturers would have less competition from foreign rivals.
At the same time Congress reduced taxes on high incomes and company profits.
Some Americans feared that revolutionaries, or “reds,” were plotting a similar take-over in the United States.
People who criticized the way American society was organized risked being accused of disloyalty.
People who held them were feared and persecuted, especially if they were foreign-born, On April 15, 1920, two people were shot dead in a $15,000 robbery near Boston.
Three weeks later two Italian immigrants named Nicola Sacco and Bartolomeo Vanzetti were arrested.
But Sacco owned a gun that could have been used in Yet there were lots of poor Americans.
A survey in 1929 showed that half the American people had hardly enough money to buy sufficient food and clothing.
In the industrial cities of the North, such as Chicago and Pittsburgh, immigrant workers still labored long hours for low wages in steel mills, factories and slaughter houses.
In the South thousands of poor farmers, both black and white, worked from sunrise to sunset to earn barely enough to live on.
The wealth that Republicans said would benefit everybody never reached people like these.
For rent, a sharecropper gave the landowner part of what he grew — often so much that he was left with hardly enough to feed his family.
During the First World War they had been able to sell their wheat to Europe for high prices.
By 1921, however, the countries of Europe no longer needed so much American food. the killings.
He told friends that he was going to get “those anarchist bastards,” and eventually sentenced both Sacco and Vanzetti to death.
Many believed that Sacco and Vanzetti had been condemned for their origins and political beliefs, not because of the evidence against them.
For six years people both in the United States and abroad fought for their release.
To this day neither the guilt nor the innocence of Sacco and Vanzetti has been finally proved.
But their case is remembered as an example of how racial and political prejudice may cause justice to suffer.
And farmers were finding it more difficult to sell their produce at home.
Immigration had fallen, so the number of people needing food was growing more slowly.
American farmers found themselves growing products they could not sell.
But to Americans who owned shares or “‘stock,” in industrial companies the future looked bright.
This meant bigger profits for the firms that made them, This in turn sent up the value of shares in such firms.
Hoover was sure that American prosperity would go on growing and that the poverty in which some Americans still lived would be remembered as something in the past.
Looking at the way their standard of living had risen during the 1920s, many other Americans thought the same.
Most were made in Hollywood, a suburb of the city of Los Angeles in California.
Hollywood’s big attraction for filmmakers was its clean air and plentiful sunshine.
The men who ran these studios were businessmen and their main aim was to make as much money as possible.
They soon found that one way to do this was to standardize their films.
When audiences had shown that they liked a certain kind of film, the studios made many more of exactly the same kind.
Stars were actors who were so popular that people went in crowds to see any film they appeared in, no matter how City Activities by Thomas Hart Benton, The artist gives his view of American society in the 1920s. good or bad it was.
They set up special publicity departments to get stories about their actors into the newspapers.
They spoke in pictures, not words, and so their language was international.
All over the world, from Berlin to ‘Tokyo, from London to Buenos Aires, tens of millions of people lined up every night of the week to sce their favorite Hollywood stars—and, without realizing it, to be Americanized.
Hollywood movies showed people a world that was more exciting, more free, more equal, than their own.
To most people this world of the movies remained a dream world, separate from real life.
It made them realize, however dimly, that perhaps their own conditions of life could be improved.
Al Capone and the bootleggers In 1919 the American people voted in favor of a new amendment to the Constitution.
The Eighteenth Amendment prohibited the making or selling of alcoholic drinks in the United States.
Millions began to break the prohibition law deliberately and regularly.
Illegal drinking places called “‘speakeasies’” opened in basements and backrooms all over the country.
The bestknown mob was one in Chicago led by the gangster “Scarface” Al Capone.
Competition between rival mobs sometimes caused bloody street wars, fought out with armored cars and machine guns.
They used their wealth to bribe police and other public officials to do nothing about their law-breaking.
He had a private army of nearly a thousand thugs equipped with machine guns.
By the end of the 1920s most Americans regarded prohibition as half scandal, half joke.
Many used the money they had made as bootleggers to set up other criminal businesses.
One Thursday afternoon in October 1929, a workman outside an upper floor window ofa Wall Street office found himself staring into the eyes of four policemen.
Here dealers called stockbrokers buy and sell valuable picces of paper.
Each certificate represents a certain amount of money invested in a company.
Every year in the 1920s the sales of cars, radios and other consumer goods rose.
Owning shares in a business gives you the right toa share of its profits.
You can buy them at one price, then, if the company does well, sell them later at a higher one.
By 1929 buying and selling shares~ “playing the market” —had become almost a national hobby.
You could see this from the rise in the number of shares changing hands.
Like most other things in the United States in the 1920s, you could buy shares on credit.
A hundred dollars cash would “buy” a thousand dollars’ worth of shares from any stockbroker.
Many people borrowed large amounts of money from the banks to buy shares in this way—“‘on the margin”, as it was called.
This cartoon accurately predicted the stock market crash that occurred three weeks later.
Their idea was to spot shares that would quickly rise in value, buy them at one price and then resell at a higher one a few weeks later.
One visitor to Wall Street was reminded ofa strect fight, as stockbrokers pushed and scrambled to buy shares for their customers.
By the fall of 1929 the profits being made by many American firms had been decreasing for some time.
If profits were falling, thought more cautious investors, then share prices, too, would soon fall.
On Thursday, October 24, 1929—Black Thursday —13 million shares were sold, On the following Tuesday, October 29— Terrifying Tuesday—16. million were sold, By the end of the year the value of all shares had dropped by $40,000 million.
Thousands of people, especially those who had borrowed to buy on the margin, found themselves facing debt and ruin, Some committed suicide.
This was what the policemen thought that the window cleaner was planning.
This collapse of American share prices was known as the Wall Street Crash.
Some blamed the blindness of politicians for the Crash, others the greed of investors and stockbrokers.
The fact was that by the end of the 1920s not enough people were buying the products of America’s expanded industries.
Because too little of the United States’ increased wealth was finding its way into the hands of the country’s workers and farmers.
The most important cause of the Wall Street Crash was simply this—that too few Americans were carning enough money to buy the goods that they themselves were producing.
Many decided to save any money they had instead of spending it on such things as new cars and radios.
American factories were already making more goods than they could sell.
In the 1920s American goods had sold well overseas, especially in Europe.
But countries such as Britain and Germany had not prospered after the war as the United States had.
They had often paid for their purchases with money borrowed from American banks.
European buyers became short of cash and American overseas sales dried up almost completely.
Unlike unemployed workers in countries such as Germany and Britain, they received no government unemployment pay.
Here they received free pieces of bread or bowls of soup, paid for by money collected from those who could afford it.
Industrial production had fallen by half and wage payments by 60 percent.
Twelve million people, one out of every four of the country’s workers, were unemployed.
The city of Chicago alone had almost three-quarters of a million workers without jobs.
The Depression was easiest to see in the towns, with their silent factories, closed shops and slowly moving breadlines.
With the number of people out of work rising day by day, their customers in the cities could no longer afford to buy.
They took out shotguns and banded together to drive away men who came to throw them off their farms for not paying their debts.
It’s cold, and you shiver and stand in doorways or sit in railroad stations.
By 1932 people of every kind—factory workers, farmers, office workers, store keepers— were demanding that President Hoover take stronger action to deal with the Depression.
The first was to “‘balance the budget’’—that is, to make sure that the government’s spending did not exceed its income.
The second was to restore businessmen’s confidence in the future, so that they would begin to take on workers again.
To masses of unemployed workers Hoover seemed uncaring and unable to help them.
Roosevelt gave an impression of energy and determination, and of caring deeply for the welfare of ordinary people.
All over the United States anxious men and women felt that here at last was a man who H AND DEPRESSION understood their troubles, who sympathized with them —and, most important of all, who sounded as if he would do something to help them.
Roosevelt’s main idea was that the federal government should take the lead in the fight against the Depression.
He was sure that such policies They would, he said, “destroy the very foundations of our American would only make things wors The bonus army In the spring of 1932 thousands of unemployed ex-servicemen poured into Washington, the nation’s capital.
They wanted the government to give them some bonus payments that it owed them from the war years.
The men of the bonus army were determined to stay in Washington until the President did something to help them.
Similar camps could be found on rubbish dumps outside every large’ American city by this time.
The homeless people who lived in them named their camps “Hoovervilles,”’ after the President.
They would cause people to lose their ability to stand on their own feet and bear their own responsibilities.
On November 9, 1932, they elected Franklin Roosevelt as the next President of the United States by the largest majority in American history.
In only six of the nation’s fortycight states did Hoover gain a majority of the votes.
He ordered soldiers and the police to burn their camp and drive them out of Washington.
As the smoke billowed up from the burning, huts of the bonus army, a government spokesman defended Hoover’s decision.
Only two courses were open, As anyone can see: To vindicate law and order Or yield to anarchy.
For a hundred days, from March 8 to June 16 he sent Congress a flood of proposals for new laws.
Many of the new laws set up government organizations called “ ’ to help the nation to recover from the Depression.
The Civilian Conservation Corps found work for many thousands of young men.
It told of a judge who was hearing a case against a farmer who was in debt.
Other farmers had dragged the judge from his courthouse and almost killed him.
Selling a wagon load of oats carned them less than the price of a pair of shoes.
The price of many other crops was too low even to cover harvesting costs.
During the Hundred Days, Roosevelt set up the Agricultural Adjustment Agency to help the farmers.
The AAA aimed to persuade farmers to produce less meat, corn, cotton and other main crops.
The idea was to make such products scarcer, so that selling prices would rise and farmers would be better off.
Farmers who agreed to grow less were given money by the government to make up for having less to sell.
But for the farmers this crop limitation scheme, as it was called, did its job.
The Tennessee Valley Authority built a network of dams to make electricity and stop floods in a poor southeastern region of the United States.
And the National Recovery Administration worked to make sure that businesses paid fair wages and charged fair prices.
Let us look more closely at the work of some of these “alphabet agenc ‘The American people knew both thes Roosevelt believed that his most urgent task was to find people work.
Thousands were stealing rides on freight trains and wandering about the country searching for jobs.
By August 1933, the CCC had already placed 250,000 young men in camps all over the country.
They were hard at work cutting fire-lanes through forests, strengthening river banks against flooding, planting trees in places where the soil was being blown away.
Like the CCC, it aimed to set people to work on jobs that were useful to the community.
By 1937 its workers had built thousands of miles of new roads and thousands of schools and hospitals.
Alphabet agencies like the CCC and the WPA put millions of people to work.
He believed that putting moncy into people’s pockets was like pouring fucl into an engine that had stopped to make it start again.
The engine could then once more drive the economic machinery that earned the country its living.
The valley of the Tennessee was once a country of tréccovered slopes, but generations of farmers cut down the trees and ploughed the slopes to grow corn, tobacco and cotton.
All these crops were planted in the spring and harvested in the autumn.
The same rains often caused floods which drove people from their homes.
The very names that the farmers gave to the countryside—Hard Labor Creek, Long Hungry Creek, Poorland Valley—showed how hopeless they were.
Roosevelt set up a special alphabet agency to organize help for the Tennessee Valley’s millions of people.
The TVA had three main aims—to stop floods, to make electricity and to make the land fertile again.
From 1933 onwards the valley of the Tennessee echoed to the roar of heavy machinery.
When heavy rains fell the dams held back the flood water in great man-made lakes.
The electricity was also used to power new factories making paper, aluminum, chemicals and _fertilizers.
These factories meant jobs and a better life for the Tennessee Valley’s people.
TVA also planted millions of trees and persuaded farmers to plant crops like grass and clover.
These covered the ground all year round and prevented winter rains from washing away the soil.
The fields and hills of the Tennessee Valley became green again as the scars of erosion were healed.
Just as important as the achievements of T'VA was the way in which they were won.
In times like these the TVA was a startling demonstration of what democratic methods of government could achieve.
Far from limiting the part people were able to play in running their own lives, as happened in the countries of the dictators, TVA encouraged them to take a more active part.
It set up yoluntary cooperative groups to sell elect y, for instance, and to organize the marketing of the farmers’ produce.
Roosevelt himself regarded this aspect of TVA as one of the most important things about it.
In 1940 the armies of the German dictator Hitler seemed about to destroy the last remnants of democracy in Europe.
That September, Roosevelt traveled to the Tennessee Valley to open a new dam.
No citizen has lost a single one of these human liberties that we prize so highly.
In 1935 he persuaded Congress to passa law to protect their right to join labor unions.
He hoped this would give workers a better chance to bargain with employers.
Strikes and fighting broke out in industrial areas of the country as unions struggled to win recognition.
This was called the Wagner Act, after the man who guided it through Congress.
The Wagner Act gave every worker the right to join a union, and it set up a body called the National Labor Board to protect this right.
But despite New Deal reforms like these, millions of still lived in fear.
One part gave government pensions to people unable to provide for themselves—old people, widows and the blind, for example.
Another part gave the United States its first system of unemployment insurance.
The money to pay for these benefits came from special taxes paid by both workers and employers.
Not all Americans supported Roosevelt’s New Deal poli Some said that the country could not afford the money that he was spending.
They feared, too, that Roosevelt’s policies would make people idle and stop them standing on their own feet.
But such criticisms made little difference to Roosevelt’s popularity with the voters.
To millions of Americans he was the man who had given them jobs and saved their homes and farms.
In 1936 they re-elected him President by the largest majority of votes in the country’s history.
Even so, it was not Roosevelt’s New Deal that ended unemployment in the United States.
By 1939, despite the New Deal, ten million American workers again had no jobs.
In 1941 the United States joined the war itself and unemployment disappeared.
President Roosevelt was now too busy to give attention to further reforms at home.
A few weeks before the end of the war, on the morning of April 12, he suffered a stroke.
His Vice President, Harry Truman, took over as President of the United States.
By this time nearly all Americans were better off than they had been in the dark days of the Depression.
But there is no argument about the importance of the New Deal in other ways.
Before the New Deal most thought of the government as a kind of policeman.
It was there just to keep order, while factory owners and businessmen got on with making the country richer.
President Roosevelt spoke to the American people in 1937 about wars being fought in Spain and China.
They believed that the best thing to do was to let foreigners solve their problems themselves.
These were people who believed that Americans should try to cut off, or isolate,” the United States from the problems of the outside world.
These said that American citizens would not be allowed to sell military equipment, or lend mon é y, to any nations at war.
Even nonmilitary supplies such as foodstuffs would be sold to warring countries only if they paid cash for them and collected them in their own ships.
By the summer of 1940 Hitler’s armies had overrun all of western Europe.
With Hitler the ma of Europe, and his ally, Japan, becoming ever stronger in Asia, Americans saw at last the dangerous position of the United States, sandwiched between the two. ter Congress to Roosevelt had already persuaded € approve the first peacetime military conscription in American history and to suspend the Neutrality Acts.
Now he sent Britain all the military equipment that the United States could spare—rifles, guns, ships.
These Japanese Americans were cither “Issei’’—those born in Japan—or “Nisei” —American-born Japanese.
Most lived in California, where they had worked hard and been successful.
By 1941, for example, Issei were producing half of California’s fruit and vegetables.
After the attack on Pearl Harbor white Americans began to see every Japanese American as a potential spy or saboteur.
Most of the internment camps were in remote, desert areas of the country.
Over 100,000 Japanese American men, women and children were kept in them for the rest of the war.
And not one Japanese American was convicted of an act of disloyalty to the United States during the whole of the war.
Lend Lease gave Roosevelt the right to supply military equipment and other goods to Britain without payment.
He could do the same for any country whose defense he considered necessary to the safety of the United States.
American guns, food and aircraft crossed the Atlantic Ocean in large quantities.
They played a vital part in helping Britain to continue to fight against Hitler.
When Hitler attacked 25 THe ARSENAL OF DEMOCRACY The Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor, Hawaii the Soviet Union in June 1941, Roosevelt used the Lend Lease scheme to send aid to the Russians, too, Fighting was also taking place in Asia at this time.
Japanese forces had invaded Manchuria in 1931 and China in 1937, In July 1941, they also occupied the French colony of Indochina.
It saw the growing power of Japan as a threat both to peace in Asia and to American trading interests.
Ever since the 1937 attack on China the United States had been reducing its exports to Japan of goods that were useful in war—aircraft and chemicals, for example.
Tojo was well known for his belief that a sharp use of force was often the best way to solve disagreements.
Tojo decided that Japan must seize it—and must make it impossible for the Americans to use their Pacific battle fleet to stop them.
On December 7, 1941, Japanese warplanes roared in over Pearl Harbor, Hawaii, the American navy’s main base in the Pacific Ocean.
Their bombs and torpedoes sank or badly damaged cight American battleships, blew up hundreds of aircraft and killed over 2,000 men.
When the Pearl Harbor attack took place, the United States and Japan were still at peace.
The United States declared war on December 8, 1941, Since Germany was Japan’s ally, Hitler then declared war on the United States.
Britain, the Soviet Union and the United States were the main countries on one side.
The United States government organized the whole American economy towards winning the war.
It placed controls on wages and prices, and introduced high income taxes.
The government also spent a vast amount—two thousand million dollars—on a topsecret research scheme.
By 1945 scientists working on the scheme had produced and tested the world’s first atomic bomb.
To help the Russians, American generals recommended an early invasion of German-occupicd France.
But Winston Churchill, the British Prime Minister, persuaded Roosevelt to attack the Germans first in the Mediterranean region.
Combined American and British forces landed in North Africa in November 1942, and joined other British forces already fighting there.
Together, the Allied armies defeated the German general Rommel’s Afrika Korps.
After months of bitter fighting, on June 4, 1944. they freed Rome from German control.
Two days later, on June 6, Allied troops invaded Normandy in German-occupied France.
From early in the morning of D-Day hundreds of Allied landing craft emptied their loads of men and weapons on to the flat Normandy beaches.
Paris was liberated on August 24 and by September Allied forces had crossed Germany's western border.
In December 1944, they launched a last fierce attack in the Ardennes region of Belgium.
It was a month before the Allies could organize a counterattack and drive back the Germans.
The Battle of the Bulge proved to be the last German offensive of the Second World War.
On April 2 1945, British and American soldicrs met advancing Soviet troops on the banks of the River Elbe in the middle of Germany.
German soldiers everywhere laid down their weapons and on May 5, 1945, Germany surrendered.
In the Pacific Japanese armed forces won some striking early victories.
In only a few months they overran Southeast Asia and the islands of the western Pacific.
At fifteen minutes past cight on the morning of August 6, 1945, an American B29 bomber dropped an atomic bomb on the city of Hiroshima, Fortyfive seconds later the bomb exploded in a blinding flash.
At the time, and since, people have argued fiercely about whether he was right.
Without Hiroshima, they say, the Americans would have had to invade Japan to end the war.
Many more people than died at Hiroshima and Nagasaki, both Japanese and American, would then have been killed.
They argue that the Japanese government was ready to surrender before the bombings.
More than half a century after the destruction of Hiroshima, the argument still continues.
In the Battle of the Coral Sea, aircraft from American carriers drove back a big Japanese invasion flect that was threatening Australia.
Their main battle fleet attacked an important American base called Midway Island.
In the Battle of Midway the Japanese lost four aircraft carriers and many of their best pilots.
From Australia one prong would push northwards towards Japan through the Philippines.
From Hawaii another prong would strike westwards through the islands of the central Pacific.
Finally, the two Pacific offensives would be supported by a drive through Burma into the lands that the Japanese had conquered in Southeast Asia.
American forces advanced towards Japan by and hopping’ —thatis, they captured islands that were strategically important, but bypassed others.
In the remainder of 1943 and throughout 1944, Allied forces fought their way closer to Japan itself.
In June 1944, an enormous American task force won control of the important Mariana Islands.
In October American troops returned to the Philippines and cut off Japan from its conquests in Southeast Asia.
By 1945 Japan was within range of air attack American bombers made devastating raids on its cities.
On July 16, 1945, Allied scientists at work on the Manhattan Project tested the world’s first atomic bomb.
On August 6 an American bomber dropped an atomic bomb over the Japanese city of Hiroshima.
A few days later, on August 9, a second atomic bomb was dropped on the city of Nagasaki.
But Americans were the only people in the world that the Second World War had made better off.
Between 1947 and 1971 the value of their wages in buying power—their “‘real incomes” as this is called~more than doubled.
Americans bought more houses, cars, television sets, consumer goods of every kind.
As early as 1960, 55 percent of all families owned washing machines, 75 percent owned cars, 90 percent had television sets and nearly all had refrigerators.
Kennedy told the American people that they were facing a “new frontier,” one with both opportunities and problems.
Although most Americans were well-off, millions of others were too poor to lead decent lives.
Others lived in places like old coalproducing districts where the mines had closed.
He also wanted to help other groups who were The McCarthy witch hunts The late 1940s and the 1950s were anxious years for Americans.
Both President Truman and President Eisenhower believed that the Soviet Union’s communist way of running a country was cruel and wrong.
They made up their minds to stop it from spreading to other countries—to “contain” it.
They believed that it threatened both the freedom of individual Americans and the “capitalist” economic system of the United States.
When soldiers from communist North Korea invaded South Korea in June 1950, their fears became stronger still.
An ambitious and unscrupulous politician named Joseph McCarthy used these fears to win fame and power for himself.
He started what came to be called a “witch hunt’”—a search for people he could blame for the supposed threats to the United States.
In the carly 1950s McCarthy accused all kinds of people—government officials, scientists, famous entertainers—of secretly working for the Soviet Union.
He never gave proof, but Americans were so full of fears about communism that many believed him.
People grew afraid to give jobs or even to show friendship to anyone he accused.
But “McCarthyism” had done serious damage to the United States’ reputation for justice and fair play.
This happened while he was driving through the streets of Dallas in November 1963.
He had spent years as a member of Congress, making political friends and winning influence there.
One of his first actions was to persuade Congress to pass Kennedy’s plan to improve the position of American blacks.
He said that he wanted to turn the United States into “‘the great society” —a country where everyone received fair and decent treatment.
In the later 1960s he involved the United States more and more deeply in war in Vietnam.
The huge cost of the war forced Johnson to give up many of his plans for improvements.
Riots and protests flared up all over the country —against the war, against poverty, against continuing racial injustice.
He became so unpopular that he decided not even to try to get re-elected.
He was much less interested than Kennedy and Johnson in helping the poor.
The government was paying out more than cnough money on welfare schemes already, he said.
The main reason for this was that by then he was close to getting the United States out of the hated war in Vietnam.
Journalists on the Washington Post newspaper started to look into the burglary.
They discovered that the burglars had been paid to steal information to discredit President Nixon’s Democratic opponents.
In February 1973, the Senate set up a committee to look into the Watergate affair.
Day by day viewers watched the committee uncover a network of lies and dishonesty at the very heart of the nation’s government.
Nixon vowed time and time again that he had known nothing about the Watergate break-in.
But as the investigations went on, fewer and fewer people believed him.
Many began to demand that he should be impeached for misusing his powers as President.
A tape recording made in Nixon’s office proved that he had known all about the Watergate affair, His impeachment and even imprisonment now seemed certain.
To avoid this, Nixon resigned as President of the United States part way through his term of office—the first man ever to do so.
To many people at home and abroad the Watergate affair seemed to show clearly that the American political system had gone rotten.
But it was parts of that very system—the newspapers, the law courts, the Congress — which brought the misdeeds of the President and his advisers to light.
Ironically, it was Nixon himself who perhaps best summed up this aspect of the Watergate affair.
President Nixon has been stabbed by the quill pen of the Washington Post's investigative journalists It was Nixon’s moment of greatest triumph.
Congress threatened to put him on trial— “impeach” him— for misusing his powers.
One reason for this was that both found it difficult to control inflation.
After an Arab—Israeli war in 1973 international oil prices rose steeply.
By 1980 prices in the United States were rising by 13. percenta year and this was making life difficult for many people.
In 1980 Americans elected a President they hoped would make a better job of running the country, He was a former film actor named Ronald Reagan.
He said that he aimed to make Americans depend less on government help and more on self-help.
Abroad, ANAT Reagan was determined to make the United States stronger than its old rival, the Soviet Union.
He spent many millions of dollars on developing powerful new missiles and on research into weapons to knock out enemy missiles from space.
But Reagan’s policies — including the spending on weapons—helped more Americans to find jobs.
So did his relaxed and friendly manner, which came over well on television.
After the shame of Vietnam and Watergate his simple “stand on your own feet and act tough” policies made many Americans feel proud of their country again.
In 1984 they re-clected him as President by one of the biggest majorities in American history.
He was still popular, and for much the same reasons, when his second term as President ended in 1989.
It was the result of being treated as a second-class human being — of being told no, you can’t attend this school, have this job, live in this house, sit on this park bench.
The official term for all this was segregation -that is, separating blacks from the rest of the community and refusing them many of the rights enjoyed by other people.
In 1940 ten million of the country’s total black population of thirteen million still lived in the southern United States, most of them in great poverty.
The country’s total black population was now about twenty-four million and twelve million lived outside the South, most of them in big northern industrial cities.
More than 4. million southern blacks had caught buses and ns to the North and to California.
The big attraction for the migrants was well-paid jobs in the factories of citi ¢ Chicago, Pittsburgh and Detroit.
Taking the road north or west promised an escape not just from poverty, but from the miseries and humiliations of segregation which were a part of every southern black’s daily life.
As one black migrant wrote, “I don’t care where so long as | go where a man is a man, During the Second World War, segregation started to break down, at least outside the South.
Black workers carned more money than ever before working alongside whites in the busy wartime factories.
Black servicemen not only fought and died, but ate and slept alongside their white fellow countrymen.
That September the United States began to draft young men into the armed forces.
Before this, fewer than 4,000 blacks were serving in the American army.
Most were in support units—digging ditches, loading and unloading ships and trucks, serving food.
So did many whites, including Eleanor Roosevelt, the wife of the President.
On December 1, 1941, the American army and air force opened all types of positions to qualified blacks.
During the Second World War black combat units fought in both Europe and the Pacific.
In March 1945, the whole group was awarded a Distinguished Unit Citation.
The 332nd Group came to symbolize the struggle of all blacks for equality.
Its wartime achievements helped to end segregation in the American armed forces.
Brown Topeka the Supreme Court declared that segregated schools were illegal and ordered that black children should be allowed to attend any school as pupils.
In September 1957, black children tried to enrol at the previously all white high school in Little Rock, Arkansas.
President Eisenhower sent troops to enforce the Supreme Court decision of 1954 and the children 27 BLACK AMERICANS Black passengers choose their own seats on buses after the success of the Montgomery bus boycott were admitted.
A black woman named Rosa Parks got on a bus in the strictly segregated southern city of Montgomery, Alabama.
She took a scat towards the back of the bus, as blacks were supposed to do.
But then white workers and shoppers filled up the front section of the bus and the driver ordered her to give up her seat.
The National Association for the Advancement of Colored People helped them to persuade a judge to release Mrs.
Led by a young clergyman named Martin Luther King, they began to stop using, or “boycott,” the city’s bus services.
Finally, in November 1956, the Supreme Court declared that segregation on public buses was unconstitutional.
The success of the Montgomery bus boycott encouraged blacks in other places to act together against segregation.
They boycotted stores where black workers were refused jobs, refused to pay rent until landlords improved housing conditions, and held “sit-ins” in restaurants that would not serve black customers.
Ona hot August day 200,000 people, black and white, took part ina mass demonstration in Washington to demand full racial equality.
I have a dream that one day on the red hills of Georgia the sons of former slaves and the sons of former slaveholders will be able to sit down together at the table of brotherhood.
He sympathized with the blacks and worked outa plan to ensure that all Americans, of any race, would receive equal treatment.
He was murdered before this could happen, but his successor, Lyndon Johnson, made getting the law passed one of his first aims, In 1964 the Civil Rights Act became the law of the land.
Many Americans hoped that its passing would mark the beginning of a new age of racial harmony and friendship in the United States.
The racial difficulties of the United States were too deep-rooted to be solved by simple alterations in the law, or by demonstrations and marches.
Changes were needed in human attitudes and in underlying economic conditions.
In the 1960s most American blacks were still worse housed, worse educated, and worse paid than other Americans.
Some rejected with contempt the ideas of leaders like Martin Luther King that blacks and whites should learn to live together side by side in equality and friendship.
But other black Americans were becoming increasingly impatient at their lack of progress towards real equality — especially economic equality.
In the hot summers of the mid 1960s this impatience boiled over into violence.
In August 1965, the streets of Watts, a black ghetto in Los Angeles, became a battlefield.
For six days police and rioters fought among burning cars and buildings.
To Hughes it seemed that the people of Harlem’s hopes of better treatment had been delayed —‘“‘deferred” —for too long.
Langston Hughes He was shot dead on the balcony of a motel in Memphis, Tennessee, by a white sniper.
Black Power taught that the only way for blacks to get justice was to fight for it.
But in the 1970s and 1980s most blacks decided that voting was a more effective way to improve their position.
Their idea was to elect blacks to positions of power~as city councilors, as mayors of cities, as members of Congress.
Jesse Jackson, a former assistant of Martin Luther King’s, became the chief spokesman for this idea.
By 1985 more than 5,000 of the 50,000 elected officials in the United States were black.
This number included the mayors of such large cities as Los Angeles, Chicago, Philadelphia and Washington.
In the late 1980s black unemployment was still higher than white unemployment.
The average incomes of black Americans were still lower than those of whites.
Blacks and whites studied side by side in schools and colleges, They worked side by side in all kinds of occupations.
As King had dreamed, people seemed to be learning to judge each other more by the content of their characters than by the color of their skins.
Jesse Jackson announcing his candidacy for the 1988 presidential election Black is beautiful In the 1960s black Americans began taking new pride in their African ancestry.
It became fashion~ able to take African names, to wear long African robes and short African jackets called “dasheks,” Bushy African hairstyles became the fashion for black America and were even adopted by white youngsters.
But black pride and racial awareness showed itself in more than dress and appearance, Schools were set up to teach black childrén the history, languages and customs of their African ancestors.
One of the most striking ventures was a ballet school founded by a young dancer named Arthur Mitchell.
York’s Harlem learned to create new and exciting dances which combined the techniques of classical European ballet with the beat of African drums.
Within a few years they had become internationally famous as the Dance Theater of Harlem, playing to full theaters all over the world.
His ways of trying to improve the position of his fellow blacks were very different from Martin Luther King’s.
Yet his underlying view of people, of their hopes and needs, was not so different.
I discovered that black or white, green or purple, all kids are the same.
SUPERPOWER CoLtp War AND Korea The United States was the strongest country on earth in 1945.
Soviet soldiers were the masters of all Europe from the middle of Germany eastwards.
After driving out Hitler’s armies they had helped communists to take over the governments in country after country there.
In 1946 Britain’s wartime leader, Winston Churchill, spoke of an “Iron Curtain” across Europe, separating these communist-ruled nations of the cast from the countries of the west.
The Americans and the Russians had fought Hitler’s Germany together as allies.
The Russian dictator, Stalin, knew that many Americans hated the Soviet Union’s communist way of life.
He feared that the United States might drop atomic bombs on his country at any moment.
The new American President, Truman, was just as suspicious of the Soviet Union.
He suspected that Stalin’s actions in eastern Europe were the first steps in a plan to convert the world to communism.
The United States and the Soviet Union became deeply suspicious of one another.
Although the two countries were not actually fighting, they were always quarreling.
Truman decided to use American power and moncy to “contain” Soviet influence-that is, to stop it from spreading.
In 1947 he sent money and supplies to help the government of Greece to beat communist forces in a civil war.
From this time on, containing communism became the main aim of the United States in dealing with the rest of the world.
Because Truman started the policy, containment is sometimes called the Truman Doctrine.
Once the Allics could agree on the details, they intended the whole country to be ruled again by one government.
Each wanted to be sure, however, that this united Germany would be friendly towards them.
The only friendly Germany Stalin could think of was a Germany controlled by communists.
The United States, Britain, and France were determined to prevent this.
The result was that little progress was made in the many discussions that were held about Germany’s future.
By 1946 it was already becoming clear that not ‘one but two Germanies were beginning to take shape—a communist one in the Russian-controlled cast of the country and a non-communist one in the west.
Since Berlin was Germany’s old capital, it, too, had been divided between the Allies into arcas called sectors.
To link the western sectors of Berlin with the outside world the Russians had agreed to let goods and people pass freely through their zone of Germany.
By the summer of 1947 two years had passed since the last shots were fired.
Yet millions of people were still without work, without decent homes, without sufficient food.
In France and Italy communist parties won lots of support by promising reforms to make things better.
In the summer of 1947 his government put forward a scheme that he hoped would help Europe’s people and also make communism less appealing to them.
The scheme was called the Marshall Plan, after General George Marshall, the Secretary of State who announced it.
To solve this problem Marshall offered to give European countries the goods they needed.
Buta Sovict newspaper described his scheme as “‘a plan for interference in the home affairs of other countrics,”” Stalin refused to have anything to do with it.
He also made sure that none of the countries on the Soviet Union’s side of the Iron Curtain accepted help either.
But millions of dollars’ worth of American food, raw materials and machinery started to pour into western Europe.
By the time the Marshall Plan ended in 1952, western Europe was back on its feet and beginning to prosper.
When Japan surrendered in 1945, the north of Korea was occupied by Sovict forces and the south by Americans.
The boundary between the two areas was the earth’s 38th parallel of latitude.
Without German industrial production and German customers for their goods other European nations were finding it very difficult to revive their own economies.
But before this problem could be solved, something had to be done about German moncy.
In June 1948, the Western Allies announced that in their zones they were calling in all the old money and making a fresh start with new currency.
Stalin’s Forcign Minister, Molotov, had already attacked the Western plans to rebuild Germany's industries.
On June 24, 1948, a few days after the new money came into use, the Russians stopped all traffic between west Germany and west Berlin.
To start with they may have intended simply to persuade the Western Allies to change their economic policies.
They blocked all the roads, railway lines and canals between Berlin and the western zones of Germany.
Their aim now was to make it impossible for the Western Allies to supply the two million people living in their sectors of Berlin with sufficient food and fuel.
They hoped that this would force the Western troops and officials to go, leaving the city to the Russians.
The leaders of the United States and Britain felt that they could not accept defeat in this matter, In 1948 the occupation of Korea ended.
The Sovict army left behind a communist government in the north and the Americans set up a government friendly to themselves in the south.
Their soldiers crossed the 38th parallel in a full-scale invasion of South Korea.
On its busiest day nearly 14,000 aircraft landed on the city’s airfields.
Over two million tons of supplies were delivered, including a daily average of 5,000 tons of coal.
In February 1949, secret talks began and in May Stalin stopped the blockade.
The Berlin blockade finished all hope of uniting Germany under one government.
In 1949 the Western Powers joined their zones together to form the Federal German Republic, or West Germany.
Stalin replied by turning the Russian zone into the German Democratic Republic, or East Germany.
President Truman sent American soldiers and warplanes from Japan to fight for the South Koreans.
Then he persuaded the United Nations Organization, which had taken the place of the pre-war League of Nations, to support his action.
Sixteen nations eventually sent troops to fight in the United Nations’ forces in Korea.
Nine out of every ten 28 Cotp War anp Korea United Nations soldiers in Korea were Americans.
At first the communist armies advanced easily, But after three months of hard fighting the Americans pushed them back across the 38th parallel and advanced deep into North Korea.
By this time the American aim was no longer simply to protect South Korea.
They wanted to unite all of Korea under a government friendly towards the United States.
Only a year earlier communists led by Mao Zedong had won a long struggle to rule China by driving out Chiang Kaishek.
The Americans had backed Chiang in the struggle and in 1950 they still recognized him as China’s rightful ruler.
Mao feared that if all Korea came under American control they might let Chiang use it as a base from which to attack China.
When his warning was ignored he sent thousands of Chinese soldiers to help the North Koreans.
A new and fiercer war began in Korea, It was really between the United States and China, although neither country officially admitted this.
One reason it approaching North Korean army as United States troops advance to the battlefront.
The birth of NATO In the years after 1945 the non-communist governments of Western Europe looked uneasily at the huge Russian armies grouped just behind the barbed-wire fences of the Iron Curtain.
With Russian support a communist government took control in Czechoslovakia.
These events convinced President Truman that Western Europe needed more than economic aid.
This was analliance of nations who agreed to support one another against threats from the Russians and set up combined armed forces to do this.
The following September Americans heard the news that the Russians, too, could now make atomic bombs.
This persuaded Congress to vote millions of dollars to equip NATO's armed forces.
In 1951 General Eisenhower, one of the United States’ best known generals of the Second World War, was placed in command of these forces.
Soon thousands of American soldiers were in Europe once more. ended was the death of Stalin, who had been encouraging the Chinese to fight on.
Another was the fact that the newly-elected President Eisenhower hinted that the Americans might use atomic weapons if the Chinese did not sign a cease-fire.
The Chinese said that they had proved that nobody need be afraid of opposing the Americans.
The Americans said that they had shown communists everywhere that it did not pay to try to spread their rule by force.
More than 33,000 Americans had died in Korea and over 100,000 more had been wounded.
American scientists testing a new weapon had blasted a whole uninhabited island out of the Pacific Ocean.
Just one H-bomb had five times the destructive power of all the bombs dropped in five years of the Second World War.
The fact that both the United States and the Soviet Union had H-bombs determined how they behaved towards one another for years to come.
American Presidents appoint a Secretary of State to take charge of the United States’ dealings with foreign countries.
Instead of being, content simply to contain communism (“‘a cringing policy of the fearful,” as he called it) the United States should set out to “liberate” nations already under communist rule.
In a broadcast in 1953 he told the peoples of castern Europe that they could trust the United States to help them.
When Russian tanks rolled in to crush them they sent out desperate appeals for help.
Thousands of refugees fled across the Iron Curtain to safety in the neighboring country of Austria.
Dulles failed to help the Hungarians because he knew that doing so would mean war with the Soviet Union.
The devastation of nuclear war was, he decided, too high a price to pay for “rolling back” the Iron Curtain.
This was because he seemed ready to take the United States to the brink—the edge—of war to contain communism.
If the United States or any ofits allies were attacked anywhere, he warned, the Americans would strike back.
President Kennedy’s proposal in May 1961 that the United States should send a man to the moon was eagerly welcomed by politicians and. the American people.
The Apollo program was another move in the “space race” between the United States and the Soviet Union.
But there were two important reasons why both the Americans and the Russians were willing to pay them.
First, there was the question of international prestige—of gaining the respect of the rest of the world by achieving something calling for immense scientific and technical skill.
Secondly, both Americans and Russians felt that to let the other side get too far ahead in space technology would endanger their security.
More frightening still, rockets capable of carrying people into space could also be used to carry nuclear warheads.
Up to the mid-1960s cach side matched the other’s achievements in the space race.
Finally, they were ready for the mission to put the first men on the moon—Apollo 11.
The Apollo 11 spacecraft was launched from Cape Canaveral on the coast of Florida.
It carried three men as its crew— Neil Armstrong, Edward “Buzz” Aldrin and Michael Collins.
The first two would necessary they would drop nuclear bombs on the Sovict Union and China.
By the mid-1950s the United States had a powerful force of nuclear bombers ready to do this.
On airfields all round the world giant American planes were constantly on the alert, ready to take off ata moment’s notice.
Then, on October 4, 1957, the Soviet Union sent into space the world’s first 29 A BALANCE OF TERROR Neil Armstrong on the moon. pilot the section of the spacecraft that would actually land on the moon’s surface, the lunar module, Collins had the job of circling the moon in the other section of the spacecraft, the command module, waiting for their return.
Five days later millions of television viewers all over the world watched Armstrong and Aldrin step down on to the surface of the moon, The two men spent three hours collecting rock samples and setting up scientific instruments on the moon’s surface to send information back to earth after they left.
Three days later they splashed down safely in the Pacific Ocean and helicopters carried them off to a heroes’ welcome. earth satellite, the Sputnik.
A rocket powerful enough to do that could also carry an H-bomb to its target.
The Polaris, another missile, was carried by nuclear-powered submarines cruising deep beneath the oceans.
By the end of the 1950s the United States and the Soviet Union had enough nuclear missiles to kill everybody on earth.
Both Russian and American leaders came to see that ina full-scale war between their two countries there could be no winner.
Nikita Khrushchev, the man who took Stalin’s place as leader of the Soviet Union, realized this.
But in a world of H-bombs he believed that they had to try to live peacefully, side by side.
The Berlin Wall Just after midnight on Sunday, August 13, 1961, trucks rolled through the silent streets of East Berlin.
At the border with West Berlin soldiers jumped out and blocked the streets with coils of barbed wire.
By morning they had closed off all but twelve of the eighty crossing points to West Berlin.
Within days workmen were replacing the barbed wire with a lasting barricr of concrete.
The easiest way to do this was to catch a train from East to West Berlin and not bother to come back.
By July 1961, the number of East Germans making these one-way trips had risen to 10,000 a week.
As the leaders were on their way there in May 1960, a Russian missile shot down an American aircraft over the Sovict Union.
The aircraft was 2 U-2 spy plane, specially designed to take photographs of military targets from the edge of space.
Krushchev angrily accused Eisenhower of planning for war while talking peace.
But maybe he was rather pleased at having made the Americans look like hypocrites.
In any case, the Paris summit mcecting was over before it even started.
President Kennedy was not prepared to risk war by demolishing the Berlin Wall.
But he made it clear that the United States would not let the communists take over West Berlin.
It was not until 1989 that its people tore down the Wall as a first step towards re-uniting their city.
In 1959 a revolutionary reformer named Fidel Castro took over its government.
Cuba's banks, railroads and many other businesses were owned by Americans at this time.
Castro needed money to make changes in Cuba, To obtain it he began to take over Americanowned businesses.
In the opinion of the United States government this was stealing American property.
Not only this, but Castro seemed to be organizing a communist state right on the doorstep of the United States.
In 1960 President Eisenhower agreed to give weapons and ships to refugees from Cuba who wanted to overthrow Castro.
When Eisenhower retired in January, 1961, the plan was supported also by the new President, John F Kennedy.
On April 17, 1961, a force of 1,400 anti-Castro Cubans landed at the Bay of Pigs on Cuba’s south coast.
But Castro believed that Kennedy would attack again, so he asked the Soviet Union for help.
Khrushchev sent him shiploads of rifles, 29 A BALANCE OF TERROR tanks, and aircraft.
On Sunday, October 14, 1962, an American U-2 spy plane flew high over the island taking photographs.
Ever since the U-2 incident of 1960 Khrushchev had been making threats against the United States.
Although the Americans already had more long-range missiles than the Russians, Kennedy ordered nearly a thousand more.
The new missiles tipped the “balance of terror” strongly in favor of the United States.
When Castro asked for help, Khrushchev saw a chance to level up the balance of terror.
He would threaten the United States from missile bases on its own doorstep—Cuba.
He also thought about sending American soldiers to capture them, But instead he ordered American ships and aircraft to set up a blockade.
They were to stop any Soviet ships carrying more missile equipment to Cuba.
Kennedy then told Khrushchev to take away the Soviet missiles and destroy the bases.
For ten terrifying days in October 1962, the world trembled on the edge of nuclear war.
People waited in fear for the next news flash on their radios and televisions.
Finally Khrushchev ordered his technicians in Cuba to destroy the launching sites and return the missiles to the Soviet Union.
In return, Kennedy called off the blockade and promised to leave Cuba alone.
Privately, he also agreed to remove American missiles sited on the border of the Soviet Union in Turkey, The most dangerous crisis of the Cold War was over.
Close by, almost hidden ina hollow in the ground, stands another memorial.
It is a long wall of polished black marble and on it are carved many thousands of names.
But in 1954 the French were driven out by the soldiers ofa communist leader named Ho Chi Minh.
But the election never took place—mainly because the government of South Vietnam feared that Ho Chi Minh and his communists would win.
As part of their worldwide plan to contain communism, the Americans had already helped the French against Ho.
If one of them— Vietnam, say —fell under communist rule, others would follow.
They would be knocked over one by one, like a line of falling dominoes.
Americans were especially afraid that communist China might try to take control in Southeast Asia as the Soviet Union had done in eastern Europe.
So, in the 1950s and early 1960s, first President Eisenhower and then President Kennedy poured American money and weapons into South Vietnam.
Kennedy sent soldiers, too—not to fight, themselves, but to advise and train the South Vietnamese forces.
By the early 1960s, however, it was clear that the government of South Vietnam was losing the war.
Ho Chi Minh had a guerilla army of 100,000 men fighting in South Vietnam by then.
Many were communists from the North who had marched into the South along secret jungle trails.
He could leave Vietnam and Iet the communists take over, or he could send in American soldiers to try to stop them.
Johnson was too worried about the domino theory —and too proud—to make the first choice.
He had already ordered American aircraft to bomb railways and bridges in North Vietnam.
The Russians and the Chinese sent more weapons and supplies to Ho Chi Minh.
Thousands more of his communist troops marched south to do battle with the Americans.
After an attack the Vietcong would melt away in the jungle, or turn into peaceful villagers.
A guerilla war like this meant that the Americans often had no enemy to strike back at.
They sprayed vast areas of countryside with deadly chemicals to destroy the Vietcong’s supply trails.
They burned down villages which were suspected of sheltering Vietcong soldiers.
It continued even when Johnson stepped up or “escalated” the war by bombing cities in North Vietnam to try to force the communists to make peace.
Film reports of the suffering in Vietnam were shown all over the world on television.
For the first time in history people far away from any fighting were able to see in their own homes the horror and cruelty of modern war.
Millions began to believe that the Americans were cruel and bullying monsters.
In 1970, after riots there in protest against the war in Vietnam, any further demonstrations were banned.
When a group of about 1,000 students defied the ban, they were fired on by soldiers.
A ten-second burst of rifle fire killed four students and wounded another ten.
The Kent State tragedy showed how deeply the Vietnam War was dividing the American people.
By the end of the 1960s many Americans were sick and ashamed of the killing and the destruction.
President Johnson saw that by sending American soldiers to fight in Victnam he had led the United States into a trap.
The war was destroying his country’s good name in the world and setting its people against one another.
In 1968 he stopped the bombing of North Victnam and started to look for ways of making peace.
These have been songs about the concerns of farmers, miners, cowboys, union members.
All have had a common purpose-to express and to relieve people's feclings on subjects that are important to them.
Their writers and performers have sometimes hoped that the songs might even help to change people’s attitudes.
In the 1960s a young writer and singer named Bob Dylan used protest songs to support the anti-war movement of the time.
By the 1970s Dylan had become a very popular—and very rich—international entertainer.
For many young people he was the voice of the conscience of their generation.
His lyrics, often set to old tunes, were ironic comments on what he saw as the deceit and hypocrisy of those who held power.
Oh, the history books tell it, They tell it so well, The cavalries charged, The Indians fell.
The cavalries charged, The Indians died, Oh the country was young With God on its side.
He set out to strengthen the South Victnamese army to make it seem strong enough to defend South Vietnam. without help.
This gave him an excuse to start withdrawing American fighting men from Vietnam.
Nixon then sent Henry Kissinger, his adviser on foreign affairs, to secret talks with North Vietnamese and Russian leaders in Moscow.
In return for a ceasefire he offered to withdraw all American troops from Vietnam within six months.
When the North Vietnamese were slow to agree he started bombing their cities again in order to “persuade” them.
A sort of agreement was finally put together in January Oh, the First World War, boys, It came and it went, The reason for fighting I never did get.
But I learned to accept it, Accept it with pride, For you don’t count the dead When God’s on your side.
I’ve learned to hate Russians All through my whole life, If another war starts It’s them we must fight.
To hate them and fear them, To run and to hide, And accept it all bravely With God on my side.
But now we got weapons Of the chemical dust, If fire them we're forced to Then fire them we must.
One push of the button And a shot the world wide, And you never ask questions When God's on your side.
As frightened Vietnamese supporters of the Americans scrambled for the last places on rescue helicopters, victorious communist tanks rolled into Saigon, the capital city of South Vietnam.
In Korea, twenty years earlier, the Americans had claimed that they had made containment work.
Rocks and iron bars thudded against its roof and shattered its windows, Inside the car Richard Nixon, Vice President of the United States, was in great danger.
Nixon was visiting the city as part of a goodwill tour of Latin America, But he found only hatred on the streets of Caracas.
Nixon’s life was saved when a truck forced a way through the barricade and his car was able to accelerate away.
When news of the attack reached the United States the American people were shocked and angry.
But it made them realize how much some Latin Americans hated and resented their country.
Ever since the early nineteenth century the United States has taken a special interest in what happens in these countries.
They arc its closest neighbors and so it is important to the safety of the United States to make sure that no foreign enemies gain influence in them, In the past this has often meant that the rulers of these Latin American countries have been little more than American puppets.
Their agriculture and industry have frequently been American-controlled, too.
Up to the 1950s its railroads, banks, electricity industry and many of its biggest farms were all American-owned.
In 1933 President Franklin Roosevelt promised that the United States would respect the right of Latin Amcrican countries to control their own affairs.
Roosevelt ordered home the American soldiers and officials who had been running the affairs of Latin Amcrican countries at one time or another for much of the past thirty years.
Nicaragua, for example, had been occupied by American troops from 1912 to 1933.
He also gave up the United States’ claim to interfere in Panama and Cuba whenever it wanted.
But many Latin Americans were not convinced by Roosevelt's talk about being a good neighbor.
But the rulers who took over when the soldiers left—the Somoza family, who held power in Nicaragua from 1937 to 1979, for example—usually did what the Americans expected of them.
All the raw materials that it could produce—copper, tin, oil and countless others— were used by the wartime factories of the United States.
The result was more money and more jobs—but also even more American control.
In the 1970s it was ruled by a right-wing dictator named Somoza, who had close ties with the United States.
The rebels called themselves Sandinistas, after a guerilla leader named César Augusto Sandino, who had fought against the American occupation of Nicaragua during the 1920s and 1930s.
The Sandinistas were supported by peasants, workers, priests and many business people.
In 1979 they drove Somoza from the country and set up a new government.
They promised the people of Nicaragua land reform, social justice and democratic government.
Bott A Nicaraguan Contra rebel with Redeye missile supplied by the United States As soonas the war ended fresh calls of “Yankee, go home” were heard.
The idea of the OAS was to encourage the countries of Latin America to cooperate with one another, and with the United States, as partners.
A poster in Managua, Nicaragua proclaims that Reagan is on his way out, but the revolution is here to stay.
Reagan believed that the Sandinistas were under the influence of the Soviet Union and Cuba.
Soon he was describing their government as a com-, munist dictatorship.
Its aim, he said, was to spread revolution to other parts of Central America and he gave money and weapons to rebels who were trying to overthrow it.
They warned that his enmity was forcing the Sandinistas into the arms of the Soviet Union.
They believed that the safety of the United States depended on stopping Sandinista ideas from spreading to other nearby countries.
When the Sandinistas lost, they handed over power to a new government whose leaders were more acceptable to the United States and hopes for peace increased.
In most countries there, extremes of poverty for the many and wealth for the few existed side by side.
Oppressive governments controlled by the rich and backed by soldiers did little to improve the lives of the people.
By the mid 1980s this number had increased to 17. million and was still rising fast.
Reformers accused the United States of helping to keep these groups of wealthy tyrants in power.
The American government often seemed more concerned with suppressing, communism in Latin America than with improving conditions of life there.
In 1954, for example, the American secret service (the Central Intelligence Agency, or CIA) encouraged the overthrow of a reforming government in Guatemala.
When Guatemala’s deposed President asked the United Nations to look into this, the Americans used their Security Council veto to prevent an investigation.
The remainder came from other Latin American countries, such as Cuba and Colombia.
The newcomers’ usual reasons for coming were the same as those of earlier immigrants from Europe— to escape from poverty or political persecution in their homelands.
The increase in the number of Hispanics was partly the result of an important change in the American immigration system.
The old immi-~ gration laws, which dated back to the 1920s, had favored Europeans.
But in 1965 a new law said that what would count in the future was who applied first.
The result was a big increase in immigration from non-European countries.
By the 1980s the United States was officially accepting 270,000 newcomers a year.
Forty percent of these were coming from Asia and another forty percent from Latin America.
In 1985 the government estimated that the country had between two and ten million of these illegal immigrants, half a million of whom had arrived in the previous year.
Many were Hispanics, who had waded across the shallow Rio Grande River that formed the border between the United States and Mexico.
In later years American governments went on interfering in Latin American affairs.
In 1965 President Johnson sent 22,000 American marines to the Dominican Republic to stop a leader he distrusted from regaining power.
In 1973 CIA agents helped generals in Chile to overthrow President Allende.
Allende was sympathetic towards communist ideas and had nationalized some American-owned mining companies.
Actions like these help to explain why many Latin Americans continued to dislike their North 31 America’s BACK YarD American neighbor.
All over Latin America, it seemed, the United States was propping up oppressive and unpopular governments.
American dealings with Latin America had a more positive and humanitarian side.
During their earlier occupations of countries such as Cuba and Nicaragua the Americans had built hospitals, supplied towns with pure water and wiped out killer diseases like malaria and yellow fever.
In 1961 Kennedy set up an organization called the Alliance for Progress.
The United States gave millions of dollars to improve the lives of Latin America’s poor.
The moncy was used to build roads, homes and schools, and to improve water-supply and sanitation systems.
The Alliance also advanced money to peasant farmers, so that they could buy more land.
Kennedy hoped that aiding Latin America like this would enable governments there to make cnough improvements to stop people from turning to communism.
But the generals running much of Latin America continued to rely more on guns than on reforms to keep power.
Despite the generosity of schemes like the Alliance for Progress, many people saw little basic difference between the attitude of the United States towards Latin America and the attitude of the Soviet Union towards eastern Europe.
In one way or another, both superpowers seemed determined to protect their own interests by controlling their smaller neighbors.
Kennedy’s Peace Corps In their rivalry with the Soviet Union, American governments never forgot the lesson of the Marshall Plan.
They knew that communism is often most attractive to the people of countries where food is short and life is hard.
From the 1950s onwards, therefore, they spent millions of dollars on modernizing farms, constructing power stations and building roads in countries as far apart as Turkey and Colombia, Pakistan and Chile.
The idea of this “foreign aid”’ was to give poor people all over the world better lives, partly out of a genuine desire to help them but partly also to win new friends and supporters for the United States.
Sometimes human. skills were sent, in the form of teachers and technical experts.
Soon after John F Kennedy became President he started a new scheme of this kind when he set up an organization called the Peace Corps.
All members of the Peace Corps were volunteers, who agreed to work for two years in the poor countries of Asia, Africa and Latin America.
They said that the idea of sending immature young Americans to show the people of distant lands how to live was both naive and arrogant.
Whoever was right, the Peace Corps achieved at least one thing—for a while it gave a human face to the bare financial statistics of American foreign aid.
Both men knew that for ten days they had been close to bringing death to millions of people.
They began working harder to make such dangerous situations less likely.
In August 1963, the United States and the Soviet Union signed a treaty agreeing to stop testing new nuclear weapons in the atmosphere or under water.
They also set up a special telephone link between Washington and Moscow.
On this “hotline” American and Soviet leaders could talk directly to one another.
In future any dangerous crisis would be dealt with more quickly and with less risk of misunderstanding.
The United States was friendly with Israel, and the Soviet Union with Egypt.
But both took great care not to let these friendships drag them into fighting one another.
Even the long and bloody war in Vietnam was not allowed to interfere with “détente,” as these moves were called.
He accused Sovict leaders of “revisionism” — that is, of altcring some of communism’s most important ideas.
He declared that the only way to deal with American capitalism was to be ready to fight it to the death.
Buta lot of the arguing about whether Russians or Chinese were the best communists was just a smoke-screen hiding the real quarrel between them, which was about land.
Big armies watched and sometimes fought on the long frontier between the two countrie: The enmity between China and the Soviet Union had important effects on both countries’ relations with the United States in the early 1970s.
In May 1972, President Nixon flew to Moscow to sign the Strategic Arms Limitation Treaty with the Russians.
It was intended to save both countries money as well as to make war between them less likely.
Each agreed how many missiles of various types the other should have, how many submarines to fire them from, and so on.
The first sign that China, too, was interested in détente with the United States came in 1970.
For years the Chinese government had made it very difficult for anyone from western countries to visit China.
The American government, correctly, took this as a hint that the Chinese wanted to settle some of their differences with the United States.
The man behind the Chinese move was Zhou Enlai, China’s Prime Minister.
Zhou believed tha needed friends on the international scene, especially while the Soviet Union was so unfriendly.
He persuaded Mao Zedong to try to end the twentyyear-old feud with the United States.
President Nixon’s adviser, Henry Kissinger, flew to China for secret meetings with Zhou.
Late in 1971 the United States agrees to communist China joining the United Nations, something it had vetoed for President Nixon with Zhou Enlai in China, 1972. years.
Mao was still suspicious of the Americans, But in the years that followed China and the United States made important agreements on trade and other matters, especially after Mao’s death in 1976.
As China and the United States became more friendly, tension grew again between Russia Americans.
Russians still feared that the United States wanted to wipe out communism.
Americans still feared that the Soviet Union wanted to conquer the world, American fears grew stronger when Russian soldiers marched into the Soviet Union’s neighbor, Afghanistan, in December 1979.
Because of the Soviet action, Congress refused to renew the SALT agreement.
Both the Soviet Union and the United States had continued to develop new and more deadly nuclear missiles during the years of détente.
SUPERPOWER Henry Kissinger In 1938 a fifteen-year-old Jewish boy was forced to flee from Germany with his parents in order to escape imprisonment in onc of Hitler's concentration camps.
The family went to live in the United States where the boy got a job cleaning bristles in a shaving-brush factory.
Just over thirty years later he became the Secretary of State of the United States.
Kissinger’s rise to importance began when Richard Nixon became President in 1969.
He became Nixon’s personal adviser in all the United States’ dealings with the rest of the world.
In 1973 Kissinger officially became Secretary of State, a position he held until Jimmy Carter became President in 1977.
All through the early and middle 1970s Kissinger played a central part in shaping American foreign policy.
He helped to form and direct the Nixon government’s policy in the later years of the Vietnam War.
He prepared the way for détente with communist China, He worked to bring peace between the United States’ ally Isracl and its Arab * neighbors.
Some people believed that Kissinger’s boyhood experiences in Germany played an important part in forming his ideas about the kind of world he wanted to shape as Secretary of State.
By the middle of the 1980s President Reagan had increased American military strength so much that he was ready to start talking seriously about slowing down the arms race.
Gorbachev believed that the huge cost of the arms race was crippling the Soviet Union’s economy and he was eager to reduce it.
In December 1987, Gorbachev traveled with his wife to the United States.
People in these experiences have a real memory of chaos, of violence and brutality, like the world is collapsing under them.
Kissinger’s critics saw him as a showman, whose achievements were more apparent than real.
His admirers believed that he was one of the most cffective statesmen of the twenticth century.
In the INF treaty both countries agreed that within three years they would destroy all their land-based medium and shorter range nuclear missiles.
President Reagan gave Gorbachev a pair of cufflinks to celebrate the signing of the treaty.
To symbolize their two countries turning away from war and towards peace, the cufflinks showed swords being beaten into ploughshares.
In May 1988, Gorbachev began to withdraw Soviet troops from Afghanistan.
All over central and eastern Europe the communist political systems imposed by Stalin in the years after the Second World War crumbled away.
While Gorbachev's Soviet Union looked on without interfering, countries such as Hungary, Poland, East Germany, and Czechoslovakia set up multi-party systems and held free elections.
Such developments raised hopes that a new time of peaceful cooperation might now be possible between the Sovict Union and the United States.
The country which for most of its existence had been an importer of influences has become in the twentieth century a major exporter of them.
In many areas of life, American popular tastes and attitudes have conquered the world.
You have read carlier about the part that American movies played in this process.
After the Second World War the spreading of American influence was continued by a powerful new force—television.
As carly as 1947, around 170,000 American families had television sets flickering in their living rooms.
Soon millions of people were organizing their activities around the programs on television that evening.
Comedy and game shows, stories about policemen and detectives, the adventures of fictional western heroes like the Lone Ranger~all these were very popular.
By the 1960s filmed television programs had become an important American export.
Other countries found it cheaper to buy American programs than to make their own.
Soon such exported programs were being watched by viewers all over the world.
One of the most popular was “I Love Lucy,” a 1950s comedy series featuring a red-haired comedienne named Lucille Ball.
When Lucille Ball died in April 1989, “I Love Lucy” was still being televised.
It had been seen by then in seventy-nine different countries and had become the most watched television show ever.
In music, the process of Americanization could be seen most clearly in the huge international popularity of rock.
Rock began as “rock-and-roll”, a music that was first played in the 1950s.
It came from the American South, and combined black blues with the country music of working class whites to produce a heavily rhythmic—“rocking”’—sound that appealed especially to young people.
Many of rock and roll’s first stars were black performers such as Chuck Berry and Little Richard.
But the unchallenged “King” of rock-and-roll was young southern white named Elvis Presley.
To rock-and-roll enthusiasts, Presley came to symbolize a new culture of youth.
Among other things, this culture developed its own vocabulary, ways of dressing, even hair s les.
More significantly 3 THE AMERICAN CENTURY for the future, it began to reject socially approved ideas and ways of behaving By the 1970s rock-and-roll had blended with the protest songs of the 1960s to become rock, a music that was harder and less escapist.
Rock became an international as well as an American phenomenon, one that millions of younger people worldwide saw as their natural cultural language.
A large part of its appeal was that it symbolized opposition to officially approved ideas and standards even more strongly than its ancestor, rock-and-roll, had done in the 1950s.
The Americanization of popular taste and habits was not restricted to entertainment.
The growing popularity of hamburgers, fried chicken and other easily prepared “fast food” spread American cating habits all over the world.
Bluc jeans and T-shirts Americanized the dress of people on every continent.
And supermarkets Americanized the everyday experience of shopping for millions.
JPERPOWER A supermarket in Texas The first supermarkets appeared in the United States in the 1950s.
With their huge variety of foods and other consumer goods, supermarkets gave shoppers a much wider range of choices.
In the 1950s many Americans saw their loaded shelves and full freezers as visible proof of the superiority of the American way of organizing a nation’s economic life.
When supermarkets proved a commercial success in the United States they quickly spread to other prosperous countries, first in Europe and then in other parts of the world.
So did another feature of American cities in these years — groups of tall, shining buildings with outer walls of glass and metal.
By the 1980s such buildings were dominating city centers all over the world.
Yet their origins can be traced back more than a hundred years to the American Midwest.
During the 1880s a number of high, narrow buildings began to rise in the center of Chicago.
Similar buildings —so tall that people called them “skyscrapers” — were soon rising over other American cities.
In the first half of the twentieth century they became one of the principal visual symbols of the modern United States.
Instead of using a lot of expensive space on the ground their builders used the free space of the sky.
New industrial techniques, and the availability of plenty of cheap steel, made it possible for them to do this.
Each skyscraper was built around a framework of steel beams, or girders, which carried the weight of the building, This inner stcel skeleton was constructed before the outer walls, which were added later.
The walls of the early skyscrapers were often made of stone — not for practical reasons, but to make the buildings look solid and strong.
In the 1950s architects working in the United States began to design skyscrapers whose steel skeletons were covered by outer walls — or “curtains” — of gl and metal.
Such buildings gave visual expression to the impact of the United States on the twentieth-century world. hey were gleaming symbols of a name that some historians were giving to the century even before it reached its end.
Russell was a cowboy who taught himself to paint, and he became one of the best known artists of the American West.
Page7 Blackfoot Amerindian tepees painted by the German artist Karl Bodmer.
In the 1830s Bodmer followed the route of the Lewis and Clark expedition across the Great Plains to the Rocky Mountains.
T] a twentieth-century re-creation by Kiinstler who carries out detailed research to make his historical paintings as accurate as possible.
See also paintings on pages 22, 30, 60 and 99, Page9 This is an Aztec drawing of an event in the Spanish conquest of Mexico during the expedition of Nuno de Guzman in 1530 when the Tlascalans aided the Spaniards in punishing another tribe which had hanged a Spaniard.
Page 17 A romanticized impression of the landing of the Pilgrim Fathers by a ninetcenth-century artist.
Page 18 Pilgrims going to church painted by George H, Boughton in 1867.
Page 19 An impression of the first Thanksgiving by a nineteenth-century artist.
Page 26 A contemporary English cartoon showing the burial of the Stamp Act.
Page 31 A contemporary portrait Page 34 A contemporary painting by James Peale.
Page 36 An impression by a nineteenth-century artist, Page 38 A contemporary painting.
Miller sketched the Amerindians and mountain-men of the Rocky Mountains while traveling there in the 1830s.
Page 65 A late nincteenth-century painting of Yellowstone National Park by Thomas Moran.
The artist's representation of the tensions between labor and capital in the late nineteenth century.
Page 88 A British propaganda poster making use of the sinking of the Lusitania in 1915 to arouse American sympathies.
Page 91 A contemporary painting by Sir William Orpen of the signing of the Versailles peace treaty.
The graffiti artist has painted a view of East Berlin through a skull-shaped hole in the wall.
Making extensive use of contemporary quotations, it examines the contribution made by famous figures such as Washington, Lincoln, and Edison, and also the parts played by the less famous — hopeful early settlers from Europe, black slaves on southern cotton plantations, student protesters against the Vietnam War.
An Illustrated History of the USA shows how, in a little over two hundred years, the United States has developed from small beginnings into the most powerful nation on carth with far-reaching influence on the lives of people throughout the world.
