The Cuban missile crisis of 1962 is frequently described as the moment the cold war turned hot.
Many believe that this thirteen-day period was the closest the world came to nuclear conflict.
The essay will focus on many individual factors, such as the Berlin blockade, and will attempt to answer one of the most controversial questions in the Cold war period.
The Berlin dispute was a pivotal factor throughout the cold war period and should be considered a primary cause of the Cuban crises.
In 1948 and 1958 war had seemed near as the Soviet Union tried to force the west out.
In 1961 the Berlin Wall had been built to prevent a mass exodus from East to West Germany, this was humiliating for the Soviets.
Stalin was forced to resort to trapping people in East Berlin to stop them from escaping, not the best propaganda image for communism.
The Soviet leadership was clearly intent on protecting Soviet interests at this juncture and viewed the west with increasing suspicion.
It was a catalyst to conflict between the west and communist states and therefore a possible cause of the Cuban missile crisis.
Khrushchev may have placed missiles in Cuba to use them as a bargaining tool with the United States in hope that discussions would lead to the West staying out of Berlin, in exchange for the removal of the missiles in Cuba.
Khrushchev believed that by placing missiles on Cuba he would force the west out of Berlin.
If the United States did strike at the missiles, it would give the Soviets an excuse to attack United States outposts closer to the Soviet Union.
The one outpost that most concerned the EX COMM was West Berlin, where the Soviet Union had built a wall one year earlier.
The missiles could be employed either to deter the Americans from declaring war or be used for bargaining purposes.
Kennedy surmised that Khrushchev knew the placing of missiles was too big a risk just to restore the balance of power; he must have been using them to solve the Berlin problem.
It would appear that Khrushchev saw Cuba as a political pawn and that the Berlin dispute was a prime factor the Soviet Union’s decision to place missiles on Cuba.
Khrushchev needed to restore Soviet dignity after the Berlin crisis and the country’s international recognition especially with the Chinese who thought that the Soviets were trying to appease the Americans.
Hostility between the East and the West, evidenced by the construction of the Berlin Wall, was a causal link in Khrushchev’s decision to place missiles on Cuba; heightening the threat of nuclear war and resulting in the Cuban missile crisis.
Another possible reason as to why the Soviet Union decided to place missiles on Cuba was to re-establish the balance of missile power.
Kennedy announced that he would increase the number of missiles and warheads that could be launched against the Soviet Union.
By the end of 1962, the United States had ten times more missiles and warheads than the Soviet Union.
Soviet analysts believed the United States military build-up was the preparation for a nuclear attack against the Soviet Union, or at least an effort to intimidate the Soviet Union.
Given the United States build-up of weaponry – an aggressive move and a clear threat to Russia and its satellites– it is logical to assume that Khrushchev put the missiles in Cuba to try and prevent nuclear attack from the Americans.
Given Khrushchev’s desire to improve his country’s international standing , he may have also felt the need to stand up to America and to show that the Soviet Union was not a country to be cowed.
The United States also had twice as many nuclear submarines and Soviet missiles.
The United States not only had a far greater missile advantage but they also had the first strike advantage.
Deploying the Soviet missiles on Cuba could be considered a means of going some way to re-addressing this balance of power with the USA, but it was in fact another factor that led to the missile crisis.
It wasn’t just the missile gap that was frustrating the Soviets; the biggest blow to the Soviet Union’s military confidence was the placement of United States Jupiter missiles in Turkey in 1961, on Russia’s border.
The missiles became operational in 1962, under the Kennedy administration.
The missiles were not the strongest missiles in America’s vast arsenal, but they could still pack a punch.
Clearly the Soviets did not want missiles right outside their front door even if they weren’t the best America had.
The Soviet’s might have placed missiles in Cuba to level the playing field, Russia had missiles on it’s border and now so did America, this means that Russia were no longer at a disadvantage, both countries were of equal footing.
Russia desperately wanted the missiles to be removed from Turkey and America was eager to get rid of the Cuban missiles.
Khrushchev would have hoped that putting the missiles in Cuba might have lead to both countries removing the missiles from Turkey and Cuba reducing the tension between the two superpowers.
Unfortunately placing the missiles in Cuba generated more tension and was significant factor for the cause of the missile crisis.
The Soviets felt that they needed to protect themselves and redress the balance of power, but another reason that is commonly used to explain the decision to put missiles on Cuba was for Cuba’s defence.
Cuba was very important to the Soviets, it was the only western country to turn communist during the cold war and therefore Khrushchev wanted to show the west that communism could thrive anywhere, especially after the Berlin crisis, which made communism out to be an oppressive regime.
Khrushchev had many reasons to believe that Kennedy was threatening Cuba.
The Bay of Pigs invasion in 1961, despite its failure, did show America’s intent on overthrowing Fidel Castro.
Kennedy believed that Castro endangered the whole western hemisphere and had to be stopped.
This is true the Soviet’s might have used the bay of pigs as an excuse to place missiles in Cuba in order to protect it.
The Bay of Pigs also frightened Castro, causing him to make concessions to the U.S.S.R, which wanted to place military bases on the island of Cuba.
It included the start of the economic embargo against Cuba, which continues today.
Operation Mongoose aimed to harass and undermine the communist regime in Cuba.
There was also a military operation named Ortsac, which was a trial run for an invasion of Cuba.
In February 1962, renewed attacks against Cuba by CIA-trained commandos seemed to indicate that the United States were prepared to act aggressively against Cuba, thereby undermining Soviet interests.
Protecting Communist Cuba played a part in the decision to place missiles in Cuba.
The country also showed the world that even in the west, communism could thrive.
Soviet credibility would have suffered significantly if the leadership permitted Cuba to be invaded by the United States.
The attacks, and the suspension of Cuba from the Organization of American States, appeared to be a forewarning of such an invasion.
Given the circumstances, it would have been hard for Khrushchev not to place missiles in Cuba.
The sabre rattling actions of the Americans and the Soviets, which were borne out of suspicion and fear , were designed to protect the interests of both countries.
However, it was inevitable that these actions would lead to escalation as no one sign could climb down.
Hence, protecting communist Cuba should be considered a main reason for the missile crisis.
Cuba was a conveniently close, tourist resort; and low paid Cuban labour made it an attractive investment area, much of the island’s agriculture and industry being American-owned.
Castro felt that he needed to harm United States interests if he was to tackle the dire issues in Cuba such as poverty, ill-health and illiteracy’s.
This eventually led to Castro turning to communism in the face of United States hostility.
Economic sanctions and the United States trade embargo were imposed on Cuba in 1962.
The trade embargo would have bankrupted the island because exporting sugar to America was Cuba’s biggest money earner.
In 1960 Castro referred to himself as a socialist not a communist and there was no real intention of teaming up with communist Russia.
However the trade embargo brought the two countries together as Russia stepped in to by Cuba’s sugar and other exports.
The actions of America as a result of Castro’s Cuban revolution drove Cuba towards Communism and in the long run lead to the Cuban missile crisis.
In addition, Khrushchev may have placed missiles on Cuba to prove to hard line communists like China that they weren’t being soft on capitalism.
Khrushchev faced a lot of opposition from hard liners who accused him of being weak and appeasing the Americans.
Khrushchev was desperate to maintain the relationships the Soviets had with other Communist countries like China and the only way they could keep this friendship going was to assert Soviet dominance and prove that communism does not back down to the West.
Linked to other factors such as the Berlin dispute and United States actions in Cuba, this could have been another reason for the placement of missiles on Cuba and the cause of the missile crisis.
Russia’s relationship with China was strained during this cold war period.
Increasing competition between Beijing and Moscow for influence in the Third World and the international communist movement intensified and soured relations.
Placing missiles on America’s doorstep would certainly make this abundantly clear; a factor which may have resulted in Khrushchev placing missiles in Cuba causing the missile crisis.
Another factor that needs to be addressed when discussing causes of the Cuban missile crisis is economic conditions in the Soviet Union.
Russia was spending a huge amount of money on its nuclear weapons program, roughly 2. billion dollars spent per annum.
This constant expenditure was hard to maintain and the Soviets needed a way to reduce the spending.
Khrushchev hoped that placing missiles in Cuba would stop the nuclear arms race with America; result in a level playing field so that the risks would be too great for either side to make a move.
This would mean a reduction in Russia’s overall cost of nuclear defences and allow spending in other areas.
The economic issue could be considered a powerful reason why missiles were placed on Cuba.
Far too much money was being pumped into nuclear weapons, which could have been spent on education, or improving living conditions for the Russians.
As well as this more money was needed to strengthen Soviet control over satellite states so Russia could be seen as a credible power.
Possibly Khrushchev thought he could put an end to the nuclear arms race by putting missiles on Cuba, but it just became another factor that lead to an escalation in conflict and eventually the Cuban missile crisis.
The EX COMM believed that Kennedy had not been firm enough with the Soviet leader in their 1961 summit meeting in Vienna.
Placing the missiles on Cuba may have been a way of testing how strong a president Kennedy was – an opportunity to see how Kennedy reacted in the face of danger.
Khrushchev was an adventurer who was testing the United States in general and Kennedy in particular.
If the United States accepted the missiles in Cuba, it would only encourage the Soviet Union to act aggressively elsewhere.
Khrushchev hadn’t previously thought about trying to spread communist influence across the volatile area of South America.
A benign response from the United States would have given Khrushchev confidence to do the same in other countries and begin communist expansion in South America.
Khrushchev’s plan of testing Kennedy could have been a main reason leading up to the Cuban missile crisis.
A related motive would be to embarrass the United States and undermine United States credibility, making the Soviets appear much wiser and communism a more attractive prospect for some countries, especially after the humiliation of the Berlin blockade.
Also Khrushchev may have wanted to lure the young, vulnerable president into a nuclear war against the Soviet Union which had a much more experienced leader.
This seems plausible because there was no attempt by the Soviet’s to hide the missiles, they were so easy to spot by the American spy planes that it seemed like they were placed there just to provoke America and draw them further into a nuclear war.
Creating tension by placing the missiles in Cuba to provoke America would have led to increased hostility between the two countries and the Cuban missile crisis.
There are many different historical perspectives of the main causes of the Cuban missile crisis.
One perspective is that the main causes of the Cuban missile crisis were related to Khrushchev’s deliberately provocative placement of the missiles in Cuba to try and drag America into a nuclear war.
This view is clearly shown in the film ‘Thirteen days’ by Nancy Russell.
It portrays the Russians to be warmongers who are intent on destroying America.
It doesn’t focus on what the Soviet’s hope to achieve by putting missiles on Cuba, only anti-communist American assumptions.
This quote shows that the president and his advisors were unaware of Soviet motives for placing the missiles in Cuba and just thought Khrushchev was looking for a fight.
Gaddis uses this quote to show that Khrushchev was unhappy with the Jupiter missiles in turkey aimed at Russia.
It shows a different perspective that maybe Khrushchev was using the missiles for bargaining purposes to reach equilibrium with the United States.
There is also the Cuban perspective; some Historians think that the missile crisis was caused by the oppressive American grip on Cuba that dominated the way of life there.
This resulted in the Cuban revolution and Castro finding an alternative trading partner with the Soviet’s, a powerful backdrop to growing conflict between the United States and the Soviet Union and a convincing trigger of the Cuban missile crisis.
To conclude, I don’t believe the primary cause of the Cuban missile crisis was the Berlin dispute.
I agree that it could have been a contributory factor in the sense that the Soviet administration might have been looking for a bargaining chip with the United States to remove the west from Berlin, and also to reduce military expenditure, which was crippling the Soviet economy.
But I believe that it was the Soviet Union’s desire to protect a fellow communist state, Cuba, while defending its own personal interests, that was the prime factor that triggered subsequent events that ultimately led to the missile crisis.
In memoirs written after being ousted as Soviet leader in 1964, Khrushchev claimed that he was primarily motivated by the desire to defend the Cuban revolution, and his ally Fidel Castro, from aggression by the United States, such as the Bay of Pigs disaster.
There were many other important factors that definitely led to the crisis, such as the Jupiter missiles in Turkey.
In addition, Khrushchev was determined to be on equal footing with the United States and did not want Russia to fall behind in the arms race.
Khrushchev thought that by placing missiles in Cuba he would be able to redress this military imbalance, to degree.
Ultimately, suspicion and the desire to defend an ideology resulted in a build-up of tensions between both nations.
Cuba was the poster child of communism – to be defended and propagated at all costs by the Soviets.
Between the years 1958 and 1961, the dispute over Berlin was one of the main issues between the USA and USSR, and caused a considerable amount of growing tension between the two states.
The dispute over Berlin was a continuing issue over who was to occupy Berlin, the capital city of Germany.
The city was seen as an important area for both states and led to several conflict issues throughout the time period.
The Soviet Union and the United States of America were close to starting WWIII in October, 1962.
The cause was because the existence of Soviet Nuclear war missiles were located in Cuba just 90 miles off the coast of Florida.
The Cuban missile crisis is considered the closest time the world has ever come to nuclear war.
There are many causes that led the world to such confrontation that was ultimately the product of the hostility and secrecy between the nations.
As the world sat on the brink of mass destruction, all hope lied with Nikita Khrushchev and President Kennedy coming to a compromise.
Society Killed Tom, Not the Shooter Alone A Cycle Is a Biological Pathway or Process in Which the End Product of One Cycle Becomes the Starting Point for the Next.
