Khrushchev, Castro and Kennedy, 1958&ndash;1964'' adds information from Russian sources * Fursenko, Aleksandr and Timothy Naftali.
Khrushchev, Castro and Kennedy, 1958&ndash;1964'' adds information from Russian sourcesRevision as of 03:56, December 24, 2012 John F Kennedy 35th President of the United StatesFrom: January 20, 1961 – November 22, 1963 Vice President Lyndon Johnson Predecessor Dwight Eisenhower Successor Lyndon Johnson United States Senator from MassachusettsFrom: January 3, 1953 – December 22, 1960 Predecessor Henry Cabot Lodge, Jr.
January 3, 1947 – January 3, 1953 Predecessor James Michael Curley Successor Thomas P O'Neill, Jr.
He was the youngest person elected president and one of the most glamorous and popular.
His record of presidential accomplishments remains a subject of debate among historians and the public, but after his assassination he became a legendary figure in whom admirers saw the ideals of American mythology incarnated.
In Congress the Conservative Coalition blocked nearly all of his domestic programs, so there were few changes in domestic policy, even as the civil rights movement gained strength.
The Kennedy style called for youth, dynamism, vigor and an intellectual approach to aggressive new policies in foreign affairs.
The downside was his inexperience in foreign affairs, standing in contrast to the vast experience of the president he replaced, Republican Dwight D Eisenhower.
At the Bay of Pigs, all the invaders were killed or captured, and he was forced to negotiate for the survivors release giving Cuba medical and food.
Kennedy's supporters blamed the fiasco on Eisenhower, for JFK inherited the plan; but Kennedy took the blame himself.
Russian leader Nikita Khrushchev, seeing for himself Kennedy's inexperience at a summit conference, threw up the Berlin Wall as the Soviets escalated the Cold War regarding the status of Berlin, predicting correctly that Kennedy's response would be weak.
Khrushchev went too far in 1962 when he sent nuclear missiles into Cuba aimed at the United States For the first time since Pearl Harbor -or indeed since Washington and New Orleans were attacked in the War of 1812-the United States was vulnerable to a major attack by an enemy power.
Kennedy and Khrushchev reached a compromise whereby the Soviets removed their missiles from Cuba publicly, while Kennedy secretly removed American missiles from Turkey aimed at the Soviets, and also promised that America would never invade Cuba.
Historians are uncertain whether Kennedy would have avoided the failures of Lyndon Johnson in Vietnam.
He was assassinated on November 22, 1963 while riding in his convertible limousine in Dallas, Texas.
A Communist sympathizer, Lee Harvey Oswald, was allegedly the only assassin, and afterward Kennedy became a national icon and martyr.
Primary sources 11 References Career Educated at private schools and Harvard College, young Kennedy was an indifferent student until the war in Europe focused his attention.
As second son in the powerful Kennedy Family, he was marked for an intellectual career as a writer or journalist, while his older brother Joseph was slated for politics by their hyper-manipulative father, Joseph P Kennedy.
His brother’s death in combat, combined with JFK’s heroic war record as skipper of the PT-109, set the stage for his political debut as a Congressional candidate in 1946.
Medical Kennedy was the sickest president since William Henry Harrison, but he successfully kept his multiple maladies a secret from the press and policy makers.
Besides Addison's disease, Kennedy's most serious problem was chronic back pain, which surfaced when he strained an unstable back a number of times, both in his youth and during his PT boat service during the war.
Surgery in 1944 only worsened the condition; by 1954 Kennedy found the pain so acute that he underwent back surgery once again despite the risk of an Addisonian crisis, which nearly took his life.As a teenager, Kennedy was in and out of hospitals for chronic colitis, stomach problems, and an undisclosed blood condition, which was at first mistakenly diagnosed as leukemia.
Janet Travell, a specialist in the treatment of muscular disorders, was his primary physician after 1955, but other specialists tried any number of different treatments.
As president he took seven powerful prescription drugs daily including hydrocortisone, fludrocortisone acetate, and Meticorten for Addison's disease, a malfunction of the adrenal glands; and T3 for hypothyroidism.
In addition he regularly took Equanil for anxiety and tension; for his gastrointestinal problems he took anti-spasmodics Lomotil and Bentyl; for weight gain a daily dose of testosterone; and Chlor-Trimeton for his allergies.
White House physicians were alarmed when they learned he was seeing Dr.
Historians have not identified a single policy decision that seems to have been affected by his physical condition or medical treatments; they believe he never took any illegal drugs.
Politics Although the father had abandoned Boston in frustration, JFK’s return to the city restored the family’s traditional power base among the large and powerful Irish-American community in Massachusetts.
Strong family connections with the Chicago Irish political community augmented his national Catholic base.
JFK always had two sets of advisors, an inner circle of Irish politicians who planned his campaigns, and a Protestant-Jewish coterie of intellectuals who promoted his stature as the intellectual in politics.
JFK fought his way into the Senate in 1952 by defeating incumbent Republican Henry Cabot Lodge, Jr., the archetypal Yankee.
Kennedy largely ignored the old-boy Senate to display his talents through newspaper and television interviews, magazine articles, and highly publicized speeches around the country.
Aided by his closest advisor, his brother Robert Kennedy, JFK appealed to conservatives by tolerating Joe McCarthy and launching attacks on corrupt labor leaders, especially Jimmy Hoffa of the Teamsters Union.
The Kennedy family represented the conservative wing of the Democratic party, and was known for its anti-Communism and close ties with Republican Senator Joe McCarthy Many liberal Democrats, led by Eleanor Roosevelt, distrusted JFK primarily because they could never forget the father’s break with Franklin Roosevelt or the family’s support for McCarthy.
Yet with the fading away of Adlai Stevenson , liberals lacked a viable candidate.
Nomination By 1960 JFK was the front-runner for the Democratic presidential nomination to face Richard M Nixon, with the biggest question mark whether his Catholic base of support would be outweighed by anti-Catholicism of the sort that hurt Al Smith so badly in 1928.
Of course prohibition was no longer an issue, and fear of Tammany-like bossism had faded away with the demise of most big city machines.
The Kennedy juggernaut defeated rival Hubert Humphrey, a liberal, in the West Virginia primary, a state with so much poverty and so few Catholics that party leaders were convinced they had a winner.
Kennedy won over the party’s intellectuals by his effective academic connections, while shaming doubters by a brilliant performance before the Protestant ministers of Houston.
There he enunciated the position that he did not speak for the Catholic Church on matters of religion, and it did not speak for him on public affairs.
He was able to take that position because there were no high intensity moral issue such as abortion at that time.
Although JFK’s religiosity consisted of nominal attendance at Sunday Mass, he excited tens of millions of Catholics who saw his election as president as confirmation of their full recognition as true Americans.
With 8 of 10 Catholics voting for Kennedy, he ran up majorities in ethnic strongholds like Chicago that provided the narrow margin of victory against Richard Nixon.
Apart from a few pockets of anti-popery among some Midwestern Lutherans and Southern Baptists, fears of Catholicism largely disappeared from the voting booth after 1960, and Kennedy gets credit for bringing Catholics into the American political mainstream.
Weeks after his memorable inaugural address sounded the tocsin for vigorous anti-communism, he encountered disaster when his invasion of Cuba failed at the Bay of Pigs in 1961, and he was forced to pay ransom of $53 million United States dollars in food and medicine in exchange for the 1,113 prisoners and 76 other exiles being held in Cuba.
Peace Corps He launched the Peace Corps by executive order in 1961, putting his brother-in-law Sargent Shriver in charge.
It was mainly designed to be a new weapon in the United States Cold War arsenal, one that could reach the people directly at the grass roots not merely their national leaders.
The Peace Corps has been endorsed by all subsequent presidents; nearly 200,000 Americans have served helping underdeveloped nations through personal humanitarian aid.
Ireland Kennedy paid a state visit to Ireland in 1963 the first state visit of an American President to the country, which had secured independence from Britain forty years earlier.
Kennedy visited his ancestral home in County Wexford, and was greeted by huge crowds in the cities of Dublin, Limerick and Cork.
He told crowds that once he had completed his term as president, he would like to become United States Ambassador to Ireland, and live there.
In his greatest moment, Kennedy rejected invasion plans but imposed a blockade and demanded the missiles be removed immediately.
Khrushchev publicly backed down, but privately got Kennedy to agree to removing the older United States Jupiter missiles from Turkey; while Castro secured the promise that the United States would never invade his island.
Realizing how close they had come to war, Kennedy and Khrushchev became much friendlier in public.
In 1963, they signed a test ban treaty which eliminated nuclear testing above ground or in space; the treaty was further designed to hobble China and other countries trying to build their first bombs.
The Cuban missile crisis reversed JFK’s image of ineptness in foreign policy, but his quiet, escalation of military involvement in Vietnam set the stage for the whirlwind reaped by his successor.
Domestic policy As senator, JFK had shown limited interest in domestic affairs apart from labor union corruption.
Working with his high-powered economic advisors he proposed a Keynesian program to stimulate the economy, not by higher spending but by tax cuts.
Congress was effectively controlled a conservative coalition of Republicans and southern Democrats.
He boosted the NASA space program and pledged to put a man on the moon before the end of the 1960s.
Civil rights A new issue that Kennedy had not anticipated blazed into view as the civil rights movement in the South, led by Martin Luther King, produced dramatic confrontations for JFK with segregationist Democrats, especially Governors George Wallace of Alabama, and Ross Barnett of Mississippi.
The 1963 confrontation in Alabama was nonviolent, and although Wallace did back down, the event boosted his visibility as a leader of southern Democrats.
JFK ignored the risks to his southern base and spoke out in favor of civil rights legislation, but as in so many instances, the bill was passed after his death.
Kennedy’s assassination in November, 1963, was a stunning shock to all Americans.
Pierson argues that the liberal media turned Kennedy's death into a martyrdom against racism, ignoring Kennedy's weaker interest in race and his strong opposition to Communism.
Lee Harvey Oswald's strong Communist ties were downplayed, and instead, the conservative city of Dallas was made the guilty party.
Incoming president Lyndon Johnson used the martyrdom theme to rally support for his liberal programs, painting them as memorials to Kennedy until Johnson won reelection in 1964 by a landslide over conservative leader Barry Goldwater.
The Catholic community took his assassination hard, and immediately elevated JFK to a sort of sainthood status, celebrating the miracle that he had liberated them from second class citizenship.
Johnson in 1964 successfully retained the Catholic base JFK had fostered, but that was the last hurrah.
By 1966 Catholics started showing their disillusionment with Johnson, who never recovered from the wave after wave of urban riots, nor from the disillusionment of his Vietnam War policy.
With the assassination of Robert Kennedy in 1968, and the failure of youngest brother Ted Kennedy to recover his brothers’ national base, the Kennedy legacy increasingly became the romantic memory.
Disclosures of JFK’s affairs, and detailed reports of his multiple grave medical problems fascinated the public but failed to break the myth that if JFK had lived, his second term would be a story of political triumphs restoring people’s faith in government.
Kennedy was basically a conservative, but he had to appeal to a primarily liberal base, so he offered symbols for the liberals while following a conservative course in foreign and domestic policy.
After his death Kennedy's legacy was picked up by liberals, and there is a vague notion to the effect that Kennedy was a liberal.
He was actually more of a conservative.To be a liberal in the days when Kennedy was in politics, 1946-63, meant supporting the programs of the New Deal, following in the footsteps of Franklin D Roosevelt, and upholding the New Deal Coalition.
In foreign policy liberals had turned away from Roosevelt's détente with the Soviets and had adopted the containment policy.
Liberals rejected rollback, that is efforts to remove Communists regimes from power.
Verbal support for the United Nations was standard rhetoric, although in practice it meant little.
The symbolically most important issue of them all for liberals was opposition to Joe McCarthy and his style of aggressive anti-Communism.
He had a base in Massachusetts with many strong liberals in academe and labor unions that had to be appeased, so he never attacked liberalism too loudly.
He solved the state problem by a close alliance with the Democratic party organizations in the cities, controlled mostly by Irish politicians.
JFK's campaign manager and chief confidante was his brother Bobby, a devout Catholic who was in close touch with the Catholic establishment and the local machines.
JFK thus maintained very close ties to the Catholic establishment; he carefully followed the required public rituals of the Catholic church.
It was a major achievement by Kennedy in 1960 to resolve the religious issue and bring Catholics into the mainstream of American life and to the top ranks of national leadership.On foreign policy he was a leading anti-Communist hawk; he won in 1960 by attacking Eisenhower's foreign policies as not aggressive enough.
Liberals have misread these episodes--saying that the Cuban invasion was really Eisenhower's idea; that in Vietnam he might have changed his mind in a second term; and that in Cuba he was liberal because he did not blow the world up.
To combat Communism in Latin America he proposed a liberal program of financial and technical assistance and free-food programs, and indicated he would take a sympathetic view of revolutionary movements that have the legitimate objective of bettering the life of the hemisphere's poor and downtrodden.
Kennedy explicitly exempted any such movements dominated by ""external""—meaning Communist—forces, thereby shutting the door on renewed diplomatic relations with Fidel Castro's Cuba On domestic issues, as president he tried to cut taxes and blocked his liberal advisors who wanted deficit spending in 1961.
Kennedy had a pro-business reputation and sponsored policies such as tax cuts and low inflation that conservative businessmen wanted.
On taking office he called for a ""full-fledged alliance"" with business.
He did get into a brush-up with the steel industry when the steelmen broke their promise to him to keep prices down; that move made Kennedy more popular among the anti-business liberals, but Kennedy never proposed major legislation that business opposed.
He named Douglas Dillon, a leading Republican businessman, as his Secretary of the Treasury.
On dealing with unemployment, he never proposed New-Dealish programs but instead had a package that was acceptable to conservative Republicans.Crime was a signature issue for Kennedy, and on taking office he promised a major crackdown on organized crime, thus appealing to conservatives.
On the liberal side, Kennedy asked Congress for federal aid for school construction and more money for federally assisted housing.
Liberals intensely hated McCarthy and that carried over to the entire Kennedy clan.
JFK was not close to McCarthy, but he refused to attack him publicly or to vote for his Senate censure in 1954 when McCarthy's career was collapsing.
John F Kennedy, 1917-1963 , a standard scholarly biography; stress on medical issues excerpt and text search O'Brien, Michael.
A Biography , most detailed scholarly biography excerpt and text search Parmet, Herbert.
A History--How Faith Shaped the Presidency from John F Kennedy to George W Bush.
John F Kennedy and the Struggle for Black Equality excerpt and text search Bugliosi, Vincent.
Debunks dozens of conspiracy theories and concludes Oswald acted alone. excerpt and text search Burner, David.
The Inauguration of John F Kennedy and the Speech That Changed America ISBN 0805072136 excerpt and text search Dallek, Robert, An Unfinished Life: John F Kennedy, 1917-1963 , a standard scholarly biography; stress on medical issues excerpt and text search Donaldson, Gary A The First Modern Campaign: Kennedy, Nixon, and the Election of 1960 Donovan, Robert J , PT-109: John F Kennedy in WW II, 40th Anniversary Edition.
Berlin, Cuba, Laos and Vietnam excerpt and text search; full text online Fursenko, Aleksandr and Timothy Naftali.
Khrushchev, Castro and Kennedy, 1958–1964 excerpt and text search adds information from Russian sources Giglio, James.
The Presidency of John F Kennedy , standard scholarly overview of policies Harper, Paul, and Joann P Krieg eds.
The Promise Revisited , scholarly articles on presidency online edition Hersh, Seymour.
The Dark Side of Camelot , highly negative assessment focused on scandals Karnow, Stanley.
How the Assassination of John F Kennedy Shattered American Liberalism excerpt and text search, conservative interpetation Pietrusza, David.60: LBJ vs.
The Epic Campaign that Forged Three Presidencies Preble, Christopher A John F Kennedy and the Missile Gap Reeves, Richard.
A Life of John F Kennedy detailed assessment of his character flaws by conservative historian excerpt and text search Schlesinger, Arthur, Jr.
The Eisenhower, Kennedy, and Johnson Years , excellent analysis of the major political issues of the era.Primary sources Council of Economic Advisors, Economic Report of the President , complete series online; important analysis of current trends and policies, plus statistcial tables Sorensen, Theodore.
Leuchtenburg is a liberal and Hamby is a conservative; both are excellent historians.
