The way United States President John F Kennedy and his staff handled the crisis is still controversial.
On the one hand, President Kennedy was praised not only for having helped avoid such a war, but also for having provided one of the best models for the exercise of national leadership and decision making in times of crisis.
Nevertheless, Kennedy's leadership in this foreign affairs crisis undeniably was successful.
Prelude To the Crisis The Soviet Union installed missiles in Cuba to buttress Soviet political clout in world affairs at a time when the balance of power seemed to tip in favor of the United States.
The farthest that Soviet missiles could reach was Europe, but United States missiles could reach Soviet territory.
Thus, the Soviet Union redressed the imbalance by deciding to deploy medium-range missiles in proximity to United States territory.
The United States had already based missiles in Turkey against the Soviet Union following this logic, and thus the counterdeployment of missiles seemed justifiable to the Soviet Union.
Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev thought that although this counterdeployment would initially cause much commotion, Kennedy, whom Khrushchev viewed as being young and inexperienced as the result of Kennedy's earlier failure in the 1961 Bay of Pigs incident, would eventually get used to the idea of having missiles situated near United States territory.
Khrushchev developed the idea of deploying missiles in Cuba in May 1962.
Subsequently, the Soviet Union began clandestinely shipping missiles to Cuba and installing them.
In July 1962 the first Soviet ship, loaded with nuclear missiles and troops, set sail for Cuba.
An agreement on military and industrial assistance was signed on 2 September 1962, between Khrushchev and Cuban leader Fidel Castro, who wanted the missiles to strengthen Cuba's posture of defense against the United States.
Ever since the Bay of Pigs incident, in which the United States had tried to invade Cuba, Castro had been wary of a second invasion and had been looking for a way to defend Cuba from United States forces.
The Soviet Union and Cuba had planned to keep the agreement secret until the nuclear missiles were installed.
However, on 4 September 1962, the United States government began to receive intelligence information indicating that the Soviet Union was shipping missiles to Cuba and constructing missile sites.
President Kennedy sent two public communications to Moscow on 4 and 13 September 1962, warning against any offensive weapons the Soviet Union might introduce.
Yet, prior to the discovery of the missiles, Kennedy had rebuffed all claims that the Soviets were bringing missiles into Cuba and had reassured the United States public that such missiles did not exist.
Moscow, in response to Kennedy, stated that the missiles being shipped to Cuba were defensive in nature and were no threat to the United States.
Considered Courses of Action The United States Central Intelligence Agency's discovery and confirmation of Soviet missile sites in Cuba on 15 October 1962, escalated the mounting tensions into a full-fledged crisis.
Contrary to the Soviet Union's public explanation, United States U-2 surveillance photographs had spotted sites for SS-4 medium-range missiles a mere 90 miles from the United States mainland.
The launch pads at the sites were capable of firing ballistic missiles up to a thousand miles, which meant that the deployment was an offensive one.
This information was reported to United States National Security Adviser McGeorge Bundy and to President Kennedy.
Kennedy had asserted that the Soviets would not place offensive weapons in Cuba.
Moreover, Khrushchev had assured Kennedy that he would do nothing to worsen the problem because Khrushchev was aware of Kennedy's domestic political problems.
United States advisers spend the first week of the crisis canvassing the possible courses of action and weighing the costs and benefits that those courses entailed.
First, the Soviet Union would attempt to reverse the strategic imbalance in its favor by installing cheaper, shorter-range missiles rather than more expensive, longer-range missiles.
Additionally, other courses of action were considered, such as a secret approach to Castro, an invasion, a surgical air strike, and a naval blockade.
Members of the committee included Secretary of State Dean Rusk, Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara, McGeorge Bundy, CIA Director John McCone, Presidential Counsel Ted Sorenson, Undersecretary of State George Ball, Deputy Undersecretary of State U Alexis Johnson, Secretary of the Treasury Douglas Dillon, Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff Gen.
Maxwell Taylor, Assistant Secretary of State for Latin America Edward Martin, Adviser on Russian Affairs Llewellyn Thompson, Deputy Secretary of Defense Roswell Gilpatric, Assistant Secretary of Defense Paul Nitze, and occasionally Lyndon B Johnson, United Nations Ambassador Adlai Stevenson, Special Assistant to the President Ken O'Donnell, and Deputy Director of the United States Information Agency Don Wilson.
The ExComm was ordered to set aside all other tasks to promptly consider all possible courses of action.
Initially the president and most of his advisers supposedly preferred a clean, surgical air strike on Cuba.
Through a process of active debate and discussion, a United States naval blockade emerged as a way to impede Cuba without an air strike or invasion.
They were backed by the Republican members of Congress who were critical of the Kennedy administration for not having taken a hard stance against Cuba prior to the crisis.
The members of ExComm in favor of the air strike appealed to President Kennedy by emphasizing his responsibility as the leader of the free world, saying he had the obligation to destroy the missiles, whatever the cost.
At first President Kennedy and a majority of the ExComm members favored an air strike as an option, but soon a coalition of the most influential members in the ExComm began to support a naval blockade.
First, no one was certain that an air strike could be surgical or successful; second, an air strike would not be justified under international law, whereas a blockade would be authorized by international institutions such as the OAS; third, because human lives were at stake, military action would be immoral and damage the image of the United States over the world; fourth, an air strike would excessively provoke the Soviet Union; fifth and most important, an air strike would greatly increase the possibility of the use of nuclear weapons.
The arguments for and against an air strike and a naval blockade created tensions that could be felt within the ExComm and by President Kennedy.
In the meantime, the Soviet Union denied all charges regarding the missile sites.
Andrei Gromyko, the Soviet foreign minister, met with Kennedy on 18 October 1962, to assure him that Soviet military actions in Cuba were purely defensive.
Kennedy had decided, at this point, not to tell Gromyko that the United States already knew of the missile sites under construction in Cuba.
Kennedy spent 19 October 1962 preparing two speeches—one on an air strike and the other on a blockade.
However, in the end he and ExComm chose to abandon the air strike option because of the moral and legal implications and the awareness that an air strike would surely lead to a nuclear war between the two world powers.
Thus, on 20 October 1962, Kennedy decided on a naval blockade and scheduled an address to the United States public on 22 October 1962.
However, he ordered the United States Air Command to be ready to carry out an air strike against Cuban bases any time after the morning of 22 October 1962.
On 22 October 1962, United States personnel were evacuated from Cuba's Guantanamo Naval Base, and United States forces in Florida and around the world were put on a DEFCON-3 alert.
President Kennedy delivered a seventeen-minute speech on national television, informing the public of the discovery of the nuclear missile sites and announcing a naval blockade to prevent the delivery of offensive weapons to Cuba.
Kennedy urged the Soviet Union to dismantle its missile sites immediately and withdraw all missiles from Cuba.
Kennedy warned that if the quarantine should fail, further action would be justified.
Shortly before Kennedy's speech, Cuba had declared a combat alarm and had moved antiaircraft batteries and artillery along the Havana waterfront.
Kennedy called for other measures, such as convening an OAS meeting and calling an emergency meeting of the United Nations Security Council to gather support for the United States.
Initially the Soviet Union rejected the United States demand to remove the missiles, saying that the demand violated Cuba's rights to self-determination.
In a speech in Cuba, Fidel Castro emphasized Cuba's right to strengthen defenses with any weapon of its choice, without clarifying whether nuclear missiles were present in Cuba.
Nonetheless, on 23 October 1962, President Kennedy officially signed Proclamation 3504, declaring the creation of a naval blockade.
This hemisphere has seen many revolutions, including the one which gave my own nation its independence.
My nation has lived happily with other countries which have had thorough-going and fundamental social transformations, like Mexico and Bolivia.
The whole point of the Alliance for Progress is to bring about an economic and social revolution in the Americas.
The foremost objection of the States of the Americas to the Castro regime is not because it is revolutionary, not because it is socialistic, not because it is dictatorial, not even because Mr Castro perverted a noble revolution in the interests of a squalid totalitarianism.
It is because he has aided and abetted an invasion of this hemisphere—an invasion just at the time when the hemisphere is making a new and unprecedented effort for economic progress and social reform.
The crucial fact is that Cuba has given the Soviet Union a bridgehead and staging area in this hemisphere; that it has invited an extra-continental, antidemocratic and expansionist Power into the bosom of the American family; that it has made itself an accomplice in the communist enterprise of world dominion.
Insolently flouting the rules of international conduct and the principles of the Charter, the United States has arrogated to itself—and has so stated—the right to attack the ships of other States on the high seas, which is nothing less than undisguised piracy.
At the same time, the landing of additional United States troops has begun at the United States Guantanamo base in Cuban territory, and the United States armed forces are being placed in a state of combat readiness.
On 24 October 1962, the United States Joint Chiefs of Staff raised the national alert level to DEFCON-2 for the first time in United States history.
On the same day Soviet ships with missiles on board could be seen approaching the U.S.-drawn line, and tensions reached their peak but eventually subsided as the ships stopped in the water at the last moment instead of crossing the line.
Between 26 and 27 October the Soviet Union conveyed its decision, through United Nations Secretary-General U Thant, to order Soviet merchant ships not to violate the United States naval blockade.
Khrushchev also sent two letters to the White House offering to withdraw missiles from Cuba and pledging that the Soviet Union would not interfere in the internal affairs of Turkey if the United States were to end the naval blockade, pledge not to invade Cuba, and remove United States missiles from Turkey.
Notwithstanding the U-2 incident, Kennedy sent a letter to Khrushchev proposing that the Soviet Union immediately begin withdrawing its missiles and that the United States would end the naval blockade and pledge not to invade Cuba.
Behind the scenes Attorney General Robert Kennedy delivered a private assurance to Soviet Ambassador Anatoly Dobryinin that the United States would withdraw its missiles from Turkey.
On 28 October 1962, Moscow Radio broadcast Khrushchev's acceptance of Kennedy's proposal.
The Soviet Union began dismantling its missile sites and withdrawing missiles without consulting the Cuban government.
It was an effective strategy when both the United States and Soviet governments were skating on thin ice.
The blockade was advantageous in that it was a middle choice between inaction and aggression and in that it shifted to Khrushchev the burden of making the choice of whether or not force would be used.
Removal of the missiles was a voluntary decision on Khrushchev's part and thus less humiliating.
The Soviet Union also benefited from the crisis by being assured that the United States would withdraw its missiles from Turkey.
The greatest success of Kennedy's leadership in the crisis is that he didn't repeat his mistake of the Bay of Pigs.
After he made a mistake in the Bay of Pigs invasion by accepting the advice of a group of experts who were overconfident that the mission would succeed , he reshaped his foreign policy decision-making process.
He called on a wide array of advisers to get unfiltered and multifaceted information rather than call on a narrow array of advisers.
Kennedy achieved success by allowing his staff members to freely discuss the options.
At the initial stage of the crisis, only two options—inaction or an air strike—appeared to exist.
In the process of debating and canvassing all the options, a blockade emerged as another option.
Discovering this new option was the key to successful foreign policy in resolving the crisis.
Kennedy also effectively communicated with the American people on the crisis.
Before and after the crisis, he also skillfully used televised press conferences to express his vision and to excite young people to believe that politics is interesting business and worth pursuing.
