A 1962 aerial photograph shows Okinawa's first Mace missile site at Bolo Point, Yomitan.
One of the Okinawa Mace missiles is now displayed at the National Museum of the USAF in Dayton, Ohio.
A Mace missile is trundled through the Okinawa city of Gushikawa in the early 1960s in a rare open display.
Courtesy of Charles Headlee 1 10 | 30 | 1 APJ | JF Soon after joining the air force, these three In October 1962, the United States and the men from contrasting backgrounds were Soviet Union teetered on the brink of nuclear assigned to the 498th Tactical Missile Group war after American spy planes discovered that and sent to Lowry Air Force Base, Colorado. the Kremlin had stationed medium-range There they first set eyes on the latest weapon atomic missiles on the communist island of in their nation's nuclear arsenal the TM-76 Cuba in the Caribbean, barely over the horizon Mace.
A progeny of the V-1 ""doodlebug"" from Florida. rockets that the Nazis rained down on Britain during World War II, the 13-meter-long Mace The weapons placed large swaths of the missiles weighed 8 tons and cost $500,000 Eastern United States including Washington, D.C. within each.
Packed into the missile's guts was a 1.1range of attack and sparked a two-week megaton nuclear warhead that, at over 75 showdown between the superpowers that times the power of the bomb dropped on Pulitzer Prize-winning United States historian and Hiroshima, could obliterate everything within a Kennedy advisor Arthur Schlesinger Jr. called 5-km radius, create a crater 20 stories deep ""the most dangerous moment in all human and irradiate the landscape for decades to history.""1 come.
At Lowry, the new recruits were streamed into While the full facts of that deployment have seven-man crews and received intensive never been officially disclosed, now for the first training in the missiles' engines, guidance time three of the United States Air Force's nuclear systems and nuclear payload.
Six months later, pioneers have broken the silence about the newly graduated ""missileers"" were ready Okinawa's secret missiles, life within the for their combat postings which they assumed bunkers and a military miscalculation of would be in Europe, where the East Germans apocalyptic proportions the targeting of had just started work on the Berlin Wall.
But to unaligned China at a time when China-Soviet their surprise, they found themselves on a 36polemics were in full public view. hour island-hopping flight to the United States militarys keystone of the Pacific Okinawa.
John Bordne, Larry Havemann and Bill Horn were all born during the early days of World The United States military had seized Okinawa in June of War II, but their motivations in joining the United States 1945 in the bloodiest battle of World War II in Air Force were very different.
Coming from a the Pacific and from early on split it off from family steeped in military tradition, Bordne Japan as a United States military colony.
Communist victory in 1949 and the Korean Havemann, a laboratory technician, saw the air War, which broke out in June 1950, the island's force as a means to secure a stable income for strategic importance, and United States fortification his family.
The 1952 Treaty of San Francisco, escape route from impoverished West Virginia. which ended the U.S.-led Allied Occupation of ""Besides, I liked the color of the uniform,"" he mainland Japan, assured continued control of says.
The island was rapidly transformed 2 10 | 30 | 1 APJ | JF into the linchpin of United States Cold War plans for sometimes the escort would get distracted and Asia. forget it.
Roughly 10 meters away sat the eight , Okinawa still bore missiles around which the men's duties the scars of World War II civilian buildings revolved.
They checked the engines and finewere cobbled together from military scrap tuned the guidance systems, drilled themselves timber and the wrecks of United States invasion ships on safety procedures and practiced countdowns lay rusting off the shores.
Bordne and Horn to ensure the missiles were ready to fire at a were in for another surprise.
To pass the time, the cables from the launch bays to the control men studied for correspondence classes, played centers down below."" endless rounds of pinochle and compared notes on the shows they'd seen recently at base Finally, in early 1962, Bolo Point in Yomitan, nightclubs including a little-known band the first of Okinawa's nuclear-missile sites, called The Supremes.
Still in the same seven-member teams from Lowry, the men began the work for which The missiles themselves created few problems they'd been trained ""to defend the island, for the men and the gigantic springs beneath protect the institution of democracy and halt the bunkers designed to protect them from the spread of communism,"" explains Horn with nuclear blasts dampened the effects of the an ironic chuckle. earthquakes and typhoons that rattled nerves among their colleagues on the surface.
Following this, the crews drove to Bolo But the events of October 1962 soon dashed Point where, upon arrival, they'd be met by an any hopes that Okinawa would be a sunescort from the previous shift with the latest drenched holiday posting.
From that moment 3 10 | 30 | 1 APJ | JF on, things became very serious,"" says Horn.
I thought of my family taken on Oct., 1962, by an American spy in America, but I could do nothing to help plane on a surveillance flight over Western them.
The images revealed that, for the first that if war came it would never get there.
But time in its history, the Soviet Union had writing it helped me mentally."" stationed nuclear weapons outside its borders.
The SS-4 medium range missiles at 22 meters Mingled with the missileers' fear, though, there nose-to-tail and carrying a one megaton was also a sense of professional rivalry as the warhead could reach the White House 15 men compared their own Maces with the grainy minutes after launch.
JFK took the news as a spy-plane footage of the Soviet missiles and personal affront branding Khrushchev ""an reassured themselves that the SS-4's appeared immoral gangster,"" he immediately demanded technically inferior.
Furthermore, they that his top brass draw up plans to bomb the experienced a complex sense of excitement that Cuban sites. 4 they might finally be given a chance to put their hard months of training into practice.
Back on Okinawa, the Air Force missileers' reactions to the photographs varied.
Courtesy of Larry Johnston Over the next few days, tensions escalated in the Caribbean and the Pentagon raised the According to Bordne, ""After we reached nation's Defense Condition to level DEFCON 2, another mechanic offered me two.
That was a lot of that DEFCON 2 meant we were within 15 money a year's salary but I flatly turned him minutes of a declaration of nuclear war.
I wanted to be there for launch as badly DEFCON 1 was reached, then we would be as he did."" within five minutes of launching our missiles.
Bordne would receive his chance as events 4 10 | 30 | 1 APJ | JF spiraled out of JFK's and Khrushchev's control on the other side of the world the Cubans shot But the telephone stayed silent. down a United States spy plane and the American Navy dropped explosives on Russian submarines On Oct., Kennedy and Khrushchev finally forcing them to surface.
Hearing these struck a secret deal whereby the Soviets developments, the Okinawa missileers steeled promised to withdraw their nuclear missiles themselves for the announcement of DEFCON from Cuba in return for United States promises never to 1.
Stationed at the still-incomplete Onna site, invade the island and assurances it would pull Havemann was told that if things became any its atomic rockets out of NATO-aligned Turkey. worse, his crew would have to improvise by loading the warheads onto the missiles and When word reached Okinawa, Horn likened the covering the launch doors with tarpaulins. experience to a near-missed car wreck.
Meanwhile at Bolo Point, Horn was locked It's only when you pull over to the side of the underground for 48 hours.
There would have been three separate commands and Until now, all three men have willingly then we would have launched.
We were answered every question about their time on seconds away from midnight on the nuclear Okinawa right down to the ""honey buckets"" clock."" they used as toilets.
The Maces' relatively short range of 2,000 km put almost the entire Soviet Union, with the possible exception of Vladivostok, tantalizingly out of the missiles' reach and this technical data, combined with Horn's suspicion, illustrates one of the biggest failings of 20th century United States military intelligence.
However at the time, the Pentagon continued to operate on the Havemann raises an even more frightening assumption that the two countries were allies. prospect for the islanders still traumatized by This misconception laid the basis of America's the Battle of Okinawa in which between a infamous blueprint for atomic war the Single quarter and a third of the civilian population Integrated Operational Plan dubbed by one had died an invasion by Russian or Chinese government adviser as a ""massive, total, troops.
While JFK had made token Maces, Havemann says, ""We were told to get changes to the plan in early 1962, the our equipment, helmets and backpacks ready in amendments apparently hadn't filtered down to case we had to head for the jungles.
A Timeline 1945 United States military seizes control of Okinawa after three months fighting.
Another of the Mace bases in Kin, Okinawa, is pictured in the early 1960s.54 The crew of the Japanese Courtesy of Larry Johnston fishing boat Lucky Dragon #5 are irradiated in the United States H-bomb test Given the tensions between China and the at Bikini Island in the Pacific.
More Soviet Union, it is highly likely that Mao would than 30 million Japanese people have sat out the Soviet-American armageddon sign a petition in protest.
But had the first time, the United States military secretly Okinawan Maces annihilated Shanghai and stations nuclear weapons on Beijing, killing millions of Chinese, the United States and Okinawa.
Bordne worried about the possible ""evaporation of Okinawa in a preemptive or retaliatory 1962 The first of four Mace strike,"" while Horn believes that ""The nuclear-missile sites becomes 6 10 | 30 | 1 APJ | JF operational at Bolo Point, Okinawa.
Not to possess, manufacturer or allow the introduction of atomic weapons.
The American 1972 Okinawa reverts to Japanese military machine taught us that it was our right control. to take anything or go anywhere we wanted.
Ironically, in his Oct. televised speech in which he broke the news about the Soviet Bordne is proud that he had been able to missiles in the Caribbean, JFK accused Castro perpetuate his family's long military heritage. of turning Cuba ""into the first Latin American But the ensuing half century has revealed to country to become a target for nuclear war."" 6 him some unexpected similarities with his Now it seems clear that not only the 7 million erstwhile enemies on Cuba.
Now, I know that none of nuclear weapons were supposed to protect. us wanted to alter life on this planet for 7 10 | 30 | 1 APJ | JF eternity."" conversation.
Havemann shares Bordne's sense of Rusk assured Kosaka that he would pass the responsibility and he is a firm believer in request to his higher-ups in Washington and it passing on the lessons of 1962 to future seems he was true to his word.
It gives me a strange in tarpaulin sheets and transporting them only feeling in my stomach and sometimes I come at night.
Special Psychological Problem ""Right away, Robert McNamara (Kennedy's Situated among boiling sulfur pits and magmasecretary of defense) put the squash on those blackened rocks, the hot-spring resort of patches.
The meetings, plain sight,"" says Horn. attended by United States President John F Kennedy's secretary of state, Dean Rusk, and Japan's The Hakone memoranda and missileers' foreign minister, Kosaka Zentaro, had accounts hint at the deep tensions within the repercussions for the United States Air Force missileers heart of the Washington-Tokyo alliance.
While then recently dispatched to Okinawa and they Japanese public opinion was overwhelmingly offer a disturbing glimpse into Tokyo's attitude opposed to nuclear weapons, Japan's leaders toward United States atomic weapons just 16 years after were either ambivalent about nuclear weapons the bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki. or, in some cases, incontrovertibly pronuclear.
The issue of nuclear-armed United States Mace missiles During the U.S.-led postwar Allied Occupation had first been broached by Kosaka of Japan, American authorities had rigorously censored all media discussions of Hiroshima when he met Rusk at the Hakone Kanko Hotel and Nagasaki.
Apparently unaware that the in 1952, was accompanied by a flood of stories Americans were just about to put the finishing about survivors' ongoing struggles with touches to the first Mace launch site at Bolo radiation sickness.
The public's anger was Point on the main island of Okinawa, the reinforced in 1954 when the 23 crew members Japanese foreign minister stressed the critical of the Lucky Dragon #5 fishing trawler were importance of preventing word from leaking irradiated mid-Pacific following a United States H-bomb out about the presence of nuclear missiles on test explosion on Bikini Atoll in the Marshall Okinawa.
One crew member died leaving the others to face the lifelong effects of radiation.
Instead, he worried that U.S. within the Cold War consensus that prioritized atmospheric explosions might slow growing the need to combat the spread of Asian anti-Soviet feelings in his country.
In fact, the day before Kosaka met Rusk, Prime More than any other, it is this phrase that cuts Minister Ikeda Hayato the so-called father of to the core of U.S.-Japan atomic relations.
Japan's postwar industrial growth had Rusk's failure to acknowledge that the root of wondered out loud with the secretary of state Japan's nuclear trauma lay in United States atomic whether it might be a good idea for Japan to bombing of Hiroshima and Nagasaki, and in the possess its own nuclear weapons.
This kind of stationing nuclear weapons under its own thinking has made a big rift between them and control on Okinawa but it was not prepared to the ordinary, antiwar Japanese public,"" says contemplate the possibility of Japanese fingers Niihara. on nuclear triggers.
Throughout the 1960s, neither the government Niihara Shoji, the researcher at the forefront of of Japan nor the United States admitted that there were U.S.-Japan nuclear relations, first uncovered nuclear weapons on Okinawa.
According to the Hakone memos at the United States National Niihara's research, it was only in 1971, when Archives in Maryland in 2001.
Highreturn of the island, that the United States publicly ranking officials really might have thought that admitted to their presence.
Washington wanted Tokyo to Japan military alliance."" 10 cough up tens of millions of dollars for the weapons' removal which it eventually did.
This was followed by 1961, 9:30AM. a 90-minute program -The Scoop Special-aired 8 by TV-Asahi on 20 May 2012.
This is a revised version of an article that 10 Interviews with Niihara conducted between appeared in The Japan Times on July 8, 2012.
