This flag is shortlisted for the Emoji 13 spec, * but has landed in Twemoji early, so we can add support for it, too.
This is the least supported of the letter locale flags, * so gives us an easy test for full support.
England is a country in the United Kingdom, it * does not have a two letter locale code but rather an five letter sub-division code.
They all dearly loved to surprise everyone, in the process of keeping allies and enemies alike, off-balance.
Short, fat Ukranian, Nikita Khrushchev, career political commissar , came out on top during the predictable power-struggle that followed in the wake of Stalin’s death in 1953.
The Cuban Revolution finally succeeded in late 1959, overthrowing the rotting dictatorship of Fulgencio Batista, replacing him with spasmodic, mouthy Communist, Fidel Castro.
Cuba had, under Batista, been little more than a big, floating whorehouse, playground for American mobsters and tourists alike.
Under Castro, it was rapidly converted to a typical Communist enclavecolorless, drab, cheerless, desperately poverty-stricken, and devoid of any species of economic opportunity.
Tourism dried-up instantly, and Castro, like all Communists, had to steal virtually all private property in order to acquire enough hard cash to prop-up his fragile regime.
Castro needed the USSR and was thus not likely to deny Khrushchev anything he wanted.
Despite weary political rhetoric about a mythical “missile gap,” both Kennedy and Khrushchev were fully aware that the USSR’s ageing fleet of wheezing TU4 bombers were so dated and poorly maintained, many of them could not even take off.
His shaky “fleet” of only thirty-five SS-7 ICBMs was in even worse shape.
The Cuban Missile-Crisis was addressed via isolating Cuba, on the advice of Kennedy’s brother, Bobby, and then Secretary of Defense, Robert McNamara.
The quarantine was absolute, as shiploads of missiles and associated paraphernalia from the USSR were all turned back.
I remember watching Kennedy’s address to the nation on black-and-white television.
Khrushchev never challenged the blockade, and, less than a month later, backed down.
They were discovered by American navel aircraft far out in the Atlantic.
Years later, it was revealed that the Soviet submarines in question carried nuclear torpedoes.
There is some question as to whether they would have actually functioned if launched.
After “retiring,” he permanently faded from sight, never to rear his ugly head again.
Even today, he is not considered a national hero, in Russia, nor anywhere else.
I remember hearing the news when I was a college freshman, away from home for the first time.
