The study of international politics has evolved in reference to the great power wars, with every major conflict marked as a turning point in global history.
Consequently, the crises that trigger these wars are rigorously scrutinised for every single bit of a clue that may potentially shed light on the origins of such devastating undertakings.
The ‘other’ crises that do not lead to wars, in turn, are usually – and tautologically – treated as relatively unimportant incidents that do not require the full brunt of our attention.
The focal point of numerous scholarly and journalistic inquiries, the crisis has shaped how we have come to think about nuclear weapons and foreign policy analysis in the last half a century.
During the so-called ‘thirteen days’ of October 1962, the world literally stared into the eyes of a nuclear abyss, only to step back in the last moment.
However, these studies also suggest that after five decades, the contribution that a single study can make to our understanding of the crisis has become rather limited, if not marginal.
Stern was a historian at the John F Kennedy Library in Boston, Massachusetts from 1977 to 2000 and the first non-member of the ExComm, the President’s famous inner circle, to analyse the tapes.
The book unfolds systematically; each empirical chapter deals with the myths surrounding a key member of the ExComm.
Not only did Robert Kennedy adamantly oppose the removal of Jupiter missiles from Turkey as ‘one of the most hawkish members’ of ExComm , he also championed the full-scale invasion of Cuba before the decision to opt for a blockade was reached.
Similarly, Stern challenges the myth of Robert McNamara, who is usually depicted as the wise and cool-headed statesman who went out of his way to help John F Kennedy prevent a nuclear war.
The tapes reveal, according to Stern, that McNamara, whose erratic posture was a far cry from his cool-headed image, belonged with the hawks of ExComm.
Put simply, while the book has a lot to offer to those who are not familiar with Stern’s previous research, it will not surprise those who are familiar with it.
Gibson examines ‘the role of talk’ among the ExComm members during the crisis.
The conventional interpretations that emphasise the divergent preferences, interests, and beliefs among ExComm members, Gibson argues, are misleading.
Such machineries do not automatically lead to particular outcomes, but they can have ‘tremendous, even decisive, importance’ for them , especially when there is no guaranteed outcome.
Qualitative analysis is coupled with quantitative inquiry about ‘who spoke, how they obtained the floor, and who was addressed’ , as well as how frequently an ExComm member spoke or was addressed.
Gibson examines the ExComm debates with respect to three major turning points.
The second major decision involved not stopping some Eastern bloc ships after the blockade was declared.
The third episode relates to Kennedy’s intricate ‘strategy’ to accept Khrushchev’s milder – and first – proposal on October 27 while also making a backstage concession over Jupiter missiles in Turkey.
However, the book presents many aims and ideas, which, when combined with the book’s admittedly ‘highly inductive’ nature , sometimes prove to be overwhelming and distracting.
Paradoxically, while there is an abundance of ideas in the book, the only big idea seems to be that ‘talk’ really matters.
Also, readers who are not familiar with the intricacies of the relevant debates in sociology over theory and methodology may find some sections of Talk at the Brink rather impenetrable, or, alternatively, may not sufficiently appreciate the novelty of its arguments.
Similar to Stern, Barrett and Holland argue that the strategic myth-making efforts of the Kennedy administration in the aftermath of the crisis led to a particular narrative – which limits the temporal scope of the crisis merely to the so-called thirteen days – that is outright misleading.
By focusing on how the Kennedy administration managed the crisis, we tend to lose perspective on how their mismanagement prior to October 14th in fact paved the way for the crisis, or at least put the United States in a remarkably disadvantageous position at the bargaining table.
The Kennedy administration, in this narrative, gets the blame for turning a blind eye to Cuba for five weeks between early September and mid-October.
By building on rarely scrutinised reports (for example, papers of the members of the US Congress), Barrett and Holland carefully document how the key members of the Kennedy administration went to great lengths to cover the blunder and, armed with their post-crisis popularity, how they eventually succeeded.
First, as the authors themselves recognise, the administration might have indirectly implied to the intelligence community that it preferred to limit the risk of inciting a geopolitical crisis over Cuba, but it never turned down a request for U2 surveillance missions during the photo gap.
Second, the authors all too readily assume that the Kennedy administration made a serious mistake.
Furthermore, it remains unclear how the crisis would have played out if the missiles had been discovered earlier.
Blind Over Cuba raises important questions, but some readers may protest that its reading of the Kennedy administration’s conduct, at times, becomes slightly overcritical.
Mikoyan was a historian of the Soviet Union and the son of Anastas Mikoyan – the book’s protagonist – who was a prominent Soviet statesman, the first senior Soviet official to visit Cuba after Fidel Castro took power, and the Soviet envoy to Cuba following the much-popularised thirteen days.
Sergo Mikoyan’s account mixes his own personal recollections (he accompanied his father during his visits to Cuba in 1960 and 1962), Anastas Mikoyan’s memoirs , and a wide variety of documents from the Soviet archives.
Sergo Mikoyan passed away in 2010 and the final manuscript was edited by Svetlana Savranskaya.
Cuba was an important actor in the crisis, which itself was not ‘solved’ until the Soviet leadership and Castro came to an understanding about how to deal with the Soviet presence in the country, especially over the questions of the Soviet Il-28 bombers and the possibility of a UN weapons inspection in Cuba.
Serge Mikoyan’s account shows that just like the Kennedy administration, Khrushchev also ignored Cuban opinions and interests during the so-called October crisis.
The tensions between the Soviet Union and Cuba were finally alleviated thanks to the skillful diplomacy of Anastas Mikoyan, who spent three weeks in November 1962 in Cuba.
The book offers a great many insights into the so-called Operation Anadyr that aimed to secretly install Soviet nuclear missiles in Cuba.
According to the author, for example, it was neither the ‘missile gap’ nor feelings of strategic inferiority that prompted the operation; the Soviets were genuinely trying to prevent a United States invasion of Cuba.
However, some readers may raise issues about the author’s treatment of Anastas Mikoyan.
Such praise , when combined with the author’s portrayal of Anastas Mikoyan as a miracle-worker who repeatedly fixed the unfixable, leads to the impression that the book sometimes focuses more on Anastas Mikoyan – who, according to his son, was almost always on the right side of history – than on the Soviet position.
However, much depends on readers’ expectations; if what is sought is a ‘bird’s eye’ perspective and an aloof historical narrative, the rather personalised interpretation may be seen as a weakness.
The journalist Jim Wilson’s Britain on the Brink, in turn, investigates the British posture during the crisis.
Wilson highlights that the Macmillan government kept the public in the dark and did not take any significant measures to prepare the state and society for a nuclear showdown, merely ordering the Royal Air Force to stay on a ‘high state of operational readiness’ , which was a status that paled in comparison to the level of alertness among the United States forces based in the UK at the time.
Throughout the book, Wilson carefully summarises the evolution of the British position by juxtaposing it with the development of the crisis in the main ‘theatre’ in the Caribbean.
In fact, once scrutinised, the main ‘puzzle’ seems more self-evident than the book acknowledges.
First, Macmillan’s choice would strike most readers as a prudent and reasonable one, for it is not clear how the UK would have been served by military and societal mobilisation, especially given the risk of mass panic that could follow the relevant measures.
Regardless, Britain on the Brink is a well-written and accessible account of how Britain kept calm and carried on.
By drawing attention to the weaknesses and shortcomings of the extant interpretations, these studies contribute to our understanding of the crisis that almost brought an end to civilisation as we know it.
Jesse Ferris’s main argument is that past scholars have overestimated the degree to which the 1967 Six-Day War was responsible for Egypt’s twilight years between 1967 and 1973 when its regional influence diminished considerably.
