In October 1962, the world held its collective breath while the United States and the Soviet Union stood at the brink of full-scale nuclear warfare.
Recent disclosures show that the prospect of annihilation was even closer than most participants realized.
At issue was the discovery that the Soviets were installing nuclear weapons in Cuba, which had been subject to an ongoing campaign of harassment, including the failed Bay of Pigs invasion, Operation Mongoose's sabotage and subversion activities, and plots to assassinate Fidel Castro.
Although the United States had nuclear missiles in foreign countries pointing at the Soviet Union, particularly in Turkey, United States officials were adamant that a Communist nuclear beachhead not be established in the Western hemisphere.
President Kennedy convened the so-called ExComm meetings in tight secrecy, and participants debated what course of action to take.
Most advised air strikes followed by an invasion of Cuba to take out the missiles.
After much deliberation, Kennedy opted for a naval blockade of Cuba coupled with demands that the Soviets withdraw the missiles, and also private communications with Khrushchev to try to defuse the tensions.
He also made assurances that the missiles in Turkey, which were becoming obsolete anyway with the advent of a nuclear-armed submarine fleet, would be quietly removed at a later date.
Many hawks in the United States were furious over Kennedy's failure to seize the event as a justification for invading Cuba and removing Castro.
Air Force Chief Curtis LeMay told Kennedy that this was ""almost as bad as the appeasement at Munich,"" referring to the British government's failure to confront Hitler over his invasion of Poland.
What neither Kennedy nor LeMay knew was that Soviet field commanders in Cuba had tactical nuclear weapons at their disposal, and an invasion would almost certainly have triggered a nuclear response.
This 1963 State Dept. memo for the President presents a plan for future policy in Cuba, following the missile crisis and the abandonment of Operation Mongoose.
Another memo, this one from the Defense Dept. in January 1963, outlines possible courses of action regarding Cuba in the aftermath of the missile crisis.
CIA Director McCone forwarded deep concerns about United States Security being expressed in Congress due to the administration's failure to anticipate the placement of nuclear missiles in Cuba.
This State Department volume covers arms control negotiations throughout the Kennedy presidency, including the missile crisis.
The Federation of American Scientists has a collection of reconnaissance photos taken in 1962 upon discovery of the missiles in Cuba.
Norton and Company, 1997 KennedyTheodore C SorensenHarper and Row, 1965 Cuba and the Missile CrisisCarlos LechugaOcean Press, 2001 © Mary Ferrell Foundation.
