A CIP catalog record for this book is available from the Library of Congress.
Assyrian Conquests 18 The empire created by the Assyrians stretches as far as Egypt.
It falls to the Babylonians, who in turn are conquered by Achaemenid Persia.
The Greco-Persian Wars 20 In the 5th century bce, the Persian empire makes two attempts to conquer Greece.
The Peloponnesian War 22 Complex conflict between Athens and its allies and the Spartan-led Peloponnesian League.
Conquests of Alexander 24 The spectacular campaigns of Alexander the Great of Macedon.
He subdues opposition in Greece, then carves out a vast empire stretching from Egypt to northern India.
ISSUS 26 Alexander's Successors 28 The wars between Alexander's generals to decide who will inherit his empire.
The Rise of Rome Roman wars against the Samnites and the Greek king Pyrrhus establish Roman domination of Italy by the 3rd century bce.
The titanic clashes between Rome and Carthage for control of the western Mediterranean.
The Gallic Wars 34 Julius Caesar's successful—and profitablecampaigns in Gaul and his two military expeditions to Britain.
ENGINEERING 36 Roman Civil War 38 Rome is riven by power struggles between rival generals, notably the civil wars between Caesar and Pompey, then Octavian and Antony.
The Late Roman Empire 46 The wars that lead to the fall of the Roman empire in the West.
The Warring States Period 48 Rival feudal states vie for domination of China.
In the 3rd century bce victory goes to the ""First Emperor"" Qin Shi Huangdi.
The Three Kingdoms 50 Fragmentation of China in the 3rd century ce following the collapse of the Han dynasty.
HELMETS 52 The Mauryan Empire 54 Chandragupta founds a north Indian empire.
The Ascent of Islam The great wave of conquests by the Arabs in the first century after the founding of Islam.
Frankish Expansion Battles of Charles Martel, Pepin, and Charlemagne, and the rise of the Carolingian dynasty.
Viking Raids and the Norman Conquest The voyages and raids of the Scandinavian Vikings from the 8th century and the rise of the Normans as a major European power.
The Rise of the Turks The Turkish tribal warriors employed by Islamic rulers assert their independence, in particular the Ghaznavids and the Seljuks.
The First Crusades The capture of Jerusalem in 1099 and the foundation of the crusader kingdoms.
Expulsion of the Crusaders from the Holy Land Loss of Jerusalem to Saladin.
WARRIOR SAINT Japan's Gempei Wars The power struggle between the Minamoto and Taira clans in 12th-century Japan.
Mongol Invasions The vast empire created by Genghis Khan and his successors.
Settled city-dwellers have no answer to the fast-moving Mongol horsemen.
The Wars of Kublai Khan 56 Genghis Khan's grandson completes the conquest of China, founding the Yuan dynasty.
Guelphs and Ghibellines 64 The struggles for control of Italy in the 12th and 13th centuries, from the wars of Frederick Barbarossa to the War of the Sicilian Vespers.
MERCENARIES Crusades in Europe 70 Crusades against heretics—the Albigensians in France and the Hussites in Bohemia—and against the pagan peoples of the Baltic region.
Anglo-Scottish Wars Confused conflict in which Scotland managed 72 to assert its independence from England in the 14th century.
The Spanish Reconquista The long series of wars in Spain and Portugal 74 that finally drove out the Muslim rulers from the Iberian Peninsula in 1492.
CRECY 76 The Hundred Years War Sporadic outbreaks of war in the 14th and 15th centuries over English kings' claims to the French throne.
SWORDS The End of the Byzantine Empire 80 The terminal decline of the Byzantium, successor to the Roman empire.
Fighting between Britain and France extends to India and North America.
A focal point of the war is the siege of the Russian Black Sea port of Sevastopol.
Early Confederate successes in the eastern theatre do not lead to a decisive victory.
It is also subject to vast popular uprisings such as the Taiping Rebellion.
First victory in modern times for a non-European country over a European power.
Bulgaria falls out with its allies over division of the territory taken from the Ottomans.
The Spanish Civil War In a rehearsal for World War II, Franco's Nationalists backed by Germany and Italy defeat Soviet-supported Republicans.
The Arab-lsraeli Conflict The wars of 1948, 1967, 1973, and hostilities that have continued to the present day.
The Falklands War Britain sends a large seaborne task force to recapture the islands from the Argentinians.
MACHINE GUNS World War II: The Turning Tide America's entry into the war, Allied success in North Africa, and Soviet victory at Stalingrad.
Wars in Afghanistan From the Soviet invasion of the 1980s, through the Taliban era, to the ongoing conflict of today.
Introduction and timeline Introduction and timeline Outbreak of World War I European powers line up for a long-awaited war.
In France, Germans are halted at the Marne, but defeat Russia at Tannenberg.
STALINGRAD The Chinese Civil War Victory of Mao's Communists over Jiang Jieshi's Nationalists is completed in 1949.
At the Somme and Verdun hundreds of thousands of lives are lost but offensives come to nothing.
The Battle of the Atlantic The threat of Germany's surface raiders is neutralized, but the U-boat campaign against British and United States merchant shipping puts the Allied war effort in grave peril.
The War in the Air Axis and Allied bombing campaigns against civilian populations as well as strategic targets.
United States and UN troops face Communist forces of North Korea and China.
The Wider War The progress of the war on other fronts, principally the Eastern Front, the Balkans, Gallipoli, the Middle East, and Italy.
The Occupation of Iraq After swiftly deposing Saddam Hussein, United States and UK have less success in countering insurgency.
Air and Sea Battles Germany's U-boat campaign and the battle of Jutland.
Hitler resists almost to the bitter of United States in war between North and South Vietnam.
United States fights Uprisings against European rule, notably in French back at Midway and Guadalcanal.
Atomic African states, in particular Angola and Congo. bombs dropped on Hiroshima and Nagasaki.
The Allies' greater resources and the arrival of United States troops in the line determine the war's outcome.
ARTILLERY The Russian Civil War Bolsheviks defeat White Army and other antirevolutionary forces, but lose war with Poland.
After swift initial conquests and victory at Wuhan in 1938, the war becomes a stalemate.
The earliest communities fought each other for control of food and land.
The first recorded wars between organized armies were fought by the city-states of Sumer in the third millennium bce.
Since then, states have habitually used war as a means of achieving their political ends when all peaceful options have been exhausted.
Scarcely a generation passes in any nation without some exposure to war.
Between 1500 bce and 1860 ce there were in the known world, on average, thirteen years of war to every one year of peace.
Virtually all frontiers between nations, races, and religions have been established by wars, and most previous civilizations and empires have expired because of them.
The carnage of the 20th century—two world wars and numerous instances of genocide—and the advent of nuclear weapons have made conflict between the major powers both undesirable and unthinkable.
It mobilizes our resources of love, compassion, courage, and self-sacrifice, but also our capacity for hate, xenophobia, brutality, and revenge.
One of the strengths of this impeccably researched, well-written and beautifully illustrated volume is that it covers more than 5,000 years of warfare—from the Sumerians to the modern day—in such a multi-faceted way.
It shows how armies were organized, and equipped; how battles, campaigns, and wars were won and lost; and how technology has gradually changed the face of battle from brutal hand-to-hand encounters with axes and swords to the use of impersonal computer-guided weaponry today.
It also looks at war from the perspective of politicians, generals, ordinary soldiers, and civilians.
And it charts the attempts—not always successful—to regulate war and make it less brutal.
Thomas Aquinas thought so, and those who fought for the Allies in World War II would surely agree.
Wars are sometimes a necessary evil—to topple dictators, curb aggression, and protect the weak.
If a nation is unwilling to fight in what it believes is a just cause, it will not deter others from going to war.
Jii f # A fey r rTt * « Assyrian triumph over the Elamites The Assyrian emperor Ashurbanipal commemorated his victories in reliefs on the walls of his palace at Nineveh.
Most of his army were spearmen and archers who fought on foot, while he and his elite warriors rode in chariots.
WAR IN THE ANCIENT 3000 bce-500 ce Mesopotamia, Egypt, and China saw the development of complex urban civilizations, whose rulers protected and increased their wealth by conquest and exacting tribute.
Their example was followed by the later empires of the Persians, Greeks, and Romans.
Fighting between different groups of people was frequent in societies of hunter-gatherers and Stone Age farmers.
If some encounters seemed designed to minimize casualties—two bands of villagers hurling missiles at one another from a distance—there is also evidence of genocidal warfare, aimed at the extermination of another people to take over its land and resources.
Warring states and empires As more complex societies developed, they provided the resources for largerscale armies to be deployed in sustained warfare.
Wherever early civilizations emerged—in Mesopotamia, Egypt, China, northern India, or Central America— military success was the basis of imperial power.
Triumph in war built up the ruler's prestige as well as his wealth in plunder, land, and slaves.
Early wars were fought exclusively on foot, but in Eurasia and Africa in the 2nd millennium bce Greek hoplites In their disciplined phalanxes protected by a wall of shields, Greek hoplites were a formidable infantry force.
They wore well-made bronze armor and helmets and their main weapon was the long, stabbing spear. many elite warriors rode in chariots, and in the following millennium soldiers also began to fight on horseback.
Rulers such as the pharaohs of New Kingdom Egypt and the kings of Assyria maintained substantial standing armies and campaigned over long distances.
They also developed the science of siege warfare, with effective machines for battering down or storming city walls.
From the 6th century bce Greek city-states such as Athens and Sparta fielded armies in which every citizen over a certain age was obliged to serve.
The soldiers fought in dense spear-armed infantry formations known as phalanxes.
In the eastern Mediterranean naval warfare developed as the Phoenicians and Greeks built fleets of oared galleys, with rams for sinking their opponents.
By combining an elite cavalry force with an infantry phalanx, the Macedonian Alexander the Great conquered the mighty Persian empire and extended Macedonian-Greek rule from Egypt to India.
The might of Rome The subsequent rise of Rome as a major power was initially built on the Greek citizen-soldier concept, although the Roman army was transformed into a permanent force of professional soldiers during the 1st century bce.
The Romans extended their rule over a wide-ranging empire through military skill and ruthless willpower.
The superior flexibility of their legion infantry, armed with sword and javelin, rendered the phalanx obsolete.
Scythian horseman It was among the nomadic societies of Central Asia that horses were first domesticated and where they were first ridden in battle.
The fall of empires The larger empires proved, in the long run, difficult to sustain.
Varieties of catapult and crossbow— especially highly developed in China— gave imperial armies a technological edge, as did their engineering skills.
But neither the Roman empire nor that of Han China could ever guarantee its frontiers against incursions by tribal warbands and nomadic peoples.
Indeed, the armies of both empires were often defeated by steppe horsemen in battle, although they had considerable success in drawing these so-called ""barbarians"" into their service.
The ancient empires also suffered from the tendency of their armies to fragment into independent sources of power, leading to destructive civil wars between rival generals or regional warlords.
C.900 BCE The rule of the warlike Assyrians extends over most of Mesopotamia and Lebanon.
C.500 BCE The city of Rome begins to extend its control over the neighboring Latin-speaking tribes, becoming a local power center.
Pyrrhus fails to prevent Rome from taking control of the Greek cities of southern Italy.
C.2300 BCE Sargon of Akkade builds an empire by conquest in Mesopotamia.
The legions, a citizen militia, abandon the infantry phalanx for more flexible tactics.
C.700-500 BCE Phoenicians and Greeks develop specialist oared warships—penteconters, biremes, and triremes— some armed with rams.
Warfare is on a large scale, with the widespread use of crossbows and heavy siege weapons.
C.1700 BCE War chariots drawn by horses are introduced into the Middle East by the steppe pastoralists of Central Asia.
Porus's use of war elephants impresses the Macedonians, who later imitate it.
Pharaohs such as Thutmosis III (reigned 1479-1425) and Ramesses II fight campaigns of conquest.
The fighting continues until 276, by which time the Ptolemys rule in Egypt, the Seleucids in Persia, and the Antigonids in Macedonia and Greece.
The war advances the transformation of the legions into a professional standing army.
After a naval defeat at Actium in 31, Antony and Cleopatra flee to Egypt, where both commit suicide.
Julius Caesar campaigns in Gaul, invading Britain on two occasions and defeating the Gallic leader Vercingetorix at Alesia.
Under his rule the Roman legions take on a permanent structure. if Battle of Actium, key victory in Octavian's rise to power 1 09 BCE Han China conquers northern Korea, destroying the state of Wiman Joseon.
Cassius are defeated by Mark 43 CE Antony and Octavian at The armies of Han China Philippi.
Rome is ruled by crush nationalist uprising a triumvirate. in Vietnam led by the Trung sisters.
He leads them on aggressive campaigns, including incursions into the Roman empire from 441.
Rome is again plunged into civil war as legions support different candidates for the imperial throne.
The revolt is crushed with great severity; most Jews in Judaea are killed, enslaved, or exiled.
He stabilizes the empire, creating the Tetrarchy , with two emperors and two junior co-emperors.
They also warred with hunter-gatherers and nomadic pastoralists who preyed upon their settled societies.
WALLED TOWNS As societies became larger and more complex, warfare similarly increased in sophistication.
The earliest evidence of defensive fortifications was 1“ /''X The number of bodies ' found by archeologists at Jebel Sahaba in Egypt.
Many had been killed by arrows and were probably victims of warfare conducted some 13,500 years ago. found at the ancient town of Jericho near the Jordan River, where walls were built around 8000 bce.
In the first half of the third millennium bce the first cities emerged in Mesopotamia and Egypt, as well as in the Indus Valley and China.
Ancient arrowheads The Ancient Egyptians typically tipped their arrows and spears with flint, copper, or bronze.
Shapes varied from barbed, which were hard to extract from a wound, to leaf-shaped.
Wars in Sumer and Egypt The valleys of the Euphrates and Tigris rivers in Mesopotamia and the Nile in Egypt were the birthplaces of hierarchical societies, with powerful rulers who used warfare to found empires at the expense of weaker neighbors.
War brought a rich reward in plunder and slaves, as well as glory to the victorious leader.
T he first recorded wars between organized armies were fought by the city-states of Sumer in southern Mesopotamia in around 3000-2500 bce.
Even the largest of these states was only capable of fielding a small army for a short campaign.
The bulk of their forces consisted of helmeted foot soldiers armed with spears.
There were also trundling solid-wheeled carts drawn by asses that carried aristocratic warriors or archers to the battlefield.
Conflicts between city-states were motivated by disputes over territory and scarce water supplies.
A number of inscriptions, including one on a monument known as the Stele of the Vultures, record wars fought between the aggressive city of Lagash and its neighbor, Umma, around 2500 bce.
The stele shows Lagash's ruler, Eannatum, advancing at the head of his troops, who have adopted a tight-packed infantry formation.
According to the accompanying inscription, Eannatum was wounded by an arrow in the fighting but triumphed over Umma.
There is no mistaking Lagash's joy in the slaughter of war, for the stele depicts carrion birds feasting on the entrails of the enemy dead.
Yet it is doubtful that these early Sumerian wars took a heavy toll, even on the lives of the defeated.
On the other hand, the deaths of foot soldiers are unrecorded and these may have been far more numerous.
The Akkadian Empire The rulers of Lagash were not unambitious—there is a record of a military expedition to distant Elam in present-day western Iran—but it was not until the campaigns of Sargon of Akkade around 2300 bce that empireEgyptian sword This double-edged copper sword was crafted for an elite soldier during the New Kingdom era in Ancient Egypt.
It was a thrusting weapon, worn on a belt around the warrior's waist. building became the impulse behind war-making.
Sargon seized power in Kish, a Mesopotamian city well to the north of Lagash, and then founded his own power base at Akkade.
From there he imposed his rule on the other Mesopotamian city-states as far south as the Persian Gulf, and then continued his career of conquest northwest to the Mediterranean coast of Syria and eastern Anatolia, and east to Elam.
If his inscriptions are to be believed, Sargon maintained a standing army of 5,400 soldiers and won 34 battles during a reign that lasted over 40 years.
Its last great leader, Naram-Sin, ruled from the Taurus Mountains in the north to the south of the Persian Gulf.
Around 1760 bce Hammurabi, ruler of Babylon, defeated the Elamites and then subjugated the cities of Mesopotamia to create an empire from Syria to the Persian Gulf.
Territorial pharaohs Another center for the development of imperial warfare was Egypt.
In the Middle Kingdom era (about 2040 to 1785 bce) Egyptian pharaohs campaigned southward into Nubia and built strings of fortresses to define and defend their gL conquests.
Their weaponry included bows, spears, maces, and throwing sticks made of wood, stone, copper, and bronze.
The Middle Kingdom ended in a troubled period when Egypt was dominated by the Asiatic Hyksos, but after this the pharaohs of Stele of Sargon of Akkade Naram-Sin, ruler of the Akkadian empire, is represented as a god trampling mercilessly upon the bodies of his fallen enemies and revered by his soldiers. the New Kingdom, dated from 1570 bce, resumed and extended the Egyptian tradition of imperial conquest.
The civilizations of west Asia and the eastern Mediterranean almost certainly learned the use of war chariots from nomadic pastoralists who occasionally irrupted from the steppe into the lands of settled agriculture and cities.
It was probably from the same source that they adopted the composite bow as a more powerful alternative to the simple self-bow.
The 17 campaigns of pharaoh Thutmosis III recorded by his royal scribes ranged from as far south as the fourth cataract of the Nile in Nubia to Syria and the Euphrates in the north.
Ramesses II, in a long reign from 1279 to 1213 bce, battled with a rival power, the Hittites, for control of Palestine and Syria— the Hittites expanding to the south from their native lands in Anatolia.
The common soldiers of the Egyptian New Kingdom were a mixture of volunteers and conscripts, some of them long-serving professional soldiers rewarded for their services with a grant of land.
New recruits were trained in fighting technique, drill, and maneuvers at ""boot camps,"" where beatings to instill discipline were common.
The corps of bowmen was an elite, the use of the composite bow in particular requiring exceptional skill.
The aristocracy and the pharaoh himself rode in chariots that were armed with a bow or mace.
The soldiers were supported by administrative staff that kept records, organized supplies of Unknown Akkadian ruler This copper head was unearthed during excavations at Nineveh.
It was made at the time of Sargon of Akkade, and is often given that name. in some detail.
Around 1460 bce Thutmosis III led a punitive expedition against the rebellious princedoms in Palestine.
Marching 12‘A miles a day across deserts and mountains, the Egyptians emerged in front of the city of Megiddo in force, catching their enemies unprepared.
The battle that followed later was a swift rout, the enemy bolting to seek safety behind the city walls while the rampant Egyptians plundered their abandoned camp.
ATTRIBUTED TO PHARAOH RAMESSES III, FROM THE TEMPLE OF MEDINET HABU AFTER By the 12th century bce the Hittite Empire had collapsed and Egyptian power was on the wane.
RISE OF ASSYRIA V Egypt underwent political disintegration that destroyed its unity and left It prey to invaders.
The country was conquered by the Kushites in the 8th century, the Assyrians in the 7th century, and the Persians in the 6th century bce.
In Mesopotamia the Babylonian empire founded by Hammurabi was overrun by the Hittites around 1530 bce.
It was overtaken by Assyria, a city-state on the northern Tigris that, by the 13th century bce, had developed into a major power.
ASHURBANIPAL food and weaponry for their campaigns, and ensured wells were dug along lines of march.
Wall paintings depicting battles of the period show medical personnel attending to the wounded.
Egyptian warfare had religious sanction from the god Amun and was fought with the ruthlessness of a crusade.
Soldiers were known to collect body parts from slain enemies while prisoners were sometimes impaled or burned alive.
Egyptian campaigns Because of the records the Egyptians kept of their campaigns, it is possible to reconstruct a few military actions A more tightly contested battle was fought between the armies of Ramesses II and Hittite ruler Muwatalli at Kadesh around 1275 bce in the course of a war for control of Lebanon and Syria.
Both sides were able to deploy large numbers of chariots—possibly 2,000 of the lighter two-man Egyptian vehicles were involved and 3,500 heavier three-man Hittite chariots.
The Hittites achieved surprise, attacking the Egyptians while their forces were divided.
But the massed Hittite chariots were halted on the brink of victory by a bold counterattack, led by the pharaoh himself, in which the maneuverability of the Egyptian chariots and the skill of their archers with the composite bow carried the day.
This battle was followed by the first recorded peace treaty, a settlement that reflected the even balance between Hittite and Egyptian forces.
The later history of the Egyptian New Kingdom is dominated by defensive wars.
The occasion for the first recorded ""naval battle"" in 1176 bce was fought in the mouth of the Nile Delta between these raiders traveling by sea and a flotilla of Egyptian river vessels packed with soldiers.
By then, however, the power of Egypt and its armies was falling into steep decline.
TECHNOLOGY EGYPTIAN WAR CHARIOT Built of wood and leather, the Egyptian war chariot was a lightweight vehicle that was designed for maximum speed and maneuverability.
It was pulled by a team of two horses and, with widely spaced spoked wheels and the axle well to the rear, could execute very tight turns.
The two-man crew consisted of a driver and a warrior who shot arrows or threw javelins.
The charioteers were supported by armed runners who sprinted alongside the vehicles on the battlefield.
The chariot warriors were wealthy aristocrats and would sometimes embellish their vehicles with precious metals.
Even without this extra expense, chariots were costly to build and maintain.
While the Hittites used their heavier threeman chariots as a shock force in massed charges, the Egyptians seem to have used their chariots in a looser harassing and skirmishing role in support of the infantry.
CASKET DETAIL OF TUTANKHAMUN RIDING A WAR CHARIOT 17 BEFORE Assyria was originally a relatively small Mesopotamian kingdom that ruled the area around the cities of Ashur and Nineveh on the Tigris River.
ESTABLISHED TRADITION Assyrian Conquests The Assyrians created a powerful, brutal army as a tool for campaigns of conquest and sustained their empire through the exploitation of the conquered.
Rulers such as Tiglath-Pileser III and Ashurbanipal were particularly fearsome military leaders with a clear-headed sense of the efficacy of terror.
In its early history, Ashur was subject to conquest by more powerful Mesopotamian states.
The Assyrians had, however, a tradition of war-making, carrying out expeditions The number of campaigns carried out by King TiglathZ Pileser 1 against the Aramaeans, according to an ancient Assyrian inscription. to subdue the neighboring mountain peoples who raided their territory.
Their soldiers were part-timers, who could only campaign for short periods before returning to work in the fields.
ASSYRIAN EXPANSIONISM From the reign of Ashur-uballit I Assyrian military and diplomatic action became more expansive.
Once subsidiary to Babylon, the Assyrians became its rulers after their king, Tikulti-ninurta I, sacked the city in 1235 bce.
Assyrian power continued to wax and wane, subject to Babylonian resurgences and incursions by peoples from outside Mesopotamia.
An early peak was reached under Tiglath-Pileser I , but by the end of his reign the Assyrians were again under pressure, this time from invading Aramaeans, it was not until the late 1 Oth century bce that the Assyrian drive for empire resumed with renewed vigor.
Not only were the frontiers of the empire extended south and east to include southern Mesopotamia, Palestine, and part of eastern Anatolia, but the Assyrian army was reorganized into a fighting machine of unprecedented efficiency and ruthlessness.
Instead of levies raised for short-term service, Tiglath-Pileser III preferred to form a standing army.
The majority of the foot soldiers, who necessarily made up the numerical bulk of the army, were a mix of Assyrians and foreigners— mercenaries employed for their specialist military skills, contingents supplied by tributary states of the empire, and prisoners captured in the wars of conquest.
They were equipped with bows, spears, shields, and armor by the Scythian warrior in action The Scythians were among the steppe nomads who taught the Assyrians to ride horses into combat.
The Assyrians gave pride of place to missile weapons—in particular, powerful composite bows and slingshots.
Each archer was accompanied by a spearman who held a large wicker shield to defend the bowman against enemy missiles and who would also protect him against close-quarters attack.
Assyrian territory At its greatest extent, the Assyrian empire included all of Mesopotamia, southwestern Anatolia, western Iran, and the entire eastern seaboard of the Mediterranean.
Key Assyria under Ashur-dan II Territory added by death of Shalmaneser III Territory added by death of Sargon II Territory added by death of Ashurbanipal Greatest extent of Neo-Babylonian empire M Major battle or siege The elite of the army were the native Assyrians who formed the corps of charioteers and, with the passage of time, the cavalry.
The Assyrians developed heavy four-horse chariots with a four-man crew, probably two elite warriors and their shield-bearers, the latter also responsible for driving the vehicle.
Used en masse, these chariots constituted a formidable shock force on the battlefield.
The advantages of cavalry were something the Assyrians probably learned from their contact with nomadic horsemen such as the Scythians, who fought as skirmishers using the composite bow fired from horseback.
Under Ashurbanipal Assyrian armies campaigned deep into southern Egypt, destroying the city of Thebes in 663.
Yet even during AshurbanipaTs reign the pressures on Assyria were growing.
In the new imperial heartland of Cyrus the Great, Parsa , lived tribes who become known to the world as the Persians.
Cyrus built a grand columned palace around great gardens at Pasargadae.
Assyrian bowman An Assyrian archer draws his bow, protected by his shield-bearer.
Invented by steppe nomads, the composite bow was made from several pieces of wood.
Whether in combat or its aftermatlr, they readily practiced massacre and despoliation.
The pressures of empire But the strains of maintaining a large empire with restive subject peoples were eventually to prove too much for Assyria.
Roads were built to allow the easy movement of armies and a post system was created for rapid and effective military communications.
Conquest itself fed the military machine, giving control of strategic resources—iron from Anatolia for weapons, horses for the chariots, and cavalry from western Iran—and generating a supply of manpower and of wealth in the form of tribute or plunder.
Domination was maintained by the exercise of terror against those who dared to rebel.
The The origins of Ancient Greek civilization are in many ways obscure, but the Greeks themselves confidently traced their history back to the era of the Trojan War.
THE POWER OF GREECE The poet Homer's epic poem, the Iliad, probably created in the 8th century bce, tells the story of the Creek siege of the city of Troy.
Historians have surmised that, although mythologized, the Iliad refers to a real event, probably a war between the Mycenaeans, who flourished in Greece from1500 to 1200 bce, and the Anatolian Hittites.
The site of Troy has been tentatively identified in the west of modern-day Turkey.
The Mycenaeans fought with bronze weapons and _ chariots, in the manner of their time.
Homer describes a style of warfare in which single combat between elite warriors was common, but also the use of missile weapons and group combat with spear and shield.
The disappearance of Mycenaean civilization in the 12th century bce was followed by a period of disruption, which is often referred to as the Greek Dark Ages.
Out of this obscurity Greek city-states such as Athens, Thebes, and Sparta began to re-emerge around the 8th century bce.
PERSIAN DOMINANCE By the 6th century bce the Persians could claim with much justification to come from the heart of civilization, compared with the Greeks who lived on its periphery.
At Marathon, Thermopylae, and Salamis, Greek forces demonstrated their skill and courage against superior opposition.
His predecessors had conquered Anatolia and had gained control of the Ionian Greeks who lived on the eastern side of the Aegean.
At the start of the 5th century bce the Ionian cities rose in revolt against Persian rule.
Darius sent an army and a navy—the ships supplied by another of his subject peoples, the Phoenicians—to crush the revolt.
The Ionians received some support from Athens and Eretria but they were still humbled.
Carried forward by the momentum of this campaign, the Persians decided to extend their empire so it would cover the Aegean islands and mainland Greece.
When Athens and Sparta rejected a demand for formal submission to Persian authority, Darius mounted a seaborne expedition to bring the city-states to heel.
Greek resistance At this time Athens and Sparta were exceptional societies.
Over the previous century Athens had evolved its own democratic system of government and Persian soldiers at Susa This frieze from the palace of the Persian king Darius I at Susa depicts soldiers on parade.
Sparta was a militarized society in which male citizens were raised as soldiers and lived in barracks from the age of 20.
On land both Spartans and Athenians fought chiefly as armored infantry, or hoplites.
Although the Greeks did also employ auxiliaries equipped with bows and slingshots as skirmishers, the focus on the tight-knit phalanx of citizen-soldiers made their armies contrast starkly with the forces of the Persian empire.
Bowmen were a vital element in their style of warfare, which gave missiles primacy over close combat, as were cavalry and chariots.
Persian armies were large and well organized, operating under professional generals, and their campaigns were well planned with due attention to logistics.
The Athenians appealed to Sparta for support, but the Spartans claimed to be unable to dispatch soldiers immediately for religious reasons.
Rather than wait for Sparta to finish its religious festival, Athens sent its hoplites to challenge the Persians while they were still on the beach.
The Greeks were outnumbered by at least two to one, but they formed up in phalanxes and attacked.
The onrush of the Athenian infantry turned the battle into a close-quarters melee in which Persian archery and horses could play no effective part.
The shocked invaders extricated themselves with difficulty and at heavy cost in lives.
They also provided an opportunity for display with their fine horsehair crests.
This time there was to be no hastily organized seaborne expedition, but a wellplanned, full-scale land invasion with naval support.
The preparation of the invasion route by Xerxes's engineers was astonishingly thorough.
They built two pontoon bridges across the narrow but treacherous straits of the Hellespont so that the massive army could march from Asia into Europe.
They also dug _ a canal cutting across an isthmus by Mount Athos in Macedonia, so the Persian fleet that was accompanying the army on its journey would not have to sail around a notoriously dangerous promontory.
Bronze-sheathed ram Meticulous plans The Persian preparations took four years, giving Athens and Sparta plenty of time to look to their defenses.
Most of the city-states in northern Greece gave their allegiance to Persia, but the city-states of the Peloponnese allied themselves with the Athenians and Spartans.
Themistocles, a political leader in Athens, persuaded his fellow citizens to devote the wealth from a newly discovered silver mine to building a large fleet Mast and sail not \ carried into battle of triremes.
It marched south down the coast toward Athens, with a fleet of more than 1,000 war galleys and supply ships following offshore.
The Athenians persuaded their allies to advance north to meet the invaders.
The Greek fleet fought an indecisive battle with the Persians off Cape Artemisium, while a force of 7,000 hoplites and skirmishers commanded by the Spartan ruler Leonidas took up a strong defensive position in a narrow pass at Thermopylae.
There, they fought a holding action for three days, the restricted battlefield preventing the Persians exploiting their vast superiority in numbers.
Eventually, the Persians found a path through the mountains that brought them down on the rear of the Greek position.
Leonidas and the cream of his hoplites fought on heroically until they were annihilated.
Destruction of Athens As the Persians continued their advance, Athens was evacuated, its population carried to the safety of the island of Salamis, where the Greek fleet was now stationed.
The Persian army sacked and then occupied Athens, as the Greek army withdrew further to the south so that it could defend the Peloponnese.
The Spartans were keen to pull back the fleet as well, but Themistocles was insistent that the triremes stand and fight.
After defeating Xerxes's invasion force the Greeks launched a counter-offensive, but the city-states were often as eager to fight one another as to attack the Persians.
FREEDOM FROM PERSIA The offensive against Persia was led by Athens, which formed the Delian League of city-states to prosecute the war.
The main goal was to free the Aegean islands and the Ionian Greek cities of Anatolia from Persian rule.
The Egyptian expedition was a disaster, but in general Athens was successful in extending its own power and weakening Persian influence in Anatolia and the Aegean.
As a result of its participation in these wars of Greek against Greek, Persia regained control of the Ionian cities and part of the Aegean.
THOUSAND Persian soldiers were killed in the battle of Marathon. intercept a wrongly anticipated Greek withdrawal.
When battle was finally joined off Salamis, the reduced Persian fleet was routed, smashed by the rams of the rapidly maneuvering triremes with their skillful teams of oarsmen.
Xerxes abandoned all hope of victory that year and withdrew northward to winter his quarters.
Called away for other imperial duties, Xerxes left for the east with part of his army, leaving his general, Mardonius, to continue the campaign the following year with the remainder.
The Greek allies, after many hours of bickering among themselves, gathered all their manpower resources to field an army probably numbering 80,000, not greatly inferior to the force available to Mardonius.
At the same time, a seaborne raid destroyed the remnants of the Persian fleet beached at Mycale.
The original purpose of the league was to fight the invasion of the Persians, but it turned into an informal Athenian empire with the other league members providing troops and tribute for Athens to use as it wished.
Cities that rebelled were ruthlessly crushed by Athenian military action.
The wealth extracted from the league during this period underpinned the Golden Age of Athens under the leadership of Pericles, and the Athenian statesman believed that the interests of the city lay in developing trade around the Mediterranean.
The Spartans, traditionally acknowledged as the leading military power in Greece, were affronted by the rise of Athens and turned the Peloponnesian League of city-states, which they led, into a counter-balance to Athenian power.
T he fragmentation of the Greek world into independent city-states presented many opportunities for conflict—disputes over allegiance, territorial boundaries, and affronts to honor.
The city-state of Megara revolted against its overlord, Corinth, a member of the Spartan-led Peloponnesian League; Athens backed Megara.
Thebes aspired to leadership of the cities of Boetia, a role denied it by Athens; the Spartans backed Theban aspirations.
The Athenians backed the Corcyrians and sent a force of triremes to prevent the Corinthians from re-imposing their rule.
Pericles devised a strategy based upon the naval power of Athens and its Delian League allies.
Withdrawing within the walls of their city, the Athenians would survive sustained by supplies brought in by sea, while using their fleet to raid the shipping and coasts of the Peloponnesian League states.
Five times the Spartans rampaged through the territory around Athens, but without decisive effect.
The Athenians made good use of their naval strength by establishing a base at the town of Pylos on the Peloponnesian coast, from which they raided Spartan territory and encouraged revolt among the Spartan helots.
The warfare was characterized by the similarity between the opposing sides, which fought with essentially the same equipment and tactics.
The hoplites were supported by | large numbers of skirmishers, the peltasts, men of lower social status who used missile weapons—bows, slingshots, and javelins.
Campaigns were short because part-time soldiers needed to return to their farms.
A fleet was far more expensive to maintain than an army, and made heavy demands on manpower.
A trireme required a crew of 200, most of them experienced oarsmen, although they were typically lower class citizens rather than hoplites.
The naval dominance of Athens depended on its superior financial resources and its skilled population of seafarers Maximum facial protection This example of an early Greek helmet follows the shape of the skull, and is made from a single piece of bronze. GREEK PHALANX The armored Greek hoplite infantry fought in a tight formation called a phalanx.
Carrying shields and spears wielded overarm, the hoplites usually advanced close enough together for each man's right flank to be protected by the shield of the comrade to his left.
When phalanx met phalanx, opposing hoplites stabbed at one another from behind their shield wall or clashed shield to shield in a shoving match.
Most casualties occurred when a phalanx broke up, exposing the hoplites to piecemeal slaughter. and boat-builders.
As on land, there were no adequate supply arrangements, triremes beaching regularly to forage or buy food from coastal towns.
At this point the Athenians extended the %• LV’:■ W',r;V « war into a new theater, with disastrous consequences.
Supported by a relatively small Spartan force under Gylippus, the Syracusans resisted an Athenian siege for two years.
After a failed breakout attempt ended in the destruction of the majority of their warships, the Athenians vainly tried to escape overland.
Harassed by cavalry and light troops with bows and javelins, the remnants of the expeditionary force surrendered, ending their lives as slaves laboring in Sicilian stone quarries.
They made an alliance with Persia, which provided funding to build a fleet that could compete for naval supremacy.
Athens was in trouble, riven by political disputes and unable to make good the loss of experienced oarsmen and sailors at Syracuse.
Under Lysander, the Spartan fleet seized the straits and, at the battle of Aegospotami, crushed an Athenian fleet sent to win them back.
THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR AFTER The Spartan victory in the Peloponnesian War did not bring peace or unity to the Greek city-states.
WAR RESUMES Ten years after the end of the Peloponnesian War, a new conflict broke out.
The Corinthian War set Sparta against Corinth, Athens, Thebes, and Argos.
These allies were dependent upon the support of Persia, which re-imposed its rule on the Ionian cities of Anatolia.
Thebes aspired to leadership in its own region, Boeotia, but this was resisted by Sparta.
In reaction to the threat of Theban hegemony, Athens aligned itself with Sparta.
As a young man he had lived in Thebes, where he had witnessed a change in Greek warfare; professional soldiers were replacing the part-time citizen hoplites, and cavalry and skirmishers were playing an increasingly important role.
He assumed leadership of the Greek cities grouped in the League of Corinth and began preparations for an invasion of the Persian empire.
When this plan failed and Alexander headed eastward across Anatolia in 333, Darius advanced to meet him with a large army.
Alexander's instinct was to seek out, engage, and destroy his enemy's army, whatever the odds.
The two forces met late in the year at Issus near the Syrian-Turkish border.
The battle ended in a shock defeat for the Persian king, leaving the eastern Mediterranean open to Macedonian conquest.
The face of Alexander Alexander took great care to control his public image.
The sculptor Lysippos was engaged to create an idealized image of the conqueror that was then imitated by all subsequent artists. led the cavalry and elite infantry units in a thrust through the Persian center where Darius himself was positioned.
The emperor fled and Alexander turned his cavalry back to overwhelm the army abandoned by its leader.
Consolidating the empire The victory at Gaugamela and Darius's subsequent murder by his own satraps opened the way for Alexander to claim the succession to the Persian imperial throne.
Three years of campaigning were required to establish his control over the satrapies of Bactria and Sogdiana further to the east.
Just as he had adopted local symbols of power in Egypt, Alexander now took on some Conquests of Alexander Alexander of Macedon was a military leader endowed with skill, daring, and ambition.
Only 32 years old when he died, he created an empire that stretched from Greece and Egypt to northern India.
His heroic campaigns of conquest influenced imitators as distant as Napoleon and Hitler.
It was heavily damaged by fire at that time, whether deliberately or accidentally is not certain.
Through the following year Alexander practiced siege warfare, overcoming the resistance of the coastal cities of Tyre and Gaza and punishing their inhalritants with enslavement or massacre for the trouble they had caused.
He founded the city of Alexandria as a future capital for his Egyptian realm.
Recruited mostly from Persia's central and eastern domains, this was a predominantly Asiatic army, with Indian war elephants, Scythian horsemen, and chariots.
Alexander devised a battleplan that would allow the shock effect of his Companion cavalry to negate the numerical advantage of the Persian host.
Aged 18 he had led the Macedonian cavalry charge at the battle of Chaeronea.
His initial moves as king were decisive and ruthless, killing his main rival for power in Macedonia and crushing a rebellion by the city of Thebes.
The army that Alexander led across the Hellespont into Persian-ruled Asia Minor was a hybrid force.
The cavalry , whom Alexander led in person into battle, were Macedonians.
Thessaly provided light cavalry, Thrace javelin-throwers, and Crete archers.
The first victory of his campaign was won at Granicus in western Anatolia, against a Persian satrap whose army contained a large contingent of Greek mercenaries.
Alexander then proceeded to liberate the Greek cities of the region from Persian rule—even if they did not want liberation, which some did not.
An underestimated threat In Persepolis the Persian king, Darius III, at first perceived only an irritating local disturbance on the western edge of his vast empire.
He launched a naval counter-offensive in the Aegean and plotted to raise Athens and other Greek cities in revolt against Alexander.
Nonetheless, his conquests left a long-term legacy of political and cultural changes.
CULTURAL INTEGRATION Later commentators viewed Alexander's conquests as a means of extending Greek civilization throughout the world.
He envisaged integrating his empire ethnically—for example, by marrying his Macedonian officers to Persian wives and training young Persians to fight as hoplites—while at the same time imposing Greek culture and values.
Ptolemy took Egypt, Seleucus gained Syria and Iran, and Antigonus controlled Anatolia, but they 7 Length of the Macedonian sarissa spear in metres, equivalent to 23 feet.
The battle of Issus This Roman mosaic representation of the battle of Issus was probably copied from a 4th-century bce wall painting.
Alexander and Darius lock eyes across a battlefield dominated by sarissa spears.
Alexander's territory Alexander's great desire was to wage war on behalf of all Greeks.
In only ten years after succeeding Philip II, his father, Alexander's army conquered much of Asia, as well as parts of northern India, North Africa, and Europe. of the customs and dress of the Persian court.
He won a grueling battle against the rampaging chariots and war elephants of King Porus at the Hydaspes , but his soldiers were becoming exhausted and set a limit to his conquests by insisting on turning back at the Beas River in the Punjab.
Then he marched across the Gedrosian desert. in present-day Iran, back to Persia, a mistake that cost thousands their lives to dehydration and exhaustion.
Alexander was still full of plans for further expeditions and campaigns, but his health had suffered due to his battle wounds and from the strains of years of campaigning.
In 323, a month short of his 33rd birthday, he died in Babylon—rumor said of poisoning, but it was probably of a fever. all lacked his vision.
They abandoned his projects for integrating Persians and other ethnic groups into the upper ranks of the empire, ruling as Macedonians over conquered peoples.
However, the influence of Hellenic culture and the Greek language was extended deep into Asia; for example, Indian sculptures of Buddha reflected Greek representations of Apollo.
It was a triumph of the attacking spirit of the Macedonian cavalry and the inspirational leadership of Alexander, a warrior who always led from the front.
T he battle took place near the modem Turkish border on the strategically crucial route to the Levant coast.
Advancing south into Persian territory, Alexander's forces were surprised to find Darius's army behind them.
The Persians took up a defensive position behind a steep-banked stream.
Against a numerically superior enemy, it was important for Alexander not to be outflanked.
He stretched his line thinly across a 1.6-mile front from the Mediterranean shore on the east to the foothills of the mountains inland.
When the Persians sent men into the mountains to bring them down in the Macedonians' rear, Alexander dispatched his Thracian skirmishers, skilled in the use of the javelin, to block their path. hypaspists—elite hoplite infantry.
Like Alexander's army, the Persian forces were ethnically diverse, including Greek mercenaries forming a phalanx alongside Persian infantry in the center.
While Alexander, on horseback with spear and sword, led the Companion cavalry, Darius commanded from behind the front line, positioned in a chariot among his elite imperial guard.
Order of battle On the left of Alexander's line were his Thessalian horsemen, unarmored light cavalry.
The infantry phalanx in the center consisted primarily of Macedonians armed with the long, two-handed pike known as the sarissa.
Because of the stretching of the line, the phalanx was far shallower than the usual 16 ranks.
Alexander's armored Macedonian horsemen, the Companion cavalry, held pride of place on the right of the line, supported by Greek Macedonian triumph Alexander ordered a general advance.
The tight formation of the Macedonian infantry phalanx lost cohesion moving forward over rough ground and crossing the stream.
Darius's infantry were able to penetrate gaps in the bristling barrier of spears and to cut and stab at men in the exposed core of the phalanx.
But on the left the Thessalian horsemen performed well against the strongest concentration of Darius's cavalry, while on the right Alexander led a charge of the Companion cavalry that swept all before it.
Wheeling in from the flank, Alexander's horsemen bore down upon the rear of the enemy infantry who were driven onto the anvil of the Macedonian phalanx.
Much of the infantry was trapped and cut down where it stood, while large numbers of fleeing cavalry and skirmishers were pursued and massacred.
Roxanneresented by his Macedonian followers because she was Bactrian—was pregnant.
Otherwise the only candidate from Alexander's family was a feeble bastard half-brother, Arrhidaeus.
Alexander had adopted the Persian system of satrapies to rule his empire.
The Macedonian generals continued this system, authorizing various of their number to run different parts of the empire as satraps, while the aging Antipater became viceroy of Macedonia.
EASTERN MEDITERRANEAN Alexander's Successors For 50 years after his death, Alexander the Great's successors, known in Greek as the Diadochi, fought over his inheritance.
Alexander's generals hardly needed this invitation to a power struggle after his death.
Macedonian aristocrats were hard-fighting, hard-drinking men, and naturally quarrelsome.
At first all assumed that one man would end up controlling the whole empire, and several believed their chances were good.
Ptolemy gained appointment as satrap of Egypt and carried off the body of Alexander with him.
Embalmed and displayed, the corpse became a great tourist attraction and brought Ptolemy much prestige.
Based in Anatolia, Antigonus One-Eye, a bluff old warrior of limitless energy, also set about staking a claim to the succession.
The settlement sketched in Babylon on Alexander's death swiftly unraveled.
Perdiccas, self-appointed regent of the empire, tried in vain to assert his authority over Ptolemy and Antigonus.
He invaded Egypt but his troops were Ruins of Apamea in Syria Apamea was one of many Hellenistic cities in Asia founded or enlarged by Seleucus I Vast stables were built here to house his war elephants and cavalry horses.
ALEXANDER'S LAST WORDS ACCORDING TO DIODORUS SICULUS, 1ST CENTURY BCE ALEXANDER'S SUCCESSORS Macedonian rivals The coins bear the heads of Pompey I , Seleucus I , and Demetrius Poliorcetes, son of Antigonus , the three principal generals who fought to inherit the vast empire created by Alexander the Great. lost in the Nile Delta, many becoming food for crocodiles; the regent himself was murdered by his discontented followers.
She was then herself killed, along with Alexander's son and wife, after Cassander, son of the now deceased viceroy Antipater, seized control of Macedonia.
Macedonian generals competed with scant regard for the inhabitants of the lands they fought over.
The only subjects whose support they actively sought were those of the Greek cities, which were also the most troublesome source of intermittent rebellion against Clash of the pretenders At first Antigonus looked the likely winner.
He gained control of most of the empire in Asia and built a fleet in Phoenician shipyards to extend his dominance on land to the sea.
With Ptolemy's aid the Rhodeans held out, despite Antigonus's deployment of the latest siege engines, including giant catapults and siege towers.
This setback did not prevent the Antigonids invading Greece and threatening Macedonia.
By the usual logic of multi-sided power struggles, the success of Antigonus and Demetrius drove the other Diodachi to combine.
They decided to defend Macedonia indirectly, by an offensive in Asia that Antigonus and Demetrius could not ignore.
While Ptolemy snapped up Palestine and Syria, Cassander, Lysimachus, and Seleucus marched into Anatolia.
The Antigonids had some 80,000 men, the alliance that opposed them a slightly smaller army of 70,000. charge on the Antigonid right and swept all before him, but Seleucus used his elephants to block Demetrius's horsemen from coming to the aid of the Antigonid infantry, which wilted under a rain of arrows.
Many of the foot soldiers decided it was a good moment to change sides, and the 80-year-old Antigonus was killed by a javelin.
He emerged in control of most of the empire in Asia, which he shared with his son, Antiochus.
The successors might now reasonably have settled for kingship in their respective regions.
Seleucus did not live to enjoy his victory, however, being assassinated the moment he set foot in Macedon to claim the throne.
Ironically, it was the defeated Antigonids who ended up as rulers of Macedon.
The successors' armies were primarily composed of Macedonians and Greeks, mercenaries who readily deserted any leader who seemed to be losing or lacked the money to pay them.
They naturally continued Alexander's style of warfare, with battles conducted by an infantry phalanx armed with long pikes, supported by cavalry and skirmishers with missile weapons.
Their armies were much larger than any Alexander led, and they employed war elephants, introduced after contact with India.
WAR ELEPHANTS GREEK TERRACOTTA FIGURINE OF A WAR ELEPHANT The empire had been carved up into three main successor states, which remained mutually hostile.
CONTINUING CONFLICT The Ptolemies and Seleucids disputed control of Syria through the 3rd century bce.
Antigonid Philip V of Macedon came to the aid of Antiochus, and their combined power was sufficient to push Egypt back on the defensive.
After the Carthaginian defeat in 201, Philip was the target for Roman vengeance.
The Roman legions cut apart the Macedonian phalanx at Cynoscephalae in 197.
The Antigonid dynasty came to an end after a final defeat by Rome at Pydna in 168.
STATUE OF ROMAN LEGIONARY First used in south Asia, war elephants served as elevated command posts, platforms for soldiers armed with bows and javelins, and chargers to trample infantry underfoot.
They were effective against cavalry, because horses disliked their smell.
The Seleucids used Indian elephants, while the Ptolemies deployed smaller, African forest elephants.
Although they inspired terror, elephants were themselves easily panicked, running amok and causing havoc among their own troops.
OTHER HELLENISTIC DYNASTIES Hellenistic cities kept alive the heritage of Alexander across Asia.
Finds at Ai Khanoum have revealed a fascinating blend of Greek and Persian artistic styles and religious beliefs.
A comparable fusion of Eastern and Western cultures is found at the hilltop shrine of Nemrut Dag, built in the 1st century ce by the ruler of Commagene in present-day Turkey.
The growth of the city into a significant regional power took centuries.
ROME'S FIRST VICTORIES The dominant people in Italy during the early years of Rome were the Etruscans.
Rome was merely one of many small Latin communities of central Italy whose warrior bands fought one another over land or livestock.
By the 5th century bce, under the influence of the Greeks, who had founded cities in southern Italy, the Romans had adopted a new style of warfare.
By the early 4th century they had established their independence of the Etruscans and their dominance over other Latin cities.
With their allies they would now have to face more formidable enemies, including the Greeks, who had flourishing colonies in southern Italy.
The Rise of Rome The Roman Republic was not a likely contender for imperial power in the 4th century bce.
Yet its relentless fighting spirit and refusal to accept defeat enabled Rome to subject Samnite tribes and Greek colonies to its rule.
Rome was occupied and the Gauls left only after being paid a large sum in gold.
This humiliation revealed the defects not only of Rome's city walls but also its battle tactics, modeled upon the Greek phalanx.
In the course of the 4th century military reforms produced a more flexible and effective army that would win the Romans a far-flung empire.
The Roman army was a militia of part-time soldiers, structured according to the social status and age of the citizens Etruscan soldier Etruscan infantry wore bronze helmets and armor of bronze plates, and carried a round shield and a spear.
PLUTARCH ON THE BATTLE OF ASCULUM IN HIS ""LIFE OF PYRRHUS"" in its ranks.
Since citizen-soldiers had to supply their own equipment, the richest formed the cavalry, being able to afford a horse, and the poorest served as lightly armed skirmishers, with the armored heavy infantry in between.
That such an amateur arrangement should have proved an empire-winning force was partly due to weapons and tactics.
The soldiers accepted rigorous discipline and training, forming a tight-knit, highly committed force.
The legions were supported by auxiliaries recruited from Rome's subordinate Italian allies.
Apennine mountains, who often fought in alliance with other peoples resisting Roman expansion, such as the Gauls and the Umbrians.
At the battle of the Caudine Forks in 321, a Roman army was ambushed in mountain terrain and forced to surrender as Samnite warriors rained missiles down upon the trapped legionaries from impregnable heights.
Typically, having accepted humiliating peace terms to secure the soldiers' release, the Romans then refused to carry out the terms once the men were freed.
Rome was sometimes beaten on the battlefield but it never accepted defeat.
The Samnites ^ eventually took a place as allied auxiliaries of F the Roman legions.
Pyrrhus The king of Epirus in Greece, Pyrrhus was an experienced campaigner who often led from the front.
In support of Greek colonies, he fought against the Carthaginians in Sicily as well as the Romans in Italy.
The city appealed for help to one of the most experienced war leaders in the Greek world.
The army with which he arrived in Italy was typical of the post-Alexander era in the eastern Mediterranean.
Most of his troops were spear-wielding infantry, but he also had light and heavy cavalry, several thousand archers, and a score of war elephants.
After a final drawn battle at Beneventum in 275, Pyrrhus went home, allowing Rome to complete its domination of southern Italy.
The Roman legions had successfully stood up to one of the most advanced professional armies of the day.
AFTER The expansion of Rome took on an unstoppable momentum in the century after victory in the war with Pyrrhus.
A MEDITERRANEAN EMPIRE Roman control of southern Italy brought conflict with the Carthaginians in Sicily.
The creation of such an extensive empire put pressure on the existing Roman military system.
An army of part-time citizen-soldiers was ill-suited to lengthy overseas campaigns and providing garrisons in far-flung territories.
The Phoenicians were seafarers and Carthage grew rich on maritime trade.
By the 3rd century bce its naval power allowed it to dominate much of the western Mediterranean.
It had a strong presence in Sicily, where its main enemy CARTHAGINIAN GOLD COIN was the Creek city of Syracuse.
At the same time, Rome was extending its power southward through Italy.
This intervention escalated into a full-scale war for possession of Sicily.
The Punic Wars In the 3rd century bce the rivalry between the Romans and Carthaginians developed into a life-or-death struggle.
An invasion of Italy by the Carthaginian general, Hannibal, brought the city of Rome to the brink of disaster, but the Punic Wars ended in the total destruction of Carthage.
The Carthaginians were dependent upon supply and reinforcement by sea from North Africa.
What followed was, in terms of the numbers of ships and men committed, by far the largest naval war fought in the ancient world.
The Romans could not match the skilled Carthaginian seamen in maneuver, but their legionary marines were a formidable boarding force.
This disaster left them incapable of preventing a Roman landing in Africa.
If the estimate of 286,000 men on board is correct, this puts it among the largest naval battles in history. force in Africa was routed and almost annihilated after a devastating charge by Carthaginian massed elephants at Tunis.
The second spread from the Iberian Peninsula to the mainland of Italy, and finally to the North African heartland of Carthage.
Roman warships This relief of Roman war galleys shows vessels with double banks of oars packed with soldiers.
Roman naval tactics centerd on the boarding of enemy ships. failed African expedition, fighting was once more concentrated in Sicily.
Carthaginian forces, under general Hamilcar Barca from 247, adopted a purely defensive strategy, resisting sieges and engaging in raids and skirmishes.
Carthage agreed to abandon Sicily and pay a large indemnity in return for peace.
The second war For a long time the Carthaginians were in no state to resume war with Rome.
The desire for revenge was passed down a generation, Carthaginian general, Hannibal, inheriting it fromhis father, Hamilcar Barca.
Spain, where both Rome and Carthage were expanding their influence, provided the flashpoint for renewed war.
The following year he led an army from Spain through southern Gaul and across the Alps into Italy.
Hannibal's army—including Spanish tribesmen, Libyan infantry, Numidian horsemen, and Gallic warriors recruited en route—descended into Italy from the Alpine passes with a few surviving war elephants and struck toward Rome.
A Roman army sent to meet them was ambushed and destroyed at Lake , Trasimene.
Fabius, appointed ""dictator"" to lead the Roman war effort under now desperate circumstances, adopted a strategy that won him the nickname 32 THE PUNIC WARS AFTER ""Cunctator"" , avoiding pitched battle with Hannibal's superior forces.
The outmaneuvered Romans were encircled and systematically butchered—as many as 48,000 men may have been killed.
A protracted struggle Despite these losses Rome refused to sue for peace and resumed Fabian delaying tactics.
Hannibal maintained his army in southern Italy year after year, living off the land, but had no clear strategy for bringing the war to a successful conclusion.
Some cities took the opportunity to rebel against Roman domination, among them Syracuse in 213.
ROMAN HISTORIAN LIVY ON ROME'S REACTION TO THE DEFEAT AT CANNAE heat ray.
When his brother, Hasdrubal, led another army from Spain over the Alps in 207, he was defeated and killed by the Romans at the battle of the Metaurus.
When Hannibal finally returned to Carthage in 202, he had been in Italy for a total of 16 years.
At first the Carthaginians sued for peace, but Hannibal's return with his army stiffened their resolve and peace negotiations broke down.
Scipio's forces were strengthened by the defection of the Numidian cavalry from the Carthaginian side.
Carthage admitted defeat and was stripped of its navy and its remaining colonial possessions around the western Mediterranean.
Scipio had earned the cognomen ""Africanus"" by which he is known to history.
V After the defeat at Zama, Carthage was stripped of its military power, but Rome's thirst for vengeance would not be satisfied until its rival had been utterly destroyed.
The siege went badly until the arrival of Scipio Aemilianus, adoptive grandson of Scipio Africanus.
The Carthaginians fought desperately, a final core of resisters burning themselves to death in a temple.
The Romans then razed the city, leaving not a single building standing.
To strengthen the Roman forces for that campaign and for a war against the Berber Jugurtha in North Africa, Gaius Marius recruited volunteers from among the poorest Roman citizens into the legions.
Formerly a citizen militia, the Roman army mutated into a professional force of full-time career soldiers.
Celtic decorated knife and sheath The Celts of Gaul and Britain had a love of elaborate decoration, as seen on the handle and sheath of this dagger found in London's Thames river.
The Gallic Wars Between 58 and 51 bce Roman general, Julius Caesar, defeated the tribes of Gaul in a series of campaigns that combined military efficiency with subtle diplomacy and ruthless massacre.
Caesar exploited the divisions between his enemies and extended the frontiers of empire by piecemeal conquests.
I n 59 bce Julius Caesar, a member of the aristocracy with a modestly successful military record, served as a Roman consul.
This one-year appointment was traditionally followed by a posting to govern a province.
Since Caesar was a close ally of Rome's most successful general, Pompey, and its richest citizen, Crassus, he was given control of the extensive area of Cisalpine Gaul , Transalpine Gaul , and Illyricum for five years instead of the usual one-year term.
It was an opportunity for Caesar to win military glory—important for a politically ambitious man—and to find plunder to pay off his considerable debts.
A warlike people Cisalpine Gaul and Illyricum were peaceful, but in Transalpine Gaul Caesar found ample scope for war-making.
Among the Celtic tribes known to the Romans as the Gauls, warfare was endemic.
The tribes had traditionally been led by warrior chieftains who raided their neighbors and distributed the proceeds to reward their warband.
Although Gallic societies were evolving away from this primitive model, tribes formed alliances against one another and in order to defend against pressure from outsiders such as Germanic people from east of the Rhine.
From the Gauls' point of view, the Roman presence fitted quite easily into this world.
Rome, calling for military support when they needed it and joining the Romans in attacks on rival tribes.
But they did not expect that they would be reduced to a permanently subservient status.
Gaul, Germany, and Britain Caesar's first wars in Gaul after taking up command in 58 bce were fought in alliance with the Aedui, tribes that lived between the Saone and Loire rivers.
The first enemy was the Helvetii, a people from Switzerland who set out to migrate to western Gaul.
Caesar fought and defeated them, forcing those that survived to return to their homeland.
Then the Aedui asked for protection against the Germanic warrior, Ariovistus; Caesar's legions confronted him in the Vosges and drove him back across the Rhine.
These defensive campaigns were followed by a series of much bolder operations that extended the boundaries of Roman domination.
On the pretext again of an attack on a Celtic ally, Caesar invaded the territory of the Belgic tribes to the northeast in 57 bce.
In 55 bce he ventured beyond the borders of Gaul, bridging the Rhine for a foray into Germany and taking two legions across the English Channel on board 80 transport ships.
This landing in Britain was repeated the following year on a larger scale, the Romans advancing as far north as the Thames River, although Caesar left no permanent presence.
By 54 bce Caesar had expanded the Roman-ruled area of Gaul from southern France to the Atlantic, Channel, and North Sea coasts.
Publicized by Caesar himself in his written accounts of his wars, these successes greatly enhanced his reputation.
The campaigns had enabled him to improve the training and combat experience of his legions and weld them into an army loyal to himself, rather than to the Republic.
The Belgic tribes revolted and a Roman column was ambushed and annihilated.
The following winter Vercingetorix, who had established himself as leader of the Arverni, succeeded in uniting the tribes of western and central Gaul in an uprising against the Romans.
Caesar went on the offensive, but Vercingetorix cleverly avoided pitched battle.
His plan was to let the Romans exhaust themselves in long sieges of fortified hill towns, while depriving them of supplies through a scorched earth policy and harassing them with his cavalry.
Caesar succeeded in taking the town of Avaricum after a 25-day siege—almost the entire population was massacred when the town fell—but Gergovia, near modern-day Clermont-Ferrand, was successfully defended against the legions.
Roman troops returned to occupy Britain in 45 ce. attack while making camp near the Sambre River.
All legionaries by this period fought as heavy infantry, with skirmishers and cavalry provided by various auxiliaries—Gauls and Germans, along with other peoples from as far afield as Crete and North Africa.
The Romans were M superior to their Gallic enemies in discipline, logistics, and engineering skills—fortification and bridgebuilding—but in a face-to-face fight, a Gallic warrior was still a Hr formidable opponent.
Widespread resentment against the Romans began to show itself in the winter GROWING RIVALRY The prestige that accrued to Caesar through his campaigns in Gaul were a threat to the position of his rival 1 general, Pompey, in Rome.
Caesar was not allowed the celebration of a triumph and, in 50 bce, was ordered to disband his army.
CAVALRY TRAINING HELMET, ROMAN BRITAIN THE PRICE OF REBELLION Caesar's triumph for his Gallic victories finally took place in Rome in 46 bce.
At the triumph, Vercingetorix, held prisoner since Alesia, was first displayed to the Roman public, then executed by strangulation.
Showdown at Alesia For a while the Gallic and Roman armies skirmished and shadowed one another.
Finally, Vercingetorix installed his army at the fortified hill town of Alesia, where he was besieged.
Some I did not undertake the war... for private ends, but in the cause of national liberty.
VERCINGETORIX BEFORE SURRENDERING AT ALESIA, ACCORDING TO CAESAR'S ""GALLIC WARS"", 52 BCE of his cavalry broke through the Roman lines and rode off to call on the allied tribes to send reinforcements.
Once Caesar's legionaries had completed the fortifications around the town, it was under total blockade and the Gauls began to starve.
They attempted to send away their women and children but the Romans would not allow it.
The Romans found themselves attacked from both sides as Vercingetorix's warriors coordinated attempted breakouts with attacks on the Roman fortifications and lines by his allies outside.
There was a moment when the legionaries were almost overrun, but they held and the relief force was eventually driven off.
Vercingetorix had no choice but to surrender, riding into Caesar's camp and laying down his arms at his feet.
THE FORTIFICATIONS AT ALESIA During the siege of Alesia in 52 bce, Caesar set his legionaries to build two lines of fortifications around the hill town—one to keep Vercingetorix's Gallic army in and the other to defend the Roman besiegers against an attack from the rear by a relief force.
Totaling 22 miles in length, the fortifications consisted of a series of ditches and an earth and timber rampart, with a tower every 80 ft as well as 23 forts.
RECONSTRUCTION OF CAESAR'S FORTIFICATIONS A % ASPECTS OF WAR Engineering Military engineers have always been at the forefront of technology.
Their skills range from map-making and constructing fortifications, to bridging rivers, building strategic roads, and blowing up enemy installations.
Even when technological levels were low, engineers were put to use on fortifications, such as those of the first walled cities of the Middle East and the Maori village strongholds of New Zealand.
The greater resources of larger states and empires increased the scope of their military engineering.
Since Roman times, their work has been both defensive and offensive; a mixture of building an army's defenses and breaking those of the enemy.
Construction engineering Many military construction projects— strategic roads and railroads, water supply systems, and facilities such as barracks—are all but indistinguishable from civilian projects.
For example, United States Army engineers carried out the mapping of the American West in the 19th century, and the United States Army Corps of Engineers is responsible for flood defenses today.
The key permanent works of military engineers, however, have always been fortifications.
These range from border defenses such as the Great Wall of China and Hadrian's Wall through medieval stone castles and walled cities to the many elaborate 16thto 18th-century star-shaped forts of the style associated with French engineer the Marquis de Vauban.
At short range on a low trajectory, ballistas were highly accurate. in the 1930s along France's border with Germany—and the German-built Atlantic Wall in France, which the Allied forces encountered in 1944.
As well as permanent structures, engineers have long been responsible for field fortifications, siege works, and camps set up in haste.
A daily task for Roman engineers was to march ahead of the army to construct a camp, surrounded by a ditch and a rampart, for each night's rest.
In modern times, field fortifications (traditionally a trench or palisade) have been further defended by barbed wire, minefields, and anti-tank traps.
In World War I , these evolved into elaborate defensive systems in which soldiers lived for months on end.
Here, United States troops are bridging a river in Italy. temporary bases, engineers have also historically had a vital function in enabling troops to advance or retreat at speed.
Just as Roman engineers built bridges out of boats, in World War II the Allied armies made Bailey bridges from prefabricated steel segments that they carried with them on trucks and put up across rivers.
Roman sappers also tunneled under enemy walls so that they would partially collapse and open breaches for an assault.
The siege role of combat engineers did not fundamentally change until the gunpowder age.
When cannon were first introduced into warfare, with devastating effect on stone-walled castles, they were at first the responsibility of engineers, just as catapults had been.
However, the creation of independent artillery services took this burden off engineers.
Tunneling under enemy walls long continued to be a vital part of siege warfare, but in the gunpowder age a small bomb called a petard was usually placed at the end of the completed tunnel and exploded to make the breach.
Like tunneling, digging complex trench systems to approach the walls in preparation for an assault was an art brought to a high pitch by engineers of the 17th and 18th centuries.
These techniques were required afresh in the trenches of World War I On the Western Front engineers tunneled under enemy lines to place mines, and labored to build miles of front line, support, and communication trenches.
Vast explosions were set off under German lines at the Somme, and at Messines Ridge in 1917, where 10,000 German troops were killed by the almost simultaneous detonation of 19 huge mines.
Royal Engineers insignia The British Royal Engineers can trace their origins to the Norman Conquest of 1066.
Hazardous occupation Military engineers have always risked their own lives in the course of carrying out their often highly dangerous duties.
They can suffer high casualty rates, either because they are operating in exposed positions in advance or to the rear of the main body of the army in mobile warfare, or because of their offensive role in siege warfare.
Mining under walls is a dangerous activity, as is racing forward under enemy fire to place charges against the gates of a fortress, as British sappers did during the two-month siege of Delhi in 1857 in the Indian Mutiny.
Modern combat engineers, in the same spirit, are trained to carry out small-unit raids to lay charges against enemy targets.
In World War II, sappers were tasked with blowing up German defensive positions overlooking the Normandy beaches on D-Day, as well as with clearing obstacles planted by the enemy on the beaches.
Today, in Iraq and Afghanistan, an equally dangerous task is dealing with booby-traps and roadside bombs—two common killers in modern guerilla wars.
Combat engineering Through much of recorded history, combat engineers—also known as sappers, or pioneers—have above all been identified with siege warfare.
Just as construction engineers specialize in building fortifications, sappers are the men tasked with overcoming them.
Roman combat engineers built and operated siege engines such as stoneand bolt-throwing ballistas to batter enemy defenses.
They also built huge, iron-tipped battering rams and mobile towers, and constructed earth and timber ramps so that these machines Preparing the ground United States troops getting ready to invade Iraq from Kuwait in 2003 take cover while a Kuwaiti engineer uses a bulldozer to widen a ditch-crossing for them at an abandoned UN checkpoint on the Kuwait-lraq border.
VAUBAN'S FORT DE LA PREE ON THE ILE DE RE 1802 The United States Army Corps of Engineers is created.
WORLD WAR II SEABEES RECRUITMENT POSTER 37 Roman Civil War Between 49 and 30 bce a series of armed struggles determined who would rule the Roman world as it mutated from republic into empire.
The eventual victor was Octavian, who would later be known as the Emperor Augustus. n 56 bce Julius Caesar, then building his reputation as a I general in the Gallic Wars , held meetings with Crassus and Pompey in northern Italy.
The Triumvirate, the political alliance the three had formed, was under strain, but an agreement was reached.
Caesar was confirmed in his command in Gaul for a further five years, Crassus was given control of the rich province of Syria, and Pompey remained in Rome while serving as absentee governor of Hispania.
Caesar was at first distracted by the crisis of Vercingetorix's uprising in Gaul, but once the Gauls had been pacified the issue of his relationship with Pompey had to be resolved.
Cleopatra Although often represented as the Egyptian goddess Isis, Cleopatra was a Macedonian descendant of Alexander's general, Ptolemy.
In the 1st century bce the Roman Republic was racked by violent social conflicts in Italy and by power struggles within the ruling elite.
REVOLT AND CIVIL WAR The generals Publius Cornelius Sulla v and Gaius Marius led the suppression of a revolt by some of Rome's Italian allies, known as the Social War, from 91 to 88 bce.
The dispute was not resolved until 82 bce, when Sulla defeated a Marian army outside Rome.
This uprising was brutally crushed by the wealthy Marcus Licinius Crassus, aided by Pompey.
Originally the junior partner in the Triumvirate, Caesar had earned fame and wealth in his Gallic campaigns— wealth he used liberally to ensure the personal loyalty of his legions.
After some initial hesitation, Pompey threw in his lot with the anti-Caesar faction in the Roman Senate, which demanded that Caesar leave his army in Gaul and return to Rome.
Instead, on January 10, 49 bce, Caesar led his legionaries across the Rubicon, the river that marked the border between Cisalpine Gaul and Italy proper.
Within weeks he occupied a largely unresisting Italy and forced Pompey to flee across the Adriatic.
Instead of pursuing him, Caesar headed west, securing control of Hispania.
The defeat of Pompey Pompey had meanwhile established himself in Macedonia, where he assembled an impressive army drawn from Rome's eastern provinces.
In January 48 bce Caesar nonetheless succeeded in transporting seven legions across the Adriatic, joined later by four more legions under his follower, Mark Antony.
Outside the port of Dyrrachium, in present-day Albania, they were confronted by Pompey's numerically superior army.
Seeking to avoid offence to the victorious Caesar, Egyptian ruler, Ptolemy XII, had Pompey killed the moment he stepped ashore.
While Caesar enjoyed an affair with Ptolemy's sister, Cleopatra, and supported her claim to the Egyptian throne, Pompeian forces rallied.
After some brisk campaigning in Asia, Caesar had to fight battles at Thapsus in North Africa in 46 and Munda in Spain in 45 bce before his victory over Pompey's faction was complete.
Shortly after, on March 15, 44, he was assassinated by a conspiracy of Roman senators, led by Marcus Junius Brutus and Gaius Cassius Longinus, claiming to defend freedom and the Republic.
The two sides engaged in a cagey contest, constructing fortifications and counter-fortifications and fighting some costly skirmishes, before Caesar skillfully disengaged and marched into Greece, shadowed by Pompey.
Outnumbered two to one, Caesar nevertheless accepted a challenge to give battle.
By aggressive use of his infantry cohorts he first drove off Pompey's large cavalry force and then smashed his infantry formation.
Pompey escaped the debacle and fled Caesar's death opened a new round of civil strife.
Mark Antony, an experienced officer who had served under Caesar in Gaul as well as in the civil war; Caesar's chosen heir, Octavian, an inexperienced boy of 19; and Lepidus, a cavalry commander.
They did not control the eastern provinces from Greece to Syria, however, which remained in the hands of the Republican forces.
Brutus and Cassius took up a strong defensive 38 position near Philippi in eastern Macedonia, where they confronted an army of similar size—probably around 100,000 men—led by Antony and Octavian.
In the first Brutus's forces overran Octavian's camp in a surprise assault that found the young triumvir absent from his post.
At the same time, Antony successfully attacked Cassius's fortified position.
Wrongly believing Brutus also to have been defeated, Cassius fell upon his sword.
The Republicans were not defeated, but their morale was wavering and after a three-week stand-off Brutus felt obliged to give battle again.
Rival legions clashed in a vicious close-quarters fight that Octavian and Antony won.
Left with inadequate forces to continue the war, Brutus too committed suicide.
After this victory Octavian returned to govern in Rome while Antony campaigned in the east.
Sextus Pompeius, a son of Pompey the Great, had seized Sicily, deploying a war fleet to hold off Octavian's legions.
Octavian tasked his general, Marcus Vipsanius Agrippa, with building and equipping a fleet to take on Sextus Pompeius.
Agrippa destroyed most of the rebel warships at Naulochus in 36 bce, allowing Octavian to retake Sicily.
Victor in the civil war, he discreetly assumed the powers of an emperor, ending the Republican system of government in Rome.
Starved of reinforcements by Octavian, he fell back on the support of Cleopatra of Egypt, establishing himself with her in Alexandria.
Lepidus had been ousted by Octavian, who then mounted a propaganda campaign against Antony and his allegedly scandalous behavior in the east.
In 32 bce the Roman Senate was persuaded to declare war on Antony and Cleopatra.
Antony planned an amphibious invasion of Italy, exploiting the strength of the Egyptian fleet, but only made it as far as Actium on Greece's Ionian coast.
The fleet that Agrippa had created was even stronger and allowed Octavian both to ferry an army across to Greece and to subject Antony and Cleopatra to a naval blockade.
Octavian installed himself in a fortified position and refused to give battle, waiting while his opponents' forces withered through malnutrition and disease.
In desperation Antony led a naval breakout in September 31 bce, but most of his fleet was trapped and destroyed.
Antony and Cleopatra escaped back to Egypt, where they were pursued by Octavian.
Deserted by a large part of his army as the Romans approached Alexandria, Antony took his own life, an example soon followed by Cleopatra.
ROMAN CIVIL WAR AFTER Victorious in the civil war, Octavian was able to establish his personal rule over the Roman empire, while maintaining a facade of Republican institutions.
ANEW ROME The defeat and death of Cleopatra in 30 bce brought Ptolemaic rule in Egypt to an end.
Octavian ordered her heir, Julius Caesar's son Caesarion, to be strangled, and Egypt became a province of the Roman empire.
In 27 bce the Roman Senate authorized Octavian's extensive powers over the empire and gave him the title Augustus, by which he is generally known.
He stabilized this CAESAR The family name of Julius Caesar evolved into an imperial title.
It survived into modern times as the German Kaiser and the Russian Tsar. force, establishing fixed terms of service and turning the legions into permanent formations, each with its own traditions and identity.
The lack of a formal system of succession, whether hereditary or elective, left plentiful scope for future power struggles.
Details of his life and the lives of his men have been revealed through hundreds of letters and notes, written in ink on postcard-size wooden tablets that have survived to the present day.
Built before the construction of Hadrian's Wall, it was a distant outpost of the Roman world, providing a base for troops policing the border between the province of Britannia and unconquered Caledonia to the north.
Frontier guard From 97 ce the fort's garrison consisted of two cohorts of Batavian troops, plus a wing of cavalry from Spain.
The Batavians were auxiliaries—troops drawn from the subject peoples of the empire.
They were a tough Germanic people whose homeland was in the area of the present-day Netherlands.
Their fighting qualities were much admired by the Romans and they had served in the invasion and conquest of Britain from 43 ce.
It was standard practice for provinces to be garrisoned by men from elsewhere in the empire.
The likelihood of revolts was much greater when soldiers were stationed among their fellow countrymen in their province of origin.
Like the soldiers under his command, Flavius was Batavian, but unlike them he was a Roman citizen.
He must have been wealthy, for he enjoyed equestrian status, an aristocratic rank that was only open to men who could satisfy a strict property qualification.
His wife, Sulpicia Lepidina, lived with him in his quarters at the fort.
One of the letters is an invitation for Sulpicia to come to a birthday party thrown by the wife of Aelius Brocchus, an officer in the nearby fort of Briga.
Home comforts The fort under Flavius's command was largely self-sufficient.
It had its own shield-maker, brewed its own beer, and made and repaired its own shoes.
Accommodation for the commander was comfortable, but the soldiers slept in dormitories, probably under woollen blankets on mattresses on the floor.
Although Vindolanda tablet This letter, found by archeologists excavating an ancient rubbish heap at Vindolanda fort, is addressed to Flavius Cerialis by fellow officers Niger and Brocchus.
It wishes Flavius success in meeting the governor of Britannia. clothing was issued from central stores, the troops received extra items sent in parcels from their families at home.
Similarly, food was in plentiful supply with grain and bacon prominent among items sourced locally, but luxuries were imported to liven up the diet.
Flavius expected to have olives, spices, and wine on his table, and even ordinary soldiers managed to procure pepper and oysters.
The messages on the wooden tablets include requests for leave, presumably very desirable from what must have been at times a grim posting—especially in the frequent bad weather.
Officers were naturally interested in personal advancement, hoping for a recommendation from one of their superiors that might bring promotion or, in Flavius's case, angling for a meeting with the provincial governor.
The eventual fate of Flavius Cerialis is unknown, although his colleague, Brocchus, was later recorded as commander of a cavalry unit in the Eastern European province of Pannonia, another distant posting.
Roman legionaries This frieze is from Tropaeum Traiani in Romania on the empire's Eastern European frontier.
Formal greeting from Niger and Brocchus Hadrian's Wall today Roman legionaries and auxiliaries stationed on the northernmost frontier of the empire probably faced slightly milder winters than those of modern times.
FROM A LETTER WRITTEN TO A SOLDIER SERVING UNDER FLAVIUS CERIALIS AT VINDOLANDA, C.100 CE The tablets are thin pieces of wood, with messages written on them in ink.
About the size of a modern-day postcard, they are usually less than a half-inch thick and folded to protect the contents.
Apart from suppressing scattered internal rebellions, the legions garrisoning the empire fought wars only at or beyond its frontiers.
The Romans were tempted to cross the long land frontiers of their provinces in Western and Southern Europe and to press further into Asia from their provinces in the eastern Mediterranean.
They also traversed the English Channel to occupy much of Great Britain.
Although the Roman legions were a formidable fighting force, the campaigns that they were engaged in were far from supplying the empire with an unbroken string of successes.
The battles they fought often revealed their vulnerability when faced with enemies employing very different tactics on what was to the Romans alien terrain.
PUBLIUS FLAVIUS VEGETIUS, FROM HIS BOOK ""DE RE MILITARI"", 4TH CENTURY CE Hanover.
Arminius was commanding a body of auxiliaries fighting for the Romans, while secretly forming a tribal alliance to oppose them.
At the Teutoburg Forest in 9 ce, three legions under Publius Quinctilius Varus were ambushed by Arminius's forces and massacred.
The Romans had their revenge through punitive expeditions led by Germanicus between 14 and 16 ce, but the tribes across the Rhine were never subdued as the Gauls had been.
Romans in Britain The conquest of Britain began under Emperor Claudius in 43 ce.
Rome had exercised an influence over Britain's Celtic peoples ever since Julius Caesar's Cavalryman's helmet Roman cavalry helmets often had a hair pattern on the bowl.
The Roman Empire BEFORE k ___ The key to the power of the Roman empire was a stable, well-drilled professional army.
All legionaries had to be Roman citizens and he established a fixed term of service for soldiers, eventually set at 25 years.
Completion ""I ~7 r\ The number of I JL/jvJvJU legionaries in the army of Augustus.
Auxiliaries equaled this number, giving a total army strength of around 260,000. of service was rewarded with a grant of land.
Non-citizen allies of Rome provided auxiliaries to fight alongside the legionaries.
Almost all legionaries were stationed at permanent forts around the margins of the empire.
The Praetorian Guard was often the force that made or unmade emperors in power struggles. two expeditions across the Channel almost a century earlier.
There were puppet kingdoms that paid tribute to Rome, and Roman support for an ousted allied king provided an easy pretext for military occupation.
Four legions ferried across from Boulogne sufficed to overcome initial resistance in the southeast, but Caratacus, a chieftain of the Catuvellauni tribe, escaped to continue the fight further west.
By 47 ce the whole of southern England was under Roman rule, although resistance in Wales continued despite the eventual capture and execution of Caratacus.
The Romans were distracted from warfare in Wales in 60 ce by a major revolt in eastern England, led by Boudicca of the Iceni tribe.
After this had been suppressed, it took another 16 years for all of Wales to be brought to heel.
The Romans advanced into Caledonia and won a victory at Mons Graupius in 84 ce, but the tribes of the region escaped their long-term rule.
Extending the empire Rome's preoccupation with maintaining and extending its imperial frontiers was occasionally disrupted by disturbances within the empire.
Vespasian, an experienced military commander who had taken part in the invasion of Britain in 43, was sent to suppress the revolt, but his campaign was interrupted by an outbreak of civil war that followed the death of Emperor Nero in 68.
After legion once more fought legion, as in the days of Caesar and Pompey, Vespasian emerged as emperor.
In 70 ce Jerusalem was taken by the Roman army after a long siege, its temple was destroyed and the revolt effectively ended.
A small Jewish group held out in the hill fortress of Masada until 73 ce.
The taking of Jerusalem and Masada were both classic examples of Roman siege warfare, with the use of rams, ballistas, and siege towers.
At Masada, on the coast of the Dead Sea, the building of an immense ramp was required to bring the siege engines up the mountainside.
In neither case did the city's defenders stand a chance in the face of the Roman forces; at Masada the population finally committed suicide to avoid capture.
Here, auxiliaries, with their distinctive oval shields, slaughter Dacians.
Lance and pilum The pilum, or javelin , was a standard legionary weapon.
Legionaries threw their javelins before advancing to engage with the sword.
Roman cavalry, whether they were legionaries or auxiliaries, carried lances. the Spanish-born Emperor Trajan.
He indirectly owed his rise to power to King Decebalus of Dacia who had refused to be cowed by Roman military campaigns under Emperor Domitian.
The subsequent fall of the humiliated Domitian allowed Trajan to emerge as emperor, and dealing with Dacia in order to reassert Roman authority in the region was thus the first item on his agenda.
Trajan's Column, erected to mark this triumph, records exceptional feats of engineering, such as bridge building, accomplished by the legions, as well as the defeat and enslavement of the Dacians.
In 114, when Trajan was over 60 years old, he embarked upon another remarkable military venture in the east.
Mesopotamia who fought chiefly as mounted archers, had inflicted a notorious defeat on the Romans at Carrhae in 53 bce and remained a potential threat to Rome's eastern provinces.
When Trajan died of natural causes in 117, the Roman empire had reached its greatest extent.
Under his far less warlike successors, Hadrian and Antoninus, the legions pulled back to defensible borders.
By the end of the 2nd century ce the great age of Roman expansion was at an end.
STABILITY RESTORED In the 3rd century ce the Roman empire almost disintegrated.
Barbarian invaders overran the frontiers as rival claimants battled for the imperial throne.
The four rulers acted as military commanders, based near vulnerable frontiers rather than in Rome.
This led to another period of civil war as STATUE OF TWO claimants to the title tetrarchs of Augustus proliferated.
Emperor Marcus Aurelius spent much of his reign campaigning against the Quadi, Marcomanni, and other tribes along the Danube frontier.
This relief decorating a marble sarcophagus in Rome shows the helmeted Roman legionaries getting the better of their Germanic foes.
By the time Attila the Hun ravaged Gaul and northern Italy in the 450s, the western empire was disintegrating.
DECLINE OF ROME In 324, after winning a long series of wars against imperial rivals, Constantine I established himself as sole emperor, but his death was followed by a further collapse into civil war.
BORDER CONTROL The western empire was under constant pressure from tribes beyond the Rhine and Danube, who raided across the frontier and sometimes settled within Rome's borders.
Successive Roman emperors had much the worse of fighting with the Persians.
EMPEROR VALERIAN KNEELING BEFORE PERSIAN KING SHAPUR I T he career of Emperor Julian, known as the Apostate, reveals much about the state of the Roman empire in the 4th century cb.
A nephew of Emperor Constantine I, he narrowly survived with his life in the round of massacres and usurpations that followed Constantine's death in 337.
When Constantius II emerged as victor in this vicious power struggle, he appointed Julian his subordinate co-emperor in the west while he fought Sasanid Persia in the east.
But when Constantius ran into trouble fighting the Persians and called for Julian to bring his army to the east, the Gallic legions refused to go and instead proclaimed Julian emperor.
Now sole emperor, Julian led a large army deep into Sasanid territory in 363.
Julian was killed in a skirmish and the Romans had to accept humiliating peace terms.
This was an empire in which emperors were elected by armies and mostly lived as military commanders; in which the need to campaign simrdtaneously on different frontiers led to divisions of authority; and in which resources were stretched to cope with the military problems posed by external pressures.
Rome's faltering army The Roman army that faced these pressures in the 4th and 5th centuries ce was significantly different from the army that had enforced the Roman Peace of the 1st and 2nd centuries.
It was divided into border forces—permanent garrisons for the forts and fortifications around the frontiers—and mobile field armies stationed deeper inside the empire.
The field armies could be a reserve to respond to military emergencies wherever these occurred, but they were also power bases for their commanders who needed to uphold their slice of authority inside the empire.
The senior officers who commanded the armies had previously been drawn from the aristocracy of Roman senators, but by the end of the 3rd century they were career soldiers, drawn from anywhere in the empire.
Shortages of material resources showed in a decline in the quality of equipment, and shortages of manpower were even more evident.
The volunteers who came from the poorer strata of Roman citizens no longer dominated the ranks.
The legions were staffed mostly by conscripts, although the border forces included a large number of hereditary soldiers—the children of career legionaries settled in the area where they served.
The army had long ceased to be ethnically Roman, but was recruited from across the multi-racial empire, including from ""barbarian"" tribes who had been permitted to settle within the empire's frontiers.
The employment of non-citizens as The Vandal general The Roman general Stilicho had a Vandal father and a Roman mother.
He served faithfully as a defender of the failing Roman empire until his execution in 408, a victim of political intrigue. auxiliaries—for example, from allies of Rome beyond the frontiers—was a long-established tradition, but increasingly tribal warbands served alongside the legions under their own chieftains as allies or ""federated"" people.
The prominence of ""barbarian"" soldiers in the Roman army was to be crucial to the development of events as the western empire declined.
Although armored legion infantry remained central, there was a growing emphasis on missile weapons, with specialist artillery units and bodies of bowmen.
The Romans deployed heavily armored horses and riders in imitation of the Persian cataphracts, as well as lighter cavalry with spears and mounted archers.
These developments were doubtless a response to the occasional setbacks the Romans suffered at the hands of enemies who were practised in missile and cavalry warfare, such as the Goths who defeated Valens at Adrianople in 378.
Weak political leadership The mounting problems of the Roman empire did not, however, stem from such defeats—pitched battles were rare in any case.
The issue, especially in the western empire, was a failure of political organization and resources.
The Romans were unfortunate to confront at this point in their history a major movement of the Germanic peoples.
During the second half of the 4th century Ostrogoths and Visigoths, Vandals, Burgundians, and Lombards, Franks, Alemanni, and Saxons were all driven westward or southward by pressure from nomadic steppe horsemen, chiefly the Huns, who attacked them from the east.
CALLINICUS, DESCRIBING THE INVASION OF ITALY BY THE HUNS, C.450CE and taken into the armed forces as auxiliaries and allies, the tide was too powerful to be controlled.
The battle was fought between forces loyal to Emperor Theodosius, ruling from the eastern empire, and a usurper in the west.
Theodosius's forces were commanded by Stilicho, the son of a Vandal father and a Roman mother.
Stilicho's Attila the Hun The Huns were steppe horsemen who fought mostly as mounted archers.
Stilicho defeated the usurper, but soon found himself engaged in a prolonged struggle against Alaric's rampaging followers, transformed from allies into enemies.
In 410, after Stilicho's death, the Visigoths sacked Rome, the first time the city had fallen to hostile forces in almost eight centuries.
Yet only a few years later, the Romans were again appealing to the Visigoths as allies to help fight the Vandals, another S Germanic people.
THE LATE ROMAN EMPIRE AFTER The collapse of the Roman empire in the west was followed by the creation of new kingdoms, mostly by Germanic chieftains.
COLLAPSE IN THE WEST The fall of the western Roman empire is traditionally dated to 476, when Emperor Romulus Augustus was deposed by the commander of Rome's Germanic allies in Italy, Odoacer.
But Odoacerdid not claim the imperial title, which was held by Emperor Zeno at Constantinople.
FILLING THE VOID Germanic kingdoms were established as the empire fell.
The Visigoths ruled Spain, from which they had evicted the Vandals who themselves established a kingdom in North Africa.
In Italy Odoacer was defeated by the Ostrogoths under Theodoric in 493, Theodoric then ruling as theoretically a viceroy of the eastern emperor in Constantinople.
BEFORE The beginnings of warfare in ancient China saw peasant soldiers armed with bronze or stone weapons under the command of aristocratic warriors in chariots.
The Shang was succeeded by the Zhou, which introduced the use of iron weapons.
The Zhou supported a substantial standing army that campaigned against the ""barbarians"" around the borders of the realm.
The Warring States Period Warfare in ancient China was refined through centuries of civil conflict.
Feudal domains that flourished in the absence of a strong central authority competed for territory, expanding the resources devoted to war until the climactic battles of the 3rd century bce led to unification under Emperor Qin.
T he rulers of the Zhou dynasty created a feudal system in which power was devolved to regional lords, who depended on the allegiance of their own vassals controlling smaller areas.
In the Spring and Autumn Period the southerly state of Chu, centered on the Yangtze river, emerged as one of the most powerful players, competing with Yellow river states that included Jin, Qi, and Qin.
There were many conflicts within and between these loosely structured states.
Battles involved the offensive use of chariots—which in earlier times were Ancient Chinese bronze sword Dating from the 4th century bce, this sword shows the persistence of bronze weapons into the Iron Age of the Zhou dynasty.
SUN TZU, ""THE ART OF WAR"", 4TH CENTURY BCE H Massive state armies The Warring States Period proper emerged through the reorganization and consolidation of the larger Chinese states—inevitably a gradual process.
The four other states that eventually dominated the contest for power in China were Chu, Yan, Qi, and Qin.
He also stresses the importance of intelligence, and highlights the impact of morale on the outcome of conflict.
Sun Tzu's theories were successfully put into practice by the Qi general.
On each occasion, remarkably, Sun Bin relieved the enemy's pressure on an ■ THE WARRING STATES PERIOD probably employed only as mobile command platforms.
But armies can rarely have been large, given the limited resources of the fragmented feudal territories.
Heavy siege crossbows came into widespread use, as did small crossbows carried by skirmishing infantrymen pushed out in front of the line of battle.
Chariots were still used—crewed by three men and pulled by four horses— but cavalry took over as a shock force.
The Chinese learned about mounted warfare from fighting the nomads on their frontiers.
But the core of any Chinese army was still the conscript peasant infantry, mostly armored for fighting in close formation with long halberds and pikes.
The art of war Constant warfare in China led to the sophisticated discussion of strategy and tactics.
This was the period when the great military thinker known as Sun Tzu wrote his famous work.
In it he recommends the use of The establishment of the Qin dynasty ended the Warring States Period, but proved short-lived.
The successor to the throne, Qin Er Shi, was weak and incompetent, and rebellions soon broke out.
A serious bid for power was made by Xiang Lang of Chu, who was contested by Liu Bang, a general controlling Han.
REPELLING THE HORSEMEN The Han empire established by Gao was threatened by the Xiongnu, nomadic horsemen who were based in the northern steppes.
To keep the horsemen out, the Han reinforced the Great Wall that Emperor Qin had built.
Moreover, Han armies were sent through the wall to attack the horsemen in their home territory in an attempt to defeat them before they could get anywhere near the Great Wall.
The combined measures succeeded, the Xiongnu were beaten, and eventually the horsemen were reduced to mere tributary status.
HAN EXPANSION CONFUCIAN GOD OF WAR Under the leadership of Emperor Wu , marauding Han armies penetrated south as far as the Mekong river in Vietnam, into Central Asia, and into northern Korea. ally not by marching to confront the Wei army directly, but by making a feinting move toward the Wei capital.
When the Wei army then of necessity Despite such tactical subtleties, victory in the great Chinese power struggle eventually went to the state that could mobilize the maximum resources for warfare—men, weapons, food, and other supplies—with the greatest efficiency.
The mighty Qin A state in western China, Qin underwent political and social reforms that, by the 3rd century bce, gave it a powerful centralized government that had crushed the residual independence of the old feudal aristocracy.
Government officials and military commanders were appointed on merit, and the population was mobilized for public works and war.
Being close to the nomadic horsemen of the north, Qin also had access to a supply of good horses, a crucial edge as cavalry grew in importance.
Through the first half of the 3rd century bce, Qin's aggression forced the other states to form alliances and mobilize their own resources.
Bronze chariot decoration This gold-inlaid bull's head adorned a chariot shaft in the Warring States Period.
Chariots were owned by elite warriors with a taste for ostentatious display. moved to defend its capital, Sun Bin succeeded in luring it onto terrain where it could then be surrounded and destroyed by his own waiting forces.
The failure of anyone to win total power left China divided into three warring kingdoms.
It was a period of military and economic growth, and cultural achievements.
A MIGHTY EMPIRE The Han empire probably had the world's most powerful armed forces in its day.
In the 1st century ce its armies campaigned as far south as Vietnam, where a revolt led by the sisters, TrungTrac and Trung Ni, was crushed in 43 ce, and as far west as Central Asia.
In the course of the 2nd century ce the Han empire went into decline, undermined by the attacks of steppe nomads, corrupt officials, and the excessive privileges of landowners.
These conditions made them responsive to the teachings of Zhang Giao, who proposed a mix of religious and magical beliefs as a solution to the people's sufferings.
The movement attracted hundreds of thousands of followers, who wrapped yellow scarves around their heads to mark their allegiance.
Marshaled into mass armies, they inflicted a number of severe defeats on the empire's professional forces.
It took the Han generals close to one year to bring the revolt under control.
Pacification was not, however, enough to restore the stability of the increasingly fractious imperial dynasty.
Following the death of Emperor Ling in i89, power within the imperial palace was seized by Dong Zhuo, an exceptionally brutal military commander.
His authority was immediately contested by other generals leading armies in the provinces and chaos ensued.
Dong Zhuo was soon assassinated and Cao Cao, who had led cavalry forces in the suppression of the Yellow Turbans, took control of the imperial government.
Like a Dong Zhuo, he was unable ([n|> to win the allegiance of provincial warlords and the power struggle continued. men confronting the 100,000 troops of his rival.
There was a stand-off between the two armies, Yuan Shao hesitating to attack an enemy dug into a strong defensive position.
As the months passed, the outcome turned on who could keep his men and horses supplied with food and fodder.
Cao Cao sent out detachments of troops to harass his enemy's supply lines and destroy grain stores.
Many of Yuan Shao's malnourished troops surrendered and Cao Cao then vanquished the weakened foe.
Eight years later it was Cao Cao's turn to be worsted in a battle won by the numerically inferior side.
Two southern warlords, Liu Bei and Sun Quan, formed an alliance to resist Cao Cao's increasingly successful efforts to unify China.
The warlords depended upon their control of the Yangtze River—they were organized to fight on water while Cao Cao's forces were entirely land-based.
But marching south to attack them with a large army, Cao Cao captured the river port of Jiangling and with it enough boats to sail his troops down the Yangtze.
At a point known variously as Chibi or the Red Cliffs, they encountered the warlords' forces commanded by general Zhou Yu.
Cao Cao's northern soldiers had traveled a vast distance into an Crossbow trigger This bronze trigger is all that remains of a crossbow used by a soldier from Wei, one of the Three Kingdoms.
Yellow Sea Hainan Historic battles Later known as the Prince of Wei (and posthumously as Emperor Wu), Cao Cao fought in two battles that are classics of Chinese military history because of the odds facing the victors.
Cao Cao lashed his boats together to make a stable platform for his soldiers.
Zhou Yu prepared fireships and sent them to drift down to destroy Cao Cao's fleet that had become immobilized.
The resulting conflagration was enough to persuade Cao Cao to lead his weary forces back north by land, a withdrawal that under constant harassment turned into a rout.
Armies were large by any standards, sometimes numbering in hundreds of thousands, but almost certainly short of the 800,000 attributed by the ancient chroniclers to Cao Cao at the Red Cliffs.
They were equipped with iron and steel weapons and armor; horses were armored as well as the men.
Crossbows were an important element, used both as hand-held infantry weapons and in larger versions as field artillery.
There were even rapid-fire crossbows, known as zhuge nu, that fired bolts stored in a magazine by the simple operation of a lever—precursors of modern repeater rifles.
Warfare included sieges for which various siege engines had been developed—mobile towers, battering rams, and torsion catapults.
Incendiary devices had an important place in the Chinese armory—the fireships used at the battle of the Red Cliffs were packed with dry reeds and wax, but other substances were available for Jfc placing on the tips of arrows or coating projectiles hurled by catapults.
Cavalry formed the aristocratic elite of Chinese forces, although large numbers of steppe horsemen were also recruited as auxiliaries.
River warfare employed much the same weaponry as was used on land, the warships being propelled by oar and sail.
Waging war in China After the defeat at the Red Cliffs, Cao Cao had to content himself with regional power.
Cao's domains came to be known as Cao Wei, while Liu Be's power base was called Shu Han, and Sun Quan ruled Dong Wu.
Although these are known as the Three Kingdoms, they were not ruled by kings but by claimants to the title of emperor, for the last nominal Han dynasty emperor was deposed after the death of Cao Cao in 220.
The Three Kingdoms were destined to fight one another, because each aspired to rule the whole of China.
The wars of the Three Kingdoms devastated the Chinese economy and led to depopulation, leaving the country exposed to the incursions of steppe nomads.
FURTHER FRAGMENTATION In a process similar to that experienced by the contemporary Roman empire, steppe tribesmen collectively known as the Wu Hu had begun migrating into lands within the boundaries of the Han empire.
Many Han Chinese migrated to the south, into the area around the Yangtze.
ONE NATION AGAIN China was not reunited until 581, when the short-lived Sui dynasty established control over both the north and the south.
Arrow and spear heads Chinese arrows, whether fired from crossbows or from field artillery, were frequently tipped with iron and steel.
They would also be coated with flammable materials to set fire to vessels.
The northern state of Cao Wei was by far the strongest of the Three Kingdoms, but its power was balanced by an alliance between the southern kingdoms of Shu Han and Dong Wu.
The most famous general of the Three Kingdoms period was Zhuge Liang, who led the armies of Shu.
Known as the Northern Expeditions, these campaigns were resisted and eventually defeated by the cautious Wei commander, Sima Yi, who avoided battle and kept his forces safe in fortified positions until Zhuge Liang was forced to withdraw through exhaustion and shortage of supplies.
Remembering the fate of Cao Cao at the Red Cliffs, the Jin prepared for the conquest of Wu by building their own fleet and by training large numbers of soldiers as marines, in order to win control of the Yangtze River.
Increasing the degree of protection they afford has usually been at the expense of comfort, mobility, and all-around vision.
As well as protection, helmets offer a chance for display, although purely functional designs have predominated since World War I O This Sumerian helmet is 4,500 years old; made of gold, it was probably worn in ceremonies in the ancient city of Ur.
IQ The Chalcidian helmet, worn by Ancient Greek hoplite infantry, was made of bronze and topped by a horsehair crest.
QJ The Roman legionary's iron helmet is in the Imperial Gallic style of the late 1st century ce.
QJ The medieval knight's basinet, from the late 14th century, protected the face with a hounskull hinged visor and the neck with a mail aventail.
Q The sallet, developed in Italy, was worn by foot soldiers across much of Europe in the 15th century.
QJ The close helmet of the 16th-century knight offered good protection but was also an elaborate display of the wearer's wealth. jfj The morion open helmet was worn by the Spanish infantry of the 16th century.
The ""lobster-tail"" helmet of an English Civil War cavalryman evolved from the Ottoman chichak.
Q The Japanese samurai helmet comprised a bowl and neck protection , often elaborately decorated.
The British heavy cavalry helmet of the Napoleonic period was primarily decorative rather than functional.
The Prussian Pickelhaube, topped with a spike for the infantry and a ball for the artillery, was adopted in 1842.
The leather helmet proved inadequate as protection in World War I 0 The German Stahlhelm steel infantry helmet, with its distinctive ""coal scuttle"" shape, was introduced in 1916 during World War I trench warfare.
This World War I British tankman's helmet incorporated chain mail for defense against splinters of metal.
The M4 flak helmet, made of steel covered with green cloth, was worn by United States bomber crews in 1944-45.
ENGLISH LOBSTER-TAIL HELMET Q JAPANESE SAMURAI HELMET H SPANISH MORION QJ GERMAN CLOSE HELMET 0 GERMAN INFANTRY HELMET 0 BRITISH TANKMAN'S HELMET 0 AMERICAN FLAK HELMET 0 BRITISH INFANTRY HELMET Ancient Indian civilizations developed in the swathe of territory across the north of the subcontinent from the Indus valley in the west to the Ganges in the east.
THE MAHABHARATA Evidence for warfare in ancient India comes mostly from the Sanskrit epic, the Mahabharata.
This recounts the 18-day battle of Kurukshetra between the rival clans of the Pandavas and the Kauravas.
The Mahabharata is legend rather than history, but it sketches a style of warfare that was probably true to life.
Both sides assembled and supplied large armies, both fought in horse-drawn chariots, and both employed war elephants.
The Mauryan Empire The wars of the Mauryan emperor Chandragupta and his successors demonstrated the military sophistication of the largest Indian states in the 4th and 3rd centuries bce.
With their full-time soldiers, Indian armies were expensive to maintain but were effective instruments of conquest and domination.
He was confronted by the army of a king whom the invaders called Poms, the ruler of a powerful state in the Punjab.
Porus was defeated by Alexander at the battle of Hydaspes, unable to cope with the devastating flexibility of the Macedonian cavalry and the discipline of the infantry phalanx.
Alexander's successors adopted the elephant, while in India a young man called Chandragupta Maurya was inspired to regenerate Indian military power and to emulate Alexander's campaigns of conquest.
This was a startling achievement given the sophisticated nature of the Nanda state's armed forces.
Chandragupta may have -500 CE Stupa of Ashoka The Mauryan emperor, Ashoka, built this Buddhist stupa at Sanchi in Madhaya Pradesh.
Ashoka may have converted to Buddhism in reaction to the horrors of war.
War with the Seleucid empire Chandragupta's authority was initially concentrated in the east of the Indian subcontinent, in Bihar and Bengal, but soon he pressed westward, hlling the power vacuum left by Alexander's rampaging campaign and subsequent withdrawal.
Although there is no historical record of the hghting, Chandragupta must have won the war, since Gandhara passed into Mauryan hands.
At this time Chandragupta ruled from the Ganges plain across to the Indus and the northwestern borderlands of the subcontinent, as well as part of central India.
This formidable empire was visited by a Greek envoy of Seleucus, called Megasthenes, who wrote an account of what he saw on his trip.
According to Megasthenes, Mauryan imperial legacy This coin features Chandragupta I, ruler of India in the 4th century ce.
He took the name of the founder of the Mauryan empire six centuries earlier. warriors were one of the seven castes into which Mauryan society was divided.
These were full-time, highly trained professional soldiers—men who ""practice nothing but warlike exercises"" and ""receive high pay from the state"" in war and peace alike.
Their bow, the standard infantry weapon, was ""equal in length to the man who carries it"" and shot a long, heavy arrow that could penetrate any armor.
Foot soldiers also carried a broad, twohanded sword and a long, narrow ox-hide shield.
The horsemen were light cavalry skirmishers, riding bareback and throwing javelins.
War elephants were crewed by a mahout and four soldiers who shot arrows and threw javelins from atop the animal's back.
The elephant's main military use, however, was less as a weapons platform than as a weapon in itself; it was used to trample enemy infantry and gore them with its tusks.
The resources provided by his conquered territories no doubt facilitated further expansion of the Mauryan empire under his successors.
EDICT OF ASHOKA, REFERRING TO THE CONQUEST OF KALINGA AFTER One legacy of the Mauryan empire was an idea of the potential unity of India.
In practice, the subcontinent was disunited and exposed to invasions from the north.
THE GUPTA EMPIRE A variety of states flourished in the aftermath of the Mauryan empire, including an IndoGreek kingdom (an offshoot of Alexander the Great's conquests) ruled in the 2nd century bce by Menander Soter in the area of modern-day Pakistan and northern India.
The most ambitious attempt to recreate the Mauryan empire was made by a dynasty that came to power in the 4th century ce, and whose first emperor adopted the name Chandragupta—from which the dynastic name ""Gupta"" was then derived.
One boastful Gupta inscription refers to Samudragupta's victories over 21 kings.
However, historians have cast doubt on Gupta claims to have ruled distant parts of India that may in reality have only owed them some vague allegiance.
NOMADIC INCURSIONS In the 5th century the Guptas came under increasing pressure from the White Huns— steppe nomads from Central Asia who wore down the empire’s defenses and eventually destroyed it, laying waste the cities and monasteries of the Ganges plain.
But the Indian warrior tradition was far from exhausted, reviving from the 8th century in the Rajput kingdoms of northern India.
There is no suggestion that he disbanded his army or abandoned the use of force, but any sensitivity to the sufferings of a defeated enemy and the human cost of war is so rare in the pre-modern world that Ashoka undoubtedly deserves his reputation as an exceptionally humane individual.
The Mauryan empire united more of the Indian subcontinent than any state until the Moguls in the 16th century ce, leaving out only Mounted Mauryan warrior with bhuj This carving shows a Mauryan warrior carrying a rare kind of ax called a bhuj.
A cross between a sword and ax, the weapon is native to northwestern India. after his father's death.
Ashoka's first invasion of Kalingan territory was repulsed, leading him to assemble overwhelming forces for a second campaign.
The Kalingans again resisted, but they were overcome after a savage battle by the Daya River.
According to an inscription attributed to Ashoka himself, f 00,000 Kalingans were killed and 150,000 were deportei and many mor< died as a result of the devastation wrought by the war and its aftermath.
The same inscription states that Ashok later experienced an extreme revulsioi against the brutality of conquest.
This led him to convert to Buddhism. the southernmost area of the great peninsula and Sri Lanka.
This illustration from a French account of the Crusades shows foot soldiers armored in the style of the 15th century, fighting in front of a city under siege.
Weak, quarrelsome states were prey to conquest by nomads such as the Mongols, who created the greatest empire the world had ever seen.
Neither technology nor organization gave any great advantage to central authority or settled civilizations.
War was endemic in many regions, especially in Western Europe, and organized warfare often degenerated into plunder and piracy.
As people sought refuge from insecurity inside castles and behind town walls, siege warfare and the building of strong fortifications became the cornerstone to military success.
At the beginning of the period the rulers of the Byzantine empire made a determined effort to restore the Mediterranean empire of Rome to its full A Viking shield Colorful shields were an important part of the seafaring Vikings' battlefield equipment.
They were usually made of wood that was covered with leather and painted.
The principal Viking weapons were spears, swords, and axes. glory, but failed in the West where Christianized Germanic kingdoms were established.
Both Byzantium and Sasanid Persia were then confronted with the armed expansion of Islam.
Arab armies inspired by the new Muslim faith conquered vast territories from Spain to India.
Western Europe was vulnerable to invaders and raiders—Vikings and Magyars, as well as Arabs—but the region experienced a military resurgence from the 11th century.
Almost constant warfare between West European Christian states stimulated the development of new military tactics, while the Crusades founded short-lived Christian states in the eastern Mediterranean and drove back Islam in Spain. wt* Nomads and knights In China the Tang dynasty was able to restore imperial rule in the early medieval period.
Subsequent dynasties, such as the Song, which ruled in the south, often had to pay off various nomadic tribes as insurance against attack from the north.
Whether Turks, Mongols, Jurchens, or Tartars, the nomadic horsemen of the steppes were formidable warriors, armed with composite bows, skilled in maneuver, and ruthless to the defeated.
Under charismatic leaders such as Genghis Khan and Timur, their warlike qualities made them at different times conquerors of China, Persia, the Middle East, Russia, and eventually the Byzantine empire.
In order to make their conquests permanent, they adopted many of the skills and customs of the settled civilizations.
In Mace from China This decorated iron mace would have been used by a Mongol warrior on horseback. medieval warfare, high status was generally identified with fighting on horseback.
This was especially true of armored cavalry, from the cataphracts of the Byzantine empire and the Persian Sasanids to the knights of Western Europe.
The spread of the stirrup, improved metalworking for armor and swords, and the breeding of bigger horses all contributed to the evolution of the medieval knight.
Highstatus warriors, whether European knights or Japanese samurai, adopted chivalric codes of honor and viewed warfare as first and foremost a means of demonstrating personal prowess.
Infantry were mostly of low status and consigned to an auxiliary battlefield role rather than the central place they had held in Ancient Greece or Rome.
Nonetheless, in European warfare properly organized foot soldiers, especially when armed with longbows or crossbows, and later with pikes, became increasingly influential from the 14th century onward.
Technical advances Technological progress was fitful and often less important than fresh tactics— the longbow, for example, was a rather primitive weapon in itself but surprisingly effective when deployed en masse by the English in the Hundred Years War.
Gunpowder weapons developed first in China, where they were in extensive use by the 14th century, yet marginal in their overall impact.
It was in Europe around 1450 that cannon started to change the face of war, ending the reign of stone castles by battering down their walls.
Throughout this time a wholly separate tradition of warfare was maintained in the Americas, in the absence of both the wheel and the horse.
Metalworking was rare and weapons were generally edged or tipped with stone.
This did not prevent the creation of large empires, with both the Incas in Peru and the Aztecs in Mexico extending military domination over substantial areas.
His general Belisarius defeats the Vandals in North Africa and the Ostrogoths in Italy.
Knights from Western Europe march across Anatolia and capture Antioch and Jerusalem.
The Minamoto clan defeats the Taira and subsequently establishes the shogunate.
English king Richard the Lionheart signs a treaty with Saladin, by which Christian pilgrims are allowed to visit Jerusalem.
Charles of Anjou and the kingdom of Aragon fight for control of Sicily.
C.1486 German emperor Maximilian I pays for the creation of mostly pike-armed mercenary bands, the landsknechts.
Empire rebuilder Justinian I was a Byzantine emperor in a truly ""Roman"" mold.
Nicknamed ""the emperor who never sleeps"", his armies recaptured much of the territory that had been lost to the Barbarians.
CONSTANTINE'S CAPITAL Byzantium was an important trading center, pivotally placed between Greece and the Mediterranean on one side and the rich cities of western Asia on the other.
The first Christian emperor, Constantine I, built his city here, naming it “Constantinople"" after himself.
His successor, Emperor Theodosius II , bolstered the capital's defenses, building what became known as the Theodosian Wall.
Their city may have been founded by the Greeks, it may have looked eastward into Asia; but the Byzantines always saw themselves as Romans.
Their empire perpetuated that of Rome, even if its western states—and its nominal capital—had been routed by barbarians.
For a while, in the 6th century, it seemed possible the lost territories might be recovered.
Into Africa That this could be more than an empty dream owed much to the daring and skill of Justinian's military commander, Belisarius.
Belisarius triumphed at Dara in 530, but after a stalemate at Callinicum the following year, the Byzantines and Persians agreed an around 505, he is believed to have been of Greek or Thracian ancestry.
Byzantium had been locked in conflict with Persia's Sasanid rulers over The percentage pay cut imposed on Byzantine troops in 588, prompting a mutiny—which invited an attack by Persia and hence an expensive war. inconclusive peace.
Justinian still felt strong enough to embark upon a new campaign in a different theater and sent Belisarius out to conquer the Vandal kingdom in what for centuries had been the Roman province of Africa.
Though now established in eastern Algeria and Tunisia, the Vandals were of Germanic origin.
In 429, with Rome's THE RISE OF BYZANTIUM Sasanid sword Persia's Sasanid rulers were immensely proud of their warlike traditions.
A sword like this one was not just a weapon but a status symbol—often elaborately decorated with silver. western empire in turmoil, they had swept southward through Spain before crossing the Straits of Gibraltar.
Sacking Roman Carthage, the Vandals soon set up their own capital there.
Confined to the coastal plain, the new Vandal kingdom was insignificant in terms of territory.
Power struggle In 535, exhilarated by this success, Justinian sent Belisarius to reclaim the Italian ""homeland,"" at this time under the occupation of the Ostrogoths.
The Goths were not beaten and by the early 550s were resurgent in Italy.
It would continue intermittently for 50 years, shaping the Byzantine war machine.
The Sasanids could deploy thousands of cataphracts, armored horsemen who charged with lances raised, smashing into the enemy with a force that even the toughest, most disciplined infantrymen could not withstand.
After the shock of the first impact came the terrifying confusion as the units of cataphracts drew their bows and showered arrows all around.
Fighting back The Byzantines saw no alternative but to match the Persian threat directly.
They assembled cataphract units of their own, reinforcing them with light and heavy infantry.
Most of their soldiers were foederati, recruited from the many barbarian peoples who were bound by treaty to the Byzantine cause; others were mercenaries.
The Persians were kept at bay and at last, in 627, the armies of Emperor Heraclius scored a daring victory over the Sasanids at Nineveh, Military horsepower Cataphracts used the movement of their horses to their advantage, gleaning extra power from the animal—a rider's lance was usually chained to the horse's neck and hind leg, using momentum to strengthen a lunge.
The exhausted imperial armies had succeeded only in clearing the way for invasion by the Arabs.
Believed to have been a blend of burning oil and tar propelled by a pump—a sort of medieval flamethrower—it played havoc with the enemy in an age of wooden ships.
AFTER Decades of war in western Asia had left both Byzantium and Persia drained.
Neither was able to hold up the expansion of the Arabs through the 7th century.
BELEAGUERED BYZANTIUM The decline of the Byzantine empire from this time on was inexorable, and it was permanently on the defensive.
But long after the bulk of its land-territories had gone, it remained an important naval power.
Wars with these groups in the 9th, 10th, and Uth centuries saw Constantinople under threat, while the states in Italy and Sicily were taken by the Normans in the 11th century.
After the hijrah —the move to Medina in 622—they had to fight for their survival.
Inspired by their sense of mission, they triumphed at the battle of Badr in 624.
Jihad could mean a literal war for Islam or an inner battle for personal renewal.
By the time the prophet died in 632, his followers had grown accustomed to the idea that believers had to fight to make the truth prevail.
His successor, the first caliph, Abu Bakr, brought all the Arab tribes under Islamic rule. mm THE KA'ABA, MECCA, CENTRE OF THE MUSLIM WORLD The Ascent of Islam The 7th century saw the birth of Islam, and with it an extraordinary campaign of conquest.
In the space of a few generations, much of the known world was brought under Muslim rule.
Till then a collection of warring tribes, the Arabs had found a shared ideal, an identity in which they could unite.
Within a century, the prophet's message had been carried over an area reaching from northern Spain to Central Asia.
Their main weapons, though, were speed and surprise, as well as a passionate commitment to their beliefs.
Nomadic pastoralists, they had grown up tough, with superlative riding skills.
Brass alam This ornate alam honors the martyrdom of Husain ibn Ali, who was killed at the battle of Karbala in 680.
He is mourned each year in Muharram, the first month of the Islamic calendar. or dromedary, was used as a beast of burden rather than a mount, but it was far quicker and more versatile than any wheeled cart.
Out of the desert Abu Bakr's challenge as first caliph was bringing together all the Arab tribes.
It did so with explosive violence—Umar's armies pouring out of the Arabian Peninsula to attack the southern borders of the Byzantine empire.
The Arabs had conquered Syria, Palestine, and Egypt by 641; they had also defeated the Sasanids.
As yet, they were too few in number to take farreaching areas of the Persian empire, but they quickly made new converts and consolidated their position.
In the following decades, the empire-building effort was hampered by internal divisions.
At Karbala in Iraq in 680, the army of Umayyad Caliph Yazid I overcame that of Husain ibn Ali, the prophet's grandson.
The massacre that ensued left a legacy of The Islamic world In just a few generations, the Arabs extended their empire across much of the known world, from the Atlantic to the Indus and beyond.
Even so, Iran was secured and Afghanistan taken, while an advance-guard poured across the Hindu Kush into what is now Pakistan.
Muawiyyah I's Umayyad dynasty, with its capital at Damascus, imposed a degree of unity and order on the Arab 10 MILLION The area, in square km , of the empire by the 8th century ce; all ruled by the Umayyads. world.
Battle of Karbala Completely surrounded and hopelessly outnumbered, Husain ibn Ali, his half-brother, Abbas, and their supporters fought heroically to the death.
A F T E The Arab attempt to conquer Europe was thwarted at the battle of Poitiers in 732.
However, the Islamic hold on the Middle East remains strong to this day.
Even so, the Islamic kingdom of al-Andalus was to flourish for several centuries.
A LASTING LEGACY The long-term consequences of some of these events can be traced in the modern era.
The encounter was sparked by Husain's refusal to swear allegiance to Yazid, who wanted the blessing of the family of the Holy Prophet to legitimize his rule.
Husain was protected by a handful of relatives, many of them women and children, and was slain during the confrontation.
Muslim Arabs and Berbers had been raiding Aquitaine and Provence from Spain since 721.
When he died in 768, his kingdom was divided between his two sons, Charles and Riding to war in the 9th century Joab leads his troops in this biblical battle-scene.
Created for the Psalterium Aureum manuscript around 845, this contemporary illumination gives a colorful impression of how the Frankish cavalry would have looked.
Charles besieged Pavia, the capital of Lombardy, until Desiderius surrendered in June 774.
Then, with papal support, Charles persuaded the Lombard dukes to name him as their new king.
Meanwhile, the Saxons took advantage of his absence Frankish Expansion Arched iron blade Under King Clovis I , the Franks made themselves the masters of what had been Roman Gaul.
Under Frankish law, land—like other possessions—had to be shared out equally among a man's sons.
Equitable, perhaps, but where kingship was concerned, a recipe for war.
A cycle of civil conflict developed in which individual rulers reunited the Frankish realms by force of arms, only to divide them up again among their sons.
FRANKISH HELMET A WEAKENED MONARCHY The authority of the Merovingian kings became undermined by a rise in aristocratic factionalism.
The position ""Mayor of the Palace""— the official charged with ensuring the smooth running of the royal household—grew in importance.
From the 8th century, the Franks extended their dominion over much of Western and Central Europe.
For all its internal dynastic conflicts, the Frankish empire brought a degree of stability to Europe that had not been seen since Roman times, and it became a bulwark against Muslim expansion from the south.
B y the 8th century, the authority of the Merovingians was greatly reduced.
Power had passed to the aristocracy and to the ""Mayors of the Palace,"" but even here dissension was rife.
Lacking surviving sons, Pepin's widow, Plectrude, tried to secure the Mayor's office for an eight-year-old grandson, Theudoald, but Neustrian nobles elevated their own candidate, Ragenfred, to Mayor.
Franks fight Franks The Neustrians invaded Austrasia and, as Plectrude was agreeing terms with them, an illegitimate son of Pepin's, Charles, whom she had been keeping in captivity, escaped.
Neustrian army at Ambleve, near Liege, as it withdrew, then forced Plectrude to surrender power.
Now ruling Austrasia, Charles defeated the Neustrians at Vincy, near Cambrai, in 717.
Chilperic and Ragenfred allied themselves to Duke Eudo of Aquitaine, but Charles defeated their armies at Soissons in 718.
Up to now, these campaigns had been punitive expeditions to keep the enemy at bay.
At the royal assembly held in Quierzy, Picardy, in January 775, Charlemagne announced his plans for an invasion— subjugating the Saxons once and for all.
Although an advance force was defeated at the Weser River by I IRMINSUL A wooden column or tree trunk on which Saxon religious worship was centered.
Within a few weeks, however, Charlemagne reappeared and crushed the Lombard revolt, robbing the Saxons of their spirit.
His realms included much of modern-day France and the southern and western parts of Germany, as well as north and central Italy.
Charlemagne consolidated and enlarged his empire through a number of campaigns against his enemies, who ranged from the Byzantines to the Danes, and from the Slavs to the Saxons.
V iV Charlemagne was not always able to make his authority felt so easily, however.
Even so, he later established _____ a secure foothold to the south of the mountain range with the capture of Barcelona in 801.
This buckle for a sword belt was found in Oslo, southern Norway. dominated the Danube Valley, but whose empire was disintegrating.
Yet again, however, the Saxons exploited his absences to rise up against his rule.
A renewed revolt surfaced in the year 778, and though Charlemagne suppressed the uprising, it was clear that the Saxons were never simply going to acquiesce to Frankish rule.
An effort was made to stamp out pagan practices among the Saxons to ease their absorption into the Frankish state.
Not until 804, after the deportation of a number of Saxons into Francia, were they finally pacified.
Charlemagne's conquest of the Saxons had brought his empire up against the frontier of the Danes in southern Jutland.
Charlemagne at first had no answer to this problem, but after Godfred was succeeded by his nephew.
Hemming, in 810, the emperor was able to push him into a peace treaty through a combination of diplomatic persuasion and military force.
Fortunately, the customary succession-struggle was avoided because he had just one surviving son, Louis the Pious, who reigned from 814.
THE SAXON SITUATION Difficult as it had been to bring it about, the conquest of the Saxons was enduring.
Under Charlemagne's successors they were successfully absorbed into the Frankish state as tributaries.
The Dukes of Saxony eventually became kings and, from the time of Otto I — crowned in 962—emperors in their own right.
This strongly Germanic eastern section of the empire would, in time, part company with the western region, which had once been Roman Gaul.
The division, agreed among Louis the Pious's sons at the Treaty of Verdun in 843, eventually became permanent.
REBELLIONS AND RAIDS In the meantime, troubles continued along the Frankish empire's frontiers, with unrest among the Slavs and Danes on the one hand and the Basques and Bretons on the other.
Viking Raids and the Norman Conquest From the end of the 8th century for almost IOO years, Scandinavian shipborne attackers looted the coastal peoples of Europe and North Africa.
Over time the Vikings settled down to a life of trade, but though their raiding days were behind them, they were just as formidable in war.
BEFORE With tillable land scarce in Scandinavia, those without suffered.
No land meant no livelihood—and more prosperous societies were there for the taking.
ENVIRONMENTAL FACTORS The peoples of Scandinavia lived as farmers, keeping cattle, sheep, and pigs, and growing crops, but land was at a premium.
Much of the interior was mountainous, so people clustered around the coasts and the pressure on arable areas was intense.
Landless men without prospects at home set out to prey on other, more successful, civilizations.
O n June 8, 793, the great monastery on Lindisfarne, an island off England's Northumbrian coast, was sacked and pillaged in the first known Viking raid.
Unfortunately, such terrible, nightmarish scenes were to recur only too frequently as Viking raids became a fact of life.
Seafaring adventurers Monastic houses were a favorite target—they had rich treasures, isolated settings, and helpless inhabitants—but ordinary towns and villages also fell prey to the brutal invaders.
Danish Vikings sailed back and forth across the North Sea to eastern England.
Vikings from Norway, though, took a more westerly course, stopping off at the islands of Orkney and Shetland en route for Ireland with its ancient monasteries.
Vikings established bases Viking vessel Streamlined for speed, the longship was fast enough for its crew to be able to rely upon the advantage of surprise.
Typically, it would lurk beyond the horizon, dashing for the coast once darkness fell.
Some were ""dragon ships,"" with dragon-shaped prows—a terrifying sight for unsuspecting quarry.
Greenland VOLGA Far and wide Whether raiding or trading, by sea or by river, the Vikings reached much of medieval Europe and Asia and even ventured across the Atlantic. at Dublin and along the Seine and Loire rivers in France where they could wait out the winter, ready to resume raiding with the onset of spring.
While some headed westward across the Atlantic, setting up colonies in Iceland, Greenland, and ultimately North America, others explored the warmer waters of the south.
The 9th century saw raids along the coasts of Spain, Morocco, and even the Canary Islands.
However, they primarily came to the Byzantine metropolis in peace in order to find a market for the slaves they had captured on their journey south.
Many Vikings hired themselves out to the Byzantines as mercenaries, forming an elite unit, the Varangian Guard.
Increasingly, war-parties banded BESERK Sometimes a Viking, crazed by the excitement of battle, would tear off his ""sark,"" or tunic, and fight barechested— hence the expression, going ""beserk."" together for more ambitious raids.
Having arrived as mercenaries, the Normans came back as conquerors, wresting these vulnerable territories from Byzantine rule.
It was Robert Guiscard who won what turned into an unseemly struggle of Norman warlords, and carved out a kingdom for himself in Sicily and southern Italy.
Viking ax A badge of wealth and status, a Viking's battle-ax was often ornate.
It landed an army of up to 3,000 men—including both Norwegian and Danish Vikings.
Marching up to Maldon in Essex, a trail of destruction in their wake, they finally defeated an Anglo-Saxon militia force led by Ealdorman Byrhtnoth.
The invaders soon withdrew on payment of a large ransom but not before the AngloSaxon leader was killed.
Warrior kingdoms The Vikings were not just raiders, they were also highly formidable in larger-scale, static warfare—though they were always individualistic in Inlaid blade Norman body armor Vikings seldom bothered with armor, but the Normans did.
As the Bayeux Tapestry shows, the Normans wore chainmail hauberks that came down to the knees, with a split in the chain to facilitate riding. their fighting style.
Their battle-axes, swords, and circular, hide-covered wooden shields were items of immense prestige—often beautifully worked and richly adorned—while their owners had intimidatory war names (Erik Bloodaxe; Bjorn Ironside; Ragnar Hairy-Breeks) and had heroic poems composed about them by their bards.
The Vikings were beginning to behave more like conventional conquerors.
In the late 9th century Olav Tryggvason made a kingdom out of Norway, while early in the 11th century King Cnut the Great joined Norway and Denmark with England to form a Nordic empire.
Norsemen to Normans Meanwhile, Norwegian Vikings or Norsemen (the name ""Normans"" comes from Norsemen) had started to put down permanent roots in France, adopting the language, culture, and Christian religion.
The Normans kept their longships but took up the French way of fighting, most obviously in their use of armor and heavy cavalry, as the events of 1066 would show.
King Harold's English army had been forced to march from Yorkshire, where just days before it had fought off Harald Hardrada, the Norwegian king.
On October 14, Harold ranged his troops at the top of Senlac Hill, near Hastings.
William ordered his forces to feign retreat before Harold's Anglo-Saxon army.
The ploy enticed the English down from their advantageous position to the boggy ground below, where they were at the mercy of William's cavalry.
Even so, the struggle continued for hours, and might easily have ended differently had Harold not fatally fallen.
By nightfall, victory for William was complete, and the English throne was his.
In the 1030s Norman armies had gone to assist the AFTER „_ d f As the generations passed, Scandinavia's peoples began to move away from the policy of plunder.
PEACEFUL TRADERS In time, as the Scandinavians became Northern Europe's medieval merchant navy, the dreaded ""dragon ship"" made way for the shorter, rounder knarr.
The merchant navy followed the same routes as their raiding ancestors; now, though, they came peacefully as traders, transporting goods such as timber, weapons, ivory, and furs.
NORMAN EVOLUTION The strong state the Normans had built in England fell apart in the ""Anarchy"" of the 12th century.
During that time, the successors of Robert Guiscard had created a buoyant and prosperous multicultural kingdom in Sicily, in which Norman, Byzantine, and Arabic influences came together in a complex fusion.
SIMEON OF DURHAM ON THE HAVOC THE NORMANS WROUGHT, 11TH CENTURY TECHNOLOGY NORMAN MOTTE-AND-BAILEY CASTLE The Normans built many ""instant castles"" on campaign by what was known as the motte-and-bailey method.
First, a motte, or ""mound of earth,"" was constructed (or an existing rise or outcrop used) with a wooden stronghold, or ""keep"", erected on top.
A ""curtain wall"" was then placed around the motte, enclosing an open area, or ""bailey,"" in which arms could be stored and horses grazed.
These forts could be assembled almost overnight and later rebuilt in stone.
NOMADIC MIGRATIONS The many different Turkic peoples formed small and scattered nomadic groups.
Their lifestyle was prone to instability, as competition for water and pasture could be intense.
The Abbasid dynasty held nominal sovereignty over Islam's dominions, but local warlords were starting to assert themselves.
THE RISE OF THE GHULAM The end of the first millennium brought a new wave of migration, propelling Islamicized Turks into the region, many of them enslaved by the region's rulers.
Skilled fighters, with nothing invested in the rivalries and conflicts of the Middle East, these ghulams (slavesoldiers) served with unquestioning loyalty.
SOUTHWEST AND CENTRAL ASIA Q Empire of Mahmud of Ghazni Dates990-1020 Location Afghanistan, Iran, northern India H Great Seljuk Empire Dates 1037-1157 Location Iran, Mesopotamia, Syria, Palestine, and Turkey The Rise of the Turks The Turks who appeared in the Middle East during the 9th century were outsiders and slaves, but they were to exercise a powerful influence upon the region's history and, ultimately, upon that of Europe.
Various Turkish empires were repeatedly to alarm Byzantium until, finally, they triggered the crusades.
T he Arab invasions of the 7th and 8th centuries left an enduring legacy.
Through much of the area they conquered, the Arabic influence—and Islam—still prevail today.
Whether now exhausted by centuries of conflict, or simply spread too thinly over such vast dominions, the Arab nobility was growing weaker and its authority increasingly ignored.
Soldiers of the Samanids In Iran, especially, regional identities had been reasserting themselves and local families were once again coming to the fore.
In the east, in the early 9th century, the Samanid dynasty had arisen among the Tajik peoples, establishing an empire that extended into Afghanistan, Uzbekistan, and present-day Pakistan.
Like the other nomadic peoples of the Central Asian steppe, the Turks were superlative horsemen and seasoned fighters, expert with the composite bow and with the sword.
By the 10th century, in Khurasan (an area including the east of Iran, the Bukhara region of Uzbekistan, and much of Afghanistan) the Simjurids had gone their own way, governing from Daylarn, a mountainous region to the south of the Caspian Sea.
The Buyids deposed the caliph and ruled in their own right, but they in turn started to be undermined by warlords in the regions.
Regular raiding east into India assured a steady flow of booty that underwrote a golden age of architecture, art, and culture.
The Ghaznavids were to be overthrown in their turn by yet another influx of Turkic nomads newly arrived from the Central Asian steppe—the Seljuk Turks.
Seljuk and his successors The Seljuk Turks gained their name because they had originally come together under the leadership of Seljuk, a charismatic warlord.
THE CHRONICLER, MATTHEW OF EDESSA, ON THE SELJUK TURKS' ADVANCE INTO ARMENIA, 1064 Seljuk mace head Beautifully decorated with flowing foliage and fine calligraphy, this bronze mace head has raised fins to focus the impact of any blow.
The mace is stereotypically seen as a Western weapon—in contrast to the Eastern scimitar—but the idea may well have reached Europe through the crusades. all but independently of their masters.
In turn, this breakaway state was soon taken over by a rival ghulam dynasty, the Ghaznavids, their name deriving from the city of Ghazni, where their founder, Alpi Tigin, had made his headquarters in 962.
Meanwhile, to the west of the empire, the Abbasid caliphs of Baghdad had also recruited Turkic ghulams and were coming under mounting pressure from their supposed slaves.
In the event, the caliphs managed to prevent a coup by the ghulams — but only by seeking the help (and by submitting to the bullying) of the Buyids, a dynasty of Iranian warlords the 10th century Seljuk, leader of the Kinik clan, had set himself up at the head of the Oghuz Confederation.
This brought together a large number of nomadic communities who until then had been living in the Syr basin, an area of open grassland to the north and east of the Aral Sea.
It was a loose and opportunistic alliance, formed for the purposes of conquest and plunder.
Even so, the Seljuk Turks might have remained simply one more of many such raggle-taggle warbands roaming the western steppe had Seljuk himself not been impressed and inspired by the 72 teachings of Muslim missionaries.
All of his followers embraced Islam, and when his grandsons, Tugril Beg and Chagri, began their first raids on the northern frontier of the Ghaznavid empire, they did so with the justification that they were fighting in the prophet's name.
However, Mahmud of Ghazni's son, Mas'ud I, saw himself as the champion of Islam.
He marched out to meet the interlopers with a mighty army, some 50,000 strong.
As this formidable force marched northward, the Seljuks jabbed and harried, cutting off enemy supplies and preventing access to strategic wells.
The two armies clashed at Dandankan (now in eastern Turkmenistan), on May 23 ,1040.
Dehydrated, hungry, and demoralized, Mahmud's men were defeated before the order came to engage.
Holy war The Dandankan victory opened up a way to the west, heading over the Ghaznavid empire and beyond into Iraq.
The Seljuk Sultans (as they now referred to themselves) expected to rule jointly with the caliphs.
The Great Seljuk empire was dedicated to the strictest principles of Sunni Islam and to the punishment of infidels of every kind.
To Arp Aslan, Tugril Beg's nephew and (on his uncle's death in 1063) his successor, that included both Christian Byzantium and the Shiite Fatimid dynasty then ruling Egypt.
Arp Aslan then took Syria, invading Palestine, Egypt, and even Arabia itself in a bid to ""liberate"" the two holy sanctuaries of Mecca and Medina from Shiite rule.
The closer these supposedly ""pagan"" Seljuk Turks came to Europe through SULTAN A Turkish king or emperor.
Wooden cushions between the tiers of brick afforded some protection from earthquakes. their campaign of conquest, the more anxious Christendom became.
When Arp Aslan then destroyed the Byzantine army at the battle of Manzikert in 1071 , the West was in the grip of something close to panic.
Reaction The Byzantine emperor, Romanus IV, had an army of up to 60,000 warriors at his disposal.
Such vast numbers ought, in theory, to have made short work of the Turkish cavalry force that, at most, numbered only 20,000 men.
They were also bound to one another by ties of comradeship and loyalty that were simply lacking in the Byzantine army, as its members comprised a motley assortment of Frankish, Norman, Bulgarian, and German mercenaries.
The extent of disunity among the Byzantine troops became clear when, as evening approached after an initial and inconclusive round of fighting, the Byzantine leader gave the order to withdraw.
Fearing that their commander had sensed defeat and was trying to Warrior relief Seljuk infantrymen prepare to enter into battle in this carved Turkish relief from the 13th century.
Malik Shah holds court Arp Aslan's son, Malik Shah, succeeded him in 1072, advancing the work his father had begun at Manzikert by taking most of Anatolia from the Byzantines.
He also furthered the cause of Sunni Islam during his reign. save his own skin, the majority of the soldiers turned and fled the battlefield in abject rout.
In the years that followed, Muslim Turks overran Anatolia, fundamentally transforming what had been a Christian land with a Hellenistic culture.
Now the Middle East was Islamic, and the stage was set for one of the great showdown struggles of the medieval age.
AfTER ia The rise of the Seljuk Turks caused great consternation in the Christian West.
CHRISTIAN CRUSADES The Seljuk capture of Jerusalem from the Fatimids in 1073 was of symbolic rather than strategic importance for the West, but for a fearful Christendom it seemed the final straw.
THE SELJUK EMPIRE SPLITS In 1092, following Malik Shah's death, one son, Kalij Arslan I, founded the ""Sultanate of Rum,"" so-called because its Anatolian territories had been taken from the Byzantines or Romans.
A POWER UNDER SIEGE Islam had already made significant inroads into continental Europe, underlining what was already a widespread feeling that Christendom was CRUSADE From the Latin word crux meaning ""cross,"" a military campaign on behalf of the Christian faith. under siege.
Constantinople was clinging on, but its wider empire had inexorably been whittled away by the conquests first of the Arabs and then of the Seljuk Turks.
However, when the Byzantines appealed to Pope Urban II for assistance, he found the idea of a military expedition or crusade to recover the ""Holy Places"" for Christian pilgrims the perfect rallying point for a wider attack on Islamic power.
A t the Council of Clermont in 1095, Pope Urban II called on all Christians to join the fight for their holy faith, describing the plight of Christian Byzantium, its dominions overrun by a ""godless"" rabble that was an impending threat to the Western world.
His speech roused ardor with its promise of eternal salvation for those who enlisted; it also fired a greed for territories and plunder.
Cheers erupted and in the weeks that followed this enthusiasm spread across Europe, among rich and poor.
Though highly enthusiastic, the army that gathered in Constantinople for the assault on the Holy Land was disorganized, untrained, and very poorly provisioned.
The French nobility expected to fight as heavy cavalry themselves but had brought very large companies of infantrymen armed with swords, shields, and bows.
The excited mood was quickly sobered by the searing sun and rugged terrain of Anatolia's mountains—Seljuk Turk territory.
Of the 100,000 soldiers who set out from Constantinople, only 40,000 reached Antioch in Syria.
Those who did, in October 1097, found a city built—and fortified—on an intimidating scale.
The crusaders settled down for a siege, although, marooned in hostile territory, they were actually under a sort of siege themselves.
Many had died of starvation and disease by the time Antioch fell on June 2, 1098.
The crusader kingdoms It was a severely weakened army—only 12,000 in number now—that marched on to Jerusalem, and the prospect of another extended siege.
In the event, it took the men only a few months to find their way through Jerusalem's defenses.
Or O Cordoba Ways of the cross Any crusade represented an enormous logistical challenge for a medieval army.
V 1099 Damietta \ K | NGDO mof JERUSALEM EGYPT 1099-1187 KEY MOMENT THE CAPTURE OF JERUSALEM, 1099 The Fatimid defenders had successfully resisted the crusaders' siege of Jerusalem for several weeks and looked capable of holding out indefinitely.
But the Christians took their ships apart and used the ropes and wood to construct two enormous siege towers.
The Muslims were unfamiliar with such equipment and were undecided how to proceed until, on July 15, the first group of attackers managed to swarm across onto the city walls.
Quickly overpowering the guards, they opened the gates and let their remaining comrades in to commence their orgy of bloodshed.
More than 30,000 Jews and Muslims are believed to have been slaughtered in the following three days.
They set up a series of states across Syria and Palestine, including the County of Edessa in Armenia, the Principality of Antioch in Syria, and the Kingdom of Jerusalem.
A County of Tripoli (in what is now Lebanon) was added in 1104, with a ""military order"" of soldier-priests set up in 1120 to help protect the Holy Places.
The priests were named the Knights Templar after the Temple of Jerusalem.
Though the Temple of Jerusalem and other monuments were now in Christian hands, the territory outside Jerusalem was less firmly held.
These people had long been caring for the sick in Jerusalem, but by the 1130s it was clear that pilgrims needed more hostile protection—the knights became their armed escorts.
They too were militarized as the Order of the Knights Hospitallers, and would build the city's defenses.
As the fighting continued—mainly in the form of small-scale skirmishes and raids—the limitations of the Western Symbol of the Knights Templar The seal of the Knights Templar depicts two knights on one horse—legend has it that this is a sign of the order's early poverty. way became apparent.
A knight's heavy armor was an uncomfortable hindrance in the heat, and the wearer was easily outmaneuvered by the swifter, more lightly armed Muslims.
Arab cavalry wore no armor, relying on speed and agility, while the ghulam (armored slave-soldiers) brought the battle to the enemy on their own terms.
Muslim fightback The retaking of the County of Edessa by the Seljuks in 1144 came as a shock.
Pope Eugenius Ill's call for a Second Crusade was largely ignored, until it was taken up by the popular French abbot, Bernard of Clairvaux; then France's King Louis VII and Conrad III of Germany followed.
Conrad Ill's contingent set off from Constantinople but | suffered a shattering defeat at Dorylaeum, in southern Turkey, in 1147.
What was left of his army met up with the French who, coming by sea, had now landed safely.
The Muslims now had the initiative; they were also fired by the spirit of jihad, reignited by their outrage at this second invasion by the West.
Outmaneuvered The army of llghazi of Mardin trounced the crusaders at the battle of Ager Sanguinis in 1119.
The heavily-armed Christians labored in the heat and dust of the Middle East.
The First Crusade was a success for the Christians but the Muslims were on the ascent.
A PERMANENT LEGACY A breakdown of relations with Byzantium left the crusaders reliant on seaborne supplies, making the securing of coastal bridgeheads vital.
Further expeditions were needed if the Christian presence in the Middle East was to be maintained.
Despite the best efforts of the Christians, the Muslims were in the ascendant.
After initial success, the crusading movement had succeeded only in building rancor between Christians and Muslims.
Further crusades were mounted in the years that followed, but a series of humiliating failures left the West feeling defeated and demoralized.
One man who carried this volume wherever he went was Salah al-Din, famous as a warrior yet a reader and thinker too.
Born in Tikrit, Iraq, of Kurdish ancestry, he had risen in the service of Egypt's Fatimid caliphs; by 1131 he had set himself up as sultan, founding his own dynasty, the Ayyubids.
The following years saw him extending that power as he cut a swathe through the crusader states, finally taking Jerusalem in 1187, but he always saw himself as fighting in the service of the truth.
Most Christian believers felt that their mission had been accomplished, but their leaders knew that without control of the hinterland, the Holy City was vulnerable.
Fighting continued and, as time went on, it grew harder to see how the Christian presence in the Middle East was to be maintained.
To make matters worse, a new generation of energetic Muslim leaders, like the Emir of Syria, Nur ad-Din, and Saladin, were coming to the fore.
After Saladin's capture of Jerusalem in 1187, Henry II imposed a ""Saladin Tithe"" in England to fund a crusade that, in the event, never took place.
ISLAM RESURGENT Nur ad-Din had worked hard to unite Islam after the collapse of the Second Crusade, inspiring his followers with a cold-blooded determination to drive out the infidels.
In 1157 he had confined the Knights Hospitallers to their fortress and destroyed the army that marched out from Jerusalem to relieve them.
Saladin was also a politician of rare talent and a general of genius. wiped out.
Leopold made it through, but with only a few thousand troops he could do little to help the crusader king, Guy of Jerusalem, who was bogged down in a stalemate with Saladin outside Acre.
The port city was important to the Christians, who could not anticipate holding on to Jerusalem (in the event of their retaking it) without some safe way of bringing in supplies.
By the time Richard I was 16 his father Henry II had entrusted the young king with the command of his own army, sent to crush a rebellion against his rule in France.
He met his match in Saladin, however, and, for all his determination and dazzling generalship, his Third Crusade was at best only partially successful.
The Third Crusade, declared within a few weeks of Saladin's recapture of Jerusalem, is often referred to as the ""Crusade of Kings""; it is so-called because it was led by kings Richard the Lionheart of England, Philip II of France, and Frederick I of Germany.
Frederick I set off in 1188, months before his fellow monarchs, and drowned while crossing a river in Anatolia en route to the Holy Land.
His successor, Leopold V of Austria, was unable to take charge effectively in the ensuing panic and a huge German army was practically v> RICHARD I ( Later Crusades Dates 1187-1291 Location Palestine, Syria, and Egypt BEFORE L_ The capture of Jerusalem in 1099 had been an undoubted triumph for the West.
But the Holy Land was a long journey from Europe and Islamic opposition was growing.
But there was Saracen armor A suit of chain mail in the style of a Saracen warrior of the crusader period.
Medieval armor was flexible and could be relatively light to wear, and provided good protection both from thrusts and slashing strokes.
Padding underneath the chain mail helped deflect arrows, while a kaftan on top allowed the wearer to be recognized—and prevented his metallic armor from overheating in the sun. also rancor within the Christian camp.
Unable to agree with Richard over how to proceed next, Leopold returned home; while Philip II also had to leave the field following reports of unrest back in France. remained calm as they inched along.
On September 7, at Arsuf, north of Jaffa, the pressure from Saladin's forces became so unrelentingly intense that the Christian Knights Hospitallers could tolerate no more and, in their mounting frustration, broke first.
The last great flowering of the crusading ideal came with the Seventh Crusade, escorted by King Louis IX of France.
Louis took with him an army of 15,000, including his mounted knights, his regular infantry, and crossbowmen.
MUSLIM CHRONICLER BAHA AL-DIN, 12TH CENTURY The road to Arsuf This left Richard alone at the head of the Third Crusade, he was undaunted, planning his mission in great detail.
On August 22, 1191, he left Acre, marching his army south to where they could find food and water.
To their right, the cavalry were able to make progress relatively safely, while up ahead the baggage train lurched along, shielded by both the infantry and horses.
Meanwhile, their ships tracked them down the coast to fend off any potential threat from the seaward side.
Under Richard's leadership, his men now Richard remained in control of the situation, his generalship turning certain defeat into triumph—albeit not the definitive victory he had desired.
Saladin and his army of Saracens had suffered a disastrous setback; Richard the Lionheart's reputation had been boosted, though it was difficult to see any tangible benefits from his victory.
He himself was recalled to England soon after, having failed to win back the holy city of Jerusalem from the Saracens.
The Christians would have to keep fighting—and some were reaping huge /""A /''v/'V/'V The number of knights / U f U J taken by King Andrew II of Hungary on the Fifth Crusade.
When the Fourth Crusade was called in 1199, Enrico Dandolo, the Venetian Doge, made sure that Venice, which provided much of the waterborne transport, earned a lot of money.
The Fourth Crusade was to have a hideous conclusion when the fleet diverted to Constantinople and its Christian troops sacked the city, killing many thousands as they burned and looted for three full days.
In 1228 the Sixth Crusade saw Germany's king Frederick II diplomatically negotiate the return of Jerusalem, though the concessions he made outraged his fellow Europeans.
The king and his entire company were taken prisoner and an enormous ransom was demanded for the restoration of the monarch.
In 1270, unfazed, Louis embarked on an Eighth Crusade, but only made it to Tunis, where he died.
A Ninth Crusade led by England's Edward I began the following year, but Edward fared rather less well against the Mameluks.
Siege of Zara The Fourth Crusade began with an amphibious landing and ended with the sack of the Catholic city of Zara.
A series of ignominious failures had left Europe exhausted, demoralized, and disenchanted with the crusading dream; yet it managed to find a new focus.
HERETICS EXECUTED IN FRANCE GROWING INFLUENCE Christendom's rulers launched ""crusades"" against the pagan Slavs on their eastern borders, as well as Orthodox Christians in the Balkans.
The ""military orders"" still prospered—in some cases they had gained great wealth and power—but the Knights Templar was finally disbanded in 1305.
Meanwhile, Islam's influence grew; still the Turks came in from the eastern steppe.
It once contained relics of the ""True Cross"" and fragments of the bones of Christian martyrs.
King Louis IX of France personified the crusading movement in all its idealistic ardor, its heroism, and its haplessness.
His piety could not be doubted, and his personal kindness was legendary, yet he burned with rage to see the Holy Places of Jerusalem in Islamic hands.
But the Seventh Crusade was ultimately a disaster and the Eighth ended prematurely with his death.
They sailed from the port of Aigues-Mortes in southern France, specially rebuilt for the purpose, via Cyprus, to Damietta, in the Nile Delta.
Louis aimed to establish a bridgehead here before approaching Jerusalem and the Holy Land from the south.
Christian soldier Contemporary chronicles see no conflict between Louis' pious humility and his kingly pride, nor between his roles as a believer and as a battler for Christ.
B y the time Louis IX ascended the throne of France, there had been no fewer than six crusades.
Perhaps it now took a visionary to continue to believe in the crusading ideal.
A boy of 12 when he was crowned in 1226, he reigned with the guidance of his mother for the first few years, and retained a certain childlike innocence all his life.
In 1239 Louis spent a fortune buying what was believed to be a fragment of the ""True Cross""—the cross on which Christ had been crucified—and the ""Crown of Thorns"" that Christ's tormentors had forced him to wear.
To house these holy relics in Paris, he built the stunning Saint Chapelle.
One of France's greatest Gothic churches, it was a riot of extravagant vaulting and stained glass.
The young king Louis' youth seemed an open invitation to France's power-hungry barons.
But his tough and determined way with a series of rebels made it clear that—pious or not—he was no Not peace but the sword On a weapon fit for a crusading king, the stylized three-petalled fleurs de lys symbolize the French royal virtues of faith, wisdom, and chivalry, as well as the Holy Trinity. weakling.
Things took a more worrying turn when one rebel, Hugh of Lusignan, allied himself with Henry III of England, but Louis defeated them at Taillebourg in western France in 1242.
Two Jerusalems Two years later, as he recovered from a bout of malaria, Louis learned that Jerusalem was back in Muslim hands.
Emperor Frederick II had negotiated its return in 1228, but now Egypt's Ayyubid rulers had retaken it.
Louis' barons must have felt he was still delirious when he • proclaimed a Seventh Crusade.
The visionary and the soldier came together in Louis' career as a crusader.
Louis hoped that he and his people might show themselves worthy of the New Jerusalem by recapturing the old one.
Archangel with holy scripture The crusaders took Damietta in 1249, only to be caught out by the annual Nile flood.
When they finally managed to make their move, in April 1250, their army was pinned down by the Sultan of Egypt's forces, and then almost annihilated at the battle of Fariskur.
Despite leading with great distinction in the field, Louis's strategic planning left much to be desired.
He was captured, along with his two brothers, and an enormous ransom had to be paid for his return.
On his release, he spent time in the Holy Land, helping to refortify cities against Muslim attack.
In 1267 he called another crusade directed against the powerful new rulers of Egypt, the Mamelukes.
In July 1270, he landed his army at Tunis and besieged the city, but, after drinking contaminated water, Louis fell sick and died on August 25.
Many of his soldiers suffered the same fate, and the crusade was abandoned.
Yet, for all his failures, his idealism had been an inspiration to his contemporaries.
Here, Louis' great-grandfather, Louis VII, is shown embarking from Cyprus on the Second Crusade in 1148.
J Samurai warfare Minamoto and Taira fight in a flurry of swirling banners and flashing tachi swords.
Some ride into battle, lances leveled like Western knights, but most have dismounted and engage in single combat.
Though his official status was divine, the tenno or emperor, of Japan was in medieval times a marginal figure.
JAPANESE ""CLANS"" By the 9th century dominant dynasties were emerging, their ascendancy embodied in the strength and prowess of the armies of samurai warriors they had assembled.
These factions are known as ""clans,"" since they grew up around important families, though most of those fighting for them were not blood relations.
THE FADING FUJIWARA The Fujiwara clan quickly established its presence, holding sway as sesshos, or ""regents,"" and wielding the emperor's authority on his behalf.
By the 12th century, however, its influence was ebbing fast and other families were poised to take its place.
CIVIL WAR IN JAPAN Conflict, raging for generations between the powerful Minamoto and Taira clans, finally flared up into a full-blown civil war.
The Hogon Rebellion of 1156 saw the Fujiwara themselves reduced to figureheads as the Minamoto and Taira fought over who should have power behind the scenes.
Three years later, after the Heiji Rebellion, the Taira came out on top, and established Japan's first samurai government; the Minamoto, however, felt they still had absolutely everything to fight for.
Japan's Gempei Wars With its feuding families, its warring samurai, and its epic scale, the story of the Gempei Wars has the ring of heroic myth.
Yet the conflict convulsed Japan for five terrible years, leaving a lasting historical and cultural legacy.
Moreover, it transformed the country's military institutions and attitudes.
S immering since the humiliation of the Heiji Rebellion three years before, the wrath of the Minamoto boiled over in 1180.
Taira no Kiyomori, having first forced Emperor Takakura to abdicate, had installed his one-year-old grandson on the throne.
Prince Mochihito, was the half-brother of Takakura and was angry at being cheated out of the succession.
Prince Mochihito was put to death, but Minamoto Yorimasa avoided capture (( put my neck to the sword.
In 1181, at Sunomatagawa, the Minamoto did attempt a nocturnal ambush, but were detected in the darkness and defeated.
What strikes the reader of the Heike Monogatari, the great 13th-century epic account of the Gempei Wars, is how Curved blade Horsemanship was held in high regard—memorable descriptions abound in the Heike Monogatari — even though the samurai fought mainly on foot.
Accomplishment in archery was essential; not just with the full-length daikyu but also with the shorter hankyu — both bows could be used on Single edge ■ > ' Samurai sword The warrior's sword was his proudest possession, the symbol of his military prowess—and, potentially, the instrument of his ritual suicide if he were vanquished. by disemboweling himself in the first known act of seppuku.
From that time, this ritual suicide had its special place in the samurai code, enabling defeated warriors to die with honor.
Hearing the rustling of birds' wings in the night, the Taira sentries up-close and intimate the fighting was.
Like the heroes of Homer's Trojan War, warriors make stirring speeches before battle and trade insults as they engage in single combat.
This is all part of I 1,300 The number of ships that are thought to have dashed at the battle of Dan-no-Ura in the Inland Sea.
The Taira clan were crushingly defeated. the literary convention, affording an opportunity for building suspense.
There was no more noble calling than that of the soldier; samurai were schooled in their vocation as small boys. horseback.
The cult of the katana, or ""samurai sword,"" was yet to be established, but the warrior still took pride in his skill with the long, curved tachi sword and with the dagger.
But the samurai who willingly gave up his life did so in the certain knowledge that he would be rewarded with both honor and everlasting fame.
An exchange of arrows by both sides was typically followed by a battle that unfolded as a series of highly formal single combats between warriors.
Changing times, changing fortunes This ritualized way of making war could not be sustained.
In the Heike Monogatari, the Minamoto drew the Taira into an engagement of this kind at Kurikara in 1183—but only as a decoy—and the bulk of Minamoto Yoshinaka's army crept around to attack from the rear.
Yoshinaka tied torches to the horns of frightened cattle, which were sent stampeding into the Taira.
Despite this, in the following months, the Minamoto were split by a number of bitter power struggles.
Yoritomo, loyally backed by his cousin, Yoshitsune, emerged the victor.
At Ichi-no-Tani in 1184, the Minamoto went on the offensive, forcing the Taira to fall back on their home territory around the Inland Sea.
All at sea In 1185 Yoritomo set out to take the Taira's main fortress at Yashima, off Shikoku.
He had a party of men build fires in the hills inland to persuade the Taira that his army was approaching from that direction.
The Taira took to their ships to make their escape, only to find the Minamoto sailing at them from the seaward side.
The battle of Yashima was more of a humiliation than a real defeat for the Taira, as most of them managed to make their way to safety.
The MINAMOTO YOSHITSUNE Yoshitsune was born in 1159, the year of the Heiji Rebellion.
According to tradition, he was trained in the arts of war by Sojobo, mythical king of the tengu spirits of Mount Kurama.
In 1180 he joined his cousins, Minamoto Yoritomo and Minamoto Noriyori, in raising an army to fight the Taira clan.
He went on to win vital triumphs over the Taira but finally fell out with Yoritomo, who had him murdered in 1189.
AFTER The Gempei Wars cast a long shadow over the subsequent history of Japan.
Their impact was as much in the political and cultural spheres as in the military.
Shogunates would, with only the briefest interruptions, remain in power until the second half of the 19th century.
Traditions and values established in medieval times were to resurface in the modern age.
BATTLE OF THE GENII AND THE HEIKE CLANS climactic engagement of the Gempei Wars came a few weeks later at Dan-no-Ura.
This was technically a naval battle, though it was really more a land battle at sea.
Warriors fired off showers of arrows as they came into range of one another, before boarding each other's vessels to continue fighting in hand-to-hand combat.
It was a rigorous test of samurai strength, and one that Yoritomo's Minamoto won, decisively destroying the power of the Taira once and for all.
Tough, fierce nomads ranged the eastern steppe, warring over livestock and resources.
From time to time they banded together to attack communities in the world beyond.
A NEW LEADER The Mongol nomads lived on the move; however, this changed in the 12th century when the various tribal groups coalesced around a charismatic leader—the man known to history as Genghis Khan.
He brought peace to the warring nomads and established a political and military body.
A TIDE OF TERROR Since ancient times a tide of warlike nomadic peoples had drifted westward out of Central Asia to bring terror to the civilizations of the Middle East and Europe.
Mongol Invasions The Mongols were viewed with outright horror by civilized nations.
They were happy to let their savage reputation go before them, but their strategic sophistication tells another story.
The Mongols were fighters with flair and intelligence, who learned with every conquest.
String-bridge ATTILA THE HUN J A lmost extinct in the modern world, the nomadic-pastoralist lifestyle was an unusual one and those people who lived it developed an extraordinarily specialized set of skills.
Time after time, in both ancient and medieval history, these aptitudes had translated seamlessly from the open steppes of Central Asia to the field of war.
For generations, though, they went to war only with one another, tribe against tribe—except when an enterprising warlord fostered a larger warband for an assault on a settled community reasonably close at hand.
Thus it was from small beginnings that Genghis Khan and his sons created the biggest land empire ever seen, ranging all the way from the Pacific Ocean to Central Europe.
This freewheeling warrior of the steppe had already shown himself a cunning and calculating politician.
Now he revealed his infallible instincts as a politician and administrator.
He broke up the old hierarchies in Mongol society, marginalizing the traditional elite.
Instead, he gave leadership positions to his most trusted friends—or to promising fighters plucked from the ranks.
Having humbled the powerful, he won the gratitude of more vulnerable groups by outlawing the sale of wives and by excusing the poorest people from paying taxes.
Genghis Khan divided his warriors up into groups of ten , a hundred , 1,000 and 10,000 —taking care to cut across tribal lines of loyalty.
That way he introduced a degree of regimentation to the anarchic warfare of the steppe.
The sack of Baghdad Genghis Khan's grandson, Hulegu, took the Abbasid capital in 1258.
The Mongols destroyed the city's dykes, trapping the caliph's army behind a sea of water.
Order from chaos In their scattered, ever-mobile tribal communities, the Mongols were not the most promising material for nationbuilding.
Certainly, many of the tribal leaders resented Genghis Khan's rise to prominence.
But, by coaxing some and forcing others, by giving a promise here and administering a little pressure there, Genghis Khan slowly fashioned the Mongols into a coherent people.
Agility in the saddle kept the soldiers safe for the most part; their diminutive horses possessed stamina and speed, and were able to travel considerable distances in a relatively short time.
So much so that settled peoples who received news of Mongol attacks some distance away frequently ■ Bowstrin S underestimated just how quickly the brutal invaders would arrive.
Gold-painted grip At a gallop Genghis Khan hardly needed Mongol quiver to train his men in archery Mongols often carried and close-quarters fighting, two quivers of arrows, however, he ensured that one easily accessible they practiced daily to hone and one in reserve. their skills.
Maneuvers on horseback were an essential part of herding and hunting life, but there was always scope to iron out imperfections.
Rigid regimentation might have been alien to his approach, but discipline was not.
Time after time, his horsemen caught out enemy forces when they appeared to break formation and flee in disorder—prompting mad pursuit—only to regroup at an instant's The percentage of the Earth's land mass that was under Mongol rule at the height of their empire. notice, wheel around, and fall upon their helpless enemy.
Many of his warriors were to fight as armored lancers; in fact, Genghis Khan himself developed particular mounted maneuvers for these men, drilling them A narrow escape The Mongol army swept like a storm through East Asia, invading Xi Xia, the kingdom in northwestern China, in 1207.
The Mongols sacked Zhandu in 1215, before heading south into the heartland of the ""Middle Kingdom."" ^ shaft Moving west, their armies attacked the cities of the Central Asian Silk Road, and by 1222 they were making a diversion into northern India.
By the time their enigmatic leader died in 1227, the empire of the Mongols extended from the Pacific Ocean in the east to the Caspian Sea in the west, and Khan's successors were menacing the Arab countries of the Middle East.
The pace of the Mongols' progress was A Mongol's bow Made of wood, horn, and sinew, with strings of animal hide, the composite bow melded maximum tension with minimum length.
It survived long after his death, though it did break up into smaller khanates. dizzying, yet their military prowess depended on a great deal more than speed.
Genghis Khan had never stopped learning—and never stopped improving his fighting force.
The man who earned himself this accolade was born Temujin inl 162, the son of a minor chieftain.
On his father's death, the young Temujin was ostracized and learned the hard way how to stand up for himself—by fighting.
By 1206 he had won his title of Khan, forging a united people out of an array of squabbling tribes.
He had also created a strong war-machine, as China, India, and others were to find out. naphtha to putrid animal carcasses over the highest battlements; and they had engines that could shoot dozens of fire-arrows at a time.
When Samarkand in Uzbekistan fell after a siege in 1220, the Mongol leader had the inhabitants rounded up and led to a plain outside the city walls.
The hapless people were then slaughtered and their 1240 Mongol troops sacked the city of Kiev after a gruesome siege.
Ogedei's armies continued westward, separate warbands making exploratory forays into Poland and Hungary.
MATTHEW PARIS, 13TH-CENTURY CHRONICLER, ON THE MONGOLS skulls arranged into a pyramid—a sign of victory and a warning to those who might have been tempted to resist.
His forces invaded Russia in 1237, leaving a trail of devastation wherever they went.
All the Mongol chiefs were called back for a conclave to elect his successor.
By the time his successor, Gyuyuk Khan, was in place, the Mongols were preoccupied with other campaigns in the eastern regions of their realm.
Not, however, before Baghdad had been taken, Hulegu's Mongols literally outdoing themselves in wanton cruelty.
Anything up to half a million people may have been slaughtered in the bloodletting that followed the Iraqi city's fall, as the world's most beautiful metropolis was razed to the ground.
The Mongols were nomads by nature, and never really took to the settled life; camping among their conquests, for the most part they remained outsiders.
ADVANCING EMPIRE Only in China, conquered by Genghis Khan's grandson, Kublai Khan, did the nomadic Mongols put down real roots.
This semiindependent arm of the empire lasted into the 16th century and for much of the time—after all the carnage of its creation—the Golden Horde enjoyed a great deal of peace and prosperity.
Hulegu's army, the largest ever fielded by the Mongols, was bolstered by Chinese, Turkish, Armenian, Persian, and Christian soldiers.
In this near-contemporary manuscript, Chinese artillerymen break the city's defenses.
JBJL i /SI ■r • % BEFORE To a Mongol warlord, China was one of the world's great prizes, a land of wealth and untold splendor.
Next had come the Khitan, the Tanguts, and, in the 12th century, the Jurchen's Jin empire occupied the north.
The armies of this ""Southern Song"" managed to hold back the Jurchen raiders and so an uneasy equilibrium was maintained.
Genghis Khan's campaign had begun in China, but the northern region had borne the brunt.
Not until the time of his grandson Kublai Khan did the Mongols establish a lasting presence further south.
In Korea, the three kingdoms of Koguryo, Silla, and Paekche had been united as ""Koryo"" by King Wang Kon of Koguryo in the 10th century.
J The Wars of Kublai Khan EAST AND SOUTHEAST ASIA The conquests and campaigns of Kublai Khan Dates 1260-94 Location China, Korea, Japan, Vietnam, and Java China posed a military and cultural challenge for the Mongols.
Yet Kublai Khan was able to make himself a new kind of Mongol ruler here.
Mongol warrior The mounted archers of the Mongol armies were out of their element in China's highly urbanized environment, but they quickly adapted to the new conditions.
K ublai Khan had come into contact with Chinese culture as a young man, while working as governor of the Mongols' southern territories.
The young Kublai was an ardent admirer of Chinese civilization, and covetous of Chinese wealth and technology, and so was keen to add the ""Middle Kingdom"" to the Mongol empire.
He had been fighting against the Southern Song in China when he got news of his brother Mongke's death in 1259, and he faced a bitter struggle for succession with his younger brother, Ariq Boke.
It was not until 1264 that Kublai Khan was able to return to his long-term plans.
But his courage and determination to carve out a new Chinese empire for himself may well have been bolstered by this period of feuding.
While Kublai Khan had emerged the victor, he had lost a degree of support in the Mongol heartlands and an oppositional faction had grown up around his nephew, Kaidu.
By 1271 he had committed himself so far to his project that he declared himself Huangdi, or ""emperor""—the founder of a new Chinese ""Yuan"" dynasty.
This new title meant little, in that he did not yet control the majority of the areas to which he was laying claim, but it would have been full of significance for the Han Chinese.
By appropriating it, Kublai Khan was sending out a powerful signal that he came, not merely as a conqueror, but as a new emperor.
Stalemate at Xiangyang Kublai Khan did not object to waging war on his adoptive country.
He began by besieging Xiangyang in 1268, a strategically vital city as it controlled access to the Han River and hence to the Yangtze, and to the fertile plains of central China.
Kublai Khan attacked with 100,000 mounted warriors, and he was equipped with trebuchets— catapults that could fling rocks across the river into the city.
However, the Song defenders had widened the river at the vital point and padded their walls so that the missiles were Chinese fire-lance Contemporary chronicles agreed that the one Chinese weapon the Mongols feared was the fire-lance.
It was used at close quarters, and flames shot out from the gunpowder-packed canister at the end.
He became Khagan, or ""Supreme Khan,"" in 1260 after the death of his elder brother, Mongke.
A scholar of Chinese language and culture, renowned for his intelligence and enlightenment, in 1271 he established the Yuan dynasty.
With his grandfather's gift for government and administration, Kublai Khan's new role as Chinese emperor meant his adopted country was all the stronger for his rule. rendered harmless.
Kublai Khan responded by building a fleet of ships to blockade the river.
The breakthrough came with the advent of counterweighted trebuchets—designed specifically for Kublai Khan.
Though outnumbered, the Yuan ships succeeded in enclosing the Song fleet in a narrow bay.
The confined ships were tied 5,000 The number of ships said to have been constructed by Kublai Khan to prevent river-borne supplies reaching the Song at Xiangyang.
By 1276 most of China was in Mongol hands. together in a line, so when the Yuan attacked, they were afforded a floating walkway to the central Song flagship.
He contrived a miracle of organization and logistic Defending Japan Japanese samurai swarm onto the Mongol commander's vessel at Hakata Bay in 1281, seeing off the second of Kublai Khan's two failed invasion attempts. support, sustained it for the best part of ten years, and managed this over thousands of kilometres in an area that could hardly have been less suited to the traditional tactics of the Mongols.
Ill-prepared ventures Subsequent invasions were rather less successful.
In 1274 a seaborne assault of Japan at Hakata Bay on Kyushu was thwarted when a storm destroyed the Mongol fleet.
Again, tradition has it, a typhoon dispersed the attackers' ships; modern experts have suggested that both fleets were too hastily built and inadequately prepared.
Some even question whether the ""divine winds"" were anything more than the usual bad weather.
AN EMPIRE IN DECLINE Kublai Khan showed open-mindedness in his military innovations, and his reforms placed the empire on a stronger footing, encouraging economic innovation and increasing social harmony with the help he gave the poor.
He was followed by his grandson, Temur—but his succession was as troublesome as Kublai Khan's had been.
Later Yuan emperors failed to reign successfully over such a vast empire.
DISASTERS AND DOWNFALL A series of droughts and floods in the 1340s brought the agrarian economy to its knees.
Led by Zhu Yuangzhang, these Han Chinese rebels brought down the Yuan dynasty in 1368.
The Conquests of Timur For the settled civilizations of Western and Southern Asia, the threat from the Central Asian steppe was gaining momentum again.
The more they demonized him, the better Timur Lenk liked it; he reveled in his self-styled status as a ""second coming"" of Genghis Khan.
BEFORE To outward appearances, all was quiet on the Central Asian steppe by the 14th century, but warlords still jostled for advantage, setting their sights on greater things.
To the ambitious warlord, his story offered an alluring vision of what ruthlessness and courage might achieve.
A DUBIOUS HERITAGE Transoxania, in present-day Uzbekistan, now belonged to the Khanate of Chagatai.
Named for one of Genghis Khan's sons, the territory was still ruled by his successors— the Barlas—a Turkic-Mongolian group who prided themselves on their illustrious line of descent, though there is thought to be little merit to their claims.
His flair for fighting was already evident—as were his rigor and courage.
Deftly playing off the enmities and ambitions of men much more powerful than himself, Timur had made himself the leader of the Barlas clan by 1360; eight years later he was leader of the Chagatai Confederation.No one was in any doubt where the real power lay.
Making Samarkand his headquarters, he vowed to transform it into one of the world's greatest cities.
Only when Central Asia had been secured did he direct his energies south and west.
He began in 1381 by invading Iran, a land of small states once united under the Mongol Ilkhanids.
Strategy of atrocity Only afterward, when Timur had left, did the region rise in rebellion.
Turning back to put down the revolt, he did so with a cruelty that was little short of frenzied.
At Sabzevar he had 2,000 living prisoners heaped with mud and masonry, literally building them into the fabric of a tower.
Wherever he went, he built pyramids of skulls—a warning to the world, and monument to his murderousness.
Pushing west through Azerbaijan into Christian Georgia, he forced the king to convert to Islam before heading south through Armenia and back into Iran.
In 1387 he took Isfahan, but then rebels killed Timur's tax collectors.
Perpetual motion Timur was always a nomad at heart, a raider rather than an empire-builder.
By 1393 he was back in Iran, crushing a rebellion with his customary cruelty.
Attacks on Baghdad and Kurdistan were followed by raids on the Golden Horde, sacking and burning as he went.
The impression is of a leader eaten up by an insane blood lust; but Timur was more rational than that.
The sacking of southern Russia cut off one of the main commercial corridors between East and West.
Whatever horror he induced in the civilian populations of the countries he conquered, Timur inspired adulation and undying loyalty in his men.
As his conquests continued, his army grew in size till it eventually numbered 200,000.
A master-tactician, he loved ruses and feints; his troops would pretend to flee then suddenly regroup and attack.
Timur was a Muslim and frequently professed to be fighting for his faith— even if many thousands of his victims were Muslims too.
In 1398 he led his army over the mountains of the Hindu Q The number of pyramids, each A O one comprising 1,500 skulls, that were counted by a chronicler of 1388 in a half-circuit of the walls of Isfahan, Iran, after Timur Lenk's sacking.
It is said they killed as many as 100,000 civilians before they even reached the capital.
Bayezid's defeat gave Timur a dubious role as savior of Christian Byzantium and the Turks' conquest of Constantinople was put back 50 years.
The Middle East was his; his sumptuous tomb stood pride of place in his capital, Samarkand.
His successors' Timurid dynasty quickly destroyed itself through infighting.
FOUNDING EMPIRES One refugee from the Timurid dynasty's succession-struggle was the Muslim conqueror Babur.
TIMUR HANDING HIS CROWN TO BABUR l_ _ Decorated mace Used in dose combat, the mace was a heavy club that was common among the Mongols.
A fitting memorial Timur's magnificent mausoleum, Gur-e Amir, still stands in Samarkand.
His body, embalmed with rose water, musk, and camphor, lies in an ornate coffin.
HENRY IV TROUBLED TIMES The association between the two institutions was tested by the ""Investiture Contest"" of the 11th century.
Emperor Henry IV was at odds with the papacy over rights and was excommunicated in 1076.
He was compelled to make penance at Canossa, begging papal forgiveness.
The Concordat of Worms formally ended the power struggle between the emperors and the pope.
Thereafter, while a semblance of unity was restored, relations remained uneasy and a tussle began over control of Italy.
The northern states banded together in the Lombard League, and the focus switched to the south after the ""Sicilian Vespers"" uprising.
The Guelphs and the Ghibellines, two fluctuating alliances, fought these wars, N eatly resolving some political and institutional issues, the creation of the Holy Roman Empire of the German Nation was a masterstroke.
However, this new union invited power struggles, and tensions were quick to show.
Victory at Legnano In Italy prominent cities like Piacenza, Milan, Padua, Venice, and Bologna were trying to extract themselves from the intrusive local bishops.
They found an ally in the pope, since the bishops were appointed by the emperor, not by Rome.
Frederick served notice of the callous way with which he intended to rule when he launched an invasion, seizing Crema in 1159 and Milan in 1162.
When Frederick's men played football with severed heads at Crema, the people responded by slaying captured soldiers.
PROVENCAL CAPTAIN ON THE MEN OF ROGER Dl LAURIA'S FLEET, JULY 8, 1283 Q Wars between the Hohenstaufens and the popes Dates 1158-1266 Location Chiefly northern Italy M War of the Sicilian Vespers Dates 1282-1302 Location Sicily, southern Italy, and Malta 90 GUELPHS AND GHIBELLINES Troubled waters Charles I voyages to Rome for his investiture as king of Sicily in 1265.
Key battles in the War of the Sicilian Vespers would be fought at sea. full-blown war and spilling over onto the mainland of southern Italy.
In the event, though, a full-scale French invasion was defeated, the people rising up in support of Peter and his lords.
The French were stopped at sea as well, Peter III with an immense advantage—Roger di Lauria commanding his fleet.
The dashing Admiral di Lauria had already proved his worth, winning a great victory over the Angevins at the battle of Malta on July 8, 1283.
Now his victory at the battle of Les Formigues, off the coast of Catalonia in 1285, was observed as a decisive reverse for the crusade.
The admiral was disciplined and daring, and could trust the captains of his galleys to break formation, feign flight, and lead enemy vessels out of position in the knowledge that they could be commanded back to order at a moment's notice.
But when, on Peter's death in 1285, Pope Urban IV tried to restore Sicily to the Angevins, the conflict flared up all over again.
While James, the elder of Peter's surviving sons, was happy to agree to the terms, the younger, Frederick III, was preparing to fight.
Fighting now for James, in favour of the treaty, Roger di Lauria defeated Frederick's fleet at the battle of Cape Orlando in 1299, and then again at Ponza, on June 14, 1300.
Battle of Benevento Charles I defeats Frederick M's son, Manfred, in 1266, to secure Sicily and put an end to Italian Hohenstaufen rule.
Thwarted, the pope gave his support to the cities when they formed a defensive alliance, the Lombard League.
In 1174 Frederick's forces swept over the Alps again besieging Alessandria.
Frederick's army had more than 4,000 armored knights; that of the Lombard League comprised mainly infantrymen.
They of a famous Hohenstaufen stronghold, and they were strong supporters of the emperor.
The papal party christened themselves the ""Guelphs"" and took their name from the Hohenstaufen opposition, the Bavarian House of Welf.
Conflict between the two factions continued for the rest of the 12th century and well into the 13th.
Certain victory was snatched after the new emperor brought 8,000 Muslim archers from Apulia in the southern ""toe"" of Italy—a region where Arab influence was still strong.
Frederick II Barbarossa's grandson, Frederick II, made further conquests into Italy in the 13th century.
The number of galleys captured by Roger di Lauria on July 4, 1299, at the battle of Cape Orlando. presented their long spears like pikes and stood firm; behind, crossbowmen and archers wore down the enemy.
The Lombard cavalry now regrouped, before charging back in to defeat the emperor.
Guelphs and Ghibellines Frederick had to endure the humiliation of signing the Peace of Venice, a treaty with the Lombard League that had been brokered by the pope, but tension between the two sides continued.
This group came together as the ""Ghibellines""—the name is supposed to have been a corruption of Waiblingen, the title The Sicilian Vespers In 1262 Pope Urban IV conferred the throne of Naples and Sicily on Charles of Anjou.
This was highly provocative, given the opposing claim of Manfred of Sicily, who was related by marriage to the Hohenstaufen family.
Even so, Charles enforced his case, defeating Manfred's army at Benevento in 1266.
At Vespers (the evening service) in Palermo's Church of the Holy Spirit on Easter Monday 1282, this resentment erupted into rioting.
In the weeks that followed, hundreds of people associated with the Angevins (the House of Anjou) were killed.
Charles cracked down, and Manfred's heir (by virtue of their relationship by marriage), Peter III of Aragon, came into the conflict on the Sicilians' side.
What had been a local insurrection was soon spiraling into a 8,000 The number of French people believed to have been slaughtered in the course of the ""Sicilian Vespers"" insurrection of 1282.
TECHNOLOGY TREBUCHET Catapults of various sorts had been used on the battlefield and in siege situations since ancient times.
Roman ballistae worked like giant crossbows, shooting heavy bolts; other engines were used for hurling rocks.
Such engines had relied on the torsion of twisted or ratcheted rope, and there were limits on how powerful they could be.
But from the 12th century, engineers were employing the force of leverage, compounded by the use of counterweights.
These new ""trebuchets"" could propel huge rocks over greater distances and with an accuracy never seen before. r » The struggle between popes and emperors had gone on for more than two centuries now, the conflict assuming a range of different guises at different times.
A CONTINUING CONFLICT The papacy was never to be a military power in its own right.
But the Church continued to be a powerful influence in political affairs— and a thorn in the side of successive emperors.
CARROCCIO An ox wagon carrying both the army's standard and an altar at which mass was said before battle.
V 91 ASPECTS OF WAR Monument to a mercenary A mercenary is loyal to whoever pays him.
This statue in Venice depicts Bartolomeo Colleoni, a condottiere who fought in the 15th-century wars between Milan and Venice—and served both sides at different times.
Mercenaries Professional soldiers who fight for a living and pledge their loyalty to whoever pays them, mercenaries have been seen by many as no better than hired assassins.
Throughout history, however, the recruitment of mercenaries has been an essential part of warfare, and it is a practice that continues in several parts of the world today.
I n earliest times men fought for their families, for their homes, and out of loyalty to their chieftain in return for land.
Sargon I of Akkad is the first king known to have conscripted an army, and in New Kingdom Egypt up to 10 percent of males were forced by the pharaoh into military service.
In both cases a soldier's time was spent as much working on engineering projects as it was fighting in battle.
Smaller states, however, were not equipped to raise and maintain large armies through conscription.
Nor was conscription always viable, even for large empires, as large portions of the population could not always be removed from vital jobs to join the army.
Hiring mercenaries was therefore an obvious recourse for states of all sizes, as mercenaries are both already trained and available as needed.
A noble trade The mercenaries themselves usually came from warrior elites who saw the waging of war as the only fit occupation for a man of honor.
Such groups came with weapons, skills, and a readymade esprit de corps that could be placed at the service of a king.
From the 3rd century bce, Celtic warbands from Central Europe were in the service of both Egypt's Ptolemaic rulers and the kings of Asia Minor.
After the first Vikings found their way from Sweden Nubian mercenaries in Egypt This ancient Egyptian mural depicts Nubian mercenaries, who were soldiers with no stake in Egyptian society, and no loyalty to anyone except the pharaoh who paid them. down the Russian river system to the Black Sea in the 9th century, a number enlisted in the service of the rulers of Byzantium.
By the 10th century there was a permanent Varangian Guard of these Viking mercenaries, several thousand strong.
Likewise, Turkic warlords who drifted westward with their warriors out of the Central Asian steppe placed themselves and their warbands in the service of Islamic rulers—though the Sultans later found it more convenient to buy or capture boys as slaves, whose primary loyalty would be to them.
Often, mercenaries were recruited because they could offer special skills.
Sasanid Persia supplied its own armored cataphracts, for example, but hired other cavalry and even elephant divisions from further afield.
Private armies The Renaissance saw the rise of national armies, but also the emergence of free market economies and private enterprise in Europe.
As a result, the creation of private armies became a lucrative business, organized by Celtic mercenary's coin Found in the port of Dover on the south coast of England, this Carthaginian coin was probably brought home by a Celtic mercenary.
TIMELINE German landsknecht mercenaries A field captain on horseback talks to two landsknechts in this early 16th-century illustration.
Soldiers from certain countries—Swiss pikemen, and German landsknechts, for instance—even came to specialize in mercenary war.
More and bigger conflicts came in the wake of the Reformation, and mercenaries offered skills and disciplines that no group of conscripts could match.
Many men in this era came to depend on the mercenary life; it has been estimated, for example, that one-fifth of all Scottish males born in the 17th century went soldiering for foreign masters at some point in their lives.
Mercenaries have not always been the answer to their employers' problems— sometimes they have presented challenges of their own.
Irish and German mercenaries mounted a similar revolt in 1828 at the end of the Argentina-Brazil War.
Mercenaries have often ended up holding the upper hand over their employers.
Condottieri such as Braccio da Montone and Muzio Sforza became prominent figures in early 15th-century Italian politics.
Brought in by the Nicaraguan government to help put down a rebellion in 1855, American mercenary leader William Walker made himself president within a year.
Mercenaries have no stake in the countries they fight in, so there is MERCENARIES endure in the modern era of national armies.
Mercenaries are useful for unofficial engagements, such as the arm's-length involvement of the United States in the Angolan Civil War in the late 20th century.
They are also useful where sending official troops to fight is likely to be unpopular.
This has been the case, for example, with the use of private military contractors (mainly Blackwater, now called Xe) by the United States in Iraq.
By 2009 there may have been as many as 100,000 private contractors in Iraq, in spite of considerable international pressure to ban their activities.
In 1989 the United Nations passed the International Convention Against the Recruitment, Use and Training of Mercenaries—a resolution that finally came into force in October 2001.
The resolution bans the use of military contractors, who have since redefined themselves as security services offering armed guards to their employers.
However, numerous countries have yet to sign the convention, including the United States and the UI<; as always, it is still cheaper to buy short-term services than to pay for an extended standing army.
Until war itself is banned, it seems the mercenary soldier will always be with us.
Mercenaries in Angola Portuguese mercenaries fought alongside soldiers of the National Liberation Front of Angola in the Angolan Civil War of 1975-2002.
They serve the Gaelic chiefs and Norman lords of Ireland for the next three centuries.
Holy Roman Emperor Maximilian I founds the first landsknecht units at about this time.
Western governments fund mercenaries to help UNITA and FNLA rebels, after Cuba sends troops to support the government.
Most of these mercenaries are employed by a private company, Blackwater.
Modern-day mercenaries Lack of accountability is part of the appeal of being and hiring a mercenary, and helps explain why mercenaries 1519 Spanish adventurer Hernan Cortes launches his invasion of Mexico.
He will keep a share of any booty he brings back for the Spanish Crown.
The arrangement will later be formalized, with Gurkha regiments integrated into the British Army.
The landsknechts became notorious for collecting not just their mercenary pay, but protection money from civilians too.
But the more fervently men and women believed in their religion and its ideals, the more susceptible they were to disillusionment.
By the 12th century the wealth and power of the Church was giving rise to resentment.
People saw it as being too close to the kings and nobles who exploited and oppressed them.
Some people, like the Cathars of the Languedoc in southwest France, rejected Christianity altogether.
Theirs was a dualistic universe in which God and Satan were at war and love and power were locked in eternal opposition.
The soul was immortal and belonged in heaven, the realm of God, of light.
Since Christ was ""the Word made flesh,"" he BEFORE L \ Christendom, now beleaguered both within and without, reverted back to the ideology and method of ""Holy War"" to resolve its problems and quash dissent.
Naturally, Europe's I HERESY An opinion or doctrine at variance with established religious beliefs.
ENEMIES WITHIN The Islamic threat had not vanished entirely, but Christian Europe faced new hazards at home.
Discontent with the Church was growing; an increasingly educated public was tiring of its tyrannical ways.
Those in power, however, saw this new threat in the same way as they saw the Islamic menace. and his teachings were seen as evil too.
Crusade against the Cathars Such teachings found many followers, and as far as Pope Innocent III was concerned, this could not be ignored.
The heretics were like the ""Saracens,"" he said, and in 1209 he duly proclaimed a crusade against this enemy within.
Though local magnates like Count Raymond of Toulouse were involved, for the most part the ""enemy"" were defenseless peasants.
All the ostentation of the medieval war machine—knights on horseback with huge processions of foot soldiers, including crossbowmen I T rv AAA The number of men I L/jVyvJvJ who enlisted in the Albigensian Crusade against the Cathars of Languedoc in 1209. and archers, as well as companies of mercenaries—were deployed against unarmed civilians.
Sappers (military engineers) with siege-engines smashed through the walls of provincial cities.
On July 22 ,1209, crusaders sacked Beziers and killed 20,000 men, women, and children.
More than 1,000 people were burned alive after taking refuge in a church.
Though Pope Innocent II tried to rein in the carnage from about 1213, it had gained buoyant momentum and as many as a million people are thought to have died.
The Teutonic Knights On Europe's eastern frontiers, the Baltic Slavs were recalcitrant under the shaky rule of the Polish kings.
After recurrent invasions they remained obdurately unpacified—and pagan.
When a call to defend the faith went out, the Teutonic Battle of Muret Simon de Montfort's crusaders take on the Albigensian army of Raymond of Toulouse, in 1213.
A well-established military order, they had been founded in Acre at the time of the Third Crusade These German priests, like the Knights Hospitallers before them, had begun by tending the sick and wounded; in time they interpreted their duty more widely.
By 1198 the knights' role as fighting clerics had been acknowledged by the Church.
Their function in the ""Prussian Crusades in Europe 94 » CRUSADES IN EUROPE Crusade"" was not in doubt from1230 they swept through Prussia and beyond into presentday Lithuania, Lativa, and Estonia.
They fought as armored cavalry, followed into the field by light cavalry and infantry.
The pope had granted Prussia to the order as a ""monastic state""—so, in theory, they were its rulers.
But, in practice, this was untamed terrain and the knights struggled against guerrilla factions.
During the battle of Durbe in 1260, the knights allowed themselves to be surrounded Currency of the realm The Teutonic Knights were able to carve out their own religious state in Prussia, and even issued their own currency, like this coin. by the Samogitians (pagan tribesmen from northwestern Lithuania) and suffered a defeat that triggered a bloody uprising across Prussia.
The Teutonic Knights then concentrated on Prussia, where they consolidated their position throughout the 14th century.
During the battle of Grunwald (also named Tannenberg), , ■ more than 20,000 knights are believed to have faced up to 30,000 enemy cavalry, making this one of the biggest battles of medieval times.
The knights also had artillery, and viewing that as an advantage, they kept much of their cavalry in reserve.
But downpour doused their gunpowder, and when news came in that their general, Ulrich von Jungingen, had died, morale collapsed and they fled in disarray.
Warfare reformed Fighting with gunpowder had its disadvantages; nevertheless, this new technology offered a way forward—a fact that became evident in the Hussite Wars.
Today, the teachings of Czech reformer, Jan Hus, are seen as paving the way for Martin Luther and the Reformation.
But in his day, Hus was condemned as a heretic and burned to death on July 6 1415.
These campaigns proved inconclusive, thanks to the nerve and resourcefulness of the Hussite rebels— and the leveling effect of the hand-held cannons they used.
The gunner cradled this in one hand, trying to keep it pointing in the direction of the enemy while he bent over to light the gunpowder charge with a spill or match.
But accuracy or penetrationpower mattered little, given that these weapons were deployed against an enemy who came charging en masse, and who had no protection against shot through armor or through tactics.
The Treaty of Thorn Signed in 1412, this agreement brought peace between Poland, Lithuania, and the Teutonic Knights, but the reparations it called for would ruin the Teutonic state.
HUSSITE WAGENBURG The wagenburg, or ""wagon fort,"" was created by arranging carts to form a square enclosure, giving lightly armed infantry a way of resisting charging knights.
Crucial to Hussite strategy, the idea of using wagons to create a wall was not new, but its use by the Hussites marked a real innovation.
Set up discreetly and quickly, the wagenburg was consistently placed within firing range of the enemy.
The charging enemy found a solid wall of wagons, while the Hussites could keep up a steady barrage or sally forth among the horsemen with pikes or flails.
AFTER _ J The crusading ideal was not yet dead as a philosophy, though it was constantly being reinterpreted in response to changing conditions and changing times.
CONTINUING CONFLICTS In Spain the conflict between the Christians and the Muslims went on.
It was to last until 1492, each side taking and then retaking territories.
The Teutonic Knights' war against Russian 8,000 The number of Teutonic Knights killed at the battle of Grunwald.
But the method of war itself was undergoing change, and the religious conflicts of the following centuries were to provide the perfect testingground for ever more powerful, more accurate, and more sophisticated firearms.
TACTICAL REVOLUTION The revolution in technology brought a revolution in tactics.
Heavily armored knights with lances gave way to lighter cavalry armed with pistols as well as swords.
Infantrymen learned new drills for the coordinated loading, aiming, and firing of their matchlock and wheel-lock muskets.
Artillery was also to play an increasingly important role, its presence in turn exerting a powerful influence on tactics in the field of war.
The fact that the Christians were fighting among themselves did not mean other threats had gone away.
The period is known in Scotland as the Wars of Independence, yet the Scots were not fighting to gain their freedom, but rather to hold on to the independence they already had.
Instead, there were two separate kingdoms—England and Scotland—and an autonomous principality, Wales.
ENGLAND'S PRE-EMINENCE England had size and wealth, but the integrity of Scotland and Wales went unquestioned.
THE INVASION OF WALES Stronger than his predecessors, king Edward I invaded Wales in 1277 to punish the defiance of Prince Llewelyn.
When the latter rebelled in 1282, Edward invaded again, smashing Welsh resistance and building a chain of castles to cement his rule.
The power of the native-born princes was over, and ""Prince of Wales"" became a new title awarded to the English ruler's son and heir.
SCOTTISH SUCCESSION The death of Alexander Ill's granddaughter in Scotland sparked a crisis in 1290.
Edward I judged the decision, demanding the right of overlordship— that of supreme lord or feudal superior—a ""right"" that was angrily rejected by the Scots.
Robert had a son—also Robert the Bruce—as determined as his father that Scotland should be the kingdom of the Bruces. sitting ducks.
The arrows opened up gaping holes in their formations through which the English knights could charge.
The road to Bannockburn Wallace escaped to France and did not return until 1303.
The year after, the young Robert the Bruce killed his rival, John Comyn, in a quarrel and ascended the Scottish throne as Robert I Comyn's family was not in a forgiving mood.
Supported by Edward I, they surprised Robert at Methven, west of Perth, in 1306, almost wiping out his force.
In April 1307, his men rolled giant boulders down a steep hillside onto an unsuspecting English J ohn Balliol's coronation in 1292 was an uneasy compromise to the succession of King Alexander III of Scotland.
Far from respecting Balliol's rule, Edward I of England insisted on his overlordship.
His army sacked Berwickupon-Tweed before defeating the Scots at Dunbar, forcing John Balliol to abdicate.
Edward carried off the Stone of Scone, on which the kings of Scotland had traditionally been crowned, and placed it in London's Westminster Abbey.
Wallace's uprising The following year, the Scots patriot William Wallace led a rebellion of minor nobles against the English.
On September 11, 1297, they met the Earl of Surrey's army at Stirling Bridge over the Forth River.
Three hundred Scottish knights were matched against ten times as many English cavalry, while some 10,000 Scots infantry faced up to more than 50,000 English.
The heroism of Wallace's victory has justly been acclaimed, but the battle was also a triumph of tactical cunning and discipline.
The Scots waited on higher ground above the river until the English vanguard had crossed the narrow bridge, after which they surged downhill en masse.
Seizing the bridge, the Scots set about the English army's advance-party, while Surrey and his remaining troops looked on helplessly from the other side of the river.
Enraged, Edward then led a second invasion, with 10,000 infantry and 2,000 knights.
Formed up in defensive schiltrons, however, the spearmen held firm, exacting heavy casualties on Edward's army.
I SCHILTRON Square or circular formation of infantry, with pikes presented outwards to create an impregnable wall of spikes to ward off enemy cavalry.
Anglo-Scottish Wars Dates 1296-1328, 1332-57 Location Southern Scotland and northern England English bow and arrows The continuing inability of the English mounted knights to deal with the schiltron of the Scottish infantry prompted a move toward mass deployment of longbowmen.
The king made common cause with the disgruntled ""disinherited"" faction (the Balliols and their supporters) against Robert the Bruce's young son.
In 1332 John Balliol's son, Edward, defeated the Scottish army at Dupplin Moor near Perth.
By July 1333 Berwick was under siege, and the English inflicted a shattering defeat at Halidon Hill.
Although not much of a ""battle,"" Bruce took his triumphs where he could find them.
His son and successor, Edward II, was weak and indecisive, though he could still call upon a big and powerful army.
Over 2,000 knights and some 14,000 infantrymen came north with him in 1314.
They met Robert's army south of Stirling, in open country beside a stream—the Bannock Burn.
On June 23, during their preliminary maneuvers, an English knight spotted Robert the Bruce on his horse out in front of his own lines on open ground.
Refusing to flinch in sight of his watching soldiers, Robert calmly sidestepped and swung his ax, splitting the Englishman's helmet and skull wide open.
Dunstaffnage castle As a stronghold of the Balliol cause, this 12th-century fortress outside Oban in the west of Scotland was besieged by Robert the Bruce in 1308 following the battle of the Pass of Brander.
AN ASSURED DEFEAT The full-scale conquest and occupation of the country appeared inevitable.
The Scots offered small-scale resistance with hit-and-run attacks and skirmishes, but knew they could not win a head-on confrontation with the English.
Their strategy of harrying and hoping was to succeed beyond their wildest dreams.
TREATY OF BERWICK In 1357 David II signed the Treaty of Berwick with Edward III, agreeing that the English king should succeed him in Scotland on his death.
The Scots as a nation never accepted this, however, appointing their own king, Robert II, when David died in 1371.
Scotland remained its own kingdom, even after the devastating defeat at Flodden in 1513.
A dynastic crisis forced the ""Union of the Crowns"" in 1603—James VI becoming James I of England when Elizabeth I died childless.
A MUSLIM ADVANCE Since the prophet Muhammad first proclaimed his message in the 7th century, a series of Arab conquests had spread the word of Islam through much of the known world.
Only in a tiny pocket, in the mountains of Asturias in the far north, did Christian rulers still hold sway.
Mudejars, conversely, were Muslims living under Christian rule. wealth and culture.
Toledo, the Visigothic capital of the country, became a major center under the Moors as well.
After quarrels among the rulers of the al-Andalus, this region went its separate way, becoming an independent kingdom under the control of the caliphate.
The Spanish Reconquista The identity of Spain was forged in fighting; the Reconquista—the ""reconquest"" of those territories taken by the Moors—was, for centuries, the guiding project of the nation.
These wars became the stuff of legend for subsequent generations, but the reality was often messy and confused.
T 1 he Spanish Reconquista started as a fight for survival and became a power struggle, only gradually did it take on the character of a crusade.
By the middle of the 8th century, the Moors had occupied almost the entire Iberian Peninsula.
In 722, however, amid the mountains of Asturias to the north, the Muslims had been held by the local The number of towers in the fortified walls encircling the Spanish city of Avila.
In the centuries that followed, the region of Asturias not only flourished but managed to extend its boundaries.
A new kingdom, Galicia, was established in the west, with a new state centerd on Leon.
To the east, following Castillo de Loarre From its perch in the Pyrenean foothills in Aragon, this 1 lth-century stronghold commanded what was then the border between Navarra and Muslim Zaragoza.
Frankish incursions across the Pyrenees, the kingdoms of Navarra, Aragon, and Catalonia emerged.
Although this was a patchwork of little states that warred as much with one another as with the Moors, all of northern Spain had now fallen into Christian hands.
War without end Within these little kingdoms too, conflict was very much the norm, fc with local lords locked in endless A boat departs for the crusades Equipped for action and clad in armor, Spanish knights of the 13th century show their commitment to a strongly militarized version of the Christian faith. small-scale turf wars.
At the same time, there were truces in fighting with the Muslims— some of them of long duration.
The Moors had their own divisions, with inequalities between the Arab elite and the North African Berber rank-andfile leading at times to tension and, in some cases, open conflict.
The Reconquista was more messy and confusing than the later mythology would have us believe.
Rodrigo Dfaz de Vivar was a truly formidable figure; but “True believers, fight against the infidels who are near you, and be hard on them ...” » 1 i Santiago de Compostela Oviedo Leon LEON Toulouse Carcassonne Valladolid Oporto Q p ouro -j Coimbra 5 or Santaremo.
Amid the complicated realities of a rapidly changing situation, he found himself hghting on the Muslim side on more than one occasion.
Though real, religious oppositions sometimes paled into insignificance beside other enmities.
It was not unusual for Muslim and Christian leaders to form alliances against rivals in their own camps.
No longer content to tussle with his fellow kings, he saw himself—in aspiration, at least—as ruler of the peninsula as a whole.
He captured Toledo, until then the center of a rich and prestigious Muslim state.
Thrown into panic, the rulers of al-Andalus called on assistance from the Almoravids, who had recently taken power in North Africa.
The Almoravids went on to beat Alfonso at the battle of Sagrajas in 1086.
Very gradually, however, the Christian kingdoms extended their influence over southern Spain.
A Berber movement, dedicated to both moral and spiritual renewal within Islam, the Almoravids disapproved of the easygoing attitudes they found in Moorish Spain, and now set about transforming it into their own kind of aggressively Islamic state.
The Almoravids started reversing the conquests of the Christians, but met their match in 1094 at Valencia.
In many I ways, El Cid was the last in XJU a line whose attitude to the struggle with the Muslims remained opportunistic.
Even as the Almoravids were changing the tone of the conflict on the Muslim side, there was a clear shift on the side of the Christians too.
The calling of the First Crusade in 1099 placed the conflict with the Moors in a new perspective, as a sacred struggle to reclaim Iberia for the creed of Christ.
El Batallador (""The Battler"") soon made deep inroads into the south, where Christian Mozarabs— happy under Moorish rule for many generations—were finding life a lot El Cid's sword An inscription claims that this weapon is Tizona, the legendary sword of El Cid.
Metallurgical analysis has shown that the steel blade was forged in Cordoba in the 11th century. less comfortable under the Almoravids.
King Alfonso brought 10,000 of them back with him for resettlement along the Ebro in the far northwest.
In 1139 another Alfonso won a victory, defeating the Almoravids at Ourique, in what is now the south of Portugal.
Here, Alfonso Henriques, son of Henry of Burgundy, who also claimed the title of Count of Portugal, led his considerably outnumbered Christian army to a victory.
In the cold light of military history, this result, although unexpected, seems to have been the consequence of failing communication and disagreements on the Moorish side.
Not unnaturally, the Christians were overjoyed at this most unexpected triumph and were quick to attribute it to divine agency.
It was in fact this triumph that brought the modern country into being.
Alfonso declared—defying Castile and Leon—that he intended to reign over his conquered territory as Afonso I of Portugal.
The Almoravids found themselves faced with another enemy in the 12th century.
These were the Almohads, also Berbers, and also seeking Islamic renewal.
Having already The Reconquista substantially molded early-modern Spain—very much for the worse, it might be argued.
PURGING ISLAM 1469 saw the accession of the ""Catholic Monarchs,"" Ferdinand and Isabella.
Their marriage brought the kingdoms of Navarra, Aragon, and Castile together into a single Spain, so they were ""catholic"" in the sense of being universal.
ACROSS THE OCEAN The final expulsion of the Moors, as it happened, coincided with Columbus's discovery of America.
The opening up of a ""New Spain"" in the colonial Americas was to be justified as a continuation of the Christianizing struggle of the Reconquista.
FERDINAND AND ISABELLA, THE ""CATHOLIC MONARCHS"" Almohad Caliph, came from Morocco and took personal command of the kingdom's armies.
Final victory The ""Disaster of Alarcos"" was followed by other reversals for Alfonso.
Leading his army stealthily over the mountains of Andalucfa, he 30,000 taken over the territories of the Almoravids in North Africa, establishing their capital at Marrakesh, they invaded al-Andalus in 1147.
In doing so, they reversed what had been the gradual weakening in Moorish resistance to the Reconquista.
Even so, the northern kingdoms scented victory and pressed hard to repel them.
Begged by his officials in al-Andalus, Abu Yusuf Yaqub, the The number of Christian combatants killed at the battle of Alarcos, 1195, according to chroniclers of the day.
Muslim losses were fewer than 500. sprang a surprise attack upon the Almohads.
The vast Muslim army—by all accounts up to 300,000 strong, although this amount is dubious— was all but exterminated in the brutal fighting.
It was the longbowmen who determined the outcome—and changed military history for ever.
They all but sauntered into Caen, ""liberating"" large quantities of wine before continuing on their way.
Longbowmen slipped off into wayside woods, returning with deer and other game.
A demoralized army The French, though at home and numerically much stronger, felt far less cheerful.
Even in Picardy's green countryside there was not enough water for their thousands of horses.
Besides having no fewer than three commanders—Philip VI himself, blind King John of Bohemia, and Charles, Count of Alen^on—the French army was top-heavy with knights and nobles.
Edward's men were lined up along a ridge, with his longbowmen (up to 10,000-strong) under the command of his son—the Black Prince, Edward, Prince of Wales—grouped in wedges on either side.
The French would have to attack uphill and brave the arrows as they advanced on the English center.
Rooks descended in huge, chattering flocks, unnerving the soldiers as the sky grew ominously dark.
Then, just as abruptly, the skies cleared, the downpour ceased, and the sun came out again.
Now, though, it glinted on the armor of the English knights, dazzling the French.
Dispirited, they broke as battle commenced and the first English and Welsh arrows hit home.
The French cavalry charged, and the air again turned black—with showers of English and Welsh arrows.
Chaos became carnage, the hill a heaving mass of screaming men and horses.
The French had been trounced—and the mounted, armored knight humbled by the low-born longbowman.
Over that period, developments in military tactics and the advent of firearms technology gradually changed the face of medieval warfare.
I E F O R E In the 1300s England and France were fluid concepts; kings and lords meant more than nation-states.
The Plantagenet kings were rooted in English society and tied to France.
SOURED RELATIONS Suspicion between England and France had existed since the Norman Conquest of 1066 « 70—71.
William and his successors had been kings in England, with lands in Normandy and Aquitaine, but only vassals of the kings of France.
He had aided mutinous English nobles in their attempt to topple King John in the first ""Barons' EDWARD III War"" of 1215-17.
Edward was defeated and found his position on both sides of the Channel weakened.
His French queen, Isabella, was sent to negotiate on his behalf, and Edward of Windsor, the future Edward III, was left in no doubt of his father's humiliation.
CLAIMS TO THE THRONE France's throne had been left vacant when the Capetian line became extinct with the death of Charles IV in 1328.
However, England's Edward III was the late king's nephew—his mother, Isabella, had been Charles's sister.
His claims were not without merit, even though they came through a female line.
The battle of Sluys was not so much a naval encounter as a land battle at sea.
The French had chained their ships together to form a wall, but while this presented a solid front, it made their decks into a continuous battlefield.
Longbowmen aboard the English vessels rained arrows on to the advancing French fleet, softening up any resistance before boarding parties were dispatched.
The French held out for eight bloody hours, but were eventually forced to capitulate—up to 18,000 soldiers and sailors were killed.
Yet, despite the loss of their fleet, the French were by no means beaten.
An unequal struggle Small-scale skirmishes and truces alternated until, in 1346, Edward III invaded France.
He landed at Calais but, for the moment at least, ignored the port city.
Instead, his soldiers advanced inland, burning and looting along the way.
Philip's 40,000 troops were largely untrained The number of English knights believed to have been killed at the battle of Crecy.
His 5,000 spearmen were in the center, his mounted knights on either side, and divided between the flanks, some 7,000 longbowmen.
Although the English had a few cannon—their first known appearance on the battlefield in Western history—they did not shape the battle.
Edward brought in settlers to make this crucial port an outpost of England.
Siege and slaughter The year 1347 saw the destructive power of humanity eclipsed by that of the Black Death.
Up to a third of the population of Northern Europe may have been killed by the bubonic plague; serious hostilities had to be suspended for some years.
LETTER FROM EDWARD III TO PHILIP VI OF FRANCE, 1337 weapon—the longbow—deployed here en masse.
The carnage was horrific, compounded by the heavy cannon fire that followed.
What was most discouraging for the French was the fact that they never actually engaged their English enemy.
Trained for close-quarters fighting, they were deplete their resources.
In 1356 the French, under Jean II, tried to make a stand at Poitiers; as at Crecy, their army massively outnumbered England's.
Again, though, the longbow won the day, causing dreadful casualties among the French while the English went Hostilities begin During the naval battle of Sluys in 1340, the French fleet were tied together in a defensive wall—unable to move, they were at the mercy of the English.
The triumph gave England control of the Channel for the rest of the war. either side, so the French soldiers could not fully exploit their advantage.
After their earlier defeats, the French were intent on neutralizing the threat of archers at the outset; but, forced back by the hail of arrows, they became snarled up in their own lines, leaving the entire French force in a state of confusion as the English advance began.
It was Crecy and Poitiers again; another victory for the English longbow.
Gunpowder was playing a more important part in a conflict that was settling down into a series of sieges.
Improved alloys allowed the manufacture of more powerful, stable cannons, which, in 1453, would deliver a deadly counterblast against the English archers at Castillon.
Later that same year, Bordeaux was taken and the English army was at last expelled.
So protracted a conflict could not help but have a lasting impact on both countries.
FURTHER DIVISIONS When Pope Julius II quarrelled with France in the 16th century, King Henry VIII of England took the pontiff's side.
Henry hoped to use the religious conflict to extend his French possessions.
Indeed, it was not until the second half of the 19th century that France and Britain were able to build an enduring friendship.
After six months of stalemate from 1428-29, Joan of Arc's counter-attacks lifted the Siege of Orleans in just nine days. substantially unscathed.
A truce of sorts was agreed, the fighting flaring up once more in the 1360s before subsiding from the 1380s onward.
When Henry V ascended the English throne in 1413, he looked across the Channel to a France divided by discord.
The survivors set off for Calais but soon found themselves facing a huge French army at Agincourt.
But while the battle was fought on open ground, woods hemmed the men in on JOAN OF ARC A peasant's daughter, Joan of Arc was just 16 when, in 1428, she appeared out of nowhere, citing an order from God to drive the English out of France.
She promised to lead her countrymen to victory over the invaders and, won round by her conviction, Charles VII had her fitted with armor.
Still only 19, she was burned at the stake as a ""witch,"" though she was later revered as a patriotic martyr and, eventually, canonized in 1920.
But even though it has become obsolete on the battlefield, the sword is still regarded by many to be the eternal accoutrement of the warrior.
It was designed for slashing and was often more effective than a spear.
In use from the first millennium, iron was stronger than bronze and could be pattern-welded—blending separate bits of iron to form a stronger, longer whole.
This medieval Italian sword from the 15th century had its blade quenched in water for extra toughness; a crossguard helped protect the user's hand.
This Highland ""hand-and-a-half"" sword was developed in Scotland in the 16th century.
It was light, yet powerful, and could be wielded with either one or two hands, hence its name.
The khanda was the sword of choice for India's Sikhs of the 19th century.
This Turkish saber from the Ottoman empire is inscribed with texts from the Koran.
This Turkish-style kilij, or scimitar, evolved from the sabers of the steppe warriors; the yelman, or flaring toward the tip, enhanced its cutting power.
This Model 1850 infantry sword was worn, but not much used, by Union officers.
MIXED FORTUNES Originally the eastern part of the Roman empire, Byzantium went on to develop its own identity.
CONSTANTINOPLE'S RESTORED CITY WALLS r EASTERN MEDITERRANEAN Ottoman expansion Dates 1300-1453 Location Turkey and the Balkans TECHNOLOGY GRENADES The Byzantines made great efforts to defend Constantinople against the Turks.
They did at least possess the useful secret of ""Greek Fire""—thought to be a blend of burning oil and tar.
At sea it was pumped from dispensers which could be aimed at enemy vessels.
The soldiers flung them from catapults or dropped them on the enemy from fortifications.
The Byzantines also used them to flush out Mehmed's miners from the tunnels they had been instructed to dig beneath the city walls.
T he Ottomans were named for Osman, a 14th-century Turkic warlord whose divinely ordained imperial destiny was said to have been revealed to him in a dream.
Moving into Anatolia with his kinsfolk and clansmen, he offered their services as soldiers to the Byzantine empire and then built his own power base in what remained of the Seljuk state.
He achieved this against the reluctance of the Byzantines; indeed, the mercenary bullied his masters into acquiescence.
Into Europe Under Osman's son, Orkhan, the Ottomans extended their dominions across the Bosphorus and into Thrace.
A coalition of Christian princes came together to face Murad I at the Amselfeld in Kosovo in 1389.
A Serbian suicide-squad succeeded in assassinating Murad as the battle commenced, but Bayezid I took charge and won the day.
The Christian knights had broken through the main mass of Ottoman infantry, foundering only at the last.
It took a succession of these ""narrow"" defeats for them to realize that the Ottomans deliberately placed their softer, more expendable corps of conscripts in the front.
Fanatically loyal to each other, to the Ottoman empire, and to Islam, the janissaries were slave soldiers.
Many of them, ironically, had originated from the empire's Christian territories.
Highly disciplined and superbly trained, the majority of them knew no ^ Ottoman ""turban"" helmet Beautifully crafted in steel in around 1500, this Ottoman helmet functioned not just as protective headgear, but also as a mark of rank. other life.
Above all, the Ottomans were quicker and more ready to innovate than the Christians, who were still attached to the chivalric tradition.
The news from Kosovo awoke the West to the danger represented by the Turks.
The defenders, only 5,000 strong, still held out for almost two months.
France, Germany, Hungary, Wallachia, and Poland; the Knights Hospitaller and Teutonic Knights also participated.
Yet all these groups had their own leaders, and their divisions proved fatal to the cause.
A major setback Just as he prepared to close in on Constantinople, however, Bayezid met his own nemesis.
Taken by surprise, Bayezid marched his army across the country in the searing heat of summer.
They reached Ankara, where Timur was waiting, in a state of near-exhaustion, only to find that the warlord had poisoned the wells and diverted the waters of the (^uluk Creek so that the Ottomans and their horses had no access to drinking water.
Even so, they put up fierce resistance once battle was joined the next day, on July 20, but they ultimately suffered a shattering defeat.
Bayezid was taken prisoner by Timur and died a year later, still captive.
Christian Europe fought back—Hungary's Janos Hunyadi scored some spirited victories in the 1440s— but the European nations were still dogged by disunity, leaving them weak.
Under siege Meanwhile, under Mehmed II, the siege of Constantinople began in April 1453.
Mehmed II built his own fortress, Rumeli Hisar, which controlled access to the Black Sea.
In a single night, more than 70 warships were shifted overland on rollers into Constantinople's inner harbor so that a sustained assault could be mounted from the water.
While these big guns pounded the city walls above ground-level, Mehmed instructed miners to tunnel beneath.
AFTER f The fall of Constantinople brought the Byzantine empire to an end after 1,000 years, but—renamed Istanbul—the city was to continue to play a historic role.
ANEW AGE FOR THE CITY The Ottoman empire went from strength to strength.
Constantinople was transformed, and the great church of Hagia Sophia became a stunning mosque as the sultans assumed the authority of the old caliphs as leaders of the Islamic world.
A LONG DECLINE From the end of the 17th century, the Ottoman empire stagnated and then passed almost imperceptibly into a long decline.
With the help of treachery and cunning, small numbers of Europeans mounted on horses and armed with gunpowder weapons were able to conquer great swathes of the Americas.
EARLY MODERN WARFARE 1500-1750 As the major kingdoms of Europe grew more powerful, the Age of Discoveries opened up the world for conquest.
The Americas were easily conquered, but Asia's empires—China, Mogul India, and the Ottoman Turks—were all more powerful than any European state.
EARLY MODERN WARFARE 1500-1750 D uring the era from 1500 to 1750 European land and naval forces transformed themselves into potential agents of world domination.
This was apparent at sea early on, as sailing ships armed with cannon extended other great Muslim empires increasingly dominant on the battlefield.
European power to the coasts of Africa of the Moguls in India and the Safavids in and Asia, and made possible the conquest Persia fielded impressive fighting forces, carbines, to the light cavalry, who acted of substantial parts of the Americas. and the Moroccan army beat both African as scouts and skirmishers.
Field artillery The Spanish conquistadors overthrew and European opponents.
The conquest was introduced but, above all, guns the great American land empires of the of Ming China by the Manchu in the revolutionized the design of fortifications.
Aztecs and Incas in the 1520s and 1530s mid-17th century involved military There were no more castles with high with what seemed remarkable ease.
But campaigns larger in scale than any stone walls, but lower-lying star forts that these were Stone-Age societies, without contemporary European wars.
Nor were allowed cannon to be used as an effective horses or the wheel, and their populations armies outside Europe at all technologically defensive weapon.
The Japanese, the Ottomans, typically relied on mercenary bands led World diseases.
Elsewhere in the world, and the Moroccans all made sophisticated by military entrepreneurs or on hastily European armies at first enjoyed no clear use of muskets; the Chinese deployed trained levies.
Recurrent problems with technological or organizational superiority cannon on a large scale; and the Koreans pay and supply meant armies, whether over Asian or African states. fought the Japanese in the 1590s with mercenary or not, were permanently In the 16th and 17th centuries metal-armored ships. disruptive, given to mutiny and plunder.
Christian Europe was torn apart by Through the second half of the 17th religious and dynastic wars.
It was also The changing battlefield century, however, uniformed regular engaged in a desperate struggle to hold European armies began the period armies began to emerge, with higher off pressure from the Muslim Ottoman struggling to adapt their tactics to levels of discipline, more dependable pay empire in the Mediterranean and exploit increasingly effective gunpowder and supply, and a formal hierarchy of weapons and pike-wielding infantry. officers.
Mercenaries were still important, Although matchlock arquebuses and muskets were neither accurate nor quick-bring, they displaced bows from the battleheld.
Various combinations of musketeers and pikemen were | j V) j ■, v w ■ l Jl Wr employed, with an increasing proportion of muskets as time went on.
Commanders recognized the need for infantry to be ^ disciplined and formal drill was introduced with musket and pike.
Cavalry retained prestige and social status, but the armored knight with lance gradually died out.
Swords and brearms became the principal weapons of horsemen on the battleheld.
These ranged from heavily armored dragoons, who dismounted to bght with The riches of South America This gold mask was made by the Chimu people of Peru.
The Chimu established the largest empire in South America before they were conquered by the Incas between 1465 and 1470. but purchased from other states rather than from private entrepreneurs.
The more efficient hintlock musket replaced the matchlock, and the bayonet took the place of the pike, so that all infantry could be musket-armed.
At sea, meanwhile, European warships had evolved into huge three-masters armed with formidable arrays of cannon.
The Dutch and English fought the brst wars to be almost exclusively conducted at sea.
Efficient military machines Through the brst half of the 18th century European states continued to develop disciplined armies, with ever more effective held artillery.
They were at the service of monarchs who enjoyed an impressive degree of centralized control over their realms.
These rulers fought wars for limited dynastic objectives, characterized by lengthy sieges and generally indecisive battles, but their armies and navies would prove potent instruments for the more aggressive, expansionist age that followed.
The Spanish demonstrate the effectiveness of infantry armed with arquebuses.
Portuguese merchants aboard ship in a Japanese harbor 1532-33 Spanish adventurer Francisco Pizarro, with a handful of followers, seizes control of the Inca empire in Peru.
Spain's tercios go on to dominate European warfare for the next century.
I I 1 1545 At the battle of the Solent, a naval encounter between France and England, the English warship Mary Rose sinks off Portsmouth.
Janissaries, the elite corps of the Ottoman army 1538 The Ottoman admiral Kheir-ed-Din defeats a large Christian fleet under Genoese admiral Andrea Doha at Preveza.
Bartholomew's Day Massacre in Paris »Japanese Samurai helmet 1618 The Thirty Years War begins with a revolt by Protestant nobles in Bohemia against the rule of their Catholic Habsburg king, Ferdinand.
Thousands of Huguenots are murdered following a plot to kill many of their leaders in Paris.
King Gustavus Adolphus of Sweden defeats an imperial army at Breitenfeld.
A coalition of the Holy Roman empire, the Dutch Republic, Spain, and Savoy opposes Louis XIV's France.
Inspired by Admiral Michiel de Ruyter, the Dutch end by humiliating the English with a raid on the Medway.
JT'flfj :ft The battle of Malplaquet 1709 French forces are defeated by the armies of Marlborough and Prince Eugene of Savoy at Malplaquet, France.
A Vauban fortification The Peace of Utrecht brings the War of the Spanish Succession to an end.
The War of the Spanish Succession pits England, the Dutch United Provinces, the Holy Roman empire, and other states against France and Spain.
Louis XIV's chief military engineer Sebastien Vauban is made a field marshal.
The Italian Wars In the 1490s Italy became the base in which Western Europe's emerging powers—France, Spain, the Swiss, and the Italian city-states—fought for pre-eminence.
Italy and France were ultimately the losers, swept aside by the rise of a Spanish superpower.
BEFORE A degree of peace had returned to the Italian peninsula after the turmoil of the 12th and 13th centuries, yet with no central authority it appeared to be there for the taking.
The Swiss pikemen had won respect with their dispatch of Charles the Bold's Burgundians in 1476.
Many now needed work, and Charles VIII of France was only too happy to recruit them into his army.
Pope Innocent VIII backed Charles, and Spain's King Ferdinand I agreed not to oppose him in return for a free rein in the Pyrenean provinces of Roussillon and Cerdagne.
When, in 1494, King Ferrante I of Naples died, it seemed the moment Charles had been waiting for had come.
Some 10,000 of his soldiers are believed to have been killed in the battle, as against 1,500 on the Imperial side.
W hen King Ferrante I of Naples died in January 1494, his son, Alfonso II, inherited the crown.
Charles VIII saw this as an opportunity to advance his own Angevin claim on Naples by force.
He was encouraged to do this by Duke Ludovico Sforza of Milan, whose right to hold his own duchy was disputed by the new king Alfonso.
One of the characteristics of the Italian Wars was to be the ever-shifting tangle of enmities and alliances that CONDOTTIERE Literally ""contractor"" in Italian.
Some condottieri grew exceptionally powerful during the Italian Wars. helped shape the unfolding action on the ground.
Now sweeping southward, Charles's soldiers encountered armies commanded by condottieri, mercenaries contracted to individual cities.
Some attempted to fight back but Charles made short work of them, besieging cities and blasting at the walls and defenses with huge cannon.
Expelling the French Ludovico now realized that Charles had his own designs on the Duchy of Milan.
Pope Alexander VI added his authority to Ludovico's calls for an alliance against French aggression.
The ""League of Venice"" was formed, its main purpose to force the French into leaving Italy.
Francesco II Gonzaga, a eondottiere and also the Marquess of Mantua, was assigned to take command.
CENTRAL MEDITERRANEAN The Italian Wars Dates 1494-1559 Location Chiefly northern Italy Carrying the flag Dressed far more elaborately than the typical Swiss pikeman, the standard bearer was crucial to the pike-square's sense of honor and identity.
In July 1495, his Italians fought the French to a standstill at Fornovo.
Forced to retreat back to the safety of France, Charles's army survived.
Charles's successor, Louis XII, invaded Lombardy in 1499 and took Milan.
He deposed Duke Ludovico and continued south, agreeing with Ferdinand I of Spain to share the Kingdom of Naples.
Spanish commander, Gonzalo Fernandez de Cordoba, found his army outnumbered four-to-one.
A pikeman's war Named El Gran Capitan by his associates, Gonzalo Fernandez de Cordoba had the use of arquebuses and heavy guns.
Probably so-called because they combined pikes, arquebuses, and edged weapons equally, the tercios were Spain's answer to the Swiss pike-square.
As cohesive and effective for defense in depth and aggressive attack as the Swiss square—thanks to a well-drilled elite of pikemen—the tercio could also make use of its arquebus firepower to provide additional impact.
Gaston de Foix's French force met the Spanish at the battle of Ravenna in 1512.
The French never saw the benefit, however—the Swiss would soon invade Italy, taking Milan.
The French returned the year after but were beaten at Novara, their landsknechts coming off decidedly the worse against the Swiss pikemen.
In keeping with a feud between Swiss and landsknechts FRENCH KING FRANCIS I Bom in 1494 and crowned king in 1515, Francis I was driven by dynastic ambition.
Well educated and a cultivated patron, Francis began his reign with the great military triumph at Marignano.
But his dynastic rivalry with the emperor, Charles V, led him into a series of futile and ill-judged attempts to rule Italy.
Defeated and captured at Pavia in 1525, he was forced to win his freedom by making huge concessions to Charles V Repudiating his promises once back on French soil, he spent the rest of his reign carrying out further wasteful attempts to destabilize Charles's position, allying with the Ottoman sultan and scoring a diplomatic own goal in 1543 when he let the Ottoman fleet use the French port of Toulon.
He died on March 31, 1547. that went back several decades, the Swiss killed hundreds of the captured German landsknechts.
At Marignano in 1515, Louis's successor, Francis I, found the answer to the pike formations in artillery and 10,000 The population of Rome after the sacking of the city in 1527.
Thousands of people had been killed, though many had fled to the countryside. heavy cavalry.
The best known passes were closely guarded and so Francis had new roads especially built across less frequented—and arduous— back routes.
He was forced to agree to humiliating terms in the Treaty of Madrid in 1526.
Funds to pay their wages ran out and, enraged, 30,000 men marched on Rome.
Charles was noted for his Catholic piety, but the pro-French pope, Clement VII, was wary of Imperial power.
Some of Charles V's 14,000 landsknechts had Lutheran sympathies, and this added a note of religious enmity to the sack of Rome.
In May 1527 his German and Spanish troops inflicted an orgy of destruction in which the pope was forced to shelter, a virtual prisoner, in Castel Sant'Angelo.
AFTER The struggle for power between France and Spain continued in the decades that followed, with ramifications reaching far and wide through Europe.
The prisoner of Pavia In 1519 Francis was furious when Charles I of Spain became Emperor Charles V, as Francis had coveted that position for himself.
He decided again on an invasion of Italy—but Francis's pikemen and cavalry were once again mauled by the tercios at Bicocca in 1522 and Sesia in 1524.
Francis's cannon tore great gaps in the Imperial lines but had to cease fire as the French cavalry surged forward.
As both sides' landsknechts engaged, the Spanish arquebusiers could fire at will.
Battle of Marignano The War of the League of Cambrai had broken out in 1508.
Francis I suffered a series of reverses, but he transformed his fortunes with this victory at Marignano in 1515, where he was able to win back all the territories he had lost.
Enriched by the profits of its American empire, meanwhile, Spain started to grow ever more powerful.
By the 17th century, Europe's two great Catholic powers began resisting the upsurge of Protestant power in Northern Europe.
Italy itself now enjoyed a welcome period of peace and cultural flourishing under a largely unchallenged Spanish hegemony.
The technology gap between these Old and New World cultures was crucial to these conquests, yet their sheer audacity still defies belief.
I t was prophesied that the plumed serpent god, Quetzalcoatl, would one day appear from the eastern ocean in human form.
When Hernan Cortes arrived from Spain in 1519, he was believed to be that serpent god.
Yet the myth was of Spanish, rather than Mexican, origin; it was encouraged by Cortes in order to intimidate the people he was conquering.
That Cortes and his little band of men were able to subdue such an incredibly powerful empire was extraordinary.
His courage, charisma, and ruthlessness are BEFORE The voyages of Christopher Columbus between 1492 and 1504 opened up a New World, but it soon became exploited by the Old one, and destruction followed discovery.
NEW WORLD COLONIES Spain's colonization of Middle and South America's pagan cultures was ostensibly a Christianizing mission.
But those adventurers who undertook the dirty work of conquest, the conquistadors, were tough, ruthless opportunists in search of booty.
After all, these savages were ignorant of the Gospel; and they did moreover possess fabulous chimu mask quantities of gold.
IMPERIAL STRENGTH Prior to the Europeans' incursions, the Aztecs' crushing of other Mesoamerican peoples led to the creation of their empire.
They had widened their dominions through Mexico in a series of conquests from the 15th century.
Over the same period, the Incas had founded an even larger empire—over 2,170 miles across—conquering civilizations like the Chimu.
On the eve of the Spanish conquest both empires were consolidating their power.
AMERICA D Q Conquest of the Aztec empire Dates 1519-21 Location Mexico B H Conquest of the Incas Dates 1531-33 Location Peru not in doubt.
Nor is the cunning with which he exploited the existing enmities among the native peoples of Mesoamerica.
Alliances and atrocities Cortes took Malinche, a Nahua woman whose people were hostile to the Aztecs, as his mistress and interpreter.
At Cholula, west of Puebla, Cortes and his men killed the male population, without doubt at the urging of the Tlaxcaltecas, who wanted to punish the Cholulans for submitting to Aztec rule.
The scale of the slaughter the Spanish had been able to commit with their steel weapons and their firearms was scarcely imaginable to them.
Hence the nervous adulation bestowed upon Cortes and his company upon arrival at the Aztec capital, Tenochtitlan, though ruler Moctezuma II seems to have taken Cortes's claims to be an ""ambassador"" at face value.
Then The capture of Cuauhtemoc In 1521, the defeated Aztec ruler was caught by Cortes and his men as he tried to slip away across Lake Tenochtitlan in a flat-bottomed pirogue or dugout canoe. his lieutenant, Pedro de Alvarado, took fright at talk of a revolt and massacred the Aztec nobility.
Cortes and his men had to fight their way out of the rebellion that ensued.
Unequal struggles In the months that followed, Cortes besieged Tenochtitlan, now stricken with the smallpox the conquistadors had unwittingly brought with them.
Under Cuauhtemoc, the nephew of Moctezuma, the Aztecs resisted bravely.
And they held a number of advantages, as Cortes and his men were aware.
The city's situation—on a series of islands in a shallow lake, connected to the mainland and to each other by narrow causeways—allowed defenders to focus their efforts more effectively.
Inca complacency In the 1530s Francisco Pizarro took Peru against still more astounding odds.
The latter did, of course, have weapons never before seen in Gold trim South America—arquebuses (muzzleloaded firearms) and cannon, as well as steel-bladed swords.
But in the end it was Inca complacency that allowed Pizarro's party to probe deep into the empire completely unscathed.
Triumphant victor of a civil war that had wreaked the Inca empire for the last three years, and with his rival and half-brother captured, Atawallpa saw no reason to take a handful of ""bandits and thieves"" seriously.
The two sides met, eventually, at the city of Cajamarca, in northern Peru.
The conquistadors kept to their ""Christian"" commitment by bringing a priest out to preach to the Inca king.
DEADLY DISEASES The cruelty of the colonists was dwarfed in destructiveness by the ravages of the infections they introduced.
In every region of the Americas, epidemiologists estimate that 90 percent of the population had been killed by disease within just 50 years of the arrival of the Europeans.
In just a few years, and with only a tiny commitment of manpower, Spain had won a vast American empire.
Vasco Nunez de Balboa in Panama; Francisco de Orellana in the Amazon; Pedro de Valdivia in Chile—such adventurers grew fabulously wealthy.
Moctezuma's feather headdress Said to have belonged to Moctezuma II, this Aztec headdress is made from the tail feathers of the quetzal, consecrated to the plumed serpent Quetzalcoatl, Mesoamerican deity of death and resurrection. attacking, and opened up with cannon and arquebuses.
Although their noise and smoke had far greater impact than their penetrative power, the cold steel of the conquistadors cut down the Inca troops, shocked into passivity.
In a few hours of one-sided fighting, Pizarro's men killed 7,000 Incas; then they seized Atawallpa.
This proved so astonishing an outrage that the watching soldiers could barely believe it was happening.
Holding Atawallpa captive in Cajamarca, the conquistadors demanded an enormous ransom, and then garroted the king anyway, setting another puppet, Manqo Qapac, in his place.
He led a belated fightback, but the Incas were finally defeated in 1536.
CONQUISTADOR FRANCISCO PIZARRO Like so many of the conquistadors, Pizarro originated from Extremadura—then the poorest part of Spain.
He made his first foray into South America in 1524, faring better on his second, two years later, into Colombia and Ecuador, where he first heard of the wealth of the Incas.
The success of his third expedition owed much to his qualities as leader.
No strategist, but a formidable improviser, Pizarro always retained his composure, unfazed by the scale of his endeavor.
Aided by a coalition of native people determined to overthrow the Aztecs, the Spanish, with horses, armor, modern weapons, and gunpowder, were the cutting edge of military power.
The Aztecs, fighting on foot with clubs, bows, and spears, were overwhelmed within two years.
Mogul Conquests Descendants of the great Mongol conqueror, Timur Lenk, the Muslim Mogul dynasty took pride in its Turko-Mongol origins and was celebrated for its civilization and culture.
The Moguls lived up to their antecedents in the field of war, however, carving out an empire that ultimately extended across India.
Leading his warband into Afghanistan, Babur took Kabul in 1504, making it his base for forays into the central Asian region of Transoxania.
He made a series of invasions into Punjab and was soon asked by local nobles to assist them in overthrowing Ibrahim Lodhi's fearsome Afghan regime.
Before he did so, Babur took the time to furnish his army with the new gunpowder weapons and to train them in their use, meanwhile preserving the more traditional skills of steppe warfare.
Not until the end of 1525 did he mount a full-scale invasion of Hindustan.
Victory at Panipat Babur's army numbered only 10,000, but it brushed aside the Afghan force sent to intercept it.
On April 12, 1526, To the north, the subcontinent of India is protected by the formidable barrier of the Himalayas, but it has always been vulnerable to invasions and raids from the northwest, from the direction of Central Asia.
FOUNDING A DYNASTY Babur was a descendant of both Timur Lenk and Genghis Khan.
Caught up in the Timurid dynasty's protracted succession struggles, he found himself forced out of the Uzbek city of Samarkand in the late 15th century.
Babur built a power base first in Afghanistan, then in India, establishing his own dynasty in Delhi.
Sultan Ibrahim, with 100,000 men and 1,000 elephants, confronted the invaders at Panipat, north of Delhi.
He also dug trenches and felled trees to create barriers to left and Mogul firepower The era of the Moguls saw a gradual transformation of warfare in the subcontinent.
Guns, like this 18th-century matchlock, would have a growing role. was killed and Babur was left lord of Hindustan, soon occupying the cities of Delhi and Agra.
MOGUL POET ON THE SIEGE OF CHITOR, 1568 Armored elephant Elephants could trample infantry, stampede horses, and demolish fortifications.
Shaping the empire The Muslim Moguls are famed for their religious tolerance and their openness to India's aesthetic values.
Babur's grandson, Akbar the Great, ascended the throne in 1556, allying himself with northwest India's Hindu princes, the Rajputs.
During the 1560s and 70s he asserted his power over his Rajput ""allies""—most accepted, since Akbar gave them privileged offices of state.
Those who resisted had to be cut down by force, as at the siege of Chitor in 1568; simultaneously, Akbar invaded the country's eastern states, including Orissa and Bengal, extending the empire across the right, leaving gaps through which his cavalry could charge.
On April 21, Ibrahim attacked, but his soldiers were brought up short at Babur's well-placed fortifications.
As the Mogul cavalry approached from the wings to encircle the enemy, the bombardment began from behind the barrier, Babur's men firing at point-blank range into this close-packed mass.
Unable either to advance or retreat, the Afghan army was pulverized—almost 16,000 soldiers fell.
During this period Kabul was taken by Babur's old nemesis, the Uzbeks, under their formidable leader, Abd Allah Khan.
Khan's death in 1598 brought the northwest security, and Akbar soon established a new frontier on the banks of India's Godavari River.
Under subsequent Mogul emperors like Jahangir and Shah Jahan , these conquests were made The siege of Chitor Akbar’s men storm the fort of Chitor in 1568.
The Rajputs fought to the death; this fate seemed preferable to a dishonorable capture by the Mogul enemy.
Mogul expansion Though based in the north—the historic center of Islamic influence in India—the Mogul empire steadily expanded to take over the whole subcontinent, apart from the southern tip of the country and Sri Lanka. safe.
A puritanical and single-minded Muslim, the Mogul empire reached its greatest extent under his authority, but it was less happy and more restive.
Aurangzeb's death in 1707 saw his successors facing increasing difficulties and local unrest.
In the end, the dynasty fell into decline, gradually losing its territories to others.
In 1857, in the aftermath of the bloody Indian Mutiny, British rule continued and government reorganized, and India was incorporated into the ever-expanding British empire.
The Moguls had modernized Indian warfare, but had no answer to a changing political environment in which the power of Britain was playing an ever increasing role.
END OF AN ERA As the 18th century went on, the Moguls were increasingly powerless to prevent the expansion of the Maratha empire from the south.
Suleiman I had a much bigger military force than that of the Hungarians led by Louis II, the Jagiellonian king.
But Louis's soldiers started plundering the dead, allowing the janissaries to reach level ground and form up with their cannon.
One of the most striking aspects of the Ottomans' rise was their readiness to adapt.
The high seas could hardly have seemed further from the Central Asian steppe, but they took to seafaring as though it were in their blood.
Building JANISSARIES The janissaries may have been slaves, but peasants in the Balkans knew that if their sons were taken they would be ""made"" for life.
Some would try to pass their sons off as Christian so that they could be recruited into the sultan's special guard.
From the Ottoman point of view, it made sense to have aliens who, far from their families, would bond the stronger with their comrades and ""belong"" completely to the corps.
Conditions were restrictive and discipline ferocious, but the janissaries gained immense status and privilege.
Their The number of days that the first siege of Vienna , led by Suleiman the Magnificent, lasted.
Town by town, soldiers were mobilized to correspond with quotas; so too were the engineers and laborers needed to construct bridges and dig trenches.
The janissaries were the nucleus of the sultan's army—not just a reliable elite but literally at the physical center of his military operations.
Conscripts provided a ""cushion"" at the fore, while at the rear came the tougher, more seasoned troops with their commander.
Eventually, this idea was taken to such lengths that trenches were excavated and barriers erected at the heart of the army in the field.
Big guns were placed there too, and were to feature increasingly in Turkish tactics.
Mounted archers, or sipahis, acted as personal bodyguards to the sultan.
The akindshi, a small group of cavalry, went before the principal army as scouts and raiders— pillaging, burning, and spreading panic. half that number of men with about 80 guns.
This advantage was testimony to the organizational powers and logistical capacities of the Ottoman Turks, and helps explain their victory.
Caught descending a steep escarpment above the Danube River, the army had to break into smaller groups as they came down.
The Hungarians Battle of Mohacs Hungary, ""the Shield of Christianity,"" had been the final buffer between the Ottoman empire and Central Europe.
Its defeat at the battle of Mohacs in 1526 opened the way to Vienna for the Ottomans. home after months of campaigning, and at their logistical limits, the Ottomans attacked the city but were relatively easily repelled.
DEDICATION ON SULEIMAN THE MAGNIFICENT'S MOSQUE IN ISTANBUL, 16TH CENTURY For centuries Constantinople had been regarded as the greatest city in the world.
That it had fallen to the Ottomans sent shockwaves through Christendom.
EMPIRE'S END The Ottomans had seized territory in the eastern Balkans as early as the 14th century, when Sultan Murad I's ottoman sultan forces had defeated MURAD I the Serbs at the battle of Kosovo in 1389.
From their base in Constantinople , the Ottoman Turks pushed westward, extending their influence by both land and sea.
Though the Christian powers won significant victories, the Islamic forces were relentless.
T he fall of Constantinople in 1453 brought the suspense of centuries to an end.
But the West was now in the front line—and the Ottomans had shown their strength in the most ominous way; suddenly, they were a real and pressing threat.
Recruitment fell to district officials, ensuring access to the whole population of an Islamic empire that occupied some Ottoman Expansion A bodyguard's halberd Richly bound at the head with golden foil, its blade beautifully adorned with Koranic verses, this halberd was carried by one of Sultan's Mohammad Ill's bodyguards. one of the great navies of the earlymodern era, they delivered a series of checks to Portugal's colonial ambitions in the Indian Ocean in the 16th century.
Fighting back In the 17th century the Ottomans extended their territories across North Africa.
Freelance pirates, the Barbary corsairs (named for the Barbary coast in northern Africa), became an essential arm of Ottoman naval policy, harassing Christian shipping and raiding in the Mediterranean and beyond.
It reached its greatest extent toward the end of the 17th century, whereafter came a gradual decline.
Medina 9, A, Bahrain to Portugal 1521-1602 Jedda Mecca Suakin Massawa THOUSAND The number of Ottomans killed in the field at the battle of Zenta in 1697 THOUSAND The number who died in the Tisa River trying to escape the battle Arabian Peninsula Aden f N i o' r defeat at Lepanto.
But—testimony again to their organizational abilities—they quickly regrouped and returned to the offensive, occupying Crete in 1669.
By 1683 they were again advancing on Vienna, which they subjected to a 59-day siege.
Together with the pope, Austria, Bavaria, Saxony, and PolandLithuania formed a ""Holy League,"" raising a massive army that was more than 80,000 strong.
John III Sobieski, king of Poland-Lithuania, led the decisive cavalry-charge down the hillside—said to have been the biggest in history, with 20,000 horses.
The Holy League followed through with a series of victories in Hungary.
In 1697, it inflicted an ultimately decisive defeat of the Ottomans at Zenta.
All that was left for the Ottoman empire after its failure at the battle of Zenta was decline—but it was to be slow, and for a long time imperceptible.
POWER SHIFT The Ottoman empire remained the greatest power in the eastern Mediterranean; its wider sphere of influence extended from Morocco to the Middle East.
Already, though, the Portuguese had gained control of the trading centers of the Indian Ocean and Persian Gulf.
A WEAKENING HOLD In Egypt and Algeria, local governors, or beys, an asserting ever more autonomy without quite breaking the link with Istanbul.
Scores of ships were sunk and thousands of lives were lost in this climactic confrontation of the Cross and the Crescent.
The true strategic significance of the victory of the forces of Christendom has been disputed, but its symbolic impact could hardly have been greater.
I n 1570 Ottoman forces had taken the island of Cyprus from the Venetian Republic, making the Ottomans masters of the eastern Mediterranean.
With Christendom under threat, Pope Pius V summoned the Holy League, an alliance of Catholic powers against Islam.
Its members included Spain (the most powerful of the Western states), Venice, Malta, Genoa, and Savoy, and its commander was Don John of Austria, the halfbrother of King Philip II of Spain.
The fighting forces on both sides were large , the Ottomans equipped with composite bows and the Christians with muskets and arquebuses.
But these arms were largely irrelevant to a battle that would be decided by close-quarters fighting with edged weapons, and the Ottoman commander, Ali Pasha, was confident that his fleet would win the encounter.
As his main fleet engaged the enemy center, his wings would close in, crescent-like, and attack the Christians' flanks.
Don John commanded the Christian center, meeting the main body of Ali Pasha's fleet head on.
The battle unfolds At the outset the Ottomans tried to spring their trap, closing in from the wings.
But the initial impact of this maneuver was disrupted by the six Venetian galleases placed ahead of the main Christian galleys, whose size and firepower broke up the tightly-formed Ottoman line of battle.
Despite this disruption Scirocco's ships on the right wing made some initial headway before being forced back and finding themselves hampered by coastal shoals.
Ulug Ali's left wing was on the point of breaking through a gap that opened up on the Christian right when Don Juan de Cardona's reserve came up and blocked the Ottomans.
In the center the battle raged, combatants leaping to board one another's vessels through the fog of smoke and the hail of lead and arrows, with whole ships erupting into flames as their powder magazines were hit.
For a time Ali Pasha's fleet held firm against the onslaught but, pounded relentlessly through four hours' fierce fighting, eventually the flower of the Ottoman navy was all but destroyed.
MM i I i npo its ali ^ jt l Jl _ V V 4 p Aj iy ttiM Jl S f ft <K< * UVOTiO t Aft Ami, A confused and bloody conflict Ottoman ships and galleys of the Holy League engage at dose quarters.
Nonetheless, bitter enmities were evident, as many lords and their samurai followers felt overlooked.
The Onin War had brought another round of conflict as the daimyo fought for supremacy.
ARMED AND DANGEROUS The arrival of Portuguese merchants with firearms and gunpowder added a dangerous new ingredient to an already volatile mix.
The Europeans arrived in 1543, when a ship en route to China was caught in a storm and forced to put in on the island of Tanegashima.
In spite of this, guns almost certainly found their way into Japan before this, brought by Asian traders.
T he daimyo Oda Nobunaga came to the fore in the 1550s in Owari, in the present-day Aichi Prefecture of southeastern Honshu.
He was ready to extend his power by 1560, but the Yoshimoto and Matsudaira clans had other ideas.
So, as Nobunaga headed toward Kyoto with 1,800 men, he heard that an army of over 20,000 was marching out to meet him.
Unperturbed, he devised a dummy army, setting up a row of soldiers' hats and banners along a lengthy skyline to give the impression of a waiting force of many thousands.
Meanwhile, his army discreetly made its way around to approach his enemies in the rear at Okehazama.
His surprise attack sowed complete and utter panic and brought him an improbable victory.
Opening fire Though much reinforced by these new recruits, Nobunaga still faced enormous challenges—not least his rival, Takeda Shingen.
A formidable warlord from the nearby province of Kai, Shingen had hopes of uniting Honshu under his rule.
Shingen died soon after the encounter, but his son and successor, Kutsuyori, was no less ambitious, and just as determined to dominate Japan.
When his much larger force met with Nobunaga's at Nagashino Castle, also in Mikawa Province, a repeat of the rout at Mikatagahara seemed likely.
Instead, the impact of Kutsuyori's cavalry charge was checked by the disciplined stand of Nobunaga's men, and they were cut down in their thousands by his arquebusiers—men armed with muzzle-loaded firearms.
JAPANESE DAIMYO TOKUGAWA IEYASU Born Matsudaira Takechiyo in 1543, the son of a small-time daimyo, leyasu was a self-made man.
Hideyoshi saw off the threat, defeating his enemies at Shizugatake, in the present-day Shiga Prefecture, in 1583.
By 1585 he had secured his position as ^ A Number of Takeda Kutsuyori's 1 / I generals—his most trusted comrades—who took part in his cavalry charge at Nagashino.
He harbored ambitions of conquering China—and organized two invasions of Korea, although neither of these was ultimately to go as planned.
Even so, by the time he died in 1598, Hideyoshi had brought order to Japan. and the Tokugawa chief's back-channel diplomacy in the days preceding, which resulted in several key daimyo switching sides once fighting commenced.
Ieyasu's victory was epoch-making, though unrest continued to simmer for several years.
Only when the Toyotomi were finally cornered and destroyed at the siege of Osaka in 1615, could the wars of the Sengoku era be said to have reached their end.
Siege of Osaka castle Terrified civilians flee the fighting at the Toyotomi dan headquarters, under attack by the forces of Shogun Tokugawa leyasu, in 1615.
Bloody and violent, the siege lasted for six months before the Toyotomi fell. marched back to take on his lord's betrayer.
In hindsight, it was a victory, not just for Nobunaga, but also for modern ways of making war.
A unified Japan Nobunaga died in 1582, forced to commit sepukku by one of his own generals, Akechi Mitsuhide, having allegedly insulted his mother.
He was succeeded by his sandal-bearer, Toyotomi Hideyoshi, who had risen in his master's trust to become his most valued general.
True to Nobunaga, Hideyoshi abandoned the campaign he had been waging in the east and to harass his men from the rear, unsettling them.
But Helmet with war fan Plated with gold and covered with chain, this samurai helmet also has a detachable fan—both a signaling device and a defensive weapon. leyasu ascendant Tokugawa leyasu had eventually made his peace with Hideyoshi, but he drew the line at respecting the succession of his son.
Hundreds of daimyo felt they had a stake in the outcome, but opposition coalesced around the figures of leyasu and Ishida Mitsunari, a loyal supporter of the Toyotomi.
The former drew supporters from the east; the latter had his power base in the west.
The fighting took place over a wide area, with small warrior-groups engaging in a series of running skirmishes.
More crucial had been divisions in the Toyotomi camp MORE SETTLED TIMES Japan benefited from the stability conferred by the Tokugawa shogunate, though it could be rough and ready in its maintenance of order.
Thousands lost their lives during the Shimabara Rebellion of 1637-38, when Ieyasu's grandson, lemitsu, clamped down on Christian converts.
To shore up their authority at home, meanwhile, they bore down on the samurai, defining their privileges and restricting their the use of firearms.
SUSPENDED IN TIME For nearly three centuries, the Tokugawa shoguns maintained Japan's isolation.
But the country was poorly equipped when Commodore Perry and his American flotilla turned up in 1853, demanding commercial access.
All the old structures—the shogunate, the power of the samuraiH/vere soon swept away.
The Japanese celebrated the capture of Busan in 1592 with an orgy of bloodletting.
I ; 1 KOREA RESISTS INVASION r EAST ASIA 1 □ Japanese invasion of Korea Dates 1592-93 and 1597-98 Location Korea and its coastal waters Korea Resists Invasion Korea was to be the first overseas conquest for Toyotomi Hideyoshi's Japan—and a bridgehead for an invasion of China to the north.
But, brave, resourceful, and resilient, the Koreans repulsed the invaders— not once, but twice—thus destroying Hideyoshi's imperial ambitions.
It was diplomatically close to neighboring Ming China, and shared many of its values.
A UNITED KOREA King Wang Kon of Koguryo had united Korea's ""Three Kingdoms"" in the 10th century.
Attacking the ancient privileges of the country's aristocratic families, it built up its own authority at their expense.
By the middle of the 16th century, however, its stranglehold on society was slowly weakening as rival factions started to emerge.
Having turned his long-divided country into a single nation-state, he dreamed of building an empire overseas.
Just a short hop from Kyushu—Japan's southernmost island—Korea was not just a prize in itself but a stepping-stone to a possible conquest of Ming China. alliance against China.
It was not long, however, before he realized that Korea itself was virtually defenseless.
So it seemed to a ruler with half a million men under arms—samurai with years of experience in the arts of war.
On May 24, 1592, within one day of landing on the Korean coast, his men captured the strategic fortress-city of Busan and killed some 30,000 of its inhabitants in cold blood.
Ill-armed and inadequately equipped, the Koreans' regular troops and their ""Righteous Army"" of volunteers had no Hansando on August 13.
All of a sudden, their supply line seemed very long and desperately exposed.
In October they successfully defended the fortress of Jinju and, in February 1593, with just 2,000 soldiers to Hideyoshi's 30,000, the Korean army also held Haengju fortress.
TECHNOLOGY TURTLE SHIPS Turtle ships were so-called because they had completely enclosed decks beneath a curved cover that resembled the shell of a turtle.
The cover was shaped so that cannonand small-arms fire glanced off, and iron spikes protruded from the surface to discourage enemy boarders.
Oars and as many as five different types of cannon protruded from protected ports along the sides of the ship; there were additional cannon at the bow and stern.
The dragon had another significant role, however, in providing a spout for the thick, sulfurous smoke that was emitted by the crew to help conceal a vessel's movements at sea.
A second attempt Hideyoshi gave up and agreed to a truce, although he did not renounce his imperial ambitions in Korea.
In January 1597, he launched another invasion, sending hundreds of ships and over iOO.OOO troops.
This time, however, they lacked the advantage of surprise; their enemy had been making preparations.
Boosting both their land forces and their navy, the Koreans had also armed themselves with backing from Ming China, which sent 75,000 men as well as ships.
The Japanese took the city of Namwon and the strategic fortress of Hwangseoksan, but these victories did not prove to be substantial breakthroughs.
At sea Yi Sun-sin had been forced to relinquish his command after a dispute with his superiors, and his replacement managed to lose almost his entire fleet in a single battle.
AFTER Hideyoshi's dream of a Japanese empire had turned out to be a fantasy.
His successors would henceforth concentrate on maintaining stability at home.
A NEW ERA FOR JAPAN Conspicuous by his absence in Korea was Tokugawa leyasu, Hideyoshi's sometime ally and long-term rival.
Now, far from pursuing Hideyoshi's imperial project, the Tokugawa shoguns pulled down the shutters on Japan, excluding foreign merchants and missionaries.
KOREA'S NEW-FOUND CONFIDENCE Korea had been through terrible traumas, but it had gained much in military capability and confidence.
JAPANESE COMMANDER'S REPORT ON THE CAPTURE OF BUSAN, 1592 Korean weaponry Crucial to the Korean victory at Haengju fortress, the Korean hwacha used gunpowder charges to fire a hundred arrows or more at once.
While his contemporaries sparred and scrapped over provinces, he looked to the unification of Japan.
His first acts as regent, in 1586, were to start shipbuilding and to build a base on the northern coast of Kyushu from which to launch an invasion force.
Without an external enemy, they might direct their aggression at each other or turn on him.
So he began negotiations with Korea's Choson regime about an answer to the skill and prowess of Hideyoshi's soldiers.
Though they had some heavy cannon, they relied mainly on bows and arrows, which could not compete with the Japanese arquebuses for range or penetrating power.
Korea's capital, Hanseong , was taken in mid-June and, by the end of August, the country was all but conquered.
Here, the Japanese navy suffered heavy blows in a series of engagements with Yi Sun-sin's Korean fleet, complete with turtle ships, which culminated in a savage encounter at WITNESS TO WAR Samurai Armorer Japan's samurai tradition combined a code of honor and self-sacrifice with an aesthetic of war, and the craftsmen who furnished the warriors with weapons and armor shared this aesthetic.
One of the greatest Japanese armorers of all time was the 16th-century Myochin Nobuiye, creator of this magnificent helmet.
Heroic headgear A thing of beauty, but also immensely functional, this kabuto was created by Myoshin Nobuiye in about 1535 and is signed on the inside of the front plate.
Fighting to the finish The Toyotomi clan made their last stand against the forces of the Tokugawa shogunate in the fortress at Osaka in 1615.
Their the Sengoku era to an Myochin tsubas, 19th century Myochin Nobuiye made the tsuba, the guard that protects the hand on samurai swords, the ultimate expression of the armorer's art.
I n 1563, as he charged into battle with the Ikko warrior-monks, Tokugawa Ieyasu heard the sound of shots being fired and sensed the thump on his chest as bullets hit him.
Charged up with a warrior's frenzy and swept along in the confusion, he fought on, eventually leading his warriors to victory.
Only afterward when, back in camp, he unfastened his armor and two small leaden balls fell out, did he appreciate quite how close he had come to death.
Like that of generations of samurai before and after, Ieyasu's armor would have been made of narrow metal plates, bound together in a way that was both flexible and strong.
His helmet was also made of metal strips, riveted together for rigidity, then lacquered over.
Arching forward in a wingor horn-like shape, the fukigayeshi covered the ears.
The Myochin mystique Just as the honor of a samurai warrior was a quality that transcended his effectiveness in the field of battle, so the worth of armor far exceeded its functionality.
Beautiful and exquisitely wrought, it embodied the values of the samurai bushido code and announced the heroic valor of its wearer.
Not surprisingly, the armorer's trade was revered—indeed, it was not so much a trade as a vocation.
Its secrets were carefully guarded and its skills were handed down from father to son over generations—nowhere more so than in the Myochin family.
This dynasty of court armorers was at the center of Japanese military life from the medieval era right up until the 20th century.
A certain Myochin Munesuke is said to have created the famous helmet that saw the great Minamoto warlord Yoshitsune safely through so many campaigns before his betrayal and suicide in 1189.
But it was with his descendant, Myochin Nobuiye, in the early part of the 16th century, that the skills of the samurai armorer finally left behind the realms of artisanship for those of art.
Artistic genius Nobuiye's skills were legendary, winning him the sort of renown that was outshone only by that of a great warrior.
We know that he lived and worked in the town of Shirai, in the Kozuke district of central Honshu, and that his armor and swords were much admired by the great warlord Takeda Shingen.
So avidly did others imitate his work, that relatively few of his pieces have been reliably authenticated and many craftsmen have set out to make deliberate forgeries.
From this time on, indeed, the tsuba became the part of the sword on which Japanese swordsmiths lavished their most dazzling skills.
The fukigayeshi— forward projections of the shikoro, or neckguard—are richly decorated with embossed and gilded clouds and dragons.
Manchu Conquests The Manchu sauntered into Beijing, seizing power as the Ming administration imploded.
Force of the Manchu Brandishing spears, bows, and guns, Manchu warriors send a Chinese force into retreat.
Some soldiers ride on armored wheelbarrows propelled by their comrades— the wheelbarrows also functioning as shields.
BEFORE M anchu history is said to have started with Nurhaci, a Jurchen warlord, at the end of the 16th century.
Not only did Nurhaci encourage the creation of a written script of the Manchu language, but he brought together the warring nomad groups of the eastern steppe.
Four centuries before, the Mongol ruler had trampled the Jurchen's last bid for ascendancy.
Their Jin dynasty had extended its dominion across swathes of northern China, but Genghis Khan had reduced it to dust and smoke.
Forced since then into vassal status, the Jurchen people pledged their duty to China's Ming emperors.
However, Nurhaci's unifying efforts gave them the strength to assert EAST ASIA Manchu conquest of China w Dates 1618-83 Location Manchuria, China, Korea, and Taiwan have met.
As it was, they faced many other difficulties—floods and famines, economic chaos, and political corruption—and rebellion in the empire was rife.
THE KANGXI EMPEROR ON THE EXECUTION OF REBEL LEADERS, 1680 The Ming emperors had come to power in 1368 at the expense of the Mongols.
But Kublai Khan's successors had shown little of his wisdom or—increasingly—his strength.
THE GREAT PROTECTOR The Ming had hardly established themselves when, in the early 15th century, a new surge of Mongol attacks were launched under the leadership of Esen Tayisi.
The menace was eventually lifted, but the Ming emperors, ever mindful of the threat, plowed resources into renewing the Great Wall of China.
FALLING BEHIND The 16th century brought the Portuguese to China, along with their modern cannon.
From here, the Jurchen continued their raids and expansion into both China and the Choson dynasty's Korea.
A raft of rebellions However, Nurhaci was among those killed at Ningyuan in 1626.
Yuan's study of modern Western artillery weapons and techniques was crucial— Nurhaci was wounded by a cannonball from which he never recovered.
The shock of their leader's death distressed the Manchu, but the late Khan's sons.
By 1638 they had captured Korea, an important conquest in its own right but crucial too as an ally of the Ming.
In another era, the rise of the Manchu might have represented a crisis for the Ming rulers, but one that they could far too long.
A mutiny led by Zhang Xiangzhong broke out in the 1640s in Sichuan; hundreds of thousands of people were killed in this selfproclaimed emperor's reign of terror.
By 1644 the situation was growing increasingly hopeless and, on May 26, Li Zicheng's troops entered Beijing.
Zhu Youjian, the Chongzhen emperor and the Ming dynasty's last, committed suicide.
General Wu Sangui, fought on but was soon cornered by Li Zicheng's advancing forces.
The Kangxi emperor extended his empire and strengthened his hold at home by undertaking military campaigns beyond his frontiers.
To the west, against the Tibetans; to the north, against the Dzunghars; and, in the far east of Siberia, Russian colonists.
From 1736, when his grandson, the Qianlong emperor, ascended the throne, the Chinese empire realized its greatest extent.
Like the ruling powers of Japan, the Qing had fostered a splendid isolation.
The colonial period brought its own battles, such as the devastating Opium Wars of 1839-42 and 1856-60.
The Qing regime was finally removed from power during the Nationalist Revolution of 1911.
THE QIANLONG EMPEROR'S MILITARY DRESS Charismatic leader Zheng Chenggong leads his army out against the Manchu.
This popular general remained loyal to the Ming and went on to expel the Dutch from Taiwan, concluding 38 years of foreign rule on the island. help.
With their assistance, the general won a crushing victory over the rebels at Shanhaiguan.
Their forces fanned out through China, extending their dominions far to the south under the pretense of mopping up the rebels and re-establishing order.
A new dynasty Wu Sangui's hopes that the Chongzhen emperor's son would succeed to the throne were soon dashed.
Dorgon proclaimed his young nephew, Shunzhi, emperor, with himself as regent.
The country's new rulers took control with no compassion; Ming supporters and rebels melded into one.
The Manchu felt little sympathy for a Han Chinese population whose agricultural traditions and settled ways they despised.
They made their new subjects shave their hair at the front and wear a long pigtail behind in the Jurchen style—a profound humiliation for the Han.
Such atrocities appear only to have encouraged opposition, and fighting 8 The number of ""banners,"" or divisions, that the Manchu people were divided into, family by family, for military duty and organization—also later used for political purposes. continued across the country.
In the south-eastern coastal region of Fujian, General Zheng Chenggong—also known as ""Koxinga""—established his own state as a center of resistance.
Starting from Amoy , Koxinga's armies thrust deep into Manchu territory, forming alliances with other nearby powers, including the Portuguese in Macau and the Spanish in the Philippines.
Despite Intricate ensign The gold, ivory, and coral design on this 17th-century Manchu saddle signify the rider's status and rank.
These Chinese generals, who included the one-time Ming commander, Wu Sangui, had been charmed by the invaders with the promise of power and wealth, and had been given provinces in southern China.
The idea had been to extend the reach of an invasion force that was in danger of spreading itself thin and to afford the Manchu an important source of information.
However, the Feudatories became wayward; by 1674 they had risen up against the Qing dynasty, but the rebels defeated themselves with their disunity.
From there he invaded Taiwan— then a Dutch colony—and made it his offshore base for the campaign against the Qing.
The general's death from malaria later that year ended any hope of a Ming restoration, but the Manchu rulers still faced opposition from other quarters.
The Reformation overturned many old certainties, while dynastic power struggles caused widespread destruction.
But even after he abdicated, the two branches of the family held the thrones of Spain and the Austrian Lands, ensuring they were a natural choice for election as Holy Roman Emperors.
NORTHWEST EUROPE The French Wars of Religion Dates 1562-98 Location France French Wars of Religion In the mid-16th century the great French dynasties began to struggle with each other for power.
The conflict embroiled the whole nation and became all-consuming; their fervor fueled by sectarian hatred and the age-old, implacable fear of change.
As regent to her young son, Charles IX, in the 1560s she sought peace among the nobility—an accommodation between Catholics and Calvinists.
This intransigence was encouraged by the House of Guise, self-appointed guardians of Catholicism.
In March 1562, Due Francis de Guise led an Turning wheel , Iron pyrites hammer attack for two hours.
Conde's cavalry could not penetrate the wall of Swiss pikemen facing them, but his own landsknechts were not so stalwart.
CATALOG OF CATHOLIC ATROCITIES PRESENTED TO CHARLES IX, 1564 Wheellock pistol When the trigger was pulled, the sprung wheel spun, releasing the hammer, which struck sparks.
Armor On the brink of obsolescence during these wars, plate armor afforded a degree of protection against the shot from early firearms. attack on Protestants found worshiping in Vassy, Champagne, killing over 80 men and women.
Civil war erupted between the Catholic Crown and the Protestant Huguenots, led by Louis I de Bourbon, Prince de Conde.
Blundering into battle The battle of Dreux was fought in December 1562, and was marked by hapless generalship on both sides.
Having not sent any scouts ahead, Conde was caught unawares when his force met the Catholic army face to face.
Stunned himself, the Crown's marshal, Anne, due de Montmorency, failed to Orleans.
Protestant England, sympathetic to the Huguenots, enjoyed its enemy's difficulties.
Spain's Philip II had no love for the House of Valois, but his Catholic piety was real.
And he feared Protestantism's capacity to create political unrest, which had already manifested in the Netherlands.
BARTHOLOMEW'S DAY MASSACRE In August 1572, France's Huguenot elite had gathered in Paris for the wedding of their co-religionist, Henri of Navarre, to Charles IX's sister, Marguerite of Valois.
The match was intended to promote religious harmony, though many Catholics opposed it—including, it was said, the bride.
The prominent Catholic, Due de Guise, was enraged—the more so because among those present was the Huguenot Admiral de Coligny, thought to have ordered Guise's father's assassination years before.
When an agent of Guise tried to shoot Coligny, the admiral survived but the Huguenots were outraged.
Catholic mobs took to the streets; they burst into Huguenot houses murdering men, women, and children in an orgy of slaughter that went on for three days and left over 12,000 dead.
Armored helmet with a hinged visor, enclosing the entire head and face. the Huguenots were defeated once again, but the Peace of Longjumeau made them concessions, which enraged diehard Catholics.
A popular maneuver, known as the caracole, involved riders advancing in formation, each one with a pistol at the ready in both the right and the left hands.
On approaching his enemy, each man turned his mount slightly to one side, firing I k-' from that hand, before half-turning the other way to fire again from the other hand.
The Royalists had numbers on their side, with troops from Spain and states in Italy.
Although the Protestants prevailed nearby, at La Roche-TAbeille, the Catholics defeated them again at Moncontour in 1570, bringing an end to this round of fighting.
Most were restored under the Edict of Beaulieu, which concluded the ""Fifth War"" of 1574-76.
Charles IX died in 1574, and was succeeded by his brother, Henri III—a conciliator, like his mother.
No compromise In 1576 Due Henri de Guise, Francis's heir, established a ""Catholic League,"" its unstated aim to secure the throne for himself.
But Henri III had Henri of Navarre on his side—a Bourbon and a Protestant, already fighting for the Huguenot cause.
Henri of Navarre also descended from King Louis IX and, as Henri III was childless, this made him the legitimate heir to the French throne.
Battle of Dreux Fought in March 1562 this battle marked the beginning of the French Wars of Religion.
Family members were killed on the opposing sides as poor planning made for the most brutal of encounters.
At Coutras, in 1587, the Catholic forces marched quietly through the night to surprise Henri of Navarre at dawn.
But his men, well-trained veterans, held their formations, making every shot tell.
De Guise's Catholic cavalry, made up of armored knights with lances, made a stirring sight as they charged toward their enemy, but were cut down easily by Henri of Navarre's arquebusiers.
Two years later he did, following the assassination of Henri III by a Catholic extremist.
Henri of Navarre, now Henri IV, converted to Catholicism before he was crowned, but did not entirely abandon the Protestant cause.
In 1598 the Edict of Nantes confirmed the Huguenots' religious freedoms and gave them security in the form of rights to maintain their own garrisons and troops.
AFTER Although the coronation of Henri IV appeared to have taken most of the acrimony out of France's religious divisions, not much had been settled.
RESURGENCE OF HATRED Peace in France was brought to an abrupt end in 1610, when Henri IV was assassinated by a Catholic fanatic.
The France that emerged from this nightmare was an autocratic, highly-centralized state with no room for dissent of any kind.
The Dutch finally won their independence, not just by their bravery but by their resourcefulness and readiness to adapt.
Emden Leer i *i Jemmingen 1568 I RIESLAND '% DRENTHE j Zuider Lu q m Zee Q >■ ££ BEFORE F With the ""nation state"" just beginning to emerge in Europe, dynastic problems soon arose.
DYNASTIC POWER Charles 1 of Spain was also Charles V, Emperor of the Holy Roman Empire of the German Nation.
He came by the Burgundian possession of the Netherlands as heir to the Burgundian House of Valois.
But he was also successor to the Austrian House of Habsburg—not to mention the thrones of Catalonia and Aragon.
COUNTER-REFORMATION KING The Catholic Church could see that the Protestants had tapped into a profoundly spiritual hunger; it noted the energy of the new congregations, and sought to renew itself with a ""CounterReformation"" with Charles as its temporal leader.
Having led a determined attempt to suppress Protestantism in Germany, defeated thanks to French support for the German . . . . . rnitir n Lutheran princes, he viewed the rise of Protestantism in the Netherlands with alarm.
When he abdicated in 1556 to devote his life to prayer, his son, Philip II, continued his work.
Philip II felt threatened by dissent of any sort; under his rule the activities of the Inquisition intensified.
In Granada, in 1568, moriscos— descendants of Muslims forcibly converted to Christianity during the Reconquista—staged a revolt, which Philip put down with brutal force.
KEY MOMENT BATTLE OF THE DOWNS Until 1635 supplies and materiel for the Dutch war effort had traveled up along the ""Spanish Road"" through France.
This crucial conduit was cut when France's Catholic king, alarmed at the growth of Flabsburg power, entered the war on the side of the Protestant powers.
Flence the ruinous implications of defeat for Spain in this engagement of 1639, fought off England's coast between Dover and Deal.
It was a breakthrough victory for a rising Dutch naval power. 1 or the Dutch Protestants, sacred images of every kind were false idols.
Catholic churches were full of stone and wooden figures, stained glass, and carvings.
Philip II had always suspected that Protestantism was associated with the rejection of authority.
The doctrines of Calvin and Luther had taken root in northern Europe, among an increasingly affluent merchant class.
The ports and industrial cities were home to selfconfident communities whose people expected a measure of intellectual independence.
When the Spanish general, the Duke of Alba, led an army into Brussels in 1567 to crack down on the rebels and reinstate Catholicism, the population rose up in a patriotic rage.
Resistance coalesced around the figure of William the Silent, Prince of Orange, but the suppression of the dissenters was quick.
A rebel army marched out at Rheindalen in April 1568, but its volunteers were no match for the soldiers of the Spanish Crown.
Terrible massacres took place at Zutphen and Naarden, and then in Haarlem in 1573.
Far from encouraging other cities to surrender, such conduct strengthened their defiance.
Alba defeated them at Mookerheyde and in September 1574 resumed his siege.
The Dutch failed to oust the Spanish, and were The Dutch Revolt 1568-1609 Spain's early victories were soon forgotten as, fighting bravely on own home ground, the Dutch turned a quick policing operation into a long-running war. unpaid.
Angry soldiers went on a rampage in Antwerp in an episode known as the ""Spanish Fury,"" killing 8,000 in three days.
The geuzen were Calvinist privateers who had originally sought religious asylum in English ports.
Expelled by Elizabeth I in 1568, they returned to fight for the rebels in the Netherlands.
Despite this early rebuff, England gave covert then, from the i580s, increasingly open support to the Dutch Revolt.
His replacement, Luis de Requesens, found it hard to maintain a moderate course in a conflict that was not just exasperating but financially draining.
By 1576 Spanish troops were going alliance of the various regions of the Habsburg Netherlands.
Spain, however, reclaimed the initiative when significant funds began to arrive from the American silver mines.
His ""divide and rule"" approach played on the tensions he saw between the southern cities and the more militant, aggressively Calvinist northern centers.
Parma persuaded the southern states to form the Union of Arras, loyal to Spain.
The Duke made the southern cities his base for a new campaign of conquest.
The survivors were to witness many changes as their country reveled in its new-found independence.
THE THIRTY YEARS WAR Those who survived the Dutch Revolt—especially in the northern cities—discovered a new sense of national identity.
RENEWED NAVAL MIGHT As soon as hostilities ceased and the Treaty of Westphalia was signed in 1648, the Netherlands flourished.
As intrepid seafarers, the Dutch were soon opening up new areas for colonial exploitation in the East Indies.
A versatile weapon The halberd proved one Dutch answer to the fearsome Spanish pike.
The point pushed off attackers; the tilted ax blade could cut deep. war on England, was defeated.
While his recognition of the need to make his army into a fighting machine seems modern, his stated aim was to train his troops more Romano (""in the Roman way""), and he culled many of his ideas from the ancients.
His men performed endless repetitive drills with pikes and muskets, every one broken down into individual movements and each one numbered.
He rationalized the army's structures, training all new officers to command smaller companies.
In 20 years (while laying siege to cities and attacking fortresses), he contrived to fight just two pitched battles.
In 1600, however, his superior tactics were shown when he defeated Spain at Nieuwpoort, near Dunkirk.
Less fortunately for Maurice, the brilliant Italian general and financier, Ambrogio Spinola, entered the service of the Crown.
But from 1609, hostilities were suspended during the Twelve Years Truce.
Naval mastery The Thirty Years War began in 1618, and fighting resumed in the Netherlands in 1621.
Maurice of Nassau's health was failing and he could not prevent Spinola from taking the crucial city of Breda in 1625.
Its ships were bringing silver back from the mines of the New World—their loss was a deep humiliation and a major blow for Spain.
Maritime warfare had been changing fast—ships with side-mounted cannon were becoming the norm, and the Dutch had been quick in acquiring mastery.
They had shown this as early as 1607 in their audacious attack on the Spanish off Gibraltar.
In 1639, at the battle of the Downs, just off the coast of England, Maarten Tromp and his fellow seafarers savaged a Spanish fleet bringing reinforcements for the war effort in Flanders.
It had not been defeated; but neither was there any realistic prospect of its winning—money was running out and lives were being lost.
When the Thirty Years War came to its conclusion in 1648, Spain's power was weakened.
The Surrender of Breda Diego Velazquez's famous painting underlines the importance of this conflict to the Spanish Crown.
The Crown benefited financially by issuing ""letters of marque"" (official warrants to inspect, capture, and destroy foreign vessels) to seamen like Francis Drake, Martin Frobisher, and John Hawkins.
Invincible fleet Inconveniencing Spain—Europe's richest Catholic power—was one thing, but Elizabeth's interference in the Spanish-controlled Netherlands was something more.
The Earl of Leicester's 1585 expedition there in support of the Dutch rebels was futile, but for Spain's Philip II it was the final indignity.
In January 1586, with Frobisher, he led a party ashore to sack Santo Domingo; several weeks later he looted Cartagena de las Indias.
With rumors growing of a sizable Spanish armada, or fleet, that would take the war to England, Drake did to Spain what he had done to its colonies.
There, the Duke of Parma would be waiting with an army 30,000 The number of ships sunk by Sir Francis Drake in the raid on Cadiz, 1587.
Spanish helmet The classic ""comb morion"" was the helmet of choice for Spain's 16th-century soldiers.
F rancis Drake sighted the Nuestra Senora de la Concepcion (""Our Lady of the Conception"") off the coast of Ecuador on March 1, 1579.
Having trailed it discreetly throughout the day, his ship, the Golden Hind, finally closed in as darkness fell.
Drake's crew opened up with cannon and musket fire, shattering its mast.
The shocked crew surrendered, the English taking the Spanish cargo of gold and silver.
English vessels that stopped Spanish ships on the high seas The sinking of the Armada A relatively minor skirmish in itself, the defeat of the Armada in 1588 did still successfully frustrate Spanish invasion plans.
And the encounter was to loom large in the English myth-making of later times.
When Queen Mary I ascended the throne she restored Catholicism to England.
Despite protests at her betrothal to a Spanish prince she was able to face down her opponents.
Q Raids on Cadiz Dates 1587,1596 Location Southern Spain H The Spanish Armada Date 1588 Location The English Channel El The Counter Armada Date 1589 Location Coast of Portugal and Spain Q The Azores Date 1591 Location Mid-Atlantic THE QUEEN EXERTS HER AUTHORITY Queen Mary I's marriage to Prince Philip of Spain in 1554 promised to ensure lasting good relations between the two countries—though the wedding prompted violent protests in England.
PHILIP II OF SPAIN A NEW PERIL Protestant dangers were all too evident.
Mary's death in 1558 was not just a personal loss for Philip but a diplomatic challenge— her Protestant half-sister, Elizabeth I, took the throne.
The Anglo-Spanish War Religious conviction and power-politics proved a combustible mix in the escalating conflict between the Spanish and the English.
The events of the Anglo-Spanish War were to become fundamental to England's sense of itself as divinely appointed defender of Protestant liberty.
Naval armament Often mounted on the upper deck of warships from this period, the 10 ft long-barreled culverin could fire a light shot over long distances. strong to invade England.
Battles abound Commanded by the Duke of Medina Sidonia, Spain's Armada traveled up the Channel without much trouble.
On August 7 the Armada, waiting at Calais, proved vulnerable when the English dispatched fireships to float into its lines.
Panicked Spanish crews cut their anchor cables and the Armada broke free, its defensive formation quickly lost.
Parma's invasion was foiled, and the Armada was forced to push on into the North Sea.
The voyage home proved costly, stormy waters claiming some 60 ships and thousands of lives.
Jubilant England sent out its own armada in 1589, but this endured heavy losses.
In 1591 Spain reasserted its naval superiority at the battle of the Azores, when an attempt to capture its treasure fleet was thwarted.
Lord Howard led a joint attack on Cadiz in 1596 with the Earl of Essex.
In 1595 Hugh O'Neill, Earl of Tyrone, and ""Red"" Hugh O'Donnell had fitful Spanish backing when they led an Irish rebellion.
In 1601 Spain landed soldiers on the coast of Cork in support, but the groups did not rendezvous successfully.
Instead the Spanish were pinned down by the English at the siege of Kinsale.
Elizabeth's famous address to the troops at Tilbury showed there was no doubting her resolution or her strength.
Or indeed the Protestant convictions that brought her into conflict with Spain—a 16th-century superpower—and helped shape her country's foreign policy for years to come.
By the time she died in 1603, Queen Elizabeth I had made England the most important European counter to the dominance of the world's great Catholic monarchies.
LORD HOWARD OF EFFINGHAM'S DISPATCH OF AUGUST 9, 1588 AFTER The defeat of the Spanish Armada had sent England's confidence soaring.
However, its Irish neighbor would prove a problem, as would the Dutch Republic.
THE PLANTATION OF ULSTER The conflict with Spain had given the English a fright.
It appeared a susceptible ""back door"" for invasion, its people Catholic in religion and prone to rebellion.
The settling of loyal Protestant Lowland Scots in the northern Irish lands of the O'Donnells and O'Neills did successfully transform the political culture of the north of Ireland.
However, the strategy did not stop France from repeatedly trying to exploit Irish insurgencies toward the end of the 18th century.
ANGLO-DUTCH CONFLICT England's status as Europe's leading Protestant power was to be challenged by a buoyant Dutch Republic as the 17th century wore on.
In 16th-century Europe, it was also at the heart of social and cultural existence.
JOSTLING FOR POSITION Religion was increasingly the center of political life, especially once the Protestant Reformation had opened up the possibility of difference of belief.
Germany, within the Holy Roman Empire actually a patchwork of principalities, duchies, and other small states, was soon divided along religious lines.
Serious conflict was avoided when, at the Peace of Augsburg in 1555, the principle of cuius regio, cuius religio was agreed and regional independence cemented.
If the ruler was Catholic, then that was the state's religion; if he was Protestant, then so were his people.
As time went on, impatience grew over what appeared to be an unresolved issue.
Emperor Rudolf II seemed to be storing up trouble with his tolerant attitude.
RUDOLF II, HOLY ROMAN EMPEROR The Thirty Years War Habsburg plans to turn back the dock, reimposing Roman Catholicism as the established religion, turned Central Europe into a cauldron of conflict and suffering.
This war for the continent's Christian soul was outstanding in its heartless cynicism and in the staggering extent of its civilian casualties.
O ne of Europe's most tragic episodes began in farce, when Protestant nobles in Bohemia hurled two imperial governors, accused of violating Protestants' rights, from a high window into a heap of horse manure.
The officials in the Town Hall had been acting on behalf of the empire and the Church, and this ""Defenestration of Prague"" symbolized the Protestants' defiance.
Rocked by the Reformation, the empire had drawn strength from the CounterReformation and there were fears that Catholicism would again be enforced.
While the Habsburg emperor, Matthias, remained ruler of Upper and Lower Austria and Holy Roman Emperor until his death in 1619, in 1617 his nephew, Ferdinand, had been elected king of Bohemia by the Bohemian Diet in a move that was engineered by loyalist Bohemian grandees to ensure a fluid Habsburg succession to the aged Matthias's titles.
Ferdinand's aggressive Catholic devotion was well known but the Bohemian elites assumed that he would respect their religious privileges.
The conflict spreads Instead, Ferdinand instantly sought to change things in Bohemia in favor of the Catholics—the result was the Defenestration and open rebellion against Habsburg authority.
The Protestant rebels looked to their religious allies for help, and especially to the Calvinist ruler of the Palatinate, Elector Frederick V Frederick was leader of the Protestant Union, a military alliance of the radical Protestant States in Germany set up by his father in 1608.
In 1619 Matthias died; Ferdinand inherited his remaining titles and was German burgonet helmet The burgonet was light despite being reinforced internally.
But the war spread beyond these borders, with trouble flaring up from Sicily to Scotland.
Despite this development, the Bohemian rebels declared Ferdinand deposed and elected Frederick V to his place as ruler of Bohemia.
Ferdinand responded by preparing his military forces and looking to the support of his Habsburg cousin in Spain, Philip III, and the Catholic League, composed of German states under the leadership of Bavaria, which had been set up in 1609 4 million:;;:;* died during the Thirty Years War, whether killed in the fighting or by associated famine or disease.
Some estimates give a figure almost twice as high. to counter the Protestant Union.
In late 1620, at the battle of White Mountain just outside Prague, a united Catholic army crushed Frederick's forces, deposed him, and put down the revolt.
Frederick fled into exile, his own territories in Germany held by the victorious Catholic forces, and Habsburg authority and Key MM * OTTOMAN EMPIRE Austrian Habsburg possessions 1618 Spanish Habsburg possessions 1618 States at war with the Imperial forces and Catholic League Boundary of Holy Roman Empire 1618 Frontiers 1618 Gustavus Adolphus's intervention 1630-32 Imperial/Catholic victory Imperial/Catholic defeat Catholicism were imposed in Bohemia.
But this was just the start, not the end, of hostilities, as with religious principles and political issues at stake both in the Holy Roman Empire and across a wider European stage, a variety of powers and interests were to get involved.
In 1626 Christian IV of Denmark took up the Protestant banner, but he was worsted in successive engagements with the army of the Catholic League led by Count Tilly and by the emperor's army, created, funded, and led by Albrecht Wallenstein.
Wallenstein aroused fear and outrage among the rulers of the Holy Roman Empire.
Although without a princely title, his virtually private army had carried the emperor's power across Germany and to the Baltic coasts, and had been funded by a wave of transfers and confiscations of territory into his hands.
Beginning with a series of annexations along the Baltic seaboard, he then fought Poland.
Subscribing to Maurice of Nassau's military theories, he developed them for use on the field.
Wallenstein's defeat of Denmark took that country out of the war, while Sweden's Gustavus Adolphus stepped up to lead the Protestants.
The Peace of Prague Gustavus Adolphus won a resounding victory at the first battle of Breitenfeld on September 17, 1631.
The following year, Wallenstein's men were mauled at Liitzen by the Swedes, but Gustavus Adolphus was killed.
He imposed a truce, followed by a general German peace at Prague, in 1635.
The German princes, Protestant and Catholic, were war-weary and alienated by Sweden's military policies.
They accepted a settlement that moderated the emperor's tough religious demands.
Cardinal Richelieu, King Louis XIII's chief minister, had The sack of Magdeburg The Protestant city of Magdeburg was the scene of one of the greatest atrocities of European history.
In 1631 some 25,000 people were slain and the city destroyed. grown uneasy at the thought of the Habsburgs being so firmly established in Germany and Spain.
So France declared war on both Spain and the empire, soon invading the Spanish Netherlands and Imperial territories along the Rhine, but they were repelled.
Spanish and German armies cut through Picardy, Burgundy, and Champagne.
The Habsburgs were also weakened by Dutch victories at sea and rebellion in Portugal.
Concentrating its forces in North Germany, Sweden regrouped before winning decisively at the second battle of Breitenfeld in 1642.
Spain's tercios were massacred at Rocroi in France the year after by France's Due d'Enghien.
Gradually, the fighting eased, and in 1648 the Treaty of Westphalia was signed.
AFTER The Thirty Years War had been both a crucible for lasting hatreds and a useful laboratory for the testing and development of new technology and tactics.
TROUBLE AT HOME AND WITH SPAIN In France the easing of external threats allowed domestic discontents to boil over in the popular rebellion known as the Fronde.
Spain—still at war with France—took the opportunity to take FRONDE Literally a ""sling""—improvised weapons like this were used in Paris by rioters in order to break the windows of establishment supporters in what became a civil war, raging from 1G48 to 1653. back Catalonia and other captured territories.
This injected new acrimony into the Franco-Spanish War, which went unresolved until 1659.
It was the ■ I discipline and tactical flexibility of the Swedish infantry units that won the day for Custavus's forces.
KEY BATTLE First Battle of Breitenfeld Sparked by religious conflict, the Thirty Years War settled down into a struggle for strategic advantage and political power.
In time it became a blood-soaked, life-and-death laboratory in which a new science of warfare slowly took shape.
Nowhere was this more apparent than at Breitenfeld, where in 1631 Swedish forces gave the world a terrifying taste of things to come.
B y 1630 the advantage in a war that had been going on for just over a decade seemed to have swung toward the Catholic powers.
Swedish king Gustavus Adolphus's entry into the conflict on the Protestant side occasioned little concern, for the Duke of Friedland had proved all but indomitable in his service to Ferdinand II, the Holy Roman Emperor.
However, the emperor himself had become so alarmed by Friedland's growing power that he replaced him in 1630 with another great commander.
A new way of war In 1630 Gustavus landed in Pomerania with an army that had learned much from previous combat experience.
His infantry were now organized into brigades of 1,200-1,500 men, which combined excellent cohesion and battlefield staying-power with tactical flexibility.
The infantry were powerful in defense, could quickly deploy in lines six deep to maximize the impact of musketry, and could combine with artillery and cavalry to deploy a variety of offensive tactics.
It was this tactical flexibility that gave Gustavus victory against Tilly; a victory that was far from assured on the outset of the battle.
From theory to practice Tilly advanced into Saxony, where Gustavus had linked up with the Elector of Saxony's army.
The initial assault of Tilly's troops swept away the Saxon army corps on the left flank, and threatened to roll up the Swedes from the flank.
The rapidity, skill, and determination with which the second line were swung round to drive back the Catholic forces turned apparently inevitable disaster into crushing victory.
Tilly's army resisted bravely, but Adolphus's juggernaut could not be stopped.
Despite this, deep conviction drove him to support the Cromwellian cause.
The 17th century saw the British Isles torn by religious and ideological struggles, which were to exact an appalling human cost.
C harles I's attempt to arrest leading Parliamentarians—in parliament itself—precipitated the outbreak of civil war.
Meanwhile, the Earl of Essex had been assembling a Parliamentarian force, derisively named ""Roundheads"" by their opponents on account of the radical Protestant fashion for close-cropped hair.
While the war was fought in the defense of sincerely-held principles, a number of soldiers signed up as mercenaries, including leading officers who were veterans of the Thirty Years War.
Led by the king's nephew, Prince Rupert, the Essex was waiting west of the city at Turnham Green.
He had been busy creating volunteer town and village militias, so he also had an ample force; too big for the king to think of tackling.
Over the following year, the armies criss-crossed southern England, closing occasionally for brief “ If these times hold, I fear there will be no men left for women.” casualties on both sides, the Royalists could not break the steady resolve of the Parliamentarian pikemen.
A leader emerges Light as it was, the falconet could be hitched up to a team of horses and moved quickly —an important advantage in the fast-moving action of the British Civil Wars.
Charles I of England believed in the king's ""divine right"" to rule unchallenged.
This absolutism brought him into a long and bitter conflict with his parliament.
THE ISSUE OF RELIGION Alongside concern at his despotism, there were suspicions in what was now a proudly Protestant England that the Stuart dynasty had Catholic sympathies.
Charles certainly had no time for the freedom of individual conscience that Protestants prized.
In 1638 Presbyterians in Scotland signed a National Covenant, noting their defiance.
Charles undertook two ""Bishops' Wars"" for his right to impose his own hierarchy on the Scottish Kirk.
The failure of this enterprise not only damaged his authority at home, but saddled England with an enormous debt for reparations to the Scots.
LOSING CONTROL In order to raise taxes, Charles had to recall his parliament, to the alarm of Ireland's ""old English"" Catholic nobility, fearful for their position in a situation in which the Protestants of Scotland and England's Parliamentarians were in the ascendant.
Such trust as still existed between the king and his critics now broke down.
Falconet Essentially an outsized musket on wheels, the falconet could fire single-round shot, and tiny ""grapeshot""—both devastating against enemy infantry.
Essex seemed no more able to press his advantage than Charles had been before.
Both armies struggled to sustain support among their troops, and both were short of supplies and funding.
Men deserted and preyed on the country people, who grew disillusioned with the conflict.
Both sides sought help from outside, Charles from the Catholic Irish lords; his enemies from the Presbyterian Scots.
ENGLISHWOMAN ELIZABETH ISHAM ON HER NIECE'S WEDDING, 1645 engagements, most of which were won by the Royalists.
But much of this good work was undone in one afternoon at Newbury in September 1643 where, once again, the Royalist cavalry charged to apparently devastating effect against Essex's horsemen.
Despite a succession of attempts, however, and dreadful cavaliers charged with scorching pace and force, scattering the Parliamentarian horses before them.
Some infantrymen fled, but the core was disciplined— and apparently forgotten by Charles's Royalists, who seemed to think the battle already won.
The Royalists threw away their advantage, chasing plunder while the Parliamentarian infantry pushed forth, their cavalry regrouping.
Though his political resistance to the king had commanded respect in the years leading up to the war, as a military novice, he had since been sidelined.
Nevertheless, he had set 1 900,000 rri, of casualties in the British Civil Wars in 1639—51.
About a third of the population of Ireland is thought to have been killed or exiled. about raising his own mounted militia in Cambridgeshire.
By July 1644 he was a Lieutenant-General of the Horse, and served at the head of 3,000 cavalry under Sir Thomas Fairfax at the battle of Marston Moor, near York.
Fairfax Bullet mold and shot Shot could be made in the field by pouring molten lead into a hinged mold.
Troops used pointed ""nippers""—or their teeth—to trim the rough edges. was hurt, though only slightly.
The Scots stood firm, however, and Cromwell called his cavalry back into formation.
Seizing the initiative, he led an audacious charge across the breadth of the battlefield to attack the Royalist horse, putting them to flight before turning on the infantry.
The New Model Army Marston Moor might have given the Parliamentarians mastery in the north, but Essex was being overwhelmed in the south.
Fairfax created a ""New Model Army,"" numbering 20,000, a body of professional full-timers who could be deployed at speed wherever needed.
With 11 regiments of cavalry, 12 of infantry, and a single regiment of dragoons, they were trained and drilled in the best modern continental style.
Ornate muzzle himself led the infantry—8,000 in all, backed by 14,000 Scots.
Cromwell led the Parliamentarian attack, striking unexpectedly in the evening.
The attack started well but faltered when Fairfax's infantry was slowed by marshy ground.
As the Royalists counterattacked, Cromwell it was centralized and imbued from top to bottom with the Protestant virtue— and military value—of discipline.
Hence the manner in which the army held its shape as Prince Rupert's cavalry squandered another victory at Naseby in Northamptonshire the following June.
In 1648 Scots nobles came to Charles's rescue with 20,000 men, but they were halted by Cromwell LORD PROTECTOR OLIVER CROMWELL Cromwell was an astonishing man in both energy and resource.
A self-taught soldier, he helped build an army—and a strategy— from scratch, and was indefatigable in the execution of his plans.
He showed a shockingly implacable side during his campaigns in Ireland. at Preston.
In 1649 they tried and executed Charles I Both sides in England's First Civil War had learned from the example of the Thirty Years War in technology and tactics.
Cromwell's determination to quash the Irish rebellion in 1649 was shocking in its ferocity.
At the siege of Drogheda on September 11, the entire garrison of 2,800 and some civilians were purposely killed when the city was stormed by Cromwell's troops.
Scotland's turn The role of Scotland in the conflict had been changing.
While its Presbyterian religious and political establishment had at first supported the Parliamentarian cause in England, rifts over political aims and the more doctrinally-radical Protestantism espoused by much of the New Model Army, including Cromwell himself, had led to rifts, and finally to Scottish support for a Stuart monarchy, which they considered would better maintain their Presbyterian religious settlement.
In 1648 the Scots had mounted an invasion of England, and in 1650 they prepared for another.
Cromwell returned from Ireland and marched an army north, besieging Edinburgh.
There, on September 3, he trounced the much larger Scottish army that came after him, drawing it down from its superior position on higher ground then deftly outflanking it.
Back in England, at Worcester, exactly a year after his triumph at Dunbar, Cromwell smashed Charles II's Royalist army once and for all.
Battle of Naseby The Royalists were heavily outnumbered at the battle of Naseby in 1645, but it was the superior discipline of the Parliamentarian forces—and the crucial contribution of their cavalry—that won the day.
CROMWELL'S LEADERSHIP Cromwell repressed rebellions in Ireland and Scotland.
In Ireland ""Penal Laws"" were passed preventing Catholics from holding public office and restricting their property rights.
While Cromwell was away, his parliament in England bickered and government eventually ground to a halt.
Cromwell suspended parliament in 1653 and took power as ""Lord Protector"" in what amounted to a military coup.
THE MONARCHY RESTORED Cromwell died in 1658, to be succeeded by his son, Richard—as ineffectual as his father had been strong.
A reconvened parliament invited Charles II to return from exile and take his crown.
The Commonwealth period was retrospectively defined as nothing more than an ""Interregnum""— a break between two reigns.
L Four Days Battle What remains the longest-ever naval engagement in history was fought in 1666 at the height of the Second Anglo-Dutch War.
The English faced a struggle to rebuild their fleet in the years afterward.
BEFORE In the second half of the 17th century, two ambitious, up-and-coming maritime powers came into conflict with each other over the possession of the seas.
MARITIME ADVERSARIES The Netherlands had won their freedom after 80 years of struggle «138-39, emerging as a major mercantile economy and colonial power.
REGRET But now that peace had returned to pikeman's breastplate, England, the 1 7TH century Commonwealth was looking to a future it saw as being shaped overseas, in a growing empire.
War with the Netherlands seemed inevitable, though it was a policy that England was soon to regret.
The Anglo-Dutch Wars England and the Dutch Republic had much in common.
Two Protestant nations in the north of Europe, they had both recently triumphed over an overbearing Spain.
From the 1650s they fought a series of wars over which state was to have supremacy.
Under the Navigation Act of 1651, imports to England had to be shipped directly from their source nation—vessels from a third nation could not be involved.
A portentous start Both sides were caught out when the fighting started, however.
On May 29, 1652, Lieutenant-Admiral Maarten Tromp's fleet and that of England's Robert Blake chanced upon each other in the English Channel.
The encounter led to the battle of Goodwin Sands, which lasted five hours and left both fleets badly damaged.
George Ayscue's English fleet attacked a convoy of Dutch merchantmen that August, taking a battering from Michiel de Ruyter's warships for its efforts.
Blake took revenge in October, defeating the Dutch at the battle of Kentish Knock.
Vice-Admiral Witte de With wanted to take the battle to the English, while Vice-Commodore Michiel de Ruyter favored a more cautious, defensive approach.
With their bigger ships and superior cannon, the English won decisively, while the Dutch fled in disarray—scattered like sheep before wolves, complained a bitter de With.
In the slightly longer term, however, the Dutch were to benefit from this bruising.
Taking stock, they set about NORTHWEST EUROPE Anglo-Dutch Wars Dates 1652-54, 1665-67, 1672-74 Location The English Channel and North Sea building bigger, more powerfully armed ships.
Admiral Blake could not contain his disgust at what he described as a certain ""baseness of spirit"" in some sections of his fleet—those ships whose skippers had hung back from the fighting at its height.
The new tactics paid off in March 1653 at the battle of Portland, in an engagement known as the Three Days Battle.
Blake's fleet finally made its superiority in arms and tactics tell against a Dutch fleet of similar size, and the enemy was forced out of the English Channel.
A new directive The English Admiralty issued ""Instructions"" schematizing a new approach to war at sea.
Until now, ships had closed with enemy vessels as quickly as possible, hoping to get men aboard in a general free-for all.
Ships not only risked being destroyed by enemy gunfire but also endangered comradevessels with their own.
As such, the broadsides inflicted the greatest possible losses, while avoiding damage by ""friendly fire.
The hostilities ended in mutual exhaustion, though the underlying issues remained unresolved.
The real cause of the conflict, however, was continuing competition for trade.
The Dutch had built up their fleet since the first conflict and felt confident of a victory, so the battle of Lowestoft, on June 13, proved a rude awakening.
The English casualties were negligible, and yet they did not build on this victory.
Instead, the Dutch were able to recover and went on to triumph at the Four Days Battle, which was fought off the east coast of Kent from June 1-4, 1666.
JOHN EVELYN ON THE ENGLISH FLEET AFTER THE FOUR DAYS BATTLE, 1666 flagship, the Royal Charles.
This was the final straw for an enemy reeling from the impact of both the Great Plague of 1665-66 and the Great Fire of London of 1666.
The French connection England no longer had the stamina for further fighting, but King Charles had committed his support to Louis XIV of France, so when the latter attacked the Dutch in 1672, he was compelled to help.
Louis's invasion was halted when the Dutch opened up their dykes to flood the countryside, and the English fleet was summoned to assist.
The worst fears of the demoralized English public were confirmed when DUTCH FLEET ADMIRAL MICHIEL DE RUYTER The Dutch admiral who was to win such admiration for his dash and daring was a surprisingly modest man.
Almost 60 years old when he masterminded the Raid on the Medway in 1667, he had been at sea since boyhood.
Scrupulously professional and cautious by nature, the audacity of his most famous victories was that of a consummate seafarer, thoroughly familiar with his men and ships, their limitations and capabilities.
The Dutch and the French remained at war after Charles II retired from the conflict in 1674.
FIGHTING THE FRENCH Michiel de Ruyter died in 1674 at the battle of Augusta, though his fleet was victorious.
By 1678 the Dutch had forced King Louis XIV to give up his idea of conquering their country.
AN UNEASY PEACE It would not be too long before England had a Dutchman as its ruler.
William of Orange was called to take the place of the Catholic Stuart king, James II, in 1688.
But it did bring almost a century of peace with the Netherlands before a Fourth Anglo-Dutch War flared up in 1780.
A NEW ERA FOR NAVAL WARFARE No longer could naval combat be seen as a continuation of land warfare by other means.
Later editions of the Admiralty Instructions developed new theories of naval warfare—just as the reforms of Maurice of Nassau were rationalizing the waging of war on shore. the Dutch navy easily staved off their fleet's attack.
By some good fortune, a sudden change in the wind averted a shattering defeat by the Dutch at the battle of Solebay, off the coast of Suffolk, on June 7, 1672.
However, divisions between the French and English navies led to crushing defeats at Schooneveld and Texel, in June and August 1673 respectively, and Charles II was forced to sue for peace.
FOUR DAYS BATTLE Dutch warships under the command of Michiel de Ruyter respond to an attack by English warships under the Duke of Albemarle off Dunkirk, on June 11,1666.
The action precipitated the most brutal battle of the Anglo-Dutch Wars, and one of the longest naval battles in history.
Raging off the Flemish and English coasts for four days, the battle was a disaster for Albemarle; ten ships were lost, and over 2,000 English seamen were killed.
BEFORE Aged just five when he succeeded to the French throne in 1643, Louis XIV reigned under the guidance of his chief minister.
For France, the war ended in an eruption of civil violence, the Fronde.
This helped shape the attitudes of Cardinal Mazarin—and of his charge, who grew up to be the ""Sun King,” Europe's model for the absolute monarch.
This conflict appeared to have very little to do with France, still very much an agrarian economy, with limited involvement in overseas trade.
The Early Wars of Louis XIV Louis XIV's vision for himself and for France was too grand and heroic to be contained within the frontiers he had inherited from his forebears.
Determined to win recognition as the continent's pre-eminent ruler, the ""Sun King"" plunged Europe into a dark period of permanent conflict.
F rom 1661 Louis XIV assumed full control of his country, but France was almost bankrupt.
Jean-Baptiste Colbert, the finance minister, inaugurated a program of economic rearmament, encouraging industry and stimulating trade.
The War of Devolution began in 1667, the Vicomte de Turenne leading the French army into the southern Netherlands.
The Spanish garrisons were undermanned and the defensive infrastructure neglected.
Louis backed down, but discreetly set to work undermining the Alliance.
He bribed Charles II of England to sign the secret Treaty of Dover in 1670.
Two The siege of Maastricht Military engineering entered the modem era at Maastricht.
Vauban deployed heavy cannon above the ground and carefully directed miners below; he dug zigzag trenches running parallel to the walls to protect his infantry. years later, as if out of the blue, France and England declared war on the Dutch Republic.
Sweden sided with the aggressors, but Spain, the elector of Brandenburg, and Leopold I, ruler of the Austrian Lands and Holy Roman Emperor, allied with the Dutch, who opened the dykes to flood their countryside—impeding the French infantrymen.
Unable to defeat them, Louis turned his attention back to the Spanish Netherlands.
Drawn into a further six years of war against an able coalition of enemies, Louis's armies were successful on the battlefield and gained him more territory at the expense of the Spanish monarchy.
Building success The conflict saw advances in siegecraft and fortification—in particular after the capture of Maastricht by Sebastien Le Prestre de Vauban.
Vauban, a military engineer, convinced Louis that he could build a Fortress France.
Utilizing Vauban's ""systems of fortifications,"" the king erected a chain of ramparts and fortresses along his northeastern frontier.
He substantially modified 83 towns; eight new strategic centers were built from scratch.
Pioneers opened up the Mississippi basin in the American colonies, and Canada; missionaries and merchants set up contacts in southern Asia and the Far East.
The year after, his enemies—not just the Dutch Republic, Sweden, and the Protestant principalities in Germany, but Catholic “ I never saw a Louis XIV, king of France L'Etat, c'estMoi , Louis XIV reputedly said.
The ""Sun King"" became the despotic ruler of a wealthy and powerful France. had married William of Orange in 1677— his concerns proved well-founded when the Dutchman was crowned King William III of England.
Although France's navy triumphed in 1690 at Beachy Head, it was unable to prevent William's landing in Ireland to contend with James's fightback.
Inconclusive conflict Louis XIV, meanwhile, was finding things extremely frustrating.
A man who ruled by diktat, he was horrified by the indecisiveness of war.
VICOMTE DE TURENNE, AFTER THE BATTLE OF SINSHEIM, JUNE 1674 AFTER 0 The 17th century came to an end, but Louis XIV still had business that needed attending to—both with Europe and with his country's military strength.
The French army reached a size—350,000 men by the mid-1690s—not seen In Europe since the fall of the Roman empire.
PERCENT The proportion of France's overall budget going toward military expenditure.
PERCENT The proportion of military spending going toward Vauban's fortifications.
Although the army, and an impressive navy, imposed a huge financial burden on the population of France, it had the enthusiastic support of the nobility, who served, en masse, as the officer corps.
Not only did Louis have to face the financial and military might of the Anglo-Dutch alliance, but in 1683, the Austrians repulsed the Ottomans at Vienna.
This coalition, founded by Emperor Leopold I in 1686, had the primary aim of challenging the French king's expansionist plans.
The War of the Grand Alliance In 1688, in anticipation of an Imperial invasion, Louis sent an army to lay waste the Palatinate of the Rhine.
Louis had been dismayed when James's daughter, Princess Mary, study their maps and plan tactical maneuvers and feints, but these invariably foundered on the muddy ground of Europe.
At Fleurus in 1690, for example, Louis's army, led by the Due de Luxembourg, won what appeared to be a victory over Prince Waldeck's allied army (William III had entrusted his forces to the prince while he was away)—yet the battle had no strategic gain.
The War of the Grand Alliance ended with the Treaty of Rijswijk in 1697, but no resolution was reached.
Louis XIV was militarily the war's victor (he had modernized warfare in many ways), but the Sun King had gained very little else.
They feared the rise of a Franco-Spanish superpower and were prepared to fight to make sure this did not come about.
BEFORE The reign of the ""Sun King"" was at its zenith by the start of the 18th century, but Louis XIV had not managed to impose his authority on the continent at large.
In 1700 King Charles II of Spain died, and Louis's great-grandson, Philip, Due d'Anjou, succeeded the throne.
The Habsburg emperor, Leopold I, objected, as did England, Portugal, Prussia, and the Netherlands.
T he Habsburgs did not like the idea of the Due d'Anjou inheriting the Spanish crown; neither did other European nations.
The fighting began in Italy, where Austria's Prince Eugene of Savoy invaded the Spanish-held duchy of Milan.
After driving off a French attack at Chiari in September 1701, Eugene captured Cremona the following February; he was said to possess a bloodthirsty ire during battle.
England's John Churchill, the Duke of Marlborough, could not have been more different in his style, though like Eugene he led his soldiers from the front.
At the head of English, Dutch, and allied German forces in the Low Countries—the ""Grand Alliance"" had been renewed—he seized a series of fortresses along the Meuse River.
In October 1702, Prince Louis William of Baden-Baden faced a French force at Friedlingen, Bavaria.
He lost the battle, but he stopped the French from joining their Bavarian allies and, having inflicted heavy casualties, extricated his army almost intact.
In September Marshal Villars defeated an Imperial army at Hochstadt in Bavaria, opening the road to Vienna.
Prince Eugene had, in the meantime, brought his army up from Italy and together, at Blenheim in Bavaria, they engaged with FrancoBavarian forces.
Marlborough began by encircling Blenheim village— with much of the enemy inside.
He tricked the remaining troops with dummy attacks, prompting them to commit their reserves too soon.
Marlborough had his artillery moved at speed across the battlefield to where it could be most advantageously deployed.
Cavalry charges delivered precise thrusts at a weakened enemy before a final and devastating advance of the infantry.
KEY MOMENT 1 THE BATTLE OF BLENHEIM The Duke of Marlborough's conduct of the battle of Blenheim on August 13, 1704, was masterly.
On a battlefield spanning almost 4 miles , Marlborough threw his enemy off-guard with a series of feints, before smashing his way through their center.
The brilliance of his thinking and the fluent ease with which his forces executed his instructions on the ground were something quite new in military history.
Marlborough's victories The campaign had seen great daring underpinned by supreme efficiency.
The modern idea of the army as a ""military machine"" had been gaining ground for some time, with increased regimentation and standardization of uniforms and weapons.
The flintlock was replacing the unreliable matchlock musket, while lightweight and easily movable cannon could be deployed more imaginatively on the battlefield.
Marlborough used the same tactics at the battle of Ramillies, in present-day Belgium, in May 1706.
With a feint to one side, followed by a shattering frontal attack, the French and Bavarians were defeated. with 22,000 casualties to the Alliance's 2,500.
Having lost half the Spanish Netherlands as a result of this crushing defeat, France attempted to recover the territory.
Marlborough, once more linked up with Eugene, ordered, in 1708, an overnight march to ambush the invading French, whom they Double cock Frizzen spring Trigger attacked across the Scheldt River to win a third great victory at the battle of Oudenarde.
Queen Anne's War All this time, a subsidiary struggle had been unfolding across the Atlantic.
The French, Spanish, and Native American allies had been fighting Britain and its American colonists, allied with the tribes Double-barrelled flintlock pistol This ornate weapon, made around 1700, was routinely used in combat by the cavalry.
During this period flintlocks were gradually replacing matchlocks, which tended to be less reliable.
Battle of Malplaquet Eugene urged the Alliance to fight at Malplaquet in 1709.
Almost 40,000 were killed and wounded in a battle that critics claimed need not have been fought. of the Iroquois Confederacy.
While attacks on South Carolina by Spanish forces from Florida were easily rebuffed, the French became a real threat when they struck south from Canada into New England.
It would be an exaggeration to claim that the Grand Alliance had won this most mutually draining of wars; but it was clear that Louis XIV had lost.
AFTER The outcome of the War of the Spanish Succession was less conclusive than it at first appeared.
BRITAIN'S MONARCHY Though ousted in the ""Glorious Revolution"" of 1688, James II still considered himself king of England.
He lived until his death, in 1701, as a guest of Louis XIV who continued to treat him as rightful king.
In 1701 Louis recognized James's son as James III of England, one of the factors that determined the British on war.
James the ""Old Pretender"" was expelled from France under the terms of the Treaty of Utrecht, but following Queen Anne's death and the succession of the Hanoverian George I, he made a fresh attempt to win back the British throne.
The Jacobites (as supporters of James—in Latin, Jacobus —were called) mounted an uprising in 1715, but James's Catholicism was a stumbling block for most of the conservative groups in English society.
In a long but ineffectual reign, however, his successor—his great-grandson, Louis XV—was to preside over the gradual erosion of France's foreign-policy prestige.
The intimacy of the warrior's relationship with this weapon helps explain why it is so often ornamented.
Quillons, or crossguards, were designed in Medieval Europe to stop the from blade sinking in too far, and to protect the hand.
The Highland dirk was often used in conjunction with the broadsword, the fighter wielding one weapon in each hand.
A Rajput warrior's katar was held horizontally, and used with a ""punching"" action.
This 18th-century Sri Lankan warrior's dagger was exquisitely ornamented to reflect the owner's elite status.
This is an 18th-century Italian gunner's stiletto, with a numbered scale on the blade for quickly measuring the bores of guns.
This late 19th-century East African finger-knife belonged to a Turkana herder from Uganda.
The North African koummya dagger was curved like the slashing tusk of the wild boar, an animal that also shielded against the evil eye.
This one is from World War I 0 This knuckle-duster knife could be used for punching as well as stabbing.
I0P"" 1 56 DAGGERS |0 ITALIAN SWORD-BREAKER SCOTTISH DIRK 0 INDIAN BICHWA 0 SRI LANKAN SILVER DAGGER 0 NATIVE AMERICAN DAGGER 0 NEPALI KUKRI 0 UGANDAN FINGERKNIFE IU BRITISH SYKESFAIRBAIRN FIGHTING KNIFE PAPUAN OBSIDIAN DAGGER 0 United States KNUCKLEDUSTER KNIFE 0 SUDANESE SICKLE KNIFE 0 GERMAN BAYONET The Baltic, long a backwater, was by the 17th century one of Europe's most prosperous regions.
SWEDISH EXPANSIONISM The year 1655 saw the start of the Stormakstiden, or ""Age of Great Power,"" in Sweden.
In what outsiders call the Northern Wars, an expansionist Sweden attacked Russia, Denmark, Brandenburg, the Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth, and the Netherlands.
The French and Dutch were drawn in when Norway-Denmark invaded the island of Scania in 1675.
The war that resulted ended indecisively, but Sweden's influence was growing.
RUSSIA IN THE ASCENDANT Peter the Great of Russia, tsar since 1682, was resolved to build a modern and militarily powerful state.
He constructed his own highly centralized administration and reformed the army at the expense of the old officer elite, the Streltsy.
He had already expanded his empire in the south, taking the Ottoman naval base of Azov in 1696.
STRELTSY The Great Northern War The steady growth of Sweden's Baltic empire sparked all-out war in 1700.
After more than 20 years of conflict, Swedish supremacy was finally brought to an end.
In subsequent years, though, Russia emerged as an aggressor in the region. s weden's neighbors were jubilant when, in 1697, its king, Charles XI, died.
Now they had to deal, not with this despot, but with his son, Charles XII, not yet 15.
Peter I of Russia was making reforms that he hoped would bring his country major power.
Augustus n, was both the king of Poland-Lithuania and elector of Saxony.
In 1696 the death of his half-brother left Peter I as sole ruler of Russia, and he was able to give greater priority to a series of military and naval reforms with which he planned to assert Russian power over his neighbors.
Born to fight The rivals had underestimated their opponent, however, whose upbringing and education had prepared him for Baltic supremacy During the 17th century, the Baltic Sea became both a highway and battlefield for the powers competing for authority around its shores.
Coin showing the Narva battle NORWAY Christiana Culf of Bothnia Aland Islands Nystad Frederiksten Dynekilen *m 1716 Stockholm Gothenburg ^ Grengam 1720 D 1719 Helsinki 3 Culf of Finland Mr St.
Sweden's army had 30,000 infantry and 11,000 cavalry at home and 25,000 mercenaries around the empire.
Superbly organized and trained, it was constantly replenished by a system of conscription, which allotted men both to the military and—in peacetime—to agricultural work, ensuring supplies.
They launched a crushing combined attack in early 1700, only to be brought up short almost instantly.
Denmark was defeated in a matter of days, Charles personally leading the expedition that took Copenhagen COSSACK A member of one of several warlike, formerly nomadic communities of the southern steppe, generations of whom served the Russian tsars as cavalry in July.
Augustus II was severely weakened when, with Riga surrounded, an expected uprising of local nobles failed to materialize.
PETER THE GREAT AFTER TRIUMPHING AT POLTAVA, 1709 losing the war at sea, suffering defeats by Peter's new navy at Osel Island in 1719 and Grengam in 1720.
Russia now ruled the Baltic waves and a large area of dry land as well.
The year after, the Treaty of Nystad gave the tsar authority over much of the Baltic coast.
Peter, who had desired to secure a ""window on Europe,"" declared his kingdom an ""empire"" in 1721.
A PERIOD OF INACTIVITY Peter died in 1725 and his immediate successors struggled to stay in charge of what was still an unruly nation.
The percentage of Russia's population who were serfs—peasants bound to their landlords' fields—on the accession of the Empress Catherine the Great in 1762.
A GREATER POWER Not until 1762 would Russia have a ruler who could match Peter for resolve or ruthlessness.
Catherine II was another modernizer, eager to shake up an obdurately conservative nation.
Striking south into grain-rich Ukraine as Peter's forces retreated might have seemed sensible, but the Russians' scorched-earth tactics left the Swedes starving.
Disease was rife, and the army that surrounded the fortress of Poltava in spring 1709 was reduced to 14,000 men.
Yet Charles was optimistic, and his plan to ""punch through"" in an audacious frontal attack might well have worked against the Russian troops of old.
Though rocked by the shock of his assault, Peter's soldiers hit back with devastating force.
Peter's sense that Poltava had been a turning-point was borne out in the years that followed.
Sweden's enemies were closing in and Charles continued the struggle on his return, building up his navy.
Charles, ever-proactive, invaded Norway, but died at the siege of Frederiksten in 1718.
Sweden was also Russian military uniform Peter the Great founded the Preobrazhensky Lifeguard Regiment as part of his military reforms, and it fought with distinction in the Great Northern War.
A campaign too far But now it was the Swedish king's turn to underestimate an enemy.
Profoundly affected by the shock of Narva, Peter had ordered a root-and-branch reform of his forces.
The country Charles invaded in the fall of 1708 was not the same as before.
Winter was on Battle of Poltava Brought low by a ghastly winter in the field, Charles Xll's all-conquering army was savaged by the Russians.
Charles fled south, seeking sanctuary with the Ottomans. a string of victories against Augustus's increasingly desperate forces in Poland and Lithuania.
Charles braved overwhelming odds to deliver the decisive blow. in present-day Estonia.
They defeated the Russians, capturing just about all the weaponry Peter's army had.
All that remained was for Charles to name his conditions for his enemies' surrender; no one was in a position to object.
Yet Charles fought on, and won Supplies However dramatic the events on the front line in any war, much of the most important action takes place behind the scenes.
Ensuring those fighting have the food, tools, weapons, ammunition, and other supplies they need is vital to the success of any military campaign.
A ncient armies lived off the land, so summer was the best season for a campaign.
Even where food was readily available, organizing its collection and managing its distribution k to a large body of men were constant headaches.
Each horse or mule needed 11 gallons or more each day—not just the cavalry y mounts, but also the pack animals, of which there were often thousands.
The Assyrians had dedicated officials who could procure and train 3,000 horses a month.
That number of horses or mules needed some 75 acres of good grazing a day, \ so huge quantities of fodder had to be carried where fresh grass was scarce.
Weighted down According to Livy, writing in the reign of the first emperor, Augustus , a Roman army of 40,000 men needed 1,600 smiths and other craftsmen to maintain its armor and weapons.
Roman legionaries carried not only their weapons and food and water rations, but also basic cooking utensils, spades or pickaxes for digging, baskets for moving earth or gathering fresh produce, stakes for palisades, and much more.
Even so, Roman armies increasingly required pack animals and ox-drawn wagons for especially heavy or bulky equipment.
The organization of Peter the Great Peter's military reforms at the beginning of the 18th century made the Russian army a force to be feared.
His attention to detail in matters of supply played a major part in his victory over Sweden in the Great Northern War.
Roman legionary's basic gear A campaigning legionary's essential gear included a pickax, food bag, water flask, cooking pan, blanket, woollen cloak, and leather satchel.
This slowed it down, however, and was a weak point that an enemy could exploit.
The Gallic chieftain Vercingetorix's attempt to detach Caesar's legions from their baggage train outside Gergovia in 53 bce failed only because of the discipline of the Roman soldiers.
As the complexity and size of siege engines, guns, and other hardware increased in the 16th century, a paradoxical problem arose.
The better equipped an army, the bigger and slower its baggage train became.
This change markedly enhanced the performance of France's armed forces in the field.
Of the many factors contributing to Russia's epoch-making victory over Sweden at the battle of Poltava , Peter the Great's civil service reforms are easily overlooked.
But it was largely thanks to the tsar's centralization of military administration that Russia's army had been in a position to fight at all.
Field commanders such as England's John Churchill, 1st Duke of Marlborough, did so too.
During the War of the Spanish Succession , Marlborough saw how the tedious business of organizing and supplying an army could open up possibilities for flamboyant exploits in the field.
His march from the Netherlands to the Danube with 40 men in the weeks before the battle of Blenheim in 1704 would not have been possible without the efficient flow of food, weapons, and ammunition.
Marlborough also sent advance parties to set up camps and make sure hot food was waiting at the end of each day's march.
When his army arrived in Frankfurt, each man was issued with a new pair of boots.
Possibilities and problems The 18th and 19th centuries brought an industrial revolution in warfare, affecting everything from guns and ammunition to uniforms and rations.
These could now be mass produced, and as technology improved, so did the art of organizing it all; entire quartermaster corps were set up for the task of moving supplies.
Stubborn suppliers Tough and reliable, mules have kept armies supplied for centuries, and can still prove their worth in terrain inaccessible to vehicles.
Another revolution came with the modernization of transportation systems such as railroads.
For military purposes, railroads came of age in the American Civil War and were of vital importance to both the Union and Confederate armies.
In Europe they were essential for the movement of men and materiel during the Franco-Prussian War ; almost one million Prussian and German troops were moved to the front, and then supplied and equipped.
However, timetabling so many trains and ensuring that rolling-stock was in place when they were needed was no easy task.
And yet it took only three weeks for Britain and France to ship their own materiel much further by sea.
Ironically, the lack of infrastructure in Russia later worked in the Soviet Union's favor, when the Germans invaded Russia in 1941.
Hitler's whole blitzkrieg philosophy depended on the use of motor vehicles and planes, but these had to be taken to the war zone (be it in France, North Africa, or the United States Army Quartermaster badge The United States Army Quartermaster Corps was set up in 1775.
The United States Army's other logistics branches are the Ordnance and Transportation corps.
The Germans struggled to supply their army across inadequate Russian roads.
Simply obtaining fuel can be difficult, and moving a volatile substance as gasoline is extremely dangerous; not only can an attack on the fuel supply cause loss of life, transportation dependent on the fuel will be rendered useless.
A major problem for a superpower like the United States lies in maintaining a supply-line that may stretch halfway around the world.
Troops must be moved over huge distances and their high-tech equipment must be serviced in a range of usually inhospitable environments.
Supplies stockpiled in Prussia cannot be brought quickly enough to his troops.
There had not, however, been peace—minor skirmishes were a regular occurrence.
POWER STRUGGLES Earlier European conflicts had stemmed from dynastic disputes.
In 1739 Britain and Spain had fought in the Caribbean in the ""War of Jenkins' Ear,"" 4 80 15 PERCENT The proportion of Britain's capital spent on the Royal Navy in the 18th century.
PERCENT The proportion of the British governments' military expenditure in the 18th century.
PERCENT The proportion of British MPs who were either naval or army officers. sparked after a Spanish coastguard allegedly cut off the ear of Robert Jenkins, an English merchant sea captain he accused of piracy.
In the interim, Prussia's Frederick William I had been modernizing his forces, ready to stake his own claim to military ascendancy.
The War of the Austrian Succession Dynastic disputes loomed large in an age when Europe's great royal families held absolute dominion over vast and wealthy empires.
The disagreement over who should succeed to the Austrian throne in 1740 ignited a protracted and far-reaching series of interlocking conflicts.
T he ""Pragmatic Sanction,"" pushed through by Emperor Charles VI in 1713, stated that, in the absence of a male heir, a daughter might succeed to the Habsburg monarchy.
When he died in 1739, the Habsburgs' his soldiers relentlessly for years, inculcating iron discipline to produce a powerful military machine that was ready for action at any time.
Marginal till now, Prussia was to gain respect and fear, not just as a military power, but as a militaristic one.
Its army was ready to march onto the 16 allies accepted Maria Theresa as ruler of Austria, Bohemia, and Hungary without demur, but their enemies found a deep and principled objection to the idea that royal power might be imparted down the female line.
Frederick II promptly dispatched his Prussian forces into Habsburg Silesia, in present-day southwestern Poland.
His father, Frederick William I, had drilled The number of combatant countries in the War of the Austrian Succession.
Widening war Crossing the Oder in December 1740, Prussian armies took the area almost unopposed.
Europe looked on, amazed at the speed and efficiency of the Prussian conquest.
THE WAR OF THE AUSTRIAN SUCCESSION e Hand-protected hilt Slender steel blade r>— Residual quillon Prussian infantry sword The ""smallsword"" was light and thin, its blade fairly short—sometimes only 24 in in length.
Though soon overtaken by the socket bayonet, the smallsword was still used for fencing and thrusting.
In April 1741, the battle of Mollwitz, in present-day Poland, was a close Prussian victory.
That December, still undefeated, but feeling the pressure, Frederick II allied with France, agreeing to support the Bavarian elector, Charles Albert, as the next emperor.
The fighting moved to Bohemia, with Frederick's forces pushing southward, while the French marched into Prague from the west.
The city fell in November 1741, and Charles Albert was placed on the Bohemian throne by his allies.
He had Battle of Fontenoy The Duke of Cumbedand's English soldiers prepare to attack the French at Fontenoy in 1745, the troops lining up in a deep column numbering 15,000.
Fighting was fierce, and English regiments lost half their infantry. hardly been crowned, though, when Bohemia was overwhelmed by Maria Theresa's men, and the new emperor fled.
Battle rejoined in New England and Canada between France and Britain and their Native American allies; there was war in India too, where Britain and France had colonies.
Britain was also at war with Spain in the Caribbean, and in the Mediterranean the widening war was taking in the little states and duchies of Italy.
But although Maria Theresa had ceded most of Silesia to Prussia in 1742 as part of the Peace of Breslau, the situation deteriorated for the anti-Habsburg allies. of fortune, the ""Wild Geese,"" led the vital cavalry charge when the French triumphed at Fontenoy, in present-day Belgium, in May 1745.
That same year, supporters of Charles Edward Stuart, or ""Bonnie Prince Charlie,"" tried to place him on the throne.
In July he landed in the Outer Hebrides in Scotland, and marched south with an army from the Highlands.
The troops made it as far as Derby before turning back, disillusioned at the lack of English support.
Prince Charlie fled to France after the defeat at Culloden, Scotland, in April 1746.
Flag fragment The remains of a Prussian military ensign from the War of the Austrian Succession when Prussia became a military power.
Prussian tactics King George II led the British attack at the battle of Dettingen, Germany, in June 1743.
The allies were victorious despite having their line of retreat cut off during the ""Mousetrap""—a trap laid by the Due de Noailles.
Frederick II reopened hostilities in Silesia after Austria had tried to reclaim the region.
French occupation From France's perspective, 1745 had been successful in distracting Britain from the ""real"" war.
Marshal Saxe's French forces won at the battle of Rocoux, outside Liege, in October 1746, triumphing again at Lauffeld in July 1747.
France now occupied the whole of the Austrian Netherlands, threatening the United Provinces to the north.
With the Dutch town of Maastricht besieged by French troops for the second time in less than a century, negotiations began, leading to the Treaty of Aix-la-Chapelle.
KEY MOMENT WILD GEESE Young male Catholics from Ireland, dispossessed by the Penal Laws introduced by the English, who took flight to seek advancement as soldiers of fortune in the armies of France, Spain, Sweden, Austria, and even Russia.
In June 1745, he won a tactical victory at the battle of Hohenfriedberg, in present-day Poland, approaching the enemy in ""oblique order""—focusing his attack on one flank while at the same time presenting a solid front.
Another triumph followed at Soor, in the present-day Czech Republic, in September.
With events swinging against the Pragmatic cause, Britain's growing difficulties were seen as opportunities by longstanding foes.
Ireland's soldiers THE BATTLE OF CULLODEN The incompetence of Bonnie Prince Charlie, and the heroism of his Highland army, were both exhibited on April 16, 1746, at Culloden—the brutal climax of the ""Forty-Five"" rebellion.
The night before, the army had marched cross-country to Nairn so it could attack the Duke of Cumberland's government forces as they slept.
Arriving too late, with dawn rapidly approaching, the army was compelled to retrace its steps to Culloden Moor, where Cumberland’s army happened upon the tired troops.
While he pondered his next move, Prince Charlie left FTER For all the years of bloodshed, not a great deal had changed.
THE SEVEN YEARS WAR Frederick the Great felt that his father's past efforts—and his own—in rebuilding Prussia as a soldier-state had been amply vindicated.
Prussia was ruled as though it were an arm of the military, becoming a byword for regimentation and discipline.
The surrender of Silesia apart, Austria had emerged unscathed, and Maria Theresa held on to her throne.
FREDERICK THE GREAT THE END OF A DREAM In the months after Culloden, the Duke of Cumberland exacted cruel retribution in the Highlands, using terror tactics to quell the population.
Weapons had to be handed in and the trappings of the clan system were outlawed; wearing tartan plaids or kilts became a crime.
Having escaped from Scotland in disguise, Charles Edward Stuart spent the rest of his life in embittered exile.
When he died in 1788, the Jacobite dream died with him. his infantry lined up, steadfastly holding their positions, within range of Cumberland’s cannon.
His men obeyed, their pistols and broadswords useless as they ran across the boggy ground, cut down by heavy fire.
The government artillery was by now no longer firing cannonballs but tiny ""grapeshot"" that scattered as they flew.
Those who reached the redcoat lines found themselves facing the Duke's resolute troops with bayonets fixed.
Instead, Napoleon marched his troops across the Rhine to win spectacular victories over Austria and Russia.
THE AGE OF REVOLUTION 1750-1830 The French Revolution of 1789 failed to create a radical new political system.
More successful revolutions took place in the Americas, where colonists won their independence from Britain and Spain.
The principal battlefield weapons were the flintlock musket, bayonet, sword, and muzzle-loaded smoothbore cannon, as they had been since around 1700.
There were improvements in weapon design, but genuine innovations such as the semaphore telegraph and the Congreve rocket had only a marginal impact on warfare.
Organizational revolution The growing power of European states was evident in sheer numbers—the French army of over 600,000 men that invaded Russia in 1812 was of a size unprecedented in European warfare.
French victory at Austerlitz French general Jean Rapp presents the defeated Russian prince Repnin and enemy prisoners to Napoleon after the battle of Austerlitz in 1805.
States were able not only to mobilize such large forces, but also to equip them.
Nelson had more than 2,000 cannon at Trafalgar in 1805, and there were some 1,200 artillery pieces deployed at Borodino in 1812.
The most fervent attempt to mobilize a whole society for war was made by the French revolutionaries of 1793, who decreed a levee en masse (mass conscription) for the defense of France.
But other states could equal the French commitment to war—militant patriotism grew just as decisively in Britain and Russia.
The key innovative commanders of the revolutionary era—Napoleon on land and Nelson at sea—expressed the progressive spirit of the age.
Their predecessors had appreciated the merits of a well-conducted land campaign, with meticulously organized supplies and immaculately drilled troops, or at sea the conduct of a battle in a well-formed line.
Nelson preferred to break up the line in search of decisive victory in an unpredictable melee.
Napoleon abandoned dependence on a formal supply system in favor of living off the land, allowing his large army corps to advance at speed.
Skirmishers and sharpshooters armed with rifles became an essential element of armed forces, supplementing the ultra-disciplined musket-andbayonet infantry.
Napoleon, a former artillery officer, turned artillery into an offensive force on the battlefield, concentrated in batteries to maximize firepower and used to soften up the enemy in preparation for an infantry and cavalry attack.
Napoleonic infantry often attacked in column, rather then deploying into a line on the battlefield, and the full force of the cavalry charge was restored by the French armored cuirassier.
European states went to war across the world, fighting in India, the Caribbean, and North America.
They demonstrated a clear supremacy over opponents from outside Europe, and the process of nonEuropean countries adopting Western-style military organization and technology began to gather pace.
I 4 British 5. inch howitzer, 1782 Howitzers evolved to provide a high-angle counterpart to standard low-trajectory cannon.
This Royal Artillery howitzer was a companion to the 9-pounder field gun.
V 18th-century British ■ L blunderbuss pistol 1761 In northern India an Afghan army led by Ahmad Shah Durrani fights the Frenchtrained Indian Marathas at Panipat.
After initial clashes at Lexington and Concord, the British are besieged in Boston.
The British under General Edward Braddock are defeated by a French and Indian force at Monongahela, Pennsylvania.
This conflict leads to the Russo-Turkish War. y 1770 The Ottoman navy is destroyed by the Russians at Chesma.
General William Howe defeats the ( Americans at Brandywine I and occupies Philadelphia.
Spain declares war on Britain. sf Emperor Napoleon 1780 The British take Charleston and win a victory at the battle of Camden.
Napoleon defeats an attempted coup by turning cannon on insurgents in Paris.
In western France, Republican forces crush the royalist uprising in the Vendee region.
Nelson bombards Copenhagen, in response to the Northern League of Armed Neutrality.
After defeating the Ottomans at Aboukir, Napoleon returns to France and takes power in a coup d'etat.
Napoleon defeats the Austrians at Ulm and the Russians and Austrians at Austerlitz.
Ottoman sultan Mahmud suppresses the janissaries who are blocking military reforms.
The Ottomans are forced to accept a peace agreement granting autonomy to Greece, Serbia, Moldavia, and Wallachia.
The claim was a direct challenge to the territorial ambitions of the British colonies on the eastern seaboard of North America, which had no defined western borders.
Whenever Britain and France went to war, which was often, fighting flared in North America.
The British colonists, with the Iroquois Indians, attacked New France in King William's War of 1689 to 1697.
Colonial militia and the Royal Navy captured the French fortress of Louisbourg in 1745, but this was returned to France by the Treaty of Aix-la-Chapelle in 1748, which restored pre-war borders.
French and Indian War Involving relatively small forces, the French and Indian War was fought for high stakes.
The outcome of battles for isolated forts and settlements would determine the future shape of North America.
Had the war gone differently, Canada and the United States would not exist as we know them today.
G enerally seen as a North American offshoot of the Seven Years War of 1756 to 1763, the French and Indian War in fact started before the related European conflict.
Britain and France were still at peace when the first significant clashes occurred in 1754.
For France, this was an essential link between its colony in Canada and the lands it claimed along the Mississippi.
The British government, however, was busy awarding land grants in the region to the Ohio Company, founded by its Virginian colonists.
In 1752 Marquis Duquesne was made governor of New France with specific instructions to assert control of the Ohio territory.
He set about establishing a I T Q The number of men led by I OU Virginian Lieutenant-Colonel George Washington on his expedition to Fort Duquesne in spring 1754.
The forces engaged in the French and Indian War were often surprisingly small. string of forts southward from the Great Lakes, winning the support of many of the traditionally pro-British Algonquin Indians.
Virginia governor and leading participant in the Ohio Company, Robert Dinwiddie was determined to resist the French advance.
In spring 1754 he sent a body of Virginia militia, under Lieutenant-Colonel George Washington, to face the French at Fort Duquesne, on the site of present-day Pittsburgh.
A skirmish between Washington's force and a French patrol on May 28 left a French officer dead.
Washington's men were too weak to resist a French and Indian force sent to punish them.
He was released only after signing a document admitting to the ""murder"" of the French officer.
The British falter The Virginians appealed to the British government for support, and received it in the form of two regiments of troops under Major General Edward Braddock.
With Washington as his aide-de-camp, Braddock marched 2,000 men to attack Fort Duquesne.
On July 9, 1755, they were ambushed by a predominantly Indian force under French leadership at the Monongahela River.
The British had successes, taking Nova Scotia and holding the Hudson Valley.
But when the situation in Europe brought Britain and France to a declaration of war in May 1756, it was the French who were in a position to take the offensive in North America.
He captured and destroyed Fort Oswego, a key British outpost on the southern shore of Lake Ontario, in August 1756, and a year later forced the British to surrender at Fort William Henry on ELITE TROOPS ROGER'S RANGERS Formed in 1755 during the French and Indian War, Roger's Rangers were a company of colonial militia that specialized in special operations deep inside hostile territory and intelligence gathering.
Their leader, Major Robert Rogers, trained his men to move undetected through the wilderness, track down the enemy, and carry out ambushes.
GEORGE WASHINGTON DESCRIBING THE RETREAT FROM MONONGAHELA, 1755 The British suffered 2,000 casualties and were obliged to withdraw.
In the same month of July 1758, however, the French fortress of Louisbourg on Cape Breton Island, commanding the Gulf of St.
Lawrence, was taken by British troops under General Jeffery Amherst, brought from Halifax, Nova Scotia, by sea.
The British take Canada The following year, the Louisbourg fortress provided the base for a thrust into the heart of Canada.
While other British and colonial forces captured Forts Ticonderoga and Niagara from the French, a British fleet carried 8,000 troops under the command of General James Wolfe up the St.
An initial 15,000 This estimated number of deaths in seven years' fighting during the French and Indian War.
Some 11,000 soldiers were killed in one day at the battle of Kunersdorf, in 1759, during the Seven Years War in Europe.
George Washington at Monongahela When the British were ambushed at Monongahela in 1755, their commander, General Braddock, was mortally wounded, leaving his aide-de-camp, George Washington, to ride around the battlefield rallying the troops.
The fall of Fort William Henry became notorious because of the behavior of Montcalm's Indian allies, who tortured and massacred hundreds of British men following their surrender.
Now engaged in a general war with France, Britain began to devote more substantial military resources to the North American conflict.
The British Royal Navy's command of the Atlantic Ocean made it difficult for France to reinforce its troops in Canada, so the British enjoyed a growing numerical advantage.
As they began to score victories, the Indians tended to switch sides, further shifting the balance against the French.
While the struggle for the Ohio territory continued, the war increasingly became a British campaign of conquest directed at Canada.
An outstanding general, Montcalm ensured that his opponents enjoyed no easy successes.
With less than 4,000 men under him, Montcalm prepared field fortifications that Abercrombie disastrously attempted to take by frontal assault.
Tomahawk blade Tomahawks were general-purpose axes used in warfare by both the Indians and the colonists.
British landing was repulsed and a bombardment of the city from the opposite riverbank had little effect.
Feeling unable to maintain a lengthy siege, Wolfe adopted a risky plan that required a night landing upriver from Quebec, and the scaling of the cliffs of the Heights of Abraham.
This was achieved on September 12, forcing Montcalm to give battle on the Plains of Abraham, a plateau outside the city walls, the following day.
The British were victorious in a brief but savage encounter in which both commanders lost their lives.
The French made one last effort to retake Quebec in spring 1760, but their attacks were held off.
Vastly outnumbered, the French surrendered Canada to the British at Montreal in September 1760.
The European war between Britain and France continued until 1763, but the contest in North America was over at last.
The peace agreement of 1763 confirmed the British in possession of Canada.
The Spanish ceded Florida to the British and, in return, took Louisiana from the French, leaving France with no substantial territory in North America.
AFTER The aftermath of the war was far more painful for the Indians than for the French Canadians, and it set Britain on the path to conflict with its North American colonies.
CIVIL DISQUIET By the Quebec Act of 1774, Britain allowed its new Canadian subjects the free practice of the Catholic faith and the use of French civil law, reconciling many of them to British rule.
The Indian tribes found that treaties agreed by the I PONTIAC was an Ottawan leader who played a significant role in the Indian uprising of 1763.
His name was later ( appropriated for a city in Michigan and a brand of automobile.
British during the war to win their support were not respected after the war ended.
An Indian uprising known as Pontiac's Rebellion flared in 1763, but this petered out after a few years of massacre and counter-massacre.
UNPOPULAR POLICY The British government tried to prevent trouble by banning the westward expansion of its colonies into Indian territory.
This limitation, like the tolerance of Canadian Catholics, was deeply unpopular in the British colonies.
WESTERN EUROPE Seven Years War in Europe Dates 1756-63 Location Germany, especially Silesia and Saxony The Seven Years War Between 1756 and 1763 Europe was immersed in a general conflict between the major powers.
Prussia, having precipitated the war, fought for survival against a coalition of Austria, Russia, and France.
The French and British fought an almost separate war, chiefly at sea, linked to colonial conflicts.
BEFORE k --Both a land war between Europe's major powers and a worldwide colonial conflict between Britain and France, the Seven Years War had two separate points of origin.
THE WAR BEGINS The first shots of the conflict were fired in North America.
George Washington of the Virginia militia ambushed a party of French Canadian scouts at Fort Duquesne in 1754.
T he diplomatic revolution effected by the alliance between Habsburg Austria and Bourbon France in 1756 was seen by Frederick II of Prussia as a preparation for war.
Expecting to be attacked by the Austrians the following year, Frederick seized the initiative and launched his own preemptive assault against Saxony, a state closely aligned with Austria and the obvious starting point for an invasion of Prussia.
Saxony was overrun by Prussia's efficient army, but in response to Prussian aggression both France and Russia agreed to enter the war in support of Austria.
Frederick faced a coalition—soon to be joined by Sweden—vastly superior in aggregate manpower and resources.
Britain was already at war with France at sea and in the colonies, and only committed to a limited intervention in the European land war to defend the German state of Flanover, ruled by King George II, against the French.
In that war Prussia had proved itself a major military power and, by annexing the wealthy province of Silesia, had greatly enhanced its resources.
In May 1756, Austrian Empress Maria Theresa formed a defensive alliance with the Habsburg's enemy, France.
AGREED ALLIANCE For Britain, a big concern was to defend Hanover, the German state from which the British ruling dynasty had come, against the French.
The British government made an agreement to back Prussia in a war over Silesia, in return for their promise to defend Hanover against France—a promise the Prussians proved incapable of fulfilling.
British support Through the summer of 1757, the war went badly for the British and Prussians.
Britain's attempted defense of Hanover failed with the comprehensive defeat of the Duke of Cumberland by the French at the battle of Hastenbeck in July.
Frederick was meanwhile in a desperate situation as the Russians overwhelmed East Prussia and French and Austrian armies approached from the west and south.
In November and December the Prussian king achieved victories over the French at Rossbach and the Austrians at Leuthen—both skirmishes fought against odds of almost two to one.
Exploiting the ability of Prussia's disciplined infantry cavalry and artillery to carry out swift marches and complicated battlefield maneuvers, these encounters were the superlative exhibition of Frederick's military talent.
They did encourage the British, under a coalition government dominated by William Pitt, to provide ample financial aid to Prussia, and the deployment of a British and Battle of Quiberon Bay Fought in choppy waters off the coast of Brittany in 1759, Admiral Edward Hawke's victory shattered French naval power and ended plans for an invasion of Britain.
Hanoverian Army of Observation on Prussia's western front was sufficient to hold off the discouraged French.
But Austria and Russia continued to attack 34,000 The number of men killed or wounded in a day's fighting between Prussia and the Russians and Austrians at Kunersdorf, August 12,1759.
A desperate drawn battle was fought at Zorndorf—both the Russians and the Prussians suffered more than 30 percent casualties.
Winners and losers For Britain and France, the conflict reached crisis point in 1759.
After an initial setback in Minorca at the outset of the war, the Royal Navy had reasserted its superiority blockading French ports and raiding coastal areas.
This required their Mediterranean squadron to sail from Toulon to Brittany where it would join the Atlantic fleet and escort troop transports to Britain.
The Mediterranean squadron was intercepted and destroyed by Admiral Edward Boscawen off Lagos, southern Portugal, in August.
France continued its invasion preparations, but in November its Atlantic fleet was trailed and shattered by Admiral Edward Hawke in an extraordinary battle fought in an Atlantic storm amid the perilous rocks and reefs of Quiberon Bay.
Spain was later induced to join France's naval war against Britain, but there was never another serious challenge to the Royal Navy's command of the sea.
Coupled with victories in Canada and India, Quiberon Bay made 1759 a triumphant year for the British.
British and Hanoverian forces also defeated the French on land, at Minden, but still Frederick of Prussia fought the Austrians and Russians unaided.
At Kunersdorf, in August 1759, and went on to defeat the Austrians at Liegnitz in August 1760 and at Torgau the following November.
In 1761 British support for Prussia faltered; Pitt, the force behind Britain's war effort, resigned.
As losses mounted, Prussia's administration struggled to find fresh men and money to keep the war going.
The Empress Elizabeth of Russia died and the pro-Prussian Peter III crowned.
Peter was assassinated after six months, but he had time to make peace with Prussia, letting Frederick retake Silesia front Austria.
Peace was signed in February 1763 between Prussia and Austria and between Britain and France.
A F T E The Seven Years War left the map of Europe broadly unchanged, but it had important consequences that were not confined to the European colonies.
France's power was diminished, while Britain was the great beneficiary.
Frederick the Great's coat Frederick II of Prussia was admired both as a military commander and an enlightened despot.
KEY BATTLE Leuthen Leuthen was the second of King Frederick II of Prussia's two great victories of 1757.
A month after crushing the French at Rossbach, on December 5 he encountered a Austrian army twice the size of his own and defeated it through bold maneuver and the aggressive use of combined arms—infantry, field artillery, and cavalry.
The victory confirmed his reputation as Europe's finest military commander.
U nder Prince Charles of Lorraine, the 80,000-strong Austrian army had invaded the valuable province of Silesia.
Determined to keep it, Charles ordered his army to take up a defensive position on a four-mile line between two reaches of marshland, centerd on the village of Leuthen.
Frederick's army numbered only 36,000 men but he chose to attack against the odds rather than leave Charles in possession of Silesia.
Cunning maneuvers Frederick's plan of attack depended on the ability of the rigorously disciplined Prussian infantry to stay disciplined and faultlessly transfer parade-ground drill to the field of battle.
First he used his cavalry to drive back the Austrian pickets who were observing his forces, knowing that his army's subsequent maneuvers would largely be masked from the enemy by low hills.
Frederick then marched his infantry in perfect order to the left of the Austrian line, while his cavalry rode about showily opposite the right of the Austrian line.
The Austrians were utterly confused by what little they could see of the Prussian infantry's movements.
Interpreting their redeployment as a withdrawal, Charles reinforced the right of his line.
When the marching Prussian infantry columns emerged unexpectedly on the Austrian left, they reformed with precision into their conventional two-line attacking formation, at right-angles to the end of the enemy line.
With 12-pounder guns positioned on a knoll to support them, the Prussian infantry attacked.
The Austrians in disarray Battered by cannon from the knoll and by volleys of musket fire from the advancing infantry, the Austrian left was rolled up as Charles struggled to bring across reinforcements from the distant right wing of his position.
The chaos of pitched battle took over from organized maneuver, the Prussians taking the fortified village of Leuthen after a furious fight lasting 40 minutes.
Beyond Leuthen the Austrian forces managed to form a new defensive line that stalled the Prussian advance, and the Austrian cavalry assembled for a charge to sweep the Prussian infantry from the field.
But Frederick ordered his own cavalry into action to counter the Austrian horse.
The rival bodies of men on horseback clashed head-on in a swirling melee.
Eventually Charles's cavalry was driven back, and Austrian resistance crumbled.
Frederick had won back control of Silesia for Prussia and the disgraced Charles was forced to resign in the wake of his defeat.
SrJ. :' } XSsSflgigL W.■ Britain's Wars in India The disunity of India made the country ripe for exploitation in the 18th century.
Britain, represented by the East India Company, and often in alliance with Indian states, extended its rule over ever larger areas of the subcontinent through a series of military campaigns fought using mostly Indian troops. 1799, first under Hyder Ali and then under his son, Tipu Sultan, Mysore engaged in a series of hard-fought wars against the British, urged on by the French, who provided arms and training.
Mysore fielded armies that fought with discipline, incorporating much of the best of contemporary European tactics, including cannon.
It also deployed rocket brigades—units of several hundred soldiers armed with explosive rockets fired in salvos from iron tubes—which so impressed the The decline of the Mogul empire gave European powers the chance to expand their influence in India by intervening in the affairs of rival Indian princedoms.
TIPU SULTAN, RULER OF MYSORE AND ENEMY OF THE BRITISH European troops and around 2,000 sepoys.
However, British leaders had undermined the Nawab's position by intrigue.
They had promised the throne to a rival claimant, Mir Jafar, and bribed most of Siraj's commanders.
In the battle at Plassey , on June 23, barely one-tenth of the Nawab's forces actually fought.
The British won what appeared, by numbers alone, an impossible victory and took control of Bengal, with Jafar as a puppet Nawab.
The British victory at Plassey was a setback for French policy in India, and worse followed.
The major French settlement was at Pondicherry, which rivaled British Madras on the Carnatic coast.
Britain shipped a newly raised infantry regiment, the 84th Regiment of Foot, to India in 1759 and, led by Sir Eyre Coote, it defeated the French under Count de Lally at Wandiwash in January of the following invading Muslim Afghan army led by Ahmad Shah Durrani and the Hindu Marathas.
There may have been over 100,000 troops involved in this costly but ultimately inconclusive encounter.
A formidable foe One result of the battle of Panipat was to facilitate the rise of Hyder Ali, ruler of Mysore, who took advantage of the temporary weakness of the Maratha Confederacy to extend his power in southern India.
Between 1767 and A SHIFT OF POWER After the death of Emperor Aurangzeb in 1707, Mogul rule was soon restricted to the area around Delhi.
The new dominant power was the Maratha Confederacy, but smaller states such as Hyderabad, Mysore, and Bengal also flourished.
BRITISH EAST INDIA COIN TRADING POSTS The British East India Company established its first trading post (or ""factory"") on the Indian coast at Surat in 1612.
By the 18th century its factories included Bombay , Calcutta in Bengal, and Madras.
ANGLO-FRENCH RIVALRY From 1742, under governor-general Joseph Francois Dupleix, the French attempted to drive out the British and extend their influence over India.
The French ended the Seven Years War with only a nominal presence in India.
They failed to restore their position when war broke out with Britain again in 1778, during the American Revolution, and Napoleon's later ambitions to rule India remained in the realm of fantasy.
The East India Company's army, consisting of Indian sepoys under Indian NCOs and British officers, often aided by elements of the British Army paid for by the Company, was undoubtedly effective.
The Company confirmed its control of Bengal with a victory over numerically superior forces, including the Mogul emperor's army, at Buxar in 1764.
But it would be a mistake to exaggerate the impact of the European presence at this time or its military superiority.
The largest battle fought in India in the mid18th century was at Panipat in 1761, a conflict between an T he British takeover of India began in Bengal at the start of the Seven Years War.
At war with France from May 1756, the British bolstered their defenses in Calcutta in case of a French attack.
Britain on the offensive The British sent a small force by sea from Madras, commanded by Colonel Robert Clive, which retook Calcutta at the start of 1757.
Supported by French artillery men with heavy cannon, the Nawab led an army more than 50,000 strong to confront Clive, who had less than a thousand SOUTH ASIA PH * □ Seven Years War [ 71 El Anglo-Maratha Dates 1756-63 Wars Location Bengal and Dates 1777-1818 Madras Location Northwest & Anglo-Mysore India Wars □ Anglo-Sikh Wars Dates 1766-99 Dates 1845-49 Location Mysore and Hyderabad Location Punjab The fall of Seringapatam In 1799 British forces, led by General David Baird, stormed the city of Seringapatam, capital of Mysore.
Mysore's ruler, Tipu Sultan, was killed by the British while defending his palace.
Indian armies combined traditional dashing cavalry with cannon and muskets.
Tipu Sultan scored impressive victories, notably at Pollilur in 1780 and Tanjore in 1782.
It was not until 1799, when Napoleon's invasion of Egypt awoke British fears of a revival of French influence in India, that Tipu Sultan was defeated.
The British invaded Mysore with a force that included Maratha sepoys from Bombay, British infantry under Arthur Wellesley (he later became the Duke of Wellington), and the army of the Nizam of Hyderabad.
The British turned their attention to the Maratha Confederacy, a potential enemy weakened by divisions in its constituent semi-independent states.
The Marathas traditionally fought as skirmishing light cavalry, but under French influence they also had a musket infantry and field artillery.
In 1803 the British defeated Maratha armies in the north, while Wellesley campaigned in central India.
In September Wellesley blundered into a Maratha force at Assaye that was stronger than his own in cavalry and manufactured in Lahore for the Sikh army.
It was captured by the British Army during the wars with the Sikhs in the 1840s. artillery, as well as in overall numbers.
He chose to attack across a river and carried the day despite heavy losses.
These victories brought the British large territorial gains, but over the next two years they suffered reverses, and peace in 1805 left the Marathas still independent.
It took more fighting, in 1817-18, to break up the Confederacy, leaving Britain in control of the Indian subcontinent up to the Punjab.
Company rule extended to northern India after two fiercely fought wars against the Sikhs in the 1840s.
The Sikh state had been rapidly expanding in the early decades of the 19th century, and its army, the khalsa, was a highly motivated force that had European-trained artillery and uniformed infantry.
The key British at Sobraon in 1846 cost more than 2,000 British and sepoy casualties.
Yet again the British were not militarily superior, but they had an edge that was enough. r AFTER The Indian Mutiny of 1857 marked the end of an era.
The last Mogul was exiled, the East India Company was abolished and India became a possession of the British Crown.
BRITISH RULE Bengali sepoys mutinied, attempting to reinstate the Mogul emperor as ruler of India.
Sufficient sepoys remained loyal for the British to crush the rebellion, which included notable military actions at the siege of Delhi and the relief of Lucknow.
Massacres of some British civilians were used as justification for the extreme brutality used when suppressing the revolt.
INVASION OF AFGHANISTAN Afghanistan remained outside the borders of Britain's Indian Raj.
In 1839 British forces invaded the country and installed a pro-British ruler, but they were driven out by an uprising in 1842.
A second British invasion in 1878 was militarily more successful, but could not subdue the Afghans, who remained independent.
HUDSON'S BAY COMPANY NOVA SCOTIA The American Revolution Between 1775 and 1783 rebels in 13 American colonies, supported by France, fought a conflict for independence from British rule.
A civil war between American loyalists and rebels as well as a war between Britain and America, the fighting ended in a humiliating British surrender at Yorktown. n 1775 General Thomas Gage had orders to suppress the rebellion in Massachusetts.
They clashed with local militia first at the village of Lexington and then at Concord's North Bridge.
The rebel militia, strengthened by soldiers recruited by the American Congress, besieged the British in Boston.
Britain sailed 4,500 troops across the Atlantic to reinforce the garrison, which sortied to attack fortified militia positions on Breed's Hill and Bunker Hill on June 16.
The disciplined British infantry took the rebel positions, but at heavy cost— it eventually abandoned the garrison at Boston in March 1776.
King George Ill's government hoped that American loyalists would play the leading role in restoring royal authority Colonial territories The 13 colonies that rebelled against British rule stretched down the eastern seaboard of North America between Canada and Florida.
There were indeed many Americans who fought for the British, including slaves who saw Britain as offering hope of freedom, but the rebels controlled the militias in most of the colonies.
Despite recruiting 30,000 ""Hessian"" German mercenaries, the British faced an insoluble manpower problem.
But most resented the army presence and none wanted to pay taxes imposed by the British nor the customs duties to support it.
RETALIATION Trouble flared up in Boston, Massachusetts, where British troops killed five people in suppressing a riot in 1770.
In 1774 Massachusetts was placed under the military rule of General Thomas Gage.
The Massachusetts legislature refused to recognize his authority and the other colonies (initially excepting Georgia) rallied to its support, meeting in the Continental Congress.
Radical ""patriots” began attacks on pro-British Americans, and local militias prepared to resist the British soldiers.
BADGE OF THE BRITISH 4TH REGIMENT, WHICH FOUGHT AT LEXINGTON » their control.
Keeping large numbers of soldiers supplied across the Atlantic was a formidable task.
Moreover, Britain needed to reconcile the colonies to its rule, yet the conflict caused a bitterness that made this almost impossible.
The American political leaders in the Congress were more conservative than revolutionaries—lawyers and landowners predominated—and their views on the prosecution of war were conventional.
In June 1775, they voted to form a Continental Army, recruited from all the colonies, to fight the war under George Washington.
This was to be a traditional European-style army, which was to be disciplined and drilled into an efficient fighting machine.
Washington, assisted from 1778 by his Prussian inspector-general, Baron Friedrich von Steuben, had a hard task creating and maintaining such a force.
It was short of money and supplies and desertion was a constant problem.
French support Congress took the decisive and irrevocable measure of declaring independence in July 1776; however, it was the British who went on the offensive.
Meanwhile, after the repulse of an initial American attack on Canada, General John Burgoyne led a British army south from the Canadian border to the Hudson river.
By October 1777, Burgoyne's force was surrounded at Saratoga and had to surrender.
Washington at Valley Forge The Continental Army underwent great hardship encamped at Valley Forge in the winter of 1777-78.
Here, Washington rides past the Marquis de Lafayette, a French lord who served with the army as a volunteer. backing.
The French allied themselves with the Americans in February 1778 and went to war with the British the following June.
For the British, the conflict in North America was less important than the wider war with these European enemies, who threatened other more valuable British interests, including the colonies in the West Indies.
British strength in North America declined, while a French army under the Comte de Rochambeau arrived in July 1780 to support Washington.
Still, for a long time, it was unclear how the Americans could win control of the new country they had founded.
The rebels fight back The Continental Army barely survived a grueling winter camped at Valley Forge in 1777-78.
Then the British used their naval power to spread the fighting to the south.
General Sir Henry Clinton, they seized Charleston in South Carolina and Savannah in Georgia.
This triggered a vicious war in the back country of the Carolinas—a virtual civil war between rebel and loyalist militias.
American rebels such as South Carolina's militia leader, Francis Marion, and Continental Army general, Nathanael Greene, turned to guerrilla warfare, but the loyalists also practiced irregular warfare ruthlessly and to good effect.
General Charles Cornwallis was the commander of British forces in the southern theater.
He scored a striking United States GENERAL GEORGE WASHINGTON A wealthy plantation owner, George Washington fought as an officer in the Virginia militia during the French and Indian War.
As commander of the Continental Army throughout the Revolutionary War, he patiently husbanded his limited resources, aware that keeping the army in being was more important than controlling territory or winning battles.
After the war he retired into private life, emerging to become the first president of the USA in 1789.
David Bushnell's Turtle The Turtle, propelled by hand, was the first submarine used in war.
After the humiliation of the surrender at Yorktown, Britain gave up trying to win the war in North America, although peace was not signed for another two years.
A naval victory over the French in the West Indies in 1782 limited Britain's losses in the wider war, although Florida, held by Britain since 1763, was returned to Spanish rule. i nn nnn Thea pp r ° ximate 1 VJVJfVJUl number of North American loyalists who left the United States during or after the war.
CONSTITUTIONAL LAWS In the United States the role of armed citizens in the initial resistance to Britain ensured that a right to bear arms would be written into the Constitution.
There was a fierce dispute in the post-independence period over whether the United States required a standing army, but a small permanent force was maintained.
Cornwallis decided to end his campaign and marched north through North Carolina into Virginia.
In summer 1781, Cornwallis dug in to a position on Chesapeake Bay, where he could be supplied from the sea.
But British command of the sea could no longer be relied upon in the face of a French Navy reinvigorated since the seaborne disasters during the Seven Years War.
While Washington and Rochambeau brought their armies south to besiege Cornwallis's force on land, on September 5, Admiral de Grasse defeated a British fleet off Chesapeake Bay.
Trapped, heavily outnumbered, and without hope of relief, General Cornwallis surrendered his army at Yorktown on October 19, 1781.
BRITISH SURRENDER AT YORKTOWN French and American troops guard the defeated British army at Yorktown, Virginia, on October 21,1781.
The surrender of over 8,000 British troops marked the end of the fighting in the American Revolutionary War.
The two commanders, the British general Charles Cornwallis and the American general George Washington, conducted the surrender via their deputies.
EARLY EXPANSIONISM Peter the Great, who reigned from 1682 to 1725, transformed Russia from a backward state into a dynamic power with a modernized army and navy.
Territorial expansionism led to conflict with the Ottoman empire when Peter seized the fortress of Azov in 1696.
He was assassinated after six months by a group of nobles who placed his wife, Catherine, on the throne.
Wars fought during this period substantially extended the territory of the Russian empire, mostly at the expense of the Turkish Ottoman empire and Poland.
The trigger for the first round of warfare was the revolt of the Bar Confederation in Poland in 1768.
This group of Polish nobles rejected Russia's domination of their country, embodied in the occupant of the Polish throne.
King Stanislaw August Poniatowski, former lover of Catherine the Great.
Crushing the Ottomans The Polish uprising encouraged the Ottoman sultan, Mustafa III, to declare war on Russia, an unwise decision based Siege of Ochakov Catherine’s favorite, Prince Potyomkin, failed to reduce the Turkish fortress of Ochakov by bombardment and blockade in the siege of 1787.
T he strategic position of Russia at this time was uniquely favorable to an expansionist policy.
Ottoman Turkey, standing in Russia's path to the south, was a once-great state in military and political decline.
Its sultans had failed to modernize their armed forces and were also vulnerable to pressure from Christian subject nations within their borders.
Russia coveted control of the Black Sea as an outlet into the Mediterranean, and could envisage even wider ambitions to liberate the Christians of the Balkans from Muslim rule, capturing Constantinople and restoring the Byzantine empire.
The Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth, dominant in Central Europe as recently as the 17th century, had entered an even steeper decline than the Ottomans.
All that stood in the way of a Russian takeover of Poland was the hostility of Prussia and Austria to a westward thrust of Russian territory and power.
While pursuing these territorial ambitions, Catherine's Russia had to keep a watchful eye on the balance of power in the Baltic region, where the dominance the Russians had gained through the Great Northern War was still open to challenge from Sweden.
These areas of ambition and concern interacted, with the engagement of Russian forces in one presenting an opportunity for the country's enemies in another area to initiate combat. partly on the optimistic predictions of court astrologers.
The Russian army was, indeed, initially preoccupied with operations in Poland, but the Ottomans proved unable to take any advantage of this.
Despite support from the French, the Confederation failed to oust the Polish king; its forces were worn down through campaigns in which Russian General Alexander Suvorov ngagement ne zone rnity n First RussoTurkish War Dates 1768-74 Location Ukraine, Moldavia, Aegean H Second RussoTurkish War Dates 1787-92 Location Ukraine, Moldavia, Black Sea 13 Russo-Swedish War Dates 1788-90 Location Gulf of Finland Striking steel Ivory stock Catherine's pistol This ornate flintlock pistol was produced by St.
Petersburg gunmaker John Adolph Grecke for Empress Catherine the Great in 1786.
They sent two squadrons of warships to the Mediterranean under the overall command of Count Alexei Orlov, brother of another of Catherine's lovers, Grigory Orlov.
Count Orlov's mission was to stimulate the Greeks to revolt against Turkish rule.
In this he failed, but the expedition did achieve the destruction of an entire Ottoman fleet at Chesma Bay off the island of Chios in July 1770.
In the same month, Russian general Count Pyotr Rumyantsev defeated Ottoman forces and their Crimean Tartar allies twice; first at the Larga River and then at Kagul.
In both encounters Meanwhile, Rumyantsev's boldness at Larga and Kagul appeared to have exhausted his energy and the war with the Ottomans stagnated.
The transfer of Suvorov from Poland to the Turkish front in 1774 brought a renewal of the offensive spirit, however.
A bold thrust into Bulgaria persuaded the Ottomans to make peace at Kuchuk Kainarji, with humiliating terms that not only gave Russia ports on the Black Sea and the right of passage into the Mediterranean, but also recognized Russia's legitimate interest in the fate of the Ottoman sultan's Christian subjects.
A decade of peace followed, during which Catherine and her favorite, Prince Potyomkin, hatched bold plans for the demise of the Ottoman empire.
In 1783 Russia annexed the Crimean Khanate, until 1774 an Ottoman Barrel Fore sight the 38,000-strong Russian army was outnumbered, but triumphed through aggression and speed of movement in the face of inert opponents.
In 1773 Emelyan Pugachev, with the support of Cossacks and rebellious peasants in the Volga region, declared himself tsar and proclaimed the liberation of the serfs.
After scoring a number of successes against the government forces, Pugachev was eventually defeated at the battle of Kazan, taken prisoner, and executed. possession, and set up a protectorate over Georgia in the Caucasus.
Catherine then allied with the Austrian emperor, Joseph II, envisaging a joint attack on and partition of Ottoman territory.
The Ottoman sultan Abdulhanrid I responded to these provocations by declaring war on Russia in 1787.
A war on two fronts The next year the war widened when Sweden's King Gustav III seized the opportunity offered by the RussoTurkish War to attack Russia in the Baltic.
This war on two fronts placed Catherine's forces under considerable strain.
If Sweden had succeeded in achieving naval superiority in the Baltic, it could have attacked the Russian capital, St.
A series of hard-fought naval engagements, contested by oared galleys in shallow coastal waters and sailing ships out to sea, frustrated Swedish efforts to _ land troops but ended with a costly I Russian defeat at Svenskund.
The Russo-Turkish War also J had an important naval aspect, with a series of battles fought on the Black Sea.
Many of the officers in Russia's navy were foreigners—they included American Revolutionary war hero John Paul Jones—but the Russians found their own inspired leader in Admiral Fyodor Ushakov, whose victories from Fidonisi in 1788 to Tendra in 1790 gave the Russians command of the sea.
MILITARY COMMANDER GENERAL SUVOROV __ Russia's most admired military commander, General Alexander Suvorov joined the army at the age of 12.
His campaigns against the Poles and Ottomans exhibited the principle of maximum application of force in pursuit of a decisive victory.
He was exceptional among Russian officers in his rapport with the rank and file.
In 1799 he led an army on a sweeping campaign against the French in Italy and Switzerland, but he died in St.
On land, campaigning on both sides was predominantly pedestrian, Suvorov providing the striking exception.
When Russia besieged the Turkish fortress at Ochakov in 1788, their commander.
Only after a six-month siege, during which the Russians lost many troops to disease, was Suvorov allowed to storm the fortress.
He then defeated the Ottomans at Focsani in 1789 and, in 1790, attacked the supposedly secure fortress of Izmail, which controlled the mouth of the Danube River.
This victory ended the fighting of the Russo-Turkish War, but peace was not agreed until 1792.
The final campaigns in the reign of Catherine the Great were fought against the Poles.
In 1792 and again in 1794, Cossack cavalry The fiercely independent Cossack settlers of the frontier areas of the Russian empire provided the Russian Army with excellent skirmishing light cavalry.
Russian armies crushed Polish resistance to impose two further— and final—partitions of the country.
By 1795 Poland had ceased to exist as an independent entity, its territories having been absorbed into Russia, Austria, and Prussia.
AFTER » r Jr Catherine the Great died in 1796, having achieved a dominant position for Russia on the Black Sea with a western border that had advanced to what is now Belarus.
Russian forces were defeated by Napoleon from Austerlitz in 1805 to Friedland in 1807, but redeemed themselves in later campaigns that started with the repulse of a massive French invasion in 1812 and ended with Russian forces in occupation of Paris in 1814.
The two empires last fought during World War I, when the Russian empire had the annexation of Constantinople as one of its secret war aims.
His tunic, preserved to this day with its torn sleeve, is a silent witness to an era when European monarchs fought one another for limited objectives in wars that cost lives and limbs, often to little discernible purpose.
W achtmeister was an aristocrat, whose career depended as much upon his skills of a courtier as upon military prowess.
He was born in 1757 and, as was common for sons of Swedish noble families, embarked on military life at a young age, receiving a commission as an ensign in 1772.
Sweden was a country with a formidable military tradition, but it had declined into a second-rate power during the 18th century.
Its army was a hybrid force, with a kernel of professional soldiers supported by a larger number of provincial reserves.
The king whom Wachtmeister served, Gustav III, was determined to reassert royal authority over parliament and suppress aristocratic privileges.
His policies were resented by many of the Swedish aristocracy as an offense to their liberties.
Wachtmeister kept Positive propaganda Swedish King Gustav III, here shown inviting an old soldier to join him sitting on a log, liked to be represented as a benign ruler and friend to the common man. clear of the conspiracies that multiplied among his fellow officers.
In 1778 he went abroad to gain experience on campaign, joining the Prussian army fighting Austria in the War of the Bavarian Succession in 1778-79.
In 1788 Gustav declared war on Russia, cynically hoping to silence domestic opposition with a victorious campaign in Finland while the Russians were preoccupied with a war against the Turks.
The encounter at Valkeala was hardly a major battle. with around 3,000 troops on each side, but the Swedes had the better of it and Wachtmeister, with his wounded arm, was made the hero of the hour by a king desperate for good publicity.
The war ended in 1790 with no gain for Sweden or Russia, but promotion to major-general for Wachtmeister.
In 1792 Gustav III was assassinated by a conspiracy of army officers at a masked ball at the Royal Opera House.
His successor, Gustav IV Adolf, was as hostile to ideas of liberty as his father, but Wachtmeister suffered no interruption to his career.
Subsequent service With the French Revolution and the rise of Napoleon, however, times were changing.
Sweden's participation in a coalition against Napoleon in 1805, during which Wachtmeister fought in Pomerania, revealed how outdated the Swedish army had become.
He was deposed in a The wounded aide-de-camp King Gustav rides up to inquire after Wachtmeister.
The aide-de-camp calmly leans his wounded arm on a rock as he explains to the king how he came to be shot. military coup in 1809 as a Russian army advanced into Sweden.
The new king, Karl XIII, ordered Wachtmeister to land his troops behind Russian lines.
Meeting the Russians at Savar, his troops performed well, mounting a counterattack uphill into enemy fire, but Wachtmeister then withdrew to the coast, where his forces were sheltered by naval guns.
Wachtmeister was considered not to have acted with sufficient boldness and soon retired to his estates, a man whose time was past.
Russian flintlock The standard weapon of 18th-century warfare in Europe, a flintlock rifle like this was probably responsible for wounding Wachtmeister at the battle of Valkeala.
The tunic sleeve was presumably cut by a surgeon preparing to remove the musket ball from Wachtmeister's arm after he was shot.
GUSTAV III, FACED BY AN ATTEMPTED COUP, 1772 Battle tunic This is the tunic worn by Count Gustav Wachtmeister at the battle of Valkeala in Finland in 1789.
Although wounded in the arm, Wachtmeister suffered no permanent disability and continued to serve in the Swedish army for another two decades.
A mix of aggressive nationalism and revolutionary enthusiasm propelled the French into a series of wars against most of the rest of Europe.
WESTERN EUROPE TRICORN,1790 MILITARY ACADEMIES Reformers such as Cuibert and Gribeauval met resistance from the French nobility, however, who defended their monopoly of the higher officer ranks.
New military academies were created for the sons of the poorer nobility—Napoleon Bonaparte was one beneficiary—but even they could mostly progress only in the artillery or engineers.
NEW RECRUITS After the revolution of 1789, large numbers of aristocratic officers emigrated—about 5,500 out of 9,500 by 1792.
It was thus out of necessity as well as principle that the officer corps was opened to all classes in 1790, with NCOs and junior officers soon promoted to high rank.
New infantry regulations adopted in 1791 embraced Guibert's theories on aggressive tactics and strategy.
In the period leading up to the French Revolution, France made determined efforts to reform its armed forces and regain military ascendancy in Europe.
Army officer Jean-Baptiste de Gribeauval was responsible for a new artillery system, with an improved range of standardized guns for aggressive deployment on the battlefield.
T he French declaration of war on Austria that came in April 1792 was motivated by little more than a desire to maintain popular enthusiasm for the revolution.
It took little account of the state of the French army, which since 1789 had lost the majority of its officers as well as many regular soldiers.
An appeal for volunteers partly made up the numbers of infantry but there was almost no cavalry and the supply system was in chaos.
An initial French advance into the Austrian Netherlands was a fiasco, with most of the volunteers fleeing the moment they came under fire.
Undaunted by this, the revolutionary government declared war on Prussia that summer.
Initial victories for France The Austrians and Prussians were preoccupied with Poland, which they were preparing to partition with Russia.
Despite a bold declaration of support for Louis XVI in 1791, they had little interest in restoring his monarchical powers.
But a prostrate France was a tempting target and, after lengthy preparations, an army led by Duke Ferdinand of Brunswick crossed the French frontier in August 1792.
It advanced as far as Valmy, where on September 20 the artillery of the old French royal army put up stiff enough resistance to persuade Brunswick to withdraw.
The elated French army now returned to the offensive, again invading the Austrian Netherlands and defeating a smaller Austrian force at Jemappes.
Despite these victories, France plunged deeper into political and military crisis.
It increased its number of enemies by declaring war on the Dutch, British, and Spanish in 1793.
The introduction of conscription in February sparked uprisings in parts of the country that were already alienated by revolutionary policies, notably the Vendee.
Royalists handed the naval port of Toulon to the British and a French army was driven out of the Austrian Netherlands by the Austrians—its commander.
Lazare Carnot, a military engineer, became Minister of War in August 1793.
He oversaw the levee en masse, not only an extension of conscription to all men aged 18 to 25, but a general mobilization of the masses in aid of the war effort.
Turning the tide of war Carnot ensured that all new conscripts were integrated with the regular army and that arms supplies were expanded to equip them.
REPORT TO THE FRENCH CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY, DECEMBER 1789 War in the Vendee The rag-tag army of royalist rebels in the Vendee region of France flees government troops at Cholet in October 1793.
The pacification of the Vendee was utterly ruthless, with mass killing of women and children.
The cavalry was the part of the army worst hit by the revolution, which left it short of both horses and experienced riders. young soldiers won rapid promotion; for instance, Louis Hoche, a corporal in 1789, was a general by fall 1793.
Life for senior officers was precarious; the revolutionary government ruled by terror, and a general could easily lose his head to the guillotine for political or military failings.
But a combination of bold, ambitious commanders and armies swollen with fresh conscripts turned the tide of the war.
In the second half of 1793, Toulon was retaken—partly through the efforts of artillery captain Napoleon Bonaparte—and the Vendee was retaken, although the ruthless ""pacification"" of rebel areas would take another three years.
The French Army of the North defeated the British and Austrians at Tourcoing in May 1794, and General Jean-Baptiste Jourdan's Army of the Sambre-Meuse defeated the Austrians at the battle of Fleurus in June, finally driving France's foes out of the Austrian Netherlands.
A French generals were /N / I executed in 1793-94 when the reign of terror in France was at its peak.
Deputies were sent by the revolutionary government to keep watch on all officers on campaign.
By 1795 the French had annexed the Austrian Netherlands, occupied the Rhineland, turned the Dutch Netherlands into the satellite Batavian Republic, and made peace with Prussia and Spain.
There was no longer any military threat to France and the -revolution had passed its virulent phase, with the end of the terror and the installation of the more moderate government of the Directory.
The glory of war The French lost none of their lust for war, however, which had turned into a self-sustaining system.
In response to supply problems, as well as Guibert's theories of mobile warfare, their armies had taken to living off the land.
As long as they campaigned on foreign territory, they cost little to maintain and brought in great wealth through plundering conquered lands.
As well as exporting revolutionary principles, successful warfare brought glory to the regime, satisfied ambitious officers, and kept soldiers paid and fed.
In 1796 the French embarked on fresh campaigns against Austria, giving Napoleon Bonaparte the chance to show his military genius and begin the transition from the Revolutionary to the Napoleonic Wars.
Napoleon's campaigns in Italy in 1796-97 brought the first phase of the Revolutionary Wars to a close, but left France still at war with Great Britain.
The following year Austria was forced to make peace on French terms, leaving France temporarily at peace on the European continent.
WAR WITH BRITAIN Britain remained at war with France, defeating the Spanish in a naval battle at Cape St.
France had failed to land an army under General Hoche in Ireland in December 1796, but supported the United Irishmen uprising in 1798.
The French were only able to land a small force in County Mayo, however, and could not prevent the British from crushing the Irish rebellion.
THE SIEGE OF TOULON The Rise of Napoleon Between 1796 and 1800 Napoleon Bonaparte led two invasions of Italy and a spectacular expedition to Egypt.
A continuation of the French Revolutionary Wars, these campaigns made him a hero to the French army and people, and cleared the way for his rise to absolute political power in France. _ h idUlftlllfllAiU J “W Born in Corsica in 1769, Napoleon Bonaparte was sent to military college and then entered the artillery, where promotion was less dependent on high birth.
RISING UP IN THE RANKS In 1795, when the Directory government was threatened by a coup, Napoleon led loyalist forces in Paris and was rewarded by promotion to full general.
In 1796 France launched an assault against Austria on two fronts—on the Rhine River and in northern Italy, where the Austrians fought in alliance with the Piedmontese Kingdom of Sardinia.
W hen Napoleon Bonaparte took command of the soldiers of the French Army of Italy in spring 1796, they were short of pay, food, boots, and muskets.
Napoleon's solution was to supply the needs of his army by defeating the enemy and living off occupied territory.
He faced Austrian and Sardinian armies (the Kingdom of Sardinia included Piedmont in Italy's north) that together outnumbered his forces.
By attacking them separately, however, he swiftly drove Sardinia out of the war and forced the Austrians to retreat, allowing the French to occupy Milan.
Throughout the rest of the year Napoleon fought a series of campaigns against Austrian counter-offensives that showed his skill at concentrating his forces at the point of combat.
A decisive victory at the battle of Rivoli, in January 1797, further highlighted his tactical skill and paved the way for the Army of Italy to threaten an attack over the Alps into the south of Austria.
Austria had won 'A* various battles in the south of Germany in 1796 but now, rapidly losing their nerve, the Austrians sought an armistice.
The action in Italy brought rich plunder for the Republic and glory for Napoleon, who was presented in popular prints as a romantic figure leading his soldiers from the front.
Cairo taken The peace with Austria meant Napoleon was briefly unoccupied.
Though France was still at war with Britain, an invasion across the English Channel was rejected as unfeasible, given the strength of the Royal Navy.
Egypt was officially a province of the Ottoman empire, though in effect ruled by the Mamelukes, descendants of Turkish slave soldiers.
If Egypt fell into French hands, it might give France Austrian musket In 1798 Austria introduced a new flintlock musket to match the latest French model.
The basic flintlock design did not change from the 17th to the 19th century, but improvements were made in reliability and rate of fire.
MEDITERRANEAN 1 O; j □ □ Italian campaigns Q Egyptian campaign Dates 1796-1800 Dates 1798-1801 Location Northern and Location Egypt and central Italy Palestine control of the eastern Mediterranean and even threaten British interests in India.
The project pleased the leaders of the Directory because it would take a dangerously popular general and political rival away from Paris.
Sailing from Toulon in May 1798, the French Army of the Orient had the good fortune to evade Admiral Horatio Nelson's British Mediterranean fleet, landing in Egypt in July.
At the battle of the Pyramids the charges of the troops and British naval gunners.
Acre resisted a series of attacks by Napoleon, until he retreated to Egypt with his army struck down by plague.
The French advanced from Cairo and, though inferior in number, drove the Turks back with aggressive tactics.
By August 1799, however, France's successes in Egypt were overshadowed by defeats in Europe.
France faced a new coalition of hostile states, which ^ French soldiers were killed at the battle of the Pyramids in 1798, under attack from 6,000 Mameluke cavalry.
Battle of Marengo The meeting between the Austrians and French in northern Italy on June 14, 1800, was dose-fought.
This painting by Louis Lejeune, who fought in the battle and who appears on horseback, depicts the surrender of Austrian soldiers. armored Mameluke cavalry proved powerless against French infantry squares and Napoleon was able to occupy Cairo.
However, this success was immediately negated by Admiral Nelson's destruction of the French fleet in Aboukir Bay at the battle of the Nile.
The French are routed With his communications cut and the Ottoman sultan declaring war, Napoleon's long-term prospects were poor.
He took the offensive nevertheless, heading north over Palestine to Acre in spring 1799.
Ably defended by Ottoman this time included Russia as well as Austria and Britain.
The Russian general, Alexander Suvorov, routed French armies in a series of victories in Italy ending at Novi in August, while Archduke Charles of Austria drove the French back over the Rhine.
Napoleon returned to France to play his part in the political and military crisis.
After the failure of an Anglo-Russian invasion of France's ally, the Batavian Republic , and a shattering loss in Switzerland for Russian forces—which obliged Suvorov to stage a winter retreat across the Alps—Tsar Paul I pulled his country out of the war.
In May 1800, Napoleon took a force through the Alps from Switzerland and descended into Italy behind Austrian General Michael von Melas, who was besieging Genoa.
The Austrians turned and attacked Napoleon at the battle of Marengo in northern Italy, on June 14.
Napoleon had unwisely divided his army and was almost overwhelmed by superior numbers before General Louis Desaix, marching to the sound of the guns, brought back a division to support him.
Desaix was killed, but a cavalry charge commanded by Francois Kellermann won the battle for France.
Another notable French triumph was won by Jean-Victor Moreau's Army of the Rhine at Hohenlinden in southern Germany, on December 3, 1800.
Austria, now threatened from the west as well as from Italy in the south, made peace in February 1801.
A war-weary Britain eventually followed suit, signing the Treaty of Amiens in March 1802.
AFTER The French army left in Egypt by Napoleon was defeated by Britain in 1801.
Muhammad Ali, an officer in the Ottoman forces, set himself up as Egypt's governor in 1805.
EGYPTIAN POWER Muhammad Ali crushed the Mamelukes and embarked on a modernization drive that made Egypt the most progressive economic and military power in the Muslim world.
Meanwhile, the work of the scholars and scientists whom Napoleon had brought with him on his expedition gave THE R0SETTA stone a boost to Egyptology.
The Rosetta Stone, the key to reading ancient Egyptian hieroglyphics, was discovered in 1799 by a French army engineer, Captain Pierre-Franqois Bouchard.
ITALY UNDER NAPOLEON Meanwhile, the western half of northern and central Italy was absorbed by France, while in the eastern half an Italian Republic was formed in 1802, with Napoleon as its president.
After he was crowned Emperor of the French in 1804, Napoleon was also proclaimed King of Italy and Italian troops served in many of his armies.
By 1793 it had lost most of its experienced officers and had fallen into a state of indiscipline and demoralization.
The French suffered substantial losses of warships during a British occupation of the Mediterranean naval base, Toulon, in August 1793.
Admiral Vilaret de Joyeuse succeeded in defending a crucial grain convoy, but went on to lose seven ships of the line.
The British naval budget had stood at £2. million in 1793, so this represents an almost tenfold increase in funds.
BEFORE “X For Britain, the Royal Navy was the key to national defense and to prosperity as a commercial and colonial power.
Although the French generally had ships that were better designed than the British, the Royal Navy remained superior in gunnery.
BATTLE TACTICS Mounting pressure By 1796, however, the Spanish and the Dutch had allied with France and the Royal Navy was coming under severe pressure.
It was not able to prevent French general General Hoche sailing troops over to Ireland that December, although they failed to land.
French privateers and frigates had begun to take their toll on merchant shipping—11,000 British merchant ships were lost to enemy action between 1793 and 1815.
Under the strain of prolonged war, seamen pressed into the Royal Navy rebelled against their harsh conditions of service, staging mutinies at Spithead and the Nore in the spring of 1797.
With a mixture of stern punishments and placating concessions, the crisis Fleet actions in the 18th century were fought by twoor three-deck ships of the line, exchanging broadsides and closed to board.
Innovations in the late-18th century included the British carronades— powerful and lightweight shortrange, upper-deck guns—and copper sheathing hulls, which allowed ships to stay at sea for longer periods of time.
Key French territory ruled directly from France 1812 Dependent states 1812 Britain Territory occupied by Britain 1812 Frontiers 1812 British naval blockade Territories refusing to trade with Britain under Continental System —* Movement of British fleet Movement of French fleet & British victory j||t British defeat British strategy The main French naval bases at Brest, Rochefort, and Toulon were kept under constant blockade by the Royal Navy.
Copenhagen was strategically vital to the British as it controlled trade with the Baltic, which was a source of essential naval supplies.
Boarding encounters Many battles were fought between single ships; the exchange of broadsides was often followed by boarding and hand-to-hand fighting.
Here the British frigate Ambush and the French corvette La Bayonnaise engage in 1798. was overcome, however.
Vincent in February 1797 and the Dutch at Camperdown the following October.
Vincent, was the major influence in a restoration of discipline and improved standards among naval commanders.
Horatio Nelson emerged as a British national hero with his stunning victory at the battle of the Nile in 1798.
Having failed to prevent Napoleon landing an army in Egypt, Nelson led his 14 ships of the line into Aboukir Bay, where the French fleet was at anchor.
A British fleet was sent to pressure Denmark into quitting a league of Armed Neutrality, led by Russia, which threatened to deny Britain access to vital naval supplies British cutlass A short-bladed sword, ideal for use in combat at dose-quarters in the restricted space of a ship's deck.
Sailors used them to support musket-armed marines in boarding encounters.
KINGDOM „ to Britain OF SARDINIA KIN GDOM l C^diz Gibraltar to Britain Trafalgar A Black Sea Constantinople 1805 ** Algeciras Bay 1801 M e d} Tunis Malta Jun 1798: occupied by Napoleon.
BRITAIN'S TERRITORIAL GAINS British command of the sea brought far-flung territorial gains in the peace settlement at the end of the war, ranging from Malta in the Mediterranean, to Cape Town at the southern tip of Africa, to Tobago in the West Indies, and Mauritius in the Indian Ocean.
France remained the world's second largest naval power, but had neither the will nor the resources to tackle Britain at sea.
Steam-driven ironclads supplanted wooden sailing ships and explosive shells began to replace solid shot.
But British naval dominance was not seriously contested until the rise of American, Japanese, and German naval power in the late 19th and early 20th centuries. _ from the Baltic.
Nelson sailed into Copenhagen harbor and, ignoring an order to withdraw, battered the Danish fleet and bombarded the city.
The British mainland under threat Nelson's final triumph over a combined French and Spanish fleet at Trafalgar in October 1805 was decisive.
Napoleon planned to invade Britain, but needed temporary naval superiority in the Channel in order to ferry his army safely across from Boulogne to southern England.
Admiral Villeneuve, commander of the French Mediterranean squadron, needed to join up with their Atlantic squadron. not avert the French invasion of Britain —Napoleon had already abandoned the project, as he needed to fight the Austrians and Russians.
But Trafalgar did ensure that there would be no further attempt to organize a cross-Channel invasion.
Britain retains naval superiority Napoleon never lost hope of overcoming British naval superiority, pumping vast resources into shipbuilding right up to ports placed a heavy burden on men and resources.
The Royal Navy's insatiable manpower requirements led to abuse of the press-gang system—a form of selective conscription—and to enlisting too many landsmen, often from jails and courthouses.
On the other hand, by giving constant exercise at sea to British crews and denying the same to French crews bottled up in port, the policy increased the gap in teamwork and skills between the two navies.
The overall impact of sea power on the course of the war was significant but limited.
HORATIO NELSON, DISPATCH BEFORE TRAFALGAR, OCTOBER 9, 1805 then under British blockade in Brest.
Together with their Spanish allies, the French would then have the concentration of naval strength required.
Villeneuve succeeded in luring Nelson into a pursuit to the West Indies, then dashed back across the Atlantic.
But instead of freeing the Brest fleet from blockade, he joined the Spanish in Cadiz.
The long war continued to demand an exceptional effort from the Royal Navy.
In 1807, the British had to take prompt action against Denmark, attacking Copenhagen for a second time, in order to stop the substantial Danish fleet fighting as an ally of France.
The policy of keeping a permanent, close blockade of French secured its trade routes.
It also allowed Britain to sustain an army in Portugal and Spain during the Peninsular War of 1808-14.
However, the amphibious operations on mainland Europe, most notably the landings at Walcheren in the Netherlands in 1809, were not a success.
Despite the scale of the eventual British victory over a combined French and Spanish fleet, this was a desperately hard-fought battle and Nelson's high-risk tactics could easily have gone awry.
T he combined Franco-Spanish fleet had ended up under blockade in Cadiz, in southwest Spain, after a failed attempt to organize naval cover for a French invasion of England.
Admiral PierreCharles Villeneuve led 33 ships of the line out of port on October 19, 1805, and sailed toward Gibraltar.
Nelson's blockade force was on paper inferior— he had 27 ships of the line when battle was joined—but he saw this as an opportunity to deliver a mortal blow to the seapower of Britain's enemies.
The British attacked on the morning of October 21, when the two fleets were off Cape Trafalgar, south of Cadiz.
Nelson arranged his ships in two columns sailing at right angles to the Franco-Spanish line, which was conventionally organized into vanguard or van , center, and rear squadrons.
Nelson planned for his columns to break through the enemy line in the center and rear, creating a ""pell-mell"" fight in which his superior gunnery would prevail.
The enemy van would find itself left out of the battle until later as Nelson feigned to head toward the van, but checked back to attack the center.
The drawback of Nelson's scheme was that his fleet had to make their approach with the forward part of their ships exposed to enemy broadsides, the simultaneous bring of all guns on one side of a ship.
As his ships could not return Bre across the bow or stern of the enemy, this meant that Nelson's beet would come under Bre without being able to defend itself.
Breaking the line With only a light wind the approach was agonizingly slow.
Nelson led one column on board FIMS Victory, Admiral Collingwood the other on FfMS Royal Sovereign.
Both succeeded in sailing through the Franco-Spanish line, raking (Bring through the length of the enemy's ships with broadsides) as they went.
The battle resolved, as was Nelson's intention, into a series of close-quarters engagements in which British broadsides prevailed over an enemy who fought with the utmost courage and determination.
The exception was the Franco-Spanish van, which was slow to beat back against the wind toward the fighting and then unaccountably failed to fully engage the British fleet.
Early in the afternoon Nelson was shot by a marksman in the rigging of the French ship Redoutable.
By the evening 17 Franco-Spanish ships had been captured; one had exploded and sunk.
Bringing the enemy to battle on his own terms, he deployed artillery, heavy cavalry, and infantry columns aggressively on the field in search of victory.
Between 1801 and 1805 France faced no enemy on land, giving Napoleon Bonaparte an opportunity to organize his forces for the titanic struggles that lay ahead.
NAPOLEON'S BATTLE FORCE Land warfare in Europe ended with the Treaty of Luneville, signed by France and Austria in 1801.
Britain was a more tenacious enemy of France, peace between the two only lasting from March 1802 to May 1803.
Nonetheless, having crowned himself emperor in December 1804, Napoleon had his Grande Armee camped at Boulogne ready for a cross-Channel invasion.
It was a formidable force, its numbers swelled by annual conscription and its conscripts highly trained, with experienced commanders bearing the newly created rank of marshal.
I n August 1805, Austria joined Russia and the lesser powers of Sweden and Naples in an anti-French coalition financed by Britain.
Emperor Napoleon thus abandoned his plans for a British invasion, instead marching his Grande Armee from Boulogne across Germany to strike at Austria.
His aim was to defeat the Austrians before they could combine with the Russian army under General Kutuzov, which was advancing west to / join its ally.
Napoleon's Grande Armee numbered almost 200,000 troops, and was organized into seven all-arms corps, each capable of independent maneuver under the orders of one of the emperor's marshals.
The rapid movement this vast army achieved was peerless, a result of forced marches, self-sufficiency without the encumbrance of a supply train, and skillful organization by the general staff.
The Austrian General Mack, who had crossed Bavaria to Ulm, was encircled by the French sweeping around to the east and surrendered a 25,000-strong force without a major battle.
The unstoppable army But as the emperor pursued the enemy eastward, the Grande Armee's position became increasingly precarious.
The assault, lasting for an exhausting 14 hours, did not see a decisive result.
Napoleon gambled on bringing his enemies to battle quickly and deciding the war with a single crushing victory.
On December 2 at Austerlitz this was achieved—despite Emperor Francis of Austria and Tsar Alexander of Russia combining their armies.
Their generals taking the offensive, Napoleon defeated them in a desperately contested battle, holding their initial attack and then delivering counterblows.
After this loss the Austrians sued for peace, while the Russians withdrew into Poland.
Throughout this campaign Prussia had remained on the sidelines, unsure where its advantage lay.
Prussia's army, once the envy of Europe, was no longer a match for the French.
The Grande Armee's capacity to fight independently was shown at the simultaneous battles of Jena and Auerstadt.
With both sides unsure of Paris their enemy's dispositions, Napoleon sent most of his army—almost 100,000 FRANCE men—to fight a small Prussian force at Jena, while Marshal Davout's corps of 26,000 confronted the 64,000-strong principal Prussian army at Auerstadt, and Marshal Bernadotte's soldiers hovered unused between the two.
Despite his numerical inferiority, Davout e d 1 drove the Prussian army from the field.
Pursued by French cavalry, they dissolved in a general rout and Napoleon occupied Berlin.
The cost of war The Russians and winter weather were Napoleon's enemies.
L— q n S e 0 Florence r r<3 n TUSCANY ‘pAPAL * ^ Wagram Jul 5-6,1809 HABSBURG EMPIRE HUNGARY xb_ % TRANSYLVANIA Jassy MOLDAVIA Belgrade WALLACHIA Bucharest te' Corsica f & 0 STATES Mostar Rome KINGDOM OF NAPLES AND SICILY OTTOMAN EMPIRE Sofia Key made peace at Tilsit.
In 1809 the Austrians tried to throw off this domination by declaring war on the French again.
With Prussia failing to assist and Russia hostile, Austria had little hope.
February 1807, the men assembled for a battle with Russia and Prussia In a savage clash in a snowstorm, the day was won by a French cavalry charge, 10,000 strong, which crushed the Russian infantry and overran their cannon.
With the French suffering some 25,000 casualties, Eylau was no decisive victory.
However, after their defeat at Friedland in the summer, the Russians The number muskets and other small arms manufactured in France during the period of Napoleon's empire, 1804-14.
Aspern-Essling in May, Archduke Charles inflicted a rare reverse upon Napoleon, catching his army halfway through a river crossing and forcing him to abandon the bridgehead.
France 1797 Linder French control by 1805 Members of the Third Coalition 1805-07 Frontiers 1797 Napoleon's campaign of 1805-07 French victory A F T E r MARSHAL BERNADOTTE French 12-pounder cannon Napoleon’s favorite field artillery weapon was the 12-pounder, first introduced before the French Revolution by Gribeauval.
Napoleon never succeeded in stabilizing his command of Europe, partly because Britain remained at war, but also because his policies bred opposition and resistance.
QUEST FOR DOMINANCE Napoleonic France had absorbed the southern Netherlands, the west bank of the Rhine, and a large part of Italy into its territory.
He placed family members on thrones and made a marriage alliance by wedding Marie Louise of Austria.
His _ Marshal of France, Jean-Baptiste Jules Bernadotte, became crown prince of Sweden in 1810.
From 1806 the emperor installed the Continental System to destroy British commerce, banning all trade between Europe and Britain.
From 1807 France's army underwent changes that lessened its fighting efficiency.
Conscripts no longer had proper training, and a decreasing percentage of its troops were ethnic French.
During the Peninsular War, Cadiz was the seat of Spanish power, and had been besieged by the French for over a year.
Though the French lost the battle, the British and Spanish failed to exploit their victory and the French army, under Marshal Victor, reoccupied their siege lines.
SOUTHWEST EUROPE The Peninsular War Although a sideshow in the overall context of the Napoleonic Wars, the Peninsular War of 1808-14 contributed substantially to Napoleon's downfall.
For the British, it was a chance to mount a sustained campaign on mainland Europe.
BRITISH GENERAL THE DUKE OF WELLINGTON Irish-born Arthur Wellesley, later the Duke of Wellington, first distinguished himself fighting the Kingdom of Mysore and the Marathas in India.
His success in the Peninsular War made him a British national hero, a status enhanced by his leading role in the defeat of Napoleon at Waterloo in 1815.
Usually a cautious general, he was also capable of bold attacking strokes, as at Salamanca in 1812.
He was never careless of his men's lives and took only necessary risks.
BEFORE 1 The Peninsular War was a result of Napoleon's interference in Iberia, with an initial French invasion of Portugal followed by an attempt to grab the Spanish throne.
SPAIN AT NAPOLEON'S MERCY In 1804 the Spanish Bourbon monarchy allied itself with France against the British.
Two years later Napoleon initiated his Continental System, placing an embargo on all trade between Europe and Britain.
To enforce this blockade, a French army, helped by the Spanish, occupied Portugal in 1807, obliging the Portuguese royal family to flee to Brazil.
The presence of French forces in the Iberian peninsula left Spain at France's mercy.
By May 1808, French soldiers had seized control of key Spanish fortresses and occupied Madrid.
Napoleon bullied the Bourbons into abdicating, but his attempt to place his brother, Joseph, on the Spanish throne provoked an uprising.
O n May 2, 1808, the population of Madrid rebelled against the French garrison occupying their city.
The uprising in the Spanish capital was swiftly and brutally suppressed, but the insurrection spread across Spain as provincial councils organized military resistance.
In mid-July a 20,000-strong French army corps surrendered after being encircled by forces of the Spanish regular army at the battle of Bailen.
Meanwhile, Britain landed an army under Arthur Wellesley in Portugal and defeated Marshal Junot's French forces at Vimeiro.
Junot was isolated by the uprising in Spain, and felt his situation was untenable.
He sought an accord with more senior British generals who had replaced Wellesley for the time being.
Junot's army was generously but foolishly repatriated to France, with its arms and booty, on board British ships.
In the same period the British Army in Portugal numbered 30,000 men. a British column under Sir John Moore that had advanced from Portugal but was now forced to flee toward the northern Spanish coast—the survivors were evacuated by the Royal Navy from La Coruna in January 1809.
Napoleon left the Iberian peninsula for Germany, where Austria was presenting a fresh challenge to his dominance of the continent.
Allied counterattacks The prospect of a swift French victory in the peninsula soon evaporated.
The Spanish army sustained a stubborn resistance, while a British army—again under Wellesley, with Portuguese troops in support—denied the French control of Portugal.
A combined push toward Madrid by the British and Spanish in the summer of 1809 resulted in a costly victory over the French at Talavera, but then had to be abandoned as further French forces approached.
France needed to devote ample forces to garrisoning territory it occupied.
Its armies were harassed constantly by guerrilla bands, while campaigning against the tenacious Spanish regular armies in Spain as well as the British and Portuguese in Portugal.
The French marshals found the rapid, decisive movement of army corps, in the established Napoleonic manner, Battle of Salamanca Wellington's victory at Salamanca, on July 22,1812, was a turning point.
Like all battles of the period, it was fought in an obscuring fog of gunpowder smoke. impossible in countryside increasingly denuded of food and fodder.
But soldiers foraging for supplies were vulnerable to ambush by guerrillas and had to seize what they needed from hostile villagers by brute force.
Wellington coped better, able to depend on supply by sea through Lisbon and cautiously and thoroughly organizing his supply and communication routes when advancing with his men away from the coastal regions.
In 1810 a French army commanded by Marshal Massena invaded Portugal, but in September came up against the strong defensive lines of Torres Vedras that Wellington had prepared in front of Lisbon.
The following spring, supply problems forced Massena to withdraw toward the Spanish border.
Wellington's pursuit was cautious, for the French always had the potential to assemble forces large enough to shatter him.
Indecisive battles with heavy casualties on both sides were fought at Fuentes de Ofioro and Albuera in May 1811.
The British then concentrated on reducing the pivotal fortresses of Badajoz and TECHNOLOGY HOLLOW SHELL SHRAPNEL SHELL British artillery officer Henry Shrapnel's eponymous invention was a hollow iron sphere packed with explosive powder and musket balls.
A time fuse was designed to ignite the explosive when the sphere, fired from an ordinary cannon, was above the heads of enemy soldiers.
The airburst hurled the musket balls into their ranks to deadly effect.
Shrapnel MUSKET BALLS had far greater range than canister, until then the standard way of firing multiple projectiles from a cannon.
Described by Wellington as ""a great benefit,"" it was first used by the British Army in 1808 during the Peninsular War.
AFTER The war left Spain and Portugal devastated, economically backward and politically unstable.
The British enter France After the fall of Badajoz, Wellington advanced northward through Spain.
In July 1812, at Salamanca, he decisively defeated Marshal Marmont in a battle that revealed an unexpected flair for bold opportunistic attack.
The French withdrew from southern Spain and abandoned Madrid to concentrate their forces against Wellington.
Even with Portuguese and Spanish regulars now attached to his army, Wellington was, in theory, outnumbered two to one.
But Spanish guerrillas were increasingly active, and French morale was low.
In spring 1813, Wellington resumed the offensive, pressing toward the French border.
He attacked an army COLONIAL WARS Many Spanish and Portuguese who fought in the Peninsula War embraced liberalism and resisted the reimposition of absolutist monarchy.
In Spain King Ferdinand VII, restored in 1814, faced a liberal revolt in 1820 that started the first of a series of civil wars that was to plague Spain throughout the 19th century.
In Portugal liberals imposed a constitution on the king, who had fled to Brazil during the war.
The Portuguese liberals won a civil war against a conservative reaction in 1828-34.
The Spanish colonies in the Americas were thrown into turmoil by the weakening of Spanish rule during the war and the conflicting political currents after it.
In Brazil the son of the Portuguese monarch refused to return from exile and became ruler of an independent Brazil as Emperor Pedro I from 1822.
Wellington was ill-equipped for siege operations— which were a rarity in the Napoleonic Wars—but succeeded in taking Ciudad Rodrigo by storm in January 1812 and Badajoz in April.
The assault on the walls showed British soldiers at their best; the aftermath of the capture of the fortresses did not, degenerating into under King Joseph at Vitoria in June.
The following October the British forces crossed the Pyrenees into southwest France and by the time Napoleon abdicated, in April 1814, they were fighting for the city of Toulouse.
The Peninsular War had been a drain upon French manpower, tying down troops who otherwise might have been available for the struggle against Prussia, Russia, and Austria.
Communications At one time communication on the battlefield was limited to what soldiers could directly see and hear of each other while fighting.
Flags and banners provided an effective means of visually communicating commands.
Originally these were quite simple, but flag codes were substantially improved in the mid18th century when the French navy introduced number flags.
This allowed many more increasingly complex messages to be transmitted.
Long-range signals Developments in optics, such as high-quality telescopes and binoculars, greatly increased the distance over which visual signals could be sent.
However, all visual communication suffered from the fact that poor weather conditions and smoke often obscured the battlefield.
This difficulty proved to be especially acute in the gunpowder era, when battlefields were blanketed in smoke as soon as the firing started.
Napoleonic drummer boy This painting depicts soldiers marching into the battle of Waterloo in 1815.
In the British Army, drummer boys and band boys accompanied their regiments into battle. communication.
Regardless of the advances in military communication, however, the role of the messenger, whether traveling on foot, on horseback, or on a motorcycle, has remained prominent.
Even at sea in the era of sail, small boats flitted from ship to ship in the heat of battle delivering orders and messages.
Carrying messages on the battlefield was notoriously dangerous work, never more so than for the ""trench runners"" of World War I In the thick of battle, commanders often sent a series of soldiers with the same message, hoping that at least one would make it through.
Pre-electric communication Communication over longer distances developed in ingenious ways.
By applying the principle of a chain of communication, it was possible to transmit messages with remarkable speed over long distances with quite limited technology.
The system of fire beacons built around the English coast, for example, gave rapid warning of the approach of the Spanish Armada in 1588.
A widely spaced line of warships, each stationed within telescope range of its neighbor on each side, could transmit a flag-coded message over long distances in a few minutes.
The same principle can be applied to smoke and light signals; a heliograph, for Battlefield communication This detail from the Bayeux tapestry shows a young boy delivering a message to William the Conqueror during the battle of Hastings.
B efore the 20th century, command on the battlefield was mostly exercised by a variety of visual and auditory signals.
For small units, agreed and understood hand gestures were effective when operating with stealth, changing to shouted commands once fighting was out in the open.
For fighting on an extended battlefield, brass instruments such as trumpets or bugles and, of course, drums were widely used to signal simple commands such By World War I , the replacement of gunpowder by smokeless propellant and explosive had improved visibility, but the sheer scale of the 20th-century battlefield made it difficult to make use of visual signaling.
Color-coded signal rockets, however, were effectively used in World War I trench warfare; for example, by infantry calling for artillery support.
At sea, messages transmitted by Aldis lamps (which had shutters for making pulses of light) largely took over from flags as a visual means of Crimean war bugle This copper bugle was used by Trumpet-Major Henry Joy of the 17th Light Dragoons at the battle of Balaclava during the Crimean War.
On October 25,1854, Joy sounded the Charge for the Heavy Brigade. example, is a mirror that can be used to flash sunlight over great distances.
The most effective form of pre-electric long-range communication was probably the semaphore system (an alphabet signaling system) developed by the French inventor Claude Chappe in the early 1790s.
Semaphore stations, which used paddles mounted on large pivoting arms as visual signals, were built during the French Revolutionary and Napoleonic wars , primarily by France but also by Britain, linking the Admiralty in London to the main naval ports.
The chief disadvantage of the system was its inflexibility—it could convey messages only where lines of linked stations had been built.
For all the ingenuity of these systems, long-distance communication continued mostly to be conveyed no faster than a ship could sail, a horse could run, or a pigeon could fly— carrier pigeons being an important means of communication in armies into World War I and beyond.
Increased range The electric age brought inventions that revolutionized civilian and military communications.
Although the telegraph was extremely useful for long-distance transmitting, it did not serve on battlefields, which at that point in time were not extensive enough for such a technology to be appropriate.
The field telephone was in principle a flexible mobile system allowing units engaging the enemy to keep in contact with commanders in the rear on the ever-expanding modern battlefield.
As such it was an essential item of equipment for all armies in World War I Unfortunately, telephone cables are vulnerable to artillery shells, and advancing troops usually found their communications severed.
The field telephone nonetheless remained a useful communication tool through World War II into the contemporary age.
Modern times Developed in the early 20th century, wireless communication was primarily used by navies.
It also played an important part in the naval war in World War I, though the opportunity it presented for admiralties to interfere with the command of operations at sea was not always beneficial.
Air-ground radio communications first developed in World War I to allow spotter aircraft to communicate with artillery, and ground stations to communicate with bomber aircraft and airships.
Once improvements in radio allowed reliable mobile voice communication, for example, between tanks and aircraft, the basis was laid for a new era of fast-moving warfare in which aircraft provided close air support for ground forces.
Airmen could also be guided to targets by ground controllers, as well as receiving orders from their squadron commander and sharing what information they could see from the air.
In World War II, radios coordinated everything from U-boat operations to fighter interception of incoming bomber aircraft.
The main drawback of radio was the ease with which signals could be intercepted by the enemy.
And assumptions about enemy movements can be made from the volume of radio traffic alone—a sudden cluster of radio signals, for example, might indicate a squadron of bombers taking off, or a fleet setting to sea.
In the post-World War II era, global communication systems using satellites and computers have brought the potential for coordination and control of large-scale military operations to a new level.
Control centers use many computers to sort through and analyze a vast input of information and generate precise commands.
Any soldier can potentially be in contact with a commander, anywhere in the world.
Satellite communications Although map and compass reading are still required skills, the modern soldier also has access to the latest CPS technology to plot his exact location.
The Bell Telephone Company is created in 1877, and stock in the company soars from $50 to over $1,000 a share within three years.
WORLD WAR I FIELD TELEPHONE 1898 Reid telephones are employed by the United States Army for the first time in military operations during the Spanish-American War.
SMARTPHONE, A MODERN-DAY WALKIE-TALKIE 1991 In Iraq, the success of Operation Desert Storm demonstrates the effectiveness of JSTARS , an airborne command and control system.
The Russian economy suffered from the French-imposed embargo on trade with Britain, known as the Continental System.
Moreover, Napoleon's creation of the Grand Duchy of Warsaw in 1807 and his expansion of the state in 1809 provided a threat to Russian control of Polish lands on its western frontier.
By 1811 Tsar Alexander had withdrawn from his agreements with France and Napoleon had decided to subdue Russia by force.
Napoleon's Downfall From the catastrophic invasion of Russia in 1812 to defeat by the British and Prussians at Waterloo in 1815, Napoleon's downfall was warfare on an epic scale, unmatched in Europe before the 20th century.
Armies numbering hundreds of thousands battled to subdue him and end two decades of conflict.
By the time the first battle was fought, at Smolensk in August, the French supply line had broken down and thousands of soldiers were dropping out through hunger, fatigue and disease.
The battle was indecisive, although the Russian army again fell back, ceding Smolensk.
The emperor's razor fell into British hands after his defeat at Waterloo.
B y the summer of 1812, Napoleon had assembled an army of around 600,000 soldiers for an invasion of Russia.
About a half of them were from France, although even these included numerous men from recently annexed regions that were not ethnically French.
The rest were troops exacted from client states such as the German Confederation of the Rhine, the Kingdom of Italy, and the Polish Duchy of Warsaw.
France's reluctant allies, Prussia and Austria, also provided contingents that advanced on the flanks of Napoleon's army.
Napoleon knew that such a host would find it impossible to survive off the land in Russia and so made complex supply arrangements, but these were adequate only for a short campaign.
Fie envisaged crossing the border, bringing the Russians to battle, defeating them, and imposing a humiliating peace.
The cautious Russian generals withdrew ahead of Napoleon, drawing him deeper into A costly victory Napoleon continued his advance toward Moscow, reasoning correctly that the Russians would feel bound to defend the city.
The veteran general, Kutuzov, newly appointed to command the country's forces, took a stand at the village of Borodino.
What came next on September 7 was mass slaughter—some 70,000 from both sides were killed or wounded in a single day—as France overcame the Russian defensive position by frontal assault.
Napoleon had his victory, but it did not produce the result he expected.
The Russian general kept his army in being, and even when the French occupied Moscow, Tsar Alexander refused to make peace.
Napoleon could not provide for his army in Moscow, especially after part of the city burned down.
Shadowed by the Russian army, the French began a withdrawal in mid-October.
Driven by hunger to eat their remaining horses, harassed by Cossack skirmishers, frozen once the winter snows set in, the surviving French troops became ragged, skeletal figures.
KINGDOM OF SARDINIA 500km Naples KINGDOM OF NAPLES Palermo Sicily OTTOMAN EMPIRE The defeat of France After the catastrophic invasion of Russia in 1812, Napoleon could no longer resist his enemies in Spain and Central Europe.
Following defeat at Waterloo, Napoleon's military and political career was at an end; but the world emerged much changed from the wars the emperor had fought.
POWER SHIFT At the Congress of Vienna in 1814-15, the victorious powers returned Europe to the rule of the old dynasties.
Overall, the Napoleonic Wars had left France greatly diminished as a European power and Britain unchallenged as the world's most prominent naval power.
Surrendering to a British naval squadron on board HMS Bellerophon in July 1815, he was interned for three weeks before being sent to the remote Atlantic island of St.
In 1813 he built a new army of fresh French conscripts, Poles, and Germans, ready to battle as Prussia, Austria, and Sweden allied with Russia and Britain.
A ruler on the wane At first Napoleon looked set to defeat his enemies again despite the odds, but in October's three-day battle of Leipzig, the weight of forces against him proved set.
In December the anti-French coalition agreed to pursue the total defeat of Napoleon and invaded France, already penetrated by the British from Spain during the Peninsular War.
Napoleon rrA OOO ** ie number °f — ) VJ \J i \J vj troops engaged at Leipzig in October 1813, the largest battle in European history before World War I once more rebuilt his army, calling up Frenchmen from the age of 16 to 60, but there was scant enthusiasm for the draft and he could held little more than 100,000.
He fought a brilliant series of defensive battles against the invading armies, but at the end of March 1814, Paris was occupied by the Allies.
The victors allowed him an honorable exile as ruler of the small Mediterranean island of Elba.
Gathering an army of young and old, Napoleon seized the offensive, hoping to repulse his enemies before they L_ united.
In June he invaded Belgium, attacking the armies of the Duke of Wellington and the Prussian general Gebhard Bliicher.
After repulsing them separately on June 16 at Quatre-Bras and Ligny, he was beaten by the two together at Waterloo two days later.
The majority of his soldiers died, either through hardship or enemy action.
GALLERY |gj RUSSIAN SUIT OF ARMOR (14TH CENTURY) |Q GREEK BRONZE CUIRASS Q ROMAN LORICA SEGMENTATA g ITALIAN BRIGANDINE Nowhere are the complexities of war's history so clearly displayed as they are in armor.
Trends have depended as much on the materials and the fabricating skills available, on tactical factors, and on the type of weapons likely to be deployed against the wearer.
Q A Roman legionary's lorica segmentata was made of iron strips laced together with leather cords for flexibility as well as strength.
QJ This medieval Russian armor shows clearly the influence of the Mongols in its overlapping scales and conical helmet.
The brigandine was a canvas or leather doublet with small plates of steel riveted inside.
A lighter, cheaper alternative to plate armor, it was worn by medieval European foot soldiers, often over chain mail. g The plate armor worn by a European knight in the 1 5th century was made of steel, fashioned by skilled metalworkers.
Although heavy, it offered superb protection, allowing the mobility to fight in the saddle or on foot. g A Japanese samurai's armor from the 1 6th century onward was made of small iron plates sewn together with leather cord.
Q This early-modern infantry armor was used by an elite landsknecht mercenary, who would lead an attack on the pike-and-musket battlefield.
It was often worn over chain mail, jfl A late 15th-century Ottoman warrior's chain mail coat was reinforced in the most vulnerable places with plates of steel. g Napoleon's heavy cavalry wore iron cuirasses, both for protection and for show.
The plate would stop a sword thrust or cut and might deflect a musket ball, g Flak jackets became standard issue for United States troops in Korea and Vietnam.
The pads of tightly woven fabric or ceramic plates gave some defense against bullets or shrapnel.
M Jl ~ j L f JTjfl ’ 1 L L f nL 3 1 1 La ■ L——jf KEY BATTLE Waterloo The last battle of the Napoleonic Wars was fought south of Brussels on June 18,1815.
Napoleon sought to destroy an army of British and Netherlands troops, commanded by the Duke of Wellington, before it could be joined by the Prussians under Marshal Bliicher.
H aving withdrawn from an encounter with the French two days earlier at the battle of Quatre Bras, Wellington's army had taken up a strong defensive position on the Mont St.
Napoleon prepared to attack with 72,000 men to Wellington's combined British, German, and Dutch force of 68,000.
The disparity in force was of more significant than the numbers suggest, for Napoleon had a greater number of experienced soldiers and twice as many cannon at his disposal.
During the French preliminary bombardment Wellington kept the bulk of his army hidden from view on the reverse slope of fthe ridge.
Fie had fortified local farm buildings to form strongpoints in front of the ridge and these were first to come under attack.
Wellington's infantry formed up in line and their musket fire, along with the grapeshot and canister of the field artillery, sowed carnage through the French ranks.
Despite this, the French infantry still looked set to overwhelm the British line until Wellington's heavy cavalry drove them back with a forceful charge.
Encouraged by their success the British horsemen unwisely continued their charge toward the French batteries and were cut down by a cavalry counterattack.
The red-coated British infantry formed squares bristling with bayonets, the horsemen surging around them.
Sometimes a square was ripped apart by cannon fire, but otherwise the cavalry could not break in and were decimated by volleys of musketry at close range.
Turning the tide The crucial fortified farm of La Haye Sainte eventually fell to the French after long resistance, but too late for Napoleon—Bliicher's Prussians, a force of more than 50,000 men, were drawing near.
As part of his army struggled to hold the Prussians at bay, Napoleon threw his Imperial Guard forward in a last bid to break Wellington's battle-worn soldiers.
But confronted with steady musket fire, it was the Imperial Guard that wavered and then broke.
The French were driven from the field, and the Prussian cavalry mounted a savage pursuit.
Napoleon's army had suffered 25,000 casualties and 8,000 had been taken prisoner.
For most of the day his troops were outnumbered, but resolutely withstood the furious French attacks.
It was a war Britain did not want and, on the American side, was fought for unclear goals—whether the United States intended to annex part or all of Canada was never clear.
The background to the war between Britain and the United States lay in Britain's war with France, which had raged since 1793, and in the conflict with Native Americans. militia.
A Creek faction known as the Red Sticks had begun fighting against the United States.
In 1814 Jackson's militia, supported by other Creek and Cherokee Indians, fought a campaign against the Red Sticks, defeating and massacring them at the battle of Horseshoe Bend in March.
In spite of these successes, by 1814 the war was turning against the United States.
It was a controversial decision, pushed through by President James Madison and the ""war hawks,"" many of whom were aggressive advocates of American expansion.
While the small standing army was supplemented by short-term volunteers, the Americans relied heavily on state militias.
Madison was convinced that these forces would be adequate enough to occupy Canada.
This was possible in principle, as Britain's greater resources were concentrated on its war with France, leaving minimal forces in Canada.
Yet a United States invasion of Canada launched in August 1812 degenerated into a debacle.
The three-pronged attack was defeated by only handfuls of British soldiers, Canadian militia, and Indian warriors.
These setbacks for the United States on land were offset by stirring naval victories.
Overall the United States Navy was no given command of a small squadron of warships that were built on the spot to contest British control of the lake.
On September 10, 1813, Perry took on and defeated a roughly equal British force.
By controlling the lake waters, the United States retook Detroit, which it had lost the previous year, thus securing Ohio.
The death of Tecumseh This defeat also sealed the fate of Tecumseh, leader of the Shawnee tribe, who was fighting alongside the British.
When his allies retreated from Detroit, he had no option but to follow, pursued by the Americans under William Henry Harrison.
In 1813, at the battle of the Thames, the British and Indians were crushed; Tecumseh was slaughtered.
With the pressure of conflict and the passage of time, the United States' army developed greater discipline and found better leadership.
General Winfield Scott emerged as an American hero in summer 1814 5,000 The total strength of the British regular army in Canada in 1812.
The number of British troops engaged in the war with France at the same time was around 250,000.
TRIBAL STRIFE Americans also alleged that the British in Canada were stirring up trouble among the country's Indian tribes, accusing them of supporting the tribal confederation led by the Shawnee leader, Tecumseh, which was opposing the expansion of the United States in the northwest.
Between 1798 and 1800 an undeclared naval war was fought between the United States and France, with battles between warships and attacks on merchant shipping.
The Royal Navy's main force, however, was committed to blockading French ports and could not be spared for the American war.
United States frigates, more heavily armed than the British ones and manned by determined and skillful officers and crew, were well suited to solo raids.
It was a shock to British pride when the USS Constitution triumphed in successive single combats with the British frigates Guerriere and Java, and the USS United States captured the frigate Macedonian.
American warships and privateers also took a heavy toll of British merchant shipping.
The most important American naval victory, however, was won on Lake Erie.
Commandant Oliver Perry was when the United States mounted a second and more competent invasion of Canada.
He led his men to victory against the British in a sharp battle at Chippewa and was then badly injured in a fierce encounter at Lundy's Lane (present-day Niagara Falls) in July.
Colonel Andrew Jackson, in charge of the Tennessee Battle of New Orleans General Andrew Jackson directs the defense of New Orleans in January 1815.
Success in the battle made Jackson a popular hero in the United States.
This avenged the American firing of buildings in York the previous year.
In Europe Napoleon was deposed in April, freeing up British troops and warships.
Despite the feats of American sailors, the power of the Royal Navy was making itself felt.
The American frigates USS Chesapeake and Essex had been defeated and captured, salvaging British naval pride.
An ever-tightening blockade of the United States' coast impacted severely upon the American economy and government finances.
Burning the capital Free to attack the eastern seaboard at will, the British sent troops recently arrived from Europe to raid Washington, DC, in August 1814.
Commanded by General Robert Ross, they brushed aside militia defending the city and burned down public buildings.
The following month the British moved on to Baltimore, but despite landing troops and a naval bombardment with mortars and rockets, they were unable to take the stoutly defended Fort McHenry guarding the port.
Sir George Prevost escorted an army as far as Plattsburgh city on Lake Champlain, but Prevost's accompanying naval force was defeated by an American lake squadron and he was forced to withdraw.
The only point in continued fighting was to maneuver for potential advantage in the peace negotiations that had opened at Ghent in Belgium.
The British decided to grab New Orleans, Admiral Sir Alexander Cochrane leading a body of soldiers across from Jamaica.
On January 8, 1815, under the cover of darkness, an army commanded by Sir Edward Pakenham attempted a frontal assault on fortifications defended by the American general, Andrew Jackson, and his 5,000 determined men.
Pakenham was among those struck down by American fire before the whole operation was finally abandoned.
The troops were unaware that a peace treaty—the Treaty of Ghent—had been signed two weeks earlier.
Peace treaty The treaty ending the war was signed at Ghent in Belgium on December 24,1814.
V THE WAR OF 1812 TECHNOLOGY CONGREVE ROCKETS Inspired by missiles used against the British by the Mysore Army in India, these rockets were developed by William Congreve at Britain's Royal Arsenal.
The rockets were used with some success by the British during their 1807 bombardment ol Copenhagen in the Napoleonic Wars and during their 1814 assault on Baltimore in the War ol 1812.
Smaller, more mobile versions were also deployed, usually less successlully, in various major battles, including the battle ol Waterloo against the French in 1815.
AFTER The only territorial change resulting from the War of 1812 was the United States gain of Mobile from Spain, and they were not even fighting.
AMERICAN PRIDE The war stimulated an upsurge of national consciousness both in the United States and Canada.
The ""Star-Spangled Banner"", written by Francis Scott Key during the assault on Baltimore, was later to become the United States national anthem.
Further disputes over the US-Canadian border were determined by agreement in the course of the 19th century.
THE TRAIL OF TEARS The war brought freedom to thousands of slaves, who escaped their American owners by joining the British.
For Native Americans, the 3,900 The number of United States and British military personnel killed in action in the war.
Andrew Jackson led attacks on Native Americans and escaped slaves in Florida in the Seminole War in 1817-18; Florida was ceded by Spain to the United States in 1819, becoming an area where slave-owning was legal.
After Jackson became president in 1829, an Indian Removal Act was passed, ensuring the eviction of Cherokee, Creek, Chickasaw, and Choctaw from their tribal lands.
They were forced along the ""Trail of Tears"" to the Indian Territory in the 1830s.
The Haitian rebellion in the 1790s, which set up the first black-ruled state in the Americas, was seen by most Creoles as a warning against revolutionary upheaval, which might end their domination of the pardo and black majority in the Spanish colonies.
THE PENINSULAR WAR When Spain allied itself with France against Britain in the Napoleonic Wars, links between the colonies and Spain were disrupted by British naval control of the Atlantic.
In 1806 Creole republican Francisco de Miranda tried to invade Venezuela with British support, but was repulsed by a people still loyal to Spain.
By 1810 Latin-American Creoles decided to take government into their own hands.
J South America's Wars of Liberation The wars that resulted in the independence of Spain's colonies in South America were a complex series of conflicts, primarily fought between opposing groups of colonists and only secondarily against Spanish forces.
From the confusion, a few individuals stand out as exceptional military leaders.
Those engaged in assertions of varying degrees of autonomy from Spain were by no means united.
The poverty-stricken and the enslaved, mostly mixed race or black, hated the rich Creoles more than the Spanish authorities.
In many regions civil war raged and central government collapsed as caudillos ran their own localities.
Only in Peru Venezuelan llaneros The horsemen of the Venezuelan plains were a mix of bandits and fugitives from slavery and poverty.
Initially they supported the royalists, but later llaneros became a vital component in Bolivar's liberation army. attempt to reassert Spanish rule in the colonies.
A 10,000-strong expeditionary force under General Pablo Morillo was shipped across the Atlantic to occupy Venezuela and New Granada.
Morillo took control of the major settlements along the coasts but armed groups, with Bolivar's supporters, kept up resistance in the interior.
Bolivar found an ally in Jose Antonio Paez, the new leader of the llaneros, and attracted the support of a British Legion—British and Irish troops left unemployed by the conclusion of the Napoleonic Wars.
GUIANA ‘ SURINAM' FRENCH GUIANA Wars of independence The series of Wars of Liberation in South America from 1812 to 1824 were conducted over a vast expanse of often daunting terrain, including mountains, swamps, and jungles.
Bolivar's war In Venezuela a republic declared in 1811 was overwhelmed the following year in a royalist reaction led by Domingo de Monteverde.
Simon Bolivar was among «| $ \ PERCENT of the royalist soldiers in South America that were fighting for the I V-^r continuation of Spanish rule were Spanish.
Most were American royalists fighting other Americans. the republicans who fled to nearby New Granada.
From there, Bolivar launched an invasion in 1813 that trounced the royalists, occupied the city of Caracas, and re-established a republic.
Those among the defeated who did not escape the country established guerrilla forces in remote areas.
The end of the Peninsular War and the return of Ferdinand to the Spanish throne in 1814 heralded a determined SOUTH AMERICA'S WARS OF LIBERATION k>> INDEPENDENCE LEADER Spanish authority.
In January 1817, San Martin and O'Higgins led some 5,000 soldiers across the Andes.
It cost them heavy losses—but their surprise arrival in Chile allowed them to defeat the outnumbered royalists at Chacabuco.
An end to Spanish rule The Spanish sent an army to Chile from Peru under General Mariano Osorio that at first had considerable success, but in April 1818, at Maipu in the Andes, Osorio was defeated by San Martin, guaranteeing Chilean independence.
Politics in Chile remained complex, but in 1820 San Martin launched an invasion of Peru, aided by a Chilean navy commanded by British Admiral Lord Thomas Cochrane.
Under circumstances still not fully understood, after talks with Bolivar in 1822, San Martin withdrew to private life.
It was thus Bolivar who led the final campaign against surviving royalist strongholds in Peru.
He won a cavalry skirmish at Junin in August 1824 before his second-in-command, Antonio Jose de Sucre, conclusively defeated the Peruvians at the battle of Ayacucho in December 1824.
SIMON BOLIVAR, OCTOBER 1814 Known as ""the Liberator,"" Simon Bolivar was born in Caracas in 1783.
Returning to Venezuela he became the most prominent leader of the independence fight.
The founding of Gran Colombia in 1819, with himself as president, seemed a step toward his goal of a federal state embracing all Latin America.
Instead, even the state of Gran Colombia dissolved in disunity and Simon Bolivar died, disillusioned, in 1830. these hard-bitten veterans and llaneros, Bolivar advanced into New Granada and routed the Spanish at Boyaca, occupying Bogota.
A victory in 1821 at Carabobo in mixed success until the arrival of Jose de San Martin, an Argentine-born officer who had fought for Spain in the Peninsular War in 1812.
San Martin Venezuela gave him effective control of almost all New Granada and Venezuela, which were united as Gran Colombia.
In Argentina a junta, a government of military leaders, was established in 1810.
It fought the Spanish and royalists with The battle of Chacabuco On February 12,1817, Jose de San Martin's Argentines and Bernardo O'Higgins' Chileans defeated the royalists at Chacabuco after an epic crossing of the Andes. improved the organization of the junta's forces, securing them against a royalist reaction.
In nearby Chile a civil war left the Spanish and royalists in control in 1814, forcing their leading opponent, Bernardo O'Higgins, to escape to Argentina with the remnants of his forces.
San Martin conceived a plan to ally with O'Higgins for an invasion of Chile as a prelude to an assault on Peru, the stronghold of The former Spanish colonies found neither peace nor stability.
The legacy of the wars included disputed frontiers and a tradition of power based on military force.
THE SKIRMISHES CONTINUE In the wake of independence, there were border wars between Gran Colombia and Peru, and between Argentina and Brazil.
The republic of Gran Colombia soon split up into Colombia, Venezuela, and Ecuador.
Later, Paraguay fought Argentina, Brazil, and Uruguay in the War of the Triple Alliance , which cost around 400,000 lives.
Even more damaging for South America was the tradition of the caudillo, founded in the liberation wars.
These local warlords with their armed supporters undermined the authority of governments and at times seized political control in military coups.
SPANISH AMERICAN CAVALRY PISTOL SIMON BOLIVAR The Greek War of Independence Launched in 1821, the Greek uprising against Ottoman rule led to the creation of an independent Greek state nine years later.
The course of the war was determined by the intervention of European powers who, by the 19th century, enjoyed a comfortable military superiority over the Ottoman empire.
EASTERN MEDITERRANEAN Greek War of Independence Dates 1821-29 Location Greece, Crete, and the Aegean BEFORE A bout one in four subjects of the Ottoman empire spoke Greek.
They constituted a socially and ethnically diverse population, ranging from the wealthy Phanariot families of Constantinople, who were part of the ruling elite of the empire, to the klephts and peasants of the mountain country of the Peloponnese.
Through the centuries of Ottoman rule, a sense of Greek identity had been maintained chiefly through allegiance to the Greek dragged from church in Constantinople and hanged from a city gate.
On the Aegean island of Chios in 1822 most of the population was either massacred or deported.
The defeat of Ali Pasha that same year freed the best elements of the Ottoman army to focus on suppressing the Greek revolt, but the Peloponnesian klephts under leaders such as Markos Botsaris were fierce fighters who defied the sultan's forces.
A kernel of resistance was also maintained at Missolonghi, in present-day western Greece, under the Phanariot Alexandras Mavrokordatos.
By the early 19th century the Ottoman empire was in decline, neither able to exercise effective rule over its territories nor defend itself against external enemies.
BRITISH POET LORD BYRON, ""CHILDE HAROLD"", CANTO 2, 1812 Battle of Navarino The encounter between British, French, and Russian warships and the Ottomans and Egyptians in Navarino Bay on October 20,1827, was the last major naval battle of the sailing ship era.
The Ottoman sultans governed domains stretching from Mesopotamia to Algeria, and from the Balkans to Egypt.
Most of their provinces were controlled by local rulers, however, with little reference to Ottoman government.
Pressure from both Russia and Austria threatened Ottoman rule in southeastern Europe, encouraging resistance from the empire's Christian subjects.
Ottoman rule in the Balkans was also contested by Muslim Albanian warlord Ali Pasha, based in loannina, who ruled over much of what is now Greece.
ATTEMPTS AT SURVIVAL Sultan Selim III, who reigned from 1789 to 1807, tried to modernize his state but was overthrown by the janissaries, the traditionalist elite corps of the army.
Mahmud II, his successor, was similarly committed to reform, but pursued it with more caution.
He suppressed the Serbian revolt in 1813, and in 1820 campaigned against Ali Pasha, whom he defeated in 1822.
In the early 19th century the tide of nationalism that swept through Europe in the wake of the French Revolution encouraged Greeks to aspire to national self-rule.
It sought support from Russia, which claimed to be a natural protector of Orthodox Christians and had many Greeks in its service.
Alexander Ypsilantis, a Phanariot general in the Russian army, assumed the leadership.
Russia refused to back him, and his forces were swiftly crushed by the Ottoman army.
Scattered uprisings broke out in the Peloponnese and other parts of the empire.
At Easter 1821, the Greek Orthodox Patriarch, Gregory V, was Well-publicized Turkish atrocities won widespread sympathy in Europe for the Greek cause.
The British poet Lord Byron traveled to Missolonghi, aiming to join in the fighting, and died there amid a blaze of publicity in April 1824.
Other military idealists followed Byron's example, including British Admiral Sir Thomas Cochrane, later commander of the Greek naval forces.
Egypt, officially part of the Ottoman empire, was, in practice, an independent state under Mohammed Ali, a modernizing ruler who had succeeded in improving his armed forces in a way the Ottoman sultans had singularly failed to do.
At Sultan Mahmud's request, Mohammed Ali sent his son, Ibrahim Pasha, with a large naval force and 10,000 drilled and disciplined soldiers to reduce the Greeks to submission.
The Greek rebels had been weakened by internecine struggles between rival factions and were in poor shape to resist Ibrahim Pasha's onslaught.
They were simultaneously attacked by a less efficient but still formidable Ottoman army under Reshid Pasha from the north.
The Ottomans and Egyptians The number of Greeks ,UUU left on the island of Chios after the massacres and deportations by Ottoman forces in 1822.
The population of the island had originally been 50,000. together took Missolonghi in 1826, and Athens fell the following year after a ten-month siege of the Acropolis.
Meanwhile, Sultan Mahmud took on the power of the janissaries, who had for so long blocked his military reforms.
With the Greek revolt doomed and the path open for modernization, by 1827 the Ottoman empire looked in better shape than it had for many years.
Europe acts at last European public opinion had been horrified by the depredations visited upon the Greeks by the Egyptian forces in response to the guerrilla warfare of the klephts.
Governments were reluctant to intervene but felt under pressure to take some action.
In July 1827, in the Treaty of London, Britain, France, and Russia agreed to support the creation of an autonomous Greek state and to send a fleet to the war zone to persuade the sultan to agree to a ceasefire.
In September an Egyptian fleet sent from Alexandria joined Ottoman ships at anchor in the bay at Navarino on the west coast of the Peloponnese.
They found themselves blockaded by the British under Admiral Sir Edward Codrington, subsequently joined by Russian and French squadrons.
The Allied naval commanders did not have instructions to engage the enemy but decided to provoke a confrontation, rather than face a long winter blockade.
Firing started almost immediately and many Ottoman and Egyptian vessels were destroyed.
The sultan was defiant, so, in April 1828, the Russians seized the opportunity to pursue territorial gains by attacking the Ottomans in both the Balkans and eastern Anatolia.
By the f The number of Egyptian and Ottoman ships sunk / ' at Navarino in October 1827, almost 90 percent of their fleet of 78 vessels.
Reluctant to see Russia gain too much advantage, other Europeans intervened diplomatically to bring the fighting to an end.
Meanwhile, a French expeditionary force landed in Greece to oversee the repatriation of Ibrahim Pasha's forces, and John Capodistrias, a former Russian foreign minister born in Corfu, arrived to head a Greek government.
Massacre at Chios This famous painting by French artist Eugene Delacroix represents the Ottoman atrocities on the island of Chios in the Aegean.
Exhibited in Paris in 1824, it expressed popular support for the suffering of the Greeks.
A F T E In the aftermath of the war, the European powers dictated a settlement to the Ottoman empire, which entered a period of decline and would not survive another century.
GREEK AUTONOMY Under the terms of the 1829 Treaty of Edirne, the Ottomans were finally forced to accept the autonomy of Greece as well as that of Serbia, Moldavia, and Wallachia.
In 1830 Britain, France, and Russia went a step further and decided that Greece should now be fully independent.
The allied powers insisted that Greece become a monarchy and Prince Otto of Bavaria became king.
INTERCEDING FOR THE EMPIRE The European powers saw a need to keep the Ottoman empire in existence, fearing the chaos its dissolution would bring.
They intervened in 1833 and 1839 to defend the Ottomans against Egypt, which threatened to take over much of the empire.
Wl s Wl 1 1 * u « A new military power Japanese battleships shell the Russian fleet in the harbor of Port Arthur in 1904.
After two centuries of isolation, Japan opened itself up to trade in 1853 and rapidly adopted Western technology.
Its modern navy inflicted humiliating defeats on China in 1894-95 and Russia in 1904-05.
THE DAWN OF MECHANIZED WARFARE 1830-1914 Trains, steamships, powerful new artillery, and machine guns gave the United States and the industrialized countries of Europe enormous military advantages over the rest of the world.
Britain and other European powers rapidly expanded their empires in Africa and Asia.
PRUSSIAN DREYSE NEEDLE GUN, 1841 THE DAWN OF MECHANIZED WARFARE 1830-1914 B etween 1830 and 1914 developments in technology transformed warfare from the era of flintlock muskets, cannonballs, and wooden sailing ships to the age of machine guns, high-explosive shells, and steam-powered steel battleships.
The capacity of the world's leading industrialized states to mobilize military resources and productive power was formidable, bringing vast areas of Africa, parts of Asia, and all of North America under their rule.
A wide gap opened up between the leading European powers, the United States and latterly Japan, and those states struggling to modernize, such as Spain, China, and the Ottoman empire.
The gap was even more extreme with tribal peoples encountered in the course of colonial expansion.
Citizen armies and modern war One-sided imperial conflicts, such as the Sino-French War in which the Chinese navy was utterly destroyed at Foochow by the French, were not a rigorous testing ground for new technologies, which found their full expression in wars between similarly armed powers.
A series of wars fought from the f 850s to the f870s—the Crimean War, the American German army in China German soldiers march into battle in China in 1900.
They arrived as part of a multinational force sent to quell the Boxer Rebellion—a Chinese nationalist uprising that sanctioned the Civil War, and the wars that unified Italy and Germany—saw the first use of railroads for the movement of troops; the replacement of the flintlock musket by the rifle-musket and then by breechloading rifles; and the introduction of ironclad steamships.
An armed peace in Europe from 187f did nothing to slow the pace of technological development.
New high explosives and smokeless propellant ended the reign of gunpowder.
On land and sea rifled big guns could fire shells to a range measured in miles rather than yards.
Rapid-fire rifles with metal cartridges became the standard infantry weapon.
Warships combined steam propulsion and steel construction with large breechloading guns.
The fruits of these developments were seen in the Russo-Japanese War of 1904-05.
This deserves more than any other the title of ""the first modern war,"" with artillery bring beyond line of sight, machine guns mowing down infantry, and telephone and radio used for communications.
On the brink of global war The major powers in Europe pursued military expansion at an accelerating rate through the brst decade of the 20th century.
The system of universal military training pioneered by the Prussians Armstrong breech-loading field gun Designed by William Armstrong, this wrought-iron 12-pounder was the first rifled breech-loading gun.
It was adopted by the British Army in 1859 and saw use in the American Civil War. great war for which they constantly planned, France, Germany, Russia, and Austria would be able to held citizen armies numbered in millions.
Britain did not have a mass army, but it increased the size of its armaments industry and its world-beating navy.
Horses were still the fastest means of transportation for men and supplies once they left a railhead.
Submarines, airplanes, and airships were military novelties with barely explored potential.
But as European powers approached 1914, they had greater military force at their disposal meant that, in the event of the than any previous societies in history. murder of all foreigners living in the country.
United States artilleryman's sword 1840s 1830 Revolution in France topples the monarchy.
The United States war with Mexico ends with the United States making massive territorial gains.
S Battle of Solferino 1854 British and French troops land in the Crimea and besiege Sevastopol.
The battle of Balaclava is noted for the futile British light cavalry charge.
The Texans defeat the Mexican army at San Jacinto River and win independence. ^ 19th-century Ottoman musket « Boer trekkers 1843 Britain acquires Natal in South Africa and Sind in India.
V Battle of Vicksburg » Prussian Pickelhaube helmet » Battle of Isandhlwana 1867 French intervention in Mexico ends with the execution of Emperor Maximilian.
The United States seizes Guam, the Philippines, and Puerto Rico from Spain.
In World War I these three Entente Powers oppose the Central Powers—Germany and Austria-Hungary.
The Italians are the first to use aircraft for reconnaissance and bombing.
In southern Africa the Boers declare war on Britain and besiege Kimberley, Ladysmith, and Mafeking.
In less than a year the volatile situation in the Balkans will spark off World War I 1903 The United States acquires a lease on Guantanamo Bay in Cuba for use as a naval base.
Its causes were minor, but its political implications affected the whole of Europe.
T he first shots of the war were fired in November 1853 when the Russian navy, making good use of its new Paixhans naval guns firing explosive shells, sailed across the Black Sea and destroyed the Ottoman fleet at Sinope, northern Turkey.
Faced with this threat to the Ottoman Empire and alarmed by possible Russian expansion toward the Mediterranean, Britain and France declared war in March 1854.
They were joined by the Italian state of Piedmont, which was anxious to gain French support for its campaign to unite Italy.
Fighting far from home The British and French forces faced considerable logistical problems in marshaling troops and supplies so far from home.
Assembling at Varna E F O R E The Ottoman Empire was in decline by the mid-18th century, and the rise of Russian power in the region increasingly worried the major powers of Europe.
LOSS OF THE CRIMEA The Russo-Turkish War in 1768-74 led to Crimean independence and Russian gains at the expense of the Ottomans along the Black Sea.
Under the peace treaty the tsar became protector of Orthodox Christians within the Ottoman Empire.
EUROPEAN LOSSES Further wars between Russians and Ottomans in 1787-92 and 1806-12 saw more territory ceded to Russia.
Serbia gained autonomy from Ottoman rule in 1817, as did the Danubian provinces of Moldavia and Wallachia in 1829 after Russian intervention.
CAUSES OF WAR Since 1774 Russia had regarded itself as the protector of Christian Orthodoxy in the Ottoman Empire.
In 1852 the Ottoman sultan allowed French Catholic monks to protect the holy places in Jerusalem, which was under Ottoman control.
The Russians objected and occupied the Danubian provinces in 1853 A hussar's hackle The hackle was attached to a military cap.
This example belonged to a British assistant surgeon who served in the Crimea during the battle of Sevastopol. on the Bulgarian coast, the Allies ferried troops across the Black Sea to the Crimea with the aim of capturing the naval fortress of Sevastopol and nullifying Russian naval power in the region.
The French army included many troops hardened in campaigns in North Africa and was generally better organized than the British, who were fighting their first European war since 1815.
Lord Raglan, had never commanded a unit larger than a battalion and had no experience of modern warfare despite being 66 years old.
To make matters worse, his troops had been ravaged by cholera, and were poorly trained and badly equipped.
The Allies landed in the west of the Crimea and advanced south toward Sevastopol.
On September 20, 1854 the Allies crossed the River but the British then faced the Russians at the top of a steep slope.
British casualties were high, but poor leadership and inferior firearms forced the Russians to retreat.
The Russians had blocked the entrance to the harbor, forcing the Allies to besiege the port from the land.
Had the Allies arrived sooner, they might have taken their target at once, as the Russians had only just completed its defenses.
But by the date of the attack, on October 17, 1854, the Russians were securely fortified against the Allied bombardment.
In an attempt to break the siege, Russian forces advanced toward the Allied base at Balaclava.
A battle took place on the hills above the port on 'S JCl IEI Crimean War H Baltic Campaign Dates 1853-56 Dates 1854-56 Location Crimea and Location Baltic Sea, the Black Sea coast of Russia and Finland Times correspondent William Howard Russell, considered to be one of the first war correspondents.
These led to the fall of the government and a swift improvement in supply.
After the war the British introduced wartime censorship of the press to prevent such stories appearing again.
In the third major battle of the campaign, the Allies managed to occupy an undefended ridge at the town of Inkerman, which commanded the approaches to Sevastapol, and from here held off repeated Russian attacks on November 5.
Casualties were high on both sides and the result of the battle was inconclusive.
British and French troops were forced to dig in as the siege was set to continue through the winter.
The Allies were unprepared for the freezing conditions, with inadequate food, fuel, and clothing supplies.
Without proper shelter and provisions they were soon impaired by malnutrition and cholera.
Conditions became so desperate that they were reduced to only 12,000 fit men.
Critical reports of the situation were sent back to London by The A British officer's hat This bicorne hat is typical of the style of headgear that was popular in Europe in the 18th and 19th centuries, in imitation of Napoleon Bonaparte.
That night the Russians destroyed Sevastopol's defenses before evacuating the southern part of the city.
Fighting also took place in the Baltic Sea, where a Franco-British fleet bombarded Russian positions, and threatened St.
But this theater of operations reached a stalemate early on in the war as the Russian fleet was too small to be effective, while the British and French believed that the Russian coastal fortifications were too strong to take on.
Peace and consequences By the time Sevastopol fell, in September 1855, Russia's new tsar, Alexander II, was anxious to make peace.
By the 1856 Treaty of Paris, Russia recognized the territorial integrity of the Ottoman Empire, and gave up its guardianship of Orthodox Christians in the empire, but ultimately its dominant role in the Balkans was only temporarily reduced.
BULGARIANS War between the Ottoman and Russian empires broke out again after the Ottomans suppressed a rebellion in Bulgaria in 1876.
Alarmed by the creation of this large, pro-Russian state, the other European powers met in Berlin in July, cutting Bulgaria down in size and returning Macedonia to Ottoman rule.
HOSPITAL LAMP MILITARY REFORMS In Britain Edward Cardwell, Secretary of State for War, abolished the purchase of commissions, introduced short service as the basis of enlistment, and set up an army reserve force.
KEY MOMENT CAVALRY CHARGES The battle of Balaclava was distinguished by three cavalry charges.
A Russian charge toward Balaclava was met by the ""Thin Red Line,"" two rows of British infantry from the 93rd Regiment who stopped the charge with three volleys.
Another Russian cavalry advance was repelled by the British Heavy Cavalry Brigade, charging uphill against advised military practice.
The British Light Cavalry Brigade then misunderstood its instructions and charged down a valley toward a Russian field battery while coming under fire from Russian guns on either side.
This charge of the Light Brigade , up and back down the valley, is seen as one of the most futile actions in military history.
THE RUSSIAN EMPIRE Despite defeat in the Crimea, Russia continued to expand its empire, conquering the northern Caucasus by 1864 and gaining control over the central Asian Muslim khanates by 1884.
Capture of Malakoff Led by General MacMahon, French zouave troops distinguished themselves during the battle of Malakoff on September 8,1855.
Throughout history, millions of combatants have died in wars, most of them killed not so much by the severity of their wounds as by subsequent infections and diseases, and through lack of immediate or effective medical care.
Only with the medical advances of the 19th century did the care of wounded troops really begin to improve.
F or a great many centuries, wounded or sick soldiers— in the West, at least—did not receive special treatment.
Roman valetudinaria hospitals treated slaves and gladiators as well as soldiers.
In Jerusalem in the 12th and 13th centuries, wounded or sick crusading knights were treated by monks called the Knights Hospitallers at the hospital of St.
When Isabella of Spain pioneered the use of wagon ambulances at the siege of Malaga in 1487, the wounded were taken to local civilian hospitals.
The first specifically military hospital in Europe was not built until the late 16th century, when the Spanish, fighting a lengthy campaign against Dutch independence, established one at Mechelen in Brabant, in what is now Belgium.
After the defeat of the Spanish Armada in The Angel of the Crimea Florence Nightingale revolutionized the care of wounded soldiers in the Crimea with her attention to good nursing practice, in particular cleanliness.
Crimean War surgeon's case Surgeons in the Crimean War were expected to supply their own surgical instruments, including saws for amputating limbs as quickly as humanly possible. 1588 , for example, wounded English sailors were left to starve or beg in the Channel ports for five years, before finally being offered a pension by Elizabeth I in 1593.
Battlefield medicine Until the 16th century, soldiers received the same treatment as civilians, though army doctors and surgeons were often the most experienced.
Then, in 1517, a German surgeon, Hans von Gersdorff, published the first field manual for the treatment of wounds received in battle.
Its woodcuts illustrated the different types of wound a soldier might receive and explained how to amputate limbs.
The crude saws and other tools used by early surgeons, however, were not much different from those used by carpenters.
Until the mid-1500s, wounds were usually cauterized (seared to prevent infection) with hot oil.
Then a French military surgeon, Ambroise Pare, began sealing wounds with a mixture of egg yolk, rose oil, and turpentine, the latter having antiseptic properties.
He also pioneered ligatures (the closing of arteries) to reduce bleeding.
Dressing station on the Somme British soldiers wounded in the Somme Offensive in France in 1916 had their wounds bandaged at field dressing stations just behind the front line.
MASH unit in earthquake relief In 2005 a MASH unit helped save earthquake victims in Pakistan.
A ONE-SHOT BRITISH WORLD WAR II MORPHINE AMPULE SYRINGE 1867 English surgeon Joseph Lister pioneers the use of antiseptics in surgery, greatly reducing deaths from subsequent infection.
The same symptoms appear in veterans of the Second Gulf War, beginning in 2003.
Dominique Jean Larrey, Napoleon's chief physician and surgeon-in-chief of his armies, introduced the practice of triage, or sorting.
Triage prioritized patients according to the severity of their condition, dividing them into those who were likely to live regardless of their care, those who were likely to die regardless of their care, and those for whom immediate medical intervention might be life-saving.
These were horse-drawn wagons that removed wounded soldiers (enemy soldiers included) during the battle after they had received early treatment on the field, and took them to centralized field hospitals well away from the action.
He was also the first to treat large numbers of broken bones using plaster-of-Paris dressings, and introduced female nurses into Russian military hospitals, just as Florence Nightingale was doing in British military hospitals.
Also, the introduction of morphine and of antiseptics to the battlefield in the mid-1800s greatly reduced suffering and infection.
In the United States Civil War , the Union doctors Jonathan Letterman and Joseph Barnes ensured that every regiment had at least one two-wheeled ambulance cart capable of carrying three men.
They also pressed steamboats into use as mobile hospitals and, for the first time, transported wounded soldiers to hospital by the relatively fast means of the railroad.
Letterman used triage to good effect in forward regimental first-aid stations.
The effectiveness of his methods was shown after Gettysburg, when 14,000 wounded Union soldiers and 6,800 wounded Confederate soldiers (the latter left behind by their retreating army) were treated in a vast medical encampment nicknamed Camp Letterman.
Although such actions were effective, the lack of really fast transport to take soldiers to hospital remained a problem until Early penicillin vial Mass production of penicillin began following vital research breakthroughs made in 1943. motor ambulances were introduced in World War I Most wounded soldiers then had a fair chance of survival if orderlies could reach them quickly.
Modern developments Three developments between the two World Wars revolutionized medical treatment for soldiers.
First was the discovery of penicillin in 1928, which opened the way for the proper treatment of bacterial infections.
Second was the setting up of the precursor of the civilian Flying Doctor Service, which flew doctors to patients and patients to hospitals.
Originating in Australia, the idea was taken up by the armies of various countries.
At the same time, the United States Army introduced the Mobile Army Surgical Hospital , a unit designed to get medical personnel close to the front line.
The third development came in 1936 when Canadian doctor Norman Bethune developed the first mobile blood-transfusion service, administering life-saving transfusions on the spot to soldiers who might otherwise have died.
Thanks to these developments, soldiers today are less at risk of dying from their wounds.
But the sheer carnage caused by war and the side-effects of using certain weapons, such as depleteduranium-treated projectiles, still pose a huge challenge for medical teams.
NAPOLEONIC ITALY Wars of Italian Unification Two short wars in 1848-49 and then in 1859-61 transformed Italy from a collection of rival and largely foreign-controlled states into a single unified nation, a process completed over the next decade when foreign powers were finally driven from the peninsula.
In 1796 Napoleon Bonaparte's French army invaded northern Italy to drive out the Austrians.
French rule was established over the northwest and center of the country while the rest was rearranged into the kingdoms of Italy in the north and Sicily in the south.
Napoleon's failure to reunite Italy led patriots to form secret societies, such as the Carbonari, to fight for unity.
RESTORATION After Napoleon's defeat in 1815, the pre-war rulers and borders of Italy were restored, but with Austria now ruling a combined LombardyVenetia kingdom in the north and controlling three small duchies in the center.
The restoration separate Italian states had their independence restored after the defeat of Napoleon in 1815.
I n February 1848 a revolution broke out in France that had a knock-on effect across Europe.
Protests spread to Austria in March, with uprisings against Austrian rule breaking out in Milan, Lombardy, and in Venice.
Taking advantage of Austrian weakness, King Charles Albert of Piedmont declared war on Austria to evict it from Lombardy, and Venice declared its independence.
The Piedmontese army besieged and took Peschiera then set out to occupy the hill town of Custoza.
He then went on to re-occupy Milan and drive the Piedmontese out of Lombardy.
A truce was declared but when war broke out once more in March 1849, the Austrian forces again inflicted a defeat on the Piedmontese, at Novara, and ended the independence of Venice after a siege in August.
In response, the King of Naples and led to uprisings in Naples in 1820, Piedmont and Palermo in 1821, and Modena and the Papal States in 1831—all were crushed.
Victor Emmanuel II Although respected and well liked, the king angered many by retaining his dynastic designation, rather than renaming himself Victor Emmanuel I of Italy.
RISORGIMENTO These setbacks sparked a Risorgimento of Italian nationalism.
Radicals led by Giuseppe Mazzini and other exiles in France set up the Young Italy movement to replace earlier secret societies and campaign for Italian unity.
It was encouraged by Charles Albert, the new king of Piedmont and Sardinia.
French TUSCANY Perugia PAPAL STATES T Rome 1870: annexed Castelfidardo 1860 : Pescara Sulmona Kingdom of Sardinia 1815 Territory annexed 1859 Territory annexed 1860 Territory annexed 1866-70 Kingdom of Italy 1861 Frontiers 1815 Garibaldi and the Redshirts 1860 Sardinian army 1860 Battle 0v Volturno Gaeta *> -^ 86 ° Sardinia Naples Tyrrhenian Sea Calatafimi \ I860 \ Salerno rr 2s to i 5 k Jr‘ ® Messina Palermo ^ Marsala ,o Monreale AP i ann . nw Milazzo 1860 the new French president, Louis Napoleon, sent troops to reinstate him.
The Romans, helped by the arrival of the celebrated Italian nationalist, Giuseppe Garibaldi, from South America, defended the city, but by the night of June 30 the French had crushed the new republic.
Second Italian war for unity Nationalist hopes for Italian unity seemed doomed.
The only product of the recent upheavals was the granting of a liberal constitution in Piedmont.
Count Cavour, signed a secret treaty with Emperor Napoleon III, to gain his support against Austria.
The Austrians were then manipulated into declaring war on Piedmont, prompting the French to intervene.
This they did in style, swiftly moving 130,000 men and the same number of horses to the war zone by train—the first mass military movement by rail in history.
A small French contingent attacked across a canal from the west, while a larger force under The battle for Italy between 1815 and 1860 Early in the 19th century Italy was a collection of small states, whose rulers included the Austrian emperor.
The most successful Italian campaigns in the struggle for unification took place between 1859 and 1860.
Their progress was slow, however, allowing the far greater Austrian force to hold the French at the canal.
MacMahon's troops eventually entered the town in the late afternoon, expelling the Austrians in house-tohouse fighting.
Austrian forces retreated eastward, losing control of Milan, but on June 24 French forces unexpectedly caught up with them at Solferino.
The Austrians were eventually dislodged, largely thanks to the skills of the French zouave infantry and foreign legionaries.
Horrified by the carnage, Napoleon III hastily made peace with Austria.
Piedmont gained Lombardy from Austria while losing some of its own French-speaking areas to France in WARS OF ITALIAN UNIFICATION The horror of war The battle of Solferino was the definitive engagement of the second Italian war of Independence.
The French cannons proved more effective than the Austrian artillery over the course of the nine-hour battle.
After Italy was united, the kingdom continued to expand and to add Italianspeaking Austrian territory into its borders.
South Tyrol, Trieste, and Istria were ceded to Italy under the terms of the Treaty of St.
Germain, and the Lateran Treaty of 1929 set up the Vatican City as an independent state.
THE RED CROSS After the Battle of Solferino, Swiss humanitarian, Henri Dunant, was horrified to see the wounded lying untended all over the battlefield.
His proposals to help war victims led to the establishment of the International Red Cross in 1863 and the signing by 12 nations in 1864 of the Geneva Convention concerning the treatment of the wounded and the protection of medical personnel.
Fleeing Piedmont after an unsuccessful uprising in Genoa in 1834, he spent 14 years fighting guerrilla wars in South America.
He returned to Europe in 1848 and played a major role in the defense of the Roman Republic.
After another exile he returned to Europe, commanding Piedmontese troops against the Austrians in 1859 and then leading his Redshirts to conquer Sicily and Naples in 1860-61.
Having given up his conquests to the king of Piedmont he continued to fight for Italian unity. return for its help.
Austria lost control of three central Italian duchies, which voted for union with Piedmont.
Garibaldi defeated a Neapolitan army at Calatafimi and occupied Palermo.
Under the gaze of the British Royal Navy, Garibaldi crossed to the mainland in August.
He took Naples with barely a fight, defeated the Neapolitans again at Volturno in October, and then joined up with a Piedmontese army marching south to besiege the rest of the Neapolitan army at Gaeta, which surrendered in February 1861.
In March Victor Emmanuel II became king of Italy, although the new kingdom still lacked Venetia and the Papal States surrounding Rome.
Venice and Rome In a further attempt at unification, Italy joined Prussia in the war against Austria in June 1866 and invaded Venetia.
The two armies met at Custoza where the Austrians were victorious, as they were at Lissa.
Italian troops occupied the Papal States and entered Rome, which became the new national capital.
Prussia and Austria contested the leadership of the Confederation, and so control of Germany itself.
Three wars in the 1860s ensured Prussian dominance and ended Austrian involvement in German affairs.
WESTERN EUROPE D Q Second 13 Third Italian War Schleswig War of Independence Dates 1864 Dates 1866 Location Schleswig, Location Northeastern northern Germany H Seven Weeks War Dates 1866 Location Bohemia, Saxony Italy and the Adriatic After the defeat of Napoleon in 1815 a confederation of 59 German states was created out of the remains of the Holy Roman empire.
Like the empire before it, this German Confederation was dominated by Austria, a state of affairs that was contested by Prussia, the Confederation's second-largest state after Austria.
Reform of the Prussian army began under Gerhard von Scharnhorst, who was hired by King Frederich Wilhelm III in 1801.
It continued later in the century under Count Helmuth von Moltke, whose understanding of logistics and technology gave Prussia a truly modern fighting force.
BISMARCK Otto von Bismarck became minister-president of Prussia in 1862.
He took power at a time of conflict between a conservative government and a liberal parliament, but forced through controversial army reforms (including three-year universal conscription) while gaining liberal support for his foreign policies.
Convinced that Austria had no part to play in German politics, he directed the policies that led to the confrontation with Austria in 1866.
T he Prussian chief minister, Otto von Bismarck, set out to unify Germany under Prussian rule.
Ownership of the two duchies of Schleswig and Holstein was contested by Denmark and Prussia, the southerly Holstein having a German majority with a Danish minority and the northerly Schleswig the reverse.
In 1863 King Frederick VII of Denmark announced a new constitution for Denmark that incorporated Schleswig into the Danish Kingdom.
Bismarck made an alliance with Austria, and the two armies invaded Schleswig in February 1864.
Second Schleswig War The war lasted eight months, the Allies following a battleplan devised by their chief-of-staff.
The plan was sound, but it was mismanaged until Moltke himself left Berlin and joined the battlefield.
His appearance changed the war; the Danes withdrew and soon agreed peace terms.
The Treaty of Vienna in October 1864 saw Denmark surrender the two duchies to Austria and Prussia, but Austria's refusal to accept Prussian dominance in northern Germany soon led to hostilities between the victors.
Austria allied itself with some smaller German states, while Italy joined Prussia Prussian army Pickelhaube The Prussian spiked helmet, or Pickelhaube, was designed in 1842 by King Frederich Wilhelm IV of Prussia.
It was made of boiled leather with a metal trim. in return for Austrian-ruled Venetia—a province it required to complete Italian unification.
The Italian dimension of the conflict was therefore part of the Third Italian War of Unification.
COUNT HELMUTH VON MOLTKE, WRITING IN DECEMBER 1880 Battle of Koniggratz The Prussians under Crown Prince Friedrich Wilhelm overrun the Austrian defenses.
In the foreground, the defeated Austrian commander, Ludwig von Benedek, sits with his captured troops PRUSSIAN STRATEGIST with breech-loading Dreyse needle guns, which fired four times as quickly as the Austrians' muzzle-loaders.
Benedek withdrew his shattered troops to high ground in front of Koniggratz fortress.
Moltke's plan was for the Elbe and First armies to restrain the Austrians while the Second Army hit its right flank.
The day of the battle brought driving rain and near disaster, for a breakdown in 'EM communications meant that the Second Army did not receive the order to attack.
The other two armies attacked at dawn, but their advance stalled and they were driven back.
Luckily for the Prussians, Benedek did not press his advantage and the Prussians still had their superiority in rifles and firepower.
In the early afternoon the Second Army at last received its order to attack, and its onslaught on the Austrian flank The Treaty of Prague ended Austrian influence in Germany and created a Prussian-dominated country.
To ensure good relations in the future, Prussia did not demand compensation from Austria.
The Dual Monarchy of Austria-Hungary was created out of the Austrian empire in 1867.
POSTWAR GERMANY Prussia gained Holstein, Hanover, Hesse-Kassel, Nassau, and the city of Frankfurt.
The German Confederation collapsed and a new North German Confederation controlling all states north of the River Main was established under Prussian control.
The Prussian king became its president and controlled its foreign policy and army.
Three southern states (Baden, Bavaria, and Wurttemberg) remained outside the Confederation but were forced to sign an alliance with Prussia against France.
Von Moltke sent 278,000 troops against Austria and Saxony, leaving just 48,000 to face the various other German armies.
This small force captured the Hanoverian army in just two weeks and then drove off the remaining southern German troops.
The larger Prussian force moved south on railroad lines and split into three separate armies—the Army of the Elbe and the First and Second Armies—to march into Saxony and Austria.
The Saxon army withdrew into Austrian Bohemia, pursued by the Prussians, but the Austrians, commanded by Ludwig Benedek, were unsure which Prussian army to face.
The Prussians took the advantage, attacking the Austrians forced Benedek to withdraw.
The Prussians had won the Battle of Koniggratz and within three weeks the Austrian emperor sought a ceasefire.
The Italian front The Austrians had more success in their battles against Italy, Prussia's ally.
The Austrian and Italian armies met at Custoza, south of the Italian lakes.
The Austrians tried to attack the rear of the advancing Italian army but failed.
The confused battle was resolved by the Austrian rifled artillery outperforming the Italian smoothbore guns and by an improvised charge by Dreyse needle gun Made by Johann Nikolaus von Dreyse, this Prussian bolt-action rifle features a needle that detonates the cartridge in the barrel when fired.
A second battle, this time at sea off the Croatian island of Lissa in the Adriatic, was also won by the Austrians.
Occurring at a transitional time in naval technology, it saw the engagement of a variety of wooden sailing ships and ironclad steamships, the latter armed with battering rams.
However, the two victories were to no avail, as the main battle against Prussia was already lost.
The number of railroad lines used to transport Prussian troops to the Saxon border.
In his view, military strategy should be open to revision, since only the start of a campaign could be planned in detail.
He therefore ensured that military leaders were trained for all options.
PRETEXT FOR WAR In 1870 the vacant throne of Spain was offered to Prince Leopold von Hohenzollern-Sigmaringen, a member of the Catholic branch of the ruling house of Prussia.
The French objected, Leopold withdrew, but Wilhelm I of Prussia refused to give assurances that the offer would not be made again, recording the events of his meeting with the French ambassador in a telegram he sent to Bismarck.
The latter then edited the telegram to suggest that insults had been exchanged and released it to the press.
PRUSSIAN CHIEF MINISTER OTTO VON BISMARCK J Von Bredow's ""Death Ride"" Prussian cavalry under Major-General Friedrich von Bredow overrun French artillery at Mars-la-Tour in one of the few successful cavalry charges in modem history.
Franco-Prussian War The war between Prussia and France in 1870-71 transformed Western Europe, creating a unified German empire under Prussian leadership, and replacing the second French empire under Napoleon III with a republic.
It also saw Germany taking over two French provinces , a cause of massive French resentment that itself became one of the causes of World War I W ithin two weeks of the French declaration of war, Prussia and her German allies had moved 300,000 troops in three armies along the French border.
The French mobilized in disarray, but had the advantage of the Reffye Mitrailleuse, an early machinegun, and the Chassepot rifle that had a range over twice that of the Prussian Dreyse needle gun.
The Prussian breech-loading artillery, however, was superior to the French muzzle-loaders.
Early Prussian victories The first encounters between the two sides in eastern France saw heavy Prussian casualties, but the French were forced to withdraw by Prussian outflanking moves.
Marshal Bazaine, in command of the French left wing in Lorraine, withdrew from Metz toward Verdun to avoid encirclement.
The Prussians were heavily outnumbered and risked defeat if the French attacked.
But the cavalry under Friedrich von Bredow launched a charge that disrupted French artillery and deterred the French from taking any initiatives until the main Prussian army could arrive.
The Prussians then cut the main road to Verdun, forcing Bazaine to withdraw toward Metz and take up a defensive position between Gravelotte and St.
On August 18 the Prussians attacked in force, but suffered huge losses as they advanced over open ground into heavy Reffye Mitrailleuse fire.
Bazaine, however, failed to launch a counterattack, allowing Prussia's Saxon army to take St.
Here, they were besieged, removing them from the war and giving a strategic victory to the Prussians despite their terrible loss of over 21,000 troops.
French defeat at Sedan To the northwest, the French Army of Chalons under Marshal MacMahon, accompanied by Napoleon III, set out to relieve Bazaine in Metz forces and engaged guerillas who attacked their lines of communication.
Prussian reprisals for these attacks and Trochu's unsuccessful sorties from Paris added to the mayhem.
On January 5, 1871, the Prussians began a bombardment of Paris, an attack that saw the first use of anti-aircraft but was driven into a loop of the Meuse River at Sedan and encircled by the Prussian army led by Helmuth von Moltke.
On September 1 Prussian artillery on the hills overlooking the city opened fire and for two days pounded the French, whose own guns were too far away to respond.
The French cavalry bravely charged the Prussian lines, but the gesture was futile.
Faced with this ongoing slaughter, Napoleon III surrendered, meeting Bismarck the next day to agree peace terms.
The French Republic at war The surrender of Napoleon III, however, did not end the war.
The emperor was formally deposed and a provisional republican government of national defense was created under General Trochu.
As the Lefaucheux pinfire revolver This French cavalry revolver features one of the first designs of brass cartridge.
The hammer strikes a pin on the side of the cartridge, which fires the bullet. artillery—a steel Krupp piece designed to shoot down the balloons being used by French couriers.
At first the attack stiffened Parisian morale, but over four months famine took hold and a final, major breakout failed on January 18, with heavy losses.
In the provinces the Prussians were also routing the national defense armies.
On January 28, recognizing their inevitable defeat, the French signed an armistice with Bismarck, bringing the war to an end.
AFTER /I 5 billion:;; The number f francs France had to pay Germany within three years in compensation for the war.
Prussians made for Paris, to besiege it on September 19, Trochu rapidly organized the city's defenses.
He was greatly assisted by his Interior Minister, Leon Gambetta, who in early October left Paris by hot-air balloon, flying over the enemy lines to organize the new Armies of National Defense in the provinces.
The Prussians fought hard against these The Treaty of Frankfurt signed in May 1871 transformed the political map of Europe.
The Third Republic was created, but Paris rejected the new government and established the independent Paris Commune.
GERMANY On 18 January 1871 King Wilhelm I of Prussia was proclaimed Emperor of Germany in the Hall of Mirrors in Versailles.
The new empire included all 25 states in north and south Germany, plus the new territory of Alsace-Lorraine.
Although targeted by Prussian artillery fire, his flight is successful.
They were supported mainly by Amerindians and mestizos, people of mixed race, but opposed by wealthier mestizos and conservative Spaniards, who feared for their privileges.
War against the colonial authorities continued for ten years, but after liberals came to power in Spain in 1820, conservatives declared Mexico an independent republic in order to preserve the status quo.
A MILITARY STRONG MAN Regional differences, conflicts over the form of government and the role of the church, and acute economic problems made the independent state almost ungovernable.
From then on, politics was dominated by powerful individuals, often army officers, seeking power for their own ends.
In 1832 General Antonio Lopez de Santa Anna seized power to become president for the first of 11 times.
SANTA ANNA KEY MOMENT THE SIEGE OF THE ALAMO In December 1835 a group of Texan volunteers drove the Mexicans out of San Antonio and occupied the old San Antonio de Valero mission, known as the Alamo.
On hearing of the approach of Santa Anna's army, Texan commander, Sam Houston, urged them to leave but they refused.
Mexican Wars At independence in 1821, Mexico consisted of not just the present-day country but also what are now the southwestern states of the US, stretching from Texas in the east across to California on the Pacific coast.
Tensions with the increasingly expansionist United States of America soon led to problems.
By the end of the decade there were more than 30,000 United States settlers, who outnumbered native Mexicans three to one.
The Mexican government perceived these settlers as a threat and in 1830 its troops occupied Texan towns and policed its borders, levying heavy duties on imported goods.
The troops were withdrawn in 1832 but when the Texan leader, Stephen Austin, went to Mexico City the following year to petition the government to make Texas an autonomous province, he was arrested and imprisoned for 18 months.
War with Texas Mexican troops then returned and tension rose, until, in September 1835, they tried to disarm a group of Texans in the town of Gonzales.
In a remarkable battle fought on April 21 the Texans took the much larger Mexican force completely by surprise, achieving victory in the space of 18 minutes.
Santa 2,400 by the end of the year had evicted all Mexican troops from their state in a series of surprise attacks.
But the Mexican government was already preparing its response, assembling an army led by President Santa Anna to recapture the state.
It crossed the Rio Grande in February 1836 and advanced to San Antonio.
With the arrival of the Mexican army the prospects for an independent Texas looked bleak, but a convention was summoned to prepare a declaration of independence.
This was quickly drafted and signed on March 3, while the defenders of the Alamo were still holding out.
The victims had all surrendered and given up their arms, expecting to be treated as prisoners of war.
Santa Anna then spread out his forces to cover as much territory as possible, while Sam Houston, commanding the small Texan army, at first made a strategic retreat.
In May he signed two documents, known as the Treaties of Velasco, bringing the war to an end; but with Santa Anna now out of office, the government of Mexico refused to recognize Texas as independent.
An independent state Many Texans, including the new president, Sam Houston, hoped to join the USA, but this idea was rejected by anti-slavery states fearful of slave66 Texas Rangers to keep out marauding bands of Mexican troops.
War with the United States In 1845 Congress voted to admit Texas to the Union.
James Polk had won the recent presidential election because he supported Texas's admission and also wanted to acquire California.
He sent a delegation to Mexico City to negotiate a border settlement and the purchase of New Mexico and California for $30 million.
But the Mexicans snubbed the United States delegation, causing Polk to send troops to the disputed mouth of the Rio Grande on the Gulf of Mexico.
In the west General Stephen Kearny and 1,600 troops, including a group of Missouri volunteers led by Alexander Doniphan, easily captured Santa Fe in New Mexico.
WILLIAM BARRAT TRAVIS, A DEFENDER OF THE ALAMO, 1836 owning Texas disrupting the balance of free and slave states in the Union.
For the next nine years Texas remained an independent nation, although its border with Mexico was a matter of debate.
Large sums were needed to maintain the explorer and surveyor John Fremont.
Doniphan and his men meanwhile headed south from Santa Fe to take El Paso and then cross the border to seize Chihuahua in northern Mexico.
He was perhaps fortunate that Santa Anna was summoned back to Mexico City to put down a revolt.
THOUSAND regular soldiers made up the United States army before the outbreak of war in 1846.
THOUSAND fighting men and staff were employed by the army by the end of the war.
Short, stabbing, 19-in blade MEXICAN WARS t United States gunner's sword United States army artillerymen were issued with a short sword in case their batteries were overrun by the enemy, but it was of little practical use as a weapon.
V Alto and Resaca de la Palma and crossed the Rio Grande, capturing Matamoros and then heading inland to link up with Doniphan's force and take Monterrey after a five-day siege in September.
At this point, Santa Anna came back from exile in Cuba, where he had been since losing the presidency in 1844, to resume leadership of his country.
He raised an army and in February 1847 came close to defeating Taylor at Buena Vista outside Monterrey.
In order to break the deadlock, Polk ordered General Winfield Scott to lead a 12,000-strong army by sea to capture the Mexican port of Veracruz on the Caribbean coast.
The city surrendered in March after a three-day bombardment and United States troops then headed inland to seize Mexico City.
Santa Anna suffered three heavy defeats before he asked for an armistice in August.
After two weeks of futile negotiations, United States troops resumed fighting and entered the city in September 1847, remaining there until peace terms were agreed.
The spoils of war The United States had won largely because Mexico had been unable to present a united front.
The presidency had changed hands several times during the war and some provinces had refused to fight.
By the Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo, signed in February 1848, PERCENT was the amount by which United States national territory was increased following the war of 1846-48.
Mexico recognized the independence of Texas and its subsequent entry into the Union.
It also agreed to sell what are now the United States states of New Mexico, Arizona, half of Colorado, Utah, Nevada, and California to the United States for $15 million.
The border was fixed along the Rio Grande and then west to the Pacific.
In 1853, in return for a further $ 10 million, the impoverished Santa Anna government agreed another boundary adjustment in southern New Mexico and Arizona.
The land purchased would provide suitable terrain for the United States Southern Pacific Railroad to reach the Pacific.
By this time the discovery of gold in California in 1848 had transformed the previously poor rural state into one of the richest regions on the continent.
Santa Anna returned as president in 1853 but he and the conservatives were ousted in a revolution in 1855.
FRENCH INTERVENTION The liberals introduced a new constitution in 1857, causing a civil war with the conservatives that ended in a liberal victory in 1861.
With the country bankrupt, the new president, Benito Juarez, suspended interest payments on foreign loans.
In January 1862 the three main creditors, Britain, Spain, and France, sent fleets to Veracuz to enforce payment of the debts.
It emerged that France had a secret agenda and intended to conquer the country, so the British and Spanish withdrew.
The French advance on Mexico City was halted at Puebla, where a Mexican army drove them back in May.
The French had to await reinforcements and did not take Puebla until the following year, eventually entering Mexico City in June 1863.
They then installed the Habsburg Archduke Maximilian as emperor, but he was unable to rally support for his rule.
A guerrilla war against France ensued until the French emperor, Napoleon 111, withdrew his troops in 1867.
EXECUTION OF MAXIMILIAN TRAINING FOR THE WAR TO COME For many of the Americans who fought against Mexico, it was their first experience of war.
THE STATES BALANCED The convention of 1787 that drew up the United States Constitution allowed each of the 13 states to decide for itself whether to allow slavery.
The seven northern states abolished slavery, while the six southern states kept it, as slaves provided cheap labor on their lucrative cotton, tobacco, and sugar plantations.
But as new states were admitted to the Union, the southern states grew increasingly concerned that the balance would shift against slavery, leading to its abolition and massively damaging their plantation-based economy.
THE STATES DIVIDED For a while the Missouri Compromise of 1820 balanced the admission of free and slave states to the Union.
In 1857, however, the United States Supreme Court overturned the Missouri Compromise as unconstitutional.
Lincoln was already a figure of hate in the southern states, having promised that he would refuse to extend slavery to new territories in the west if elected.
Start of the United States Civil War j CONFEDERATE GENERAL 1807-70 ROBERT E LEE Robert E Lee could have commanded either side in the war, as Lincoln offered him command of the Union forces when the war broke out and he was opposed to the 11 states leaving the Union.
Tactical skill against numerically larger forces won him major victories at the Seven Days Battles, Fredericksburg, and Chancellorsville, but strategically he was less successful, failing to invade the North in 1862 and 1863, and losing at Antietam and Gettysburg.
The four-year civil war that divided North and South in the United States was the most destructive war ever fought on the North American continent.
The outcome of its battles was often finely balanced, and in the first two years both sides tried but failed to achieve the outright victory they so desperately sought.
B efore Abraham Lincoln was even inaugurated as the new president, southern leaders withdrew their states from the Union.
South Carolina left first, on December 20, 1860, and ten more followed early the next year.
Together they set up the Confederacy, choosing Jefferson Davis as president and establishing a capital at Richmond, Virginia.
On April 12, 1861, Confederate forces bombarded the Union-held Fort Sumter in South Carolina, marking the start of the civil war.
The Union's population of 23 million dwarfed the Confederacy's 9 million, more than a third of whom were slaves.
The Union held most of the country's industry and railroads, while the Confederacy lacked most essential supplies other than food.
Neither side, however, had an army, for the regular United States army was only 16,000 strong and had divided with the states.
Both sides therefore started to recruit 1 MILLIONS; are thought to have died on both sides in the United States Civil War, including some 618,000 soldiers, two-thirds of whom died from disease. new armies staffed with volunteers and state militia members.
Holding the naval advantage, the Union blockaded Confederate ports to prevent supplies from getting in, and began amphibious operations, the most successful of which was the capture of New Orleans in April 1862.
Inexperienced troops under General Irvin McDowell headed south into Virginia, but in July 1861 faced a hastily assembled Confederate army, reinforced by troops moved in by train, between Bull Run stream and Manassas rail junction.
Initially the Union troops had the advantage of surprise, but soon ran into Colonel Thomas J Jackson's Popular pistol An unprecedented demand for firearms saw sales of the Colt .44 revolver soar during the United States Civil War. brigade standing before them ""like a stone wall"", as Confederate General Barnard E Bee put it.
A counterattack saw off the Union troops at this first battle of Bull Run, earning ""Stonewall"" Jackson promotion to general.
Further battles in Virginia in 1862 showed the Union that the war would be hard won.
A new front opened to the west when Union general, Ulysses S Grant, captured forts in Tennessee and forced the Confederates to abandon Nashville.
Grant then advanced down the Tennessee River and waited near Shiloh Church for the Army of the Ohio to join him.
The Confederate battle flag has 13 stars—one for each breakaway state plus Kentucky and Missouri. could meet.
Confederate general Albert S Johnston launched a surprise attack on April 6, 1862.
Grant was forced back, but with the overnight arrival of Ohio troops he was able to launch his own attack at dawn the next day, and force the Confederates to withdraw.
New technology Union victory at Shiloh weakened the Confederate hold of the west and opened the way to Union seizure and control of the Mississippi.
A range of naval craft took part in this campaign, including ironclad gunboats, often with another revolutionary ship, the semi-submerged armored iron raft USS Monitor.
The two met in the first-ever clash of iron warships, although neither caused sufficient damage to decide the contest.
Railroads and the telegraph eased communications over long distances, despite being vulnerable to enemy disruption.
Photographers and reporters brought the war home to people via newspapers.
The muzzle-loading rifle-musket used Minie bullets that could be loaded quickly and fired accurately, but still only from a standing position.
Modern breech-loading repeater rifles were restricted to cavalry and sniper use, while cannon were little improved from Napoleonic times.
These revolutionary craft were first seen on March 8, 1862, at the Battle of Hampton Roads.
In an effort to break the Union blockade of the coast of Virginia, the Confederates clad the half-burned hull of the captured USS Merrimack with thick iron plates from the waterline up.
Renamed the CSS Virginia, it rammed and sank one Union ship, and drove two more aground.
The next day the Union navy responded Stalemate Throughout 1862 the war in Virginia swung from side to side.
A Union army advanced toward Richmond but was met by a bold counterattack by General Robert E Lee at the end of June at the series of encounters known as the Seven Days Battles.
Although the Union forces outnumbered their opponents and were better equipped, the offensive unnerved their commander, General George B McClellan, who withdrew to the coast.
The Confederates then won a second battle at Bull Run in August and decided to invade the North.
McClellan learned of the invasion plan but was too slow to act, allowing Lee to regroup behind Antietam Creek in Maryland.
The one-day battle that followed on September 17, 1862, was unevenly matched, as Lee's army was greatly outnumbered.
Holding too many troops back, he failed to overwhelm his 23 20 THOUSAND The total number of casualties at Antietam, the costliest one-day battle of the whole war.
THOUSAND The number of reserve Union troops fatally held back by General McClellan at Antietam. enemy, and suffered 12,000 casualties— the Confederates suffered almost as many.
A last Union effort to take Richmond failed in December that year when Union troops heading south to the city crossed the Rappahannock River in an attempt to seize Fredricksburg, but were repelled by superior firepower.
Step by bloody step Although the North had far greater resources than the South, as well as command of the sea, Union forces had to conquer Confederate territory to secure victory, so the conflict was always going to be a long war of attrition.
AFTER The stalemate reached between the two sides by the end of 1862 was not broken until July of the following year.
While mourning the loss of Jackson at Chancellorsville in May, the Confederates continued to rely on Lee's tactical genius.
But McClellan lost his job for failing to pursue Lee after the battle at Antietam, and the promotion of Grant to commanderin-chief in 1864 gave the Union the military leader it needed to win the war.
DECISIVE RE-ELECTION Lincoln won the 1860 election against a divided, pro-slavery opposition, taking less than half of the popular vote but winning all the free states except one.
No longer able to vote as they had left the Union, the Confederates hoped he would be defeated by an anti-war candidate who would bring the war to an end.
KEY BATTLE Gettysburg The crucial battle of the United States Civil War occurred at the small Pennsylvania town of Gettysburg in early July 1863.
The battle itself was not planned and for three days its outcome was unclear, but the result was overwhelming.
The Confederate invasion of the North was stopped and the tide of war turned inexorably in the Union's favor.
I n late June the Confederate Army of Northern Virginia, led by General Robert E Lee, advanced north up the Shenandoah Valley into Unionheld Pennsylvania.
In response, the Union Army of the Potomac, led by General George Meade, had instructions to seek out and destroy Lee's army.
When Lee heard that the Union Army was nearby, he ordered his scattered troops to gather at Gettysburg.
Hill arrived first and on July 1 entered the town in search of much-needed shoes.
A small, dismounted Union cavalry troop opened fire on them, the sound of gunfire drawing in large numbers of troops from both sides.
Confederate infantry then swept forward through the town, but the Union infantry and artillery established and held an inverted, U-shaped, defensive line on the high ground of Cemetery Ridge to the south of the town.
The Confederates halted On July 2 Lee launched an attack on the now reinforced Union lines.
At the north end of the ridge they failed to capture Cemetery Hill and other Union-held positions.
Crucially, they also failed to capture Little Round Top at the south end, from where their artillery could have dominated the battlefield.
At around 1:00pm a lengthy Confederate bombardment softened up Union positions in the center.
Two hours later, Confederate infantry, including a division under Major-General George Pickett, advanced through open fields but were met by heavy Union artillery fire.
Union infantry opened up with volleys of Minie bullets fired from behind earthworks and stone walls.
The Confederates were stopped in their tracks and within an hour the battle was over.
The next day, July 4, sporadic fighting continued until it petered out in the afternoon.
Both sides collected their wounded and began to bury their dead, although Lee's proposal for a prisoner exchange was rejected by Meade.
Gettysburg had been (and still remains) the largest battle ever fought on American soil.
About 85,000 Union troops faced 75,000 Confederates with both sides suffering heavy casualties.
End of the United States Civil War A trail of devastation In late 1864 General Sherman's troops marched east through Georgia, ripping up railroad tracks, burning crops, and destroying farms in an effort to ""make Georgia howl"", as Sherman himself described it.
CONTRASTING ECONOMIES The Union states had a large industrial and agricultural economy capable of sustaining a long war.
The breakaway Confederate states were mainly agricultural, needing to export their produce to pay for the import of war goods.
Two years into the United States Civil War, neither Union nor Confederacy had gained a decisive military advantage.
A total commitment to win—at whatever cost—would now be required for either side to achieve an outright victory.
MILLION number of Springfield rifle-muskets manufactured at various different factories across the states of the Union in the four years of the war.
But the Union was too slow to bring its superior resources to bear— despite its ongoing naval blockade and its successes in the west, in the main arena in and around Virginia there was stalemate.
T he issue of slavery had caused the war, and it was a resolution of this issue that President Lincoln used to break the deadlock.
On January 1, 1863, he issued the Emancipation Proclamation, declaring free all slaves residing in states still in rebellion against the Union.
Its immediate effect was limited, as it did not free slaves in the Union and could not yet be enforced in the Confederacy.
But it gave the Union the moral high ground and ended Confederate hopes of recognition and support from Europe—particularly Britain, a major customer for its cotton and tobacco exports.
Some 200,000 joined up, although they were paid less than white soldiers and could not become officers.
Conscription, which the Confederacy had introduced in 1862, was enforced in the Union in 1863.
By the end of the war around 50 percent of eligible Union men and some 75 percent of Confederate men had been mobilized.
The tide turns In both Ulysses S Grant and William T Sherman, Lincoln found the generals he needed to achieve victory.
Superior manpower, greater resources, and the industrial production of weapons and other supplies did the rest.
Boldly taking the war into Union territory, he advanced toward Pennsylvania, his tactical skills winning a superb victory at Chancellorsville in May 1863.
But two months later his offensive was turned back at the fiercely contested three-day battle of Gettysburg and he was forced to retreat south.
On the same day Union forces finally took the city of Vicksburg on the Mississippi after a lengthy siege, cutting off the states of Arkansas, Louisiana, and Texas from the rest of the Confederacy.
As the Union naval blockade slowly throttled the economy of the South, the Confederate army was denied extra manpower by Lincoln's decision in April 1864 to end prisoner exchanges between the two sides—to the much greater detriment of the resource-starved South than the North.
Any hope that the Confederacy might have had of holding out until the Union Enfield bullet mold Commonly used on both sides in the United States Civil War, this simple hand-held device made one bullet at a time out of carefully poured molten lead. -A -• UNION GENERAL THE United States CIVIL WAR Prolonge, a thick rope for maneuvering the gun Detachable sight The effects of the United States Civil War were felt for years, as the Union struggled to reunite its divided people and put slavery behind it.
ASSASSINATION OF LINCOLN On April 14,1865, five days after the Confederate surrender, Abraham Lincoln attended Ford's Theater in Washington, where he was shot in wearied of fighting would disappear once and for all as Lincoln headed for re-election as president in late 1864.
The character of the war changed, the skirmishes and pitched battles of the first two or so years replaced by a brutal war of attrition that was designed to attack the Confederate economy and intimidate its population.
Lincoln and Grant did not seek such a war, preferring to win quickly on the battlefield, but they were prepared to achieve victory at any cost.
In March 1864 Grant planned to end the war with a giant pincer movement.
The Army of the Potomac would head south into Virginia to engage General Lee's Army of Northern Virginia and ULYSSES S GRANT Grant had resigned from the United States army in 1854 and then lost his Missouri farm during the 1857 depression.
Back in the army in the rank of colonel, he fought aggressively in Tennessee, notably at Shiloh, and was soon promoted.
In March 1864 Lincoln appointed him commander-in-chief as the man he believed would best achieve victory.
BOOTH SHOOTS LINCOLN the head with a .44 Derringer pistol by the actor John Wilkes Booth, a Confederate sympathizer.
THE EMANCIPATION OF SLAVES All United States slaves were freed in 1865 when the Emancipation Proclamation of 1863 became law as the 13th Amendment to the United States constitution.
The 14th Amendment of 1868 granted them United States citizenship, and the 15th Amendment of 1870 guaranteed their right to vote.
RECONSTRUCTION LAWS The defeated Confederate states were occupied by Union troops.
Defeated states were allowed to rejoin the Union only after they approved the 14th Amendment.
All did so by 1871, but white Southerners manipulated laws to disenfranchise black people again.
GENERAL ULYSSES S GRANT, FEBRUARY 1862 Leather cover to keep 2. lb powder charge dry Cascabel, for moving barrel up and down finally capture the Confederate capital, Richmond, while further to the west, Sherman's army would sweep from Tennessee southeast into Georgia.
The final months The war in Virginia was bloody and initially inconclusive.
Union attacks at Wilderness and Spotsylvania in May 1864 and at Cold Harbor in early June failed to break through Confederate defenses.
In June Grant crossed the James River to attack Richmond from the south, but the town of Petersburg lay in his path.
There developed a ninemonth siege, both sides digging defensive trenches and earthworks.
Tied down, the THOUSAND Union troops were killed or wounded at Petersburg.
Confederates grew increasingly hungry and demoralized as well-supplied Union reinforcements kept arriving.
In May 1864 Sherman and his troops swept into Georgia, taking Atlanta by the end of August.
His troops then cut an 50-mile wide swathe of destruction as they headed east through Georgia.
At the ""Dictator"" railroad mortar at Petersburg At Petersburg the Union army employed a variety of siege tactics.
With the Confederate army now down to barely 60,000 men, Lee decided to withdraw from Petersburg, abandon Richmond, and try to link up with troops still fighting Sherman in North Carolina.
On April 2, 1865, Union troops broke through and finally captured Petersburg.
Lee managed to withdraw, but was blocked at Appomattox Court House on April 8.
EUROPEAN COLONIES In the 15th century the Portuguese set up a number of trading stations down the west coast of Africa as they made their way south round the tip of Africa to India.
The French, Dutch, and English followed in the 1600s, setting up trading and slaving stations c the West African coast.
The only substantial settlements were those established by the Portuguese after 1505 in what is now Mozambique, and after 1652, by the Dutch in the Cape Colony.
There were also a number of powerful Islamic states that emerged in sub-Saharan West Africa during the 19th century.
The most important were the Sokoto caliphate, established in northern Nigeria in 1820, and the Tukulor empire in the Niger Valley, founded in 1863.
Imperial Wars in Africa At the beginning of the 19th century European contact with Africa was limited to trading stations around the coast, those on the west coast playing a major role in the shipping of African slaves to the Americas.
By the end of the century almost the entire continent was under European control.
The coastal regions were swiftly subdued, but a determined resistance movement grew up around the figure of Abd al-Qadir.
As France continued its conquests he proclaimed a holy war against the invading infidels.
The French retaliated with a brutal scorched earth policy and eventually occupied his headquarters at Mascara.
In 1844 the Sultan of Morocco intervened but was defeated by the French.
Algeria soon became an important source of troops for the French army, notably the zouaves, who served as light infantry.
Further European incursions In West Africa British trading posts on the Gold Coast came into conflict with the gold-rich Asante kingdom.
An army of 34,000 men was landed, which swiftly defeated the troops sent to oppose them and occupied Algiers on 5 July.
A British expedition led by Sir Garnet Wolseley halted an Asante advance in November 1873 and then moved into the interior, armed with artillery.
Wolseley defeated the Asante in January at Amoafu and then burned down their capital, Kumasi, forcing their king, Kofi Karikari, to make peace.
Further wars in the 1890s led to the establishment of a British protectorate in 1897.
Elsewhere, the establishment of a colony at Lagos in 1861 brought the British into conflict with the Sokoto caliphate, while the French establishment of a protectorate in Senegal in 1854 led to conflict with the Tukulor empire.
In 1879 King Leopold II of Belgium and his International African Association began to set up trading stations on the Congo River, establishing a personal empire in the region.
In 1881 France established a The Scramble for Africa The race to colonize the whole of Africa accelerated dramatically after 1885.
Urged on by public opinion back home, European explorers, adventurers, traders, and missionaries led the race into the interior of the continent. protectorate over Tunisia, while the Germans grabbed Namibia, Cameroon, and Togo in 1884.
A ""Scramble for Africa"" broke out, in which European powers competed for African resources, markets, investments, peoples, and territories.
Otto von Bismarck, the German chancellor, convened a conference in Berlin in 1884-85 to control the situation.
It established a framework for expansion that largely avoided conflicts between the powers, opening the way for the total European colonization of Africa.
On September 2, his 26,000strong army met 50,000 men under the command of the Mahdi's successor at Omdurman.
The battle was one-sided, the British artillery decimating the Charge of the 21 st Lancers at Omdurman, Sudan As they advanced, the British encountered a concealed force of 2,500 determined Mahdists.
These were driven off by a cavalry charge—one of the last by the British army—in which a young Winston Churchill took part.
Sudanese arrowheads These weapons were used by the Mahdi's army when it overran Khartoum, killing General Gordon, in 1885.
In a pitched battle, however, traditional African weaponry was of little use against modern rifles and machine guns.
The British in Egypt and Sudan Although technically part of the Ottoman empire, Egypt had been autonomous since 1807.
Ismail Pasha, who had permitted the construction of the Suez Canal in 1869, had modernized the country, but had run up huge debts in the process.
Demands by creditors for repayment in 1881 led to riots in Alexandria that killed several British citizens.
In July 1882 British gunboats bombarded the port while a Fore sight British army under Wolseley defeated a 38,000-strong Egyptian force at Tel el-Kebir in a 30-minute battle in September.
Control of Egypt brought with it Sudan, which the Egyptians had conquered.
In 1881 Muhammad Ahmad declared himself the Mahdi and waged a holy war against Egyptian rule, annihilating a British-led Egyptian army of 10,000 men in 1883.
The British government dispatched General Charles Gordon to evacuate citizens from the capital, Khartoum, but he chose to stay and after a lengthy siege was killed by the Mahdi's troops on January 26, 1885.
Gordon's death was avenged in 1898, Gatling gun The most successful of the early rapid-fire guns, the Gatling was developed in the United States in the 1860s.
This ten-barreled model was used by the British army in Africa and India in the 1870s and 80s.
Trail spade for anchoring gun to the ground The gun was cradled on a yoke fixed to the center of the axle.
The barrels moved from side to side automatically with the turning of the crank.
Trail, the projecting beam at the back for balancing and towing the gun Early Gatlings were mounted on a carriage with two large wheels, like conventional field artillery.
Not until it was made lighter and mounted on a tripod was the gun’s full potential as an infantry weapon realized.
Each of the ten revolving barrels had its own breech, chamber, and firing pin mechanism One cartridge at a time was fed into the breech by gravity from a magazine attached to the top of the gun.
Mahdists even before they came within range of the deadly Maxim guns or the British trenches.
European superiority The technological gap between wellarmed, well-trained European armies and primitively armed native peoples mostly ensured European victory, although the invaders often needed to enlist local allies and recruit large numbers of local troops to win.
AFTER The colonization of Africa continued in the 20th century, with the French and Spanish takeover of Morocco in 1912 and the Italian invasions of Libya and Ethiopia.
ITALIAN CONQUESTS Of the European colonial powers, the only one to suffer a lasting military setback was Italy, defeated by Ethiopia at Adowa in 1896.
In 1935-36 Italy finally conquered the country, uniting it with its other East African colonies of Eritrea and Italian Somaliland.
OPPOSITION TO COLONIAL RULE Many parts of Africa saw years of fierce resistance to European rule.
In 1926 it took a combined Franco-Spanish force of 250,000 men to put an end to the successful guerrilla campaigns of Abd el-Krim in Morocco.
After World War II independence movements gained strength all over Africa.
They slowly expanded their control of the region, taking Taiwan in 1683, Amur in Siberia in 1689, Mongolia in 1697, Tibet in 1720, and eastern Turkestan in 1760.
CHINESE INSULARITY By the late 18th century Qing insularity brought China into conflict with European powers.
Like his predecessors, Emperor Qianlong ruled ""an empire with no boundary,"" and recognized no equal.
In 1793, at the height of European expansion, he was met by a British trade delegation led by Lord Macartney, who sailed to China aboard HMS Lion, a 64-gun man-of-war.
The emperor received the delegation, but declined to offer any trading concessions to Britain.
He stated that the British king, George III, was welcome to pay him homage, but that no European manufactured goods could be exchanged for Chinese exports , which could only be paid for in silver.
As a result, a crisis grew in Europe; the demand for Chinese imports increased, while supplies of silver became ever scarcer.
CHINESE RULER EMPRESS DOWAGER CIXI The Empress Cixi became ruler of China during the regencies of her son, Tongzhi, and her nephew, Guangxu.
When Guangxu announced plans to modernize China she overthrew him and consigned him to house arrest until he died.
She opposed all reforms and supported the violently xenophobic Boxer rebels.
She is held largely responsible for China’s failure to modernize and for the Revolution of 1911.
Wars in China In the 19th century the Chinese Empire declined as foreign powers intervened in its internal affairs and slowly acquired parts of its territory.
This erosion of Chinese power was accelerated by the highly conservative nature of the Qing government, which led to civil wars and finally to revolution in 1911.
C hina's ban on European imports and the increasing demand for Chinese tea, porcelain, and silk in Europe caused a huge trade imbalance between the regions.
The British East India Company redressed this by illegally selling Bengali opium to China.
As the number of addicts rose, the Chinese tried to suppress the trade, confiscating stocks of opium in Guangzhou and besieging the British merchants.
First Opium War In June 1840 a fleet of 44 British ships with some 4,000 marines was sent from Singapore to demand compensation.
The expedition blockaded the mouth of the Pearl River, then defeated the Chinese at the mouth of the Yangtze River.
Coastal towns were bombarded, Guangzhou was taken, and tax barges were seized, drastically cutting the imperial income.
Due to lack of modernization, China's defenses were no match for ironclad steamships and European cannon and muskets; the chief weapon of the Manchu soldier was still the composite bow.
In 1842 the Chinese sued for peace and signed the Treaty of Nanjing, ceding Hong Kong to Britain and opening up five so-called ""treaty ports"" to British merchants, who remained exempt from the jurisdiction of local law.
Second Opium War Taiping currency When Hong Xiuquan established the Taiping dynasty he minted coins such as these as a way of legitimizing his rule. court for the first time, and opening up ten new treaty ports.
Merchants from all foreign powers were allowed to use all 15 treaty ports, and Christian missionaries and other foreigners were given leave to travel throughout China.
The Chinese failed to ratify the treaty immediately, only doing so after an Anglo-French force captured Beijing and burned the Summer Palace.
Taiping Rebellion While European powers were attacking China from without, the country was assailed from within.
His aim was to overthrow what he saw as the ""foreign"" Qing regime, to take the land into common ownership, and to ban the use of opium, tobacco, and alcohol.
Exploiting people's fears about China's failing economy, the rebels rapidly grew in numbers and determination.
Within two years, a million-strong army swept EAST ASIA U Opium Wars Dates 1839-42, 1856-60 Location Coastal China H Taiping Rebellion Dates 1850-64 Location Eastern China B Tonkin War Dates 1893-95 Location Northern Vietnam O Sino-Japanese War Dates 1894-95 Location Korea and Manchuria El Boxer Rebellion Dates 1899-1900 Location Area around Beijing death, command passed to the British general, Charles Gordon, who, with the aid of modern artillery, retook Nanjing in 1864.
During the siege over 100,000 rebels committed suicide, including Hong, who took poison.
Wars against France and Japan With southern and central Vietnam under its control by 1883, France began to invade the Chinese-held north Vietnamese province of Tonkin.
Captain Henri Riviere marched into Hanoi and evicted the Chinese troops occupying the city.
FROM THE PEACE AGREEMENT FOLLOWING THE BOXER REBELLION, 1901 Although trade restrictions were lifted after the war, opium remained illegal.
In 1856 Chinese officials boarded the Arrow, a British-registered Chinese ship it suspected of smuggling opium.
The British retaliated by seizing Guangzhou and attacking other Chinese ports, this time joined by the French who used the murder of a French missionary in China as a pretext.
In 1858, with the British close to Beijing, the Chinese signed the Treaty of Tientsin, giving the British diplomatic representation at the imperial down the Yangtze valley and took Nanjing, killing thousands of civilians and over 30,000 imperial soldiers.
With Nanjing as its capital, the Heavenly Kingdom expanded to encompass much of south and central China, totaling some 30 million people at its height.
However, its power began to wane in 1861 when Hong was repulsed at Shanghai by the European-trained ""Ever-Victorious Army,"" led by American general Frederick Ward.
French reinforcements then won a series of victories, forcing the Chinese viceroy to concede a joint protectorate over the province.
A multinational force tried to quell the uprising but was repelled by imperial forces.
Cixi then ordered the killing of all foreigners, the resulting dead including a German minister and Japanese diplomat.
A far larger force entered Beijing in August ships destroyed its entire fleet of six new cruisers at Fuzhou.
Even worse was to come in the next decade when Japan and China clashed over the Chinese protectorate of Korea.
In August 1894 their two navies met on the Yalu River, on the border between Korea and China.
Japan's superior tactics and weaponry, combined with Chinese ineptitude (two of their ships were destroyed when their own paint and varnish caught fire), gave Japan an Boxer Rebellion Resentment of foreign involvement in China reached its peak in the Boxer Rebellion of 1899.
Encouraged by the Empress Dowager Cixi in return for their support of the Qing dynasty, the I-ho-chuan (""Righteous and Harmonious Fists"") society had the professed aim of ridding China of all its foreigners, particularly the Christian missionaries.
In the aftermath China was fined some $6. billion (in today's L terms), her coastal forts \ were razed, and all ■ anti-foreign societies were banned.
Foreign troops were also stationed along the railroad from Beijing to Shanghai.
Execution of Ketteler's murderer One of the foreigners killed in the Boxer Rebellion was German minister Clemens von Ketteler; here, his killer is executed.
The collapse of Qing power led to revolution in 1911 and a long period of instability and war that only ended with the Communist takeover of 1949.
Sun Zhongshan proclaimed the Three Principles of Revolution (nationalism, democracy, and socialism) but gave way to General Yuan Shikai, who became president.
CIVIL WAR AND INVASION Shikai failed to unite the country, and by the time of his death in 1916 China was under the control of regional warlords.
Shikai's eventual successor, Jian Jieshi , re-established central power from the new capital of Nanjing.
Plains Indian Wars Expansion west across the Mississippi to the Pacific coast brought United States settlers into conflict with Native American tribes who lived on the Great Plains.
Settler encroachment into their hunting grounds led to massacres and wars that would last until the end of the 19th century.
The expansion of the United States westwards from its original 13 colonies on the Atlantic coast to the Mississippi River brought settlers into conflict with Native Americans.
DRIVING OUT THE NATIVES The Indian Removal Act of 1830 allowed for the forced expulsion of native tribes to the unsettled Indian Territory west of the Mississippi River.
Resistance from the Sac and Fox tribes of Illinois and Wisconsin led to the Black Hawk War of 1832, and the Creeks of Georgia and Alabama were crushed in 1836.
The Seminole of Florida were defeated in 1837, and the Cherokees were evicted during the winter of 1838-39; on their ""Trail of Tears"" to the Indian Territory more than 4,000 lost their lives.
By the 1860s the land west of the Mississippi was itself being encroached on by the settlers.
T he Great Plains west of the Mississippi River were peopled mainly by Sioux, Comanche, Cheyenne, Kiowa, and Arapaho tribes, whose age-old way of life was disturbed when the settlers appeared in the 18th and early 19th centuries.
But the settlers had legal backing; Congress had passed a series of bills that offered supposedly free or unowned land on the plains in return for minimal investment.
The first wars Conflicts between tribes and settlers were inevitable, but war broke out in 1862 when bands of eastern Sioux, or Dakota, took up arms against settlers living along the Minnesota River.
It was an effective thrusting weapon and replaced the heavier model of 1840. number of hangings in a single day in United States history.
The rest of the Dakota were expelled from Minnesota and sent to Nebraska and South Dakota, and their reservations were abolished by Congress.
The next major outbreak took place less than two years later, as the United States Civil War was ending.
Black Kettle, had come to seek peace with the Americans after hostilities had flared between militant Cheyenne Dog Soldiers and white immigrants who had entered their lands in search of gold.
The atrocity led to over a year of war in Colorado, the two sides using tactics that were replicated across the plains for nearly 40 years.
Very often they fought on even terms; both sides largely fought on horseback, and the musket-rifles and pistols of the United States troops regularly found their way into native hands.
The Native Americans were skilled at guerrilla warfare and knew the land intimately, but Indians from hostile tribes often provided scouts and information to United States troops.
Tragically, each side also inflicted massacres and atrocities on the other.
Two years later Red Cloud became the first Indian leader to sign a peace treaty with the United States government as a victor.
By the Treaty of Fort Laramie the white settlers were banned from using the Bozeman Trail and the United States army forts were abandoned.
The Great Sioux Reservation was also established, encompassing all of modern ""West River"" South Dakota, including the Black Hills, and parts of Nebraska.
Broken promises The United States government honored the treaty for just six years, until gold was discovered in the Black Hills in 1874.
As gold miners and traders poured in, Sioux and Cheyenne warriors fought back under the leadership of chiefs Sitting Bull and Crazy Horse.
The United States government sent three armies to force the tribes back to their homes in the spring of 1876, one of which was defeated by the Lakota at the battle of Rosebud.
On 25 June came the Sioux's finest hour; Lieutenant-Colonel George Custer The removal of the Plains Indians to reservations from the 1860s onward precipitated a similar fate for Native Americans across the continent.
THE NEZ PERCE Gold was the cause of a war waged in 1877 between United States troops and the Nez Perce peoples of Idaho.
In 1863 their reservation was reduced to a quarter of its size to allow for mining, but after raids by both sides, their chief, Joseph, decided in 1877 that their future lay in Canada.
They trekked north for five months, but were encircled at Bear Paw mountain, just 40 miles (65 km) from the border.
The two sides fought for five days, but the Nez Perce gave up when they realized United States reinforcements were on their way.
The Apache were gradually confined to reservations after 1870, but pressure from white settlers led the government to consolidate them in the arid San Carlos Reservation.
One Apache chief, Geronimo, repeatedly broke out of the reservation, fleeing to Mexico and raiding settlements on both sides of the border, until he surrendered in 1886.
Imprisoned in Florida and Alabama, he died in Fort Sill in the Indian Territory in 1909.
NATIVE LANDS The Indian Territory changed soon after it was set up in the 1830s.
It shrank in size in 1854 and again in 1890, and was finally abolished in 1907, when, as Oklahoma, it became the 46th state to join the Union.
By then, almost all native tribes had signed treaties with the United States government and moved into reservations.
Some tribes received United States citizenship from 1855, a right that was extended to all in the Indian Territory in 1901.
Full United States citizenship was granted in 1924 to all Native Americans born in the country.
APACHE CHIEF GERONIMO 1860s following the discovery of gold in the region.
After numerous Sioux attacks on the trail, the United States army built three forts along its route.
Red Cloud, attacked the forts, at one point holding a wagon train hostage on the trail.
The Sioux victory was decisive, but shortlived; the arrival of increasing numbers of United States troops forced them to surrender in 1881.
The end of the conflict By the late 1880s most tribes were settled on reservations and officially the war was over, but their suffering continued.
Not only had they lost their traditional lands, but their means of subsistence had been destroyed by the slaughter of the buffalo, driven almost to extinction by the settlers' indiscriminate hunting.
Furthermore, the Sioux reservation was now so small that it could no longer support the population.
The half-starved Sioux turned to mysticism and the rites of the ""Ghost Dance,"" a religious ceremony associated with the ending of white rule and the rebirth of Custer's last stand Lieutenant-Colonel George Custer's 7th Cavalry Regiment is surrounded by Lakota and Northern Cheyenne warriors near the Little Bighorn River on June 25,1876.
Custer's entire force is soon annihilated. the former world of the Sioux.
Though the ceremony was banned, the Lakota of Pine Ridge and Rosebud performed it in October 1890, provoking the United States government non Thea pp r ° ximate Native American population in 1900, down from ten million when Europeans first arrived in 1492. to send troops to arrest the leaders.
On the night of 28 December 1890, they surrendered quietly to the 7th Cavalry at Wounded Knee Creek.
The following morning, however, a scuffle broke out as the Sioux were being disarmed and a trooper was shot.
The soldiers moved in with machine guns and massacred the largely unarmed Sioux.
The war with the Sioux was finally over, leaving the white man master of the plains.
Native American knife A common weapon among the Plains Indian tribes was a simple knife made from the head of a spear or lance attached to a wooden handle.
Later rifles contained a percussion cap that burst into flame when struck.
Indian matchlock o sth century) 0 The German arquebus was an early type of matchlock musket invented around 1475.
Though largely superseded by the wheel-lock in the 16th century, it continued in use until the late 17th century because of its simplicity.
Pulling the trigger plunged a smoldering match into a pan containing a small primer of gunpowder.
This ignited, sending a flash through a touch hole into the barrel to set off the main charge.
Early models were heavy, clumsy, and unreliable— the match often went out—but later ones were lighter, and much more effective.
This Indian matchlock musket was made in Mysore in the 18th century to a design first introduced to India by the Portuguese two centuries earlier.
The design was much copied, adapted, and decorated by Indian gunsmiths. [f§ The British Baker rifle of 1800 was the first rifle officially adopted for use by the British Army, and only superseded in 1838.
Its slow or shallow rifling—a groove of just a quarter turn along the length of the barrel to spin the bullet—kept the barrel clean and usable for longer than weapons with unrifled barrels.
H The Spencer rifle was developed in the United States by Christopher Spencer in his spare time.
When it appeared in 1863, it was the world's first practical, manually loaded repeater rifle, holding seven rounds in a tubular magazine in the stock.
Jfj The Italian Cavalry Carbine of 1891, often known as the MannlicherCarcano, used a modified version of the bolt-action used in the German Mauser Ml889 rifle.
United States dealers bought many of them, one of which Lee Harvey Oswald used to assassinate President John F Kennedy in 1 963.
The AK-47 assault rifle, designed by Russian tank commander Mikhail Kalashnikov, was adopted by the Soviet Red Army in 1949.
Its rugged simplicity, good handling, and ability to operate in almost any conditions made the rifle the most popular gun in the world.
The model shown here is the experimental Series 1 version, with a fluted barrel.
In the end, modern weapons and tactics defeated them—but not until they had dealt British prestige a major blow.
Eleven days later Dingane's warriors massacred hundreds of men, women, and children at various trekker camp sites along the Bushman River.
The trekkers The battlegrounds of the Zulu Wars The key battles between the Zulus and the Boers, and between the Zulus and the British, were fought in the northeast of what is now KwaZulu-Natal Province in the Indian Ocean coastal region of South Africa. rifles would be least effective, so instead of moving into the attack he decided to pitch camp on open ground by the Ncome, or Blood River, with wagons drawn up in a protective circle, or laager.
Then on December 15, when the trekkers crossed the Mzinyathi, or Buffalo River, a scouting party reported the approach of a large Zulu force.
Pretorius suspected that the Zulus were hoping to lure the trekkers into rocky terrain where the trekkers' BEFORE The estimated number Zulu warriors who surrounded, attacked, and massacred the 1,700 British troops who were encamped at Isandhlwana on January 22 1879.
Boer homeland aspirations and British imperial ambitions in southern Africa in the 19th century faced a major obstacle— the mighty Zulus.
A WARRIOR PEOPLE The Zulu heartland—Zululand— neighbored Natal in what is now eastern South Africa.
Once a small, peaceful tribe, the Zulus became a large warring force after Chief Shaka seized power in 1816.
In a series of brutal campaigns he massacred other tribes or forced them to join him.
On his death in 1828, his empire reached almost as far north as Swaziland.
IN SEARCH OF NEW TERRITORY In 1814 the British took over the Cape Colony, home to the Boers—white farmers of Dutch descent.
Alienated by British rule, in 1835 some 12,000 Boers—the trekkers—moved northward in search of a new homeland.
They headed for Natal, hoping to negotiate the peaceful cession of some land from Chief Shaka's successor.
Chief Dingane. next day the Zulus launched a mass attack with some 10,000 men.
But armed mainly with clubs and short stabbing spears—Shaka had ruled that the traditional Zulu throwing spears were cowards' weapons—they faced a hail of rifle fire.
For two hours the Zulus charged repeatedly, then Pretorius launched a counter-offensive with a group of horsemen.
After suffering heavy losses, the Zulus fled, with the trekkers in pursuit.
Although the Boers established an independent Republic of Natalia in 1838, they continued to fight the Zulus in Natal for another two years, until Dingane's brother, Mpande, joined forces with the Boers, bringing with him a large number of men.
Dingane was finally defeated in January 1840, and was assassinated later in the year.
To the west they established the independent Orange Free State, to the north the Transvaal republic.
But the British had not finished expanding their southern African territories.
Anxious to claim territory before the Germans or Portuguese, in 1877 they annexed the Transvaal.
Gambling on a quick victory, and taking advantage of the slow communications between London and southern Africa, they took the initiative.
Using a minor border incident as an excuse, they demanded that Zulu Chief Cetshwayo disband his army, knowing full well he would not.
Cetshwayo duly refused, and in January 1879 the British marched across the Buffalo River into Zululand at Rorke's Drift, confident of success— IKLWA The Zulu term for the short stabbing spear they used in close combat, after the squelching sound its blade made on being pulled out of a person's body. far too confident, indeed, because Lord Chelmsford took only 4,000 or so men with him.
After pitching a small camp at Rorke's Drift, Chelmsford established a second, larger camp at Isandhlwana on Slaughter at Isandhlwana Armed with single shot, breech-loading Martini-Henry rifles and bayonets, the British troops inflicted heavy casualties on the Zulus at Isandhlwana before finally being overcome by sheer weight of numbers January 20, but did nothing to fortify it.
Worse, he let himself be lured away with 2,500 troops by Zulu scouts, leaving 1,700 men behind, including most of the 1st Battalion of the 24th regiment, with Lieutenant-Colonel Henry Pulleine in command.
Chelmsford fatally underestimated the military abilities of the Zulu forces, 20,000 of whom on January 22 launched a typically disciplined attack on the British camp at Isandhlwana in their traditional encircling buffalo-hornsand-chest formation, under the command of generals Ntshingwayo and Mavumengwana.
Although armed with a few rifles of their own, the Zulus still relied on the stabbing spear and club as their main weapons, and despite suffering 2,000 casualties to both rifle and bayonet, by sheer weight of numbers they eventually overwhelmed the camp and slaughtered the British forces to a man.
Defiance at Rorke's Drift If Isandhlwana represented one of the worst defeats in British military history, what followed later the same day and all the following night at Rorke's Drift has entered British military folklore.
At one point the two sides engaged in quite desperate hand-tohand combat.
The fighting lasted for ten hours, the Zulus finally withdrawing at dawn when they saw Lord Chelmsford's relief column approaching in the distance.
The British government sent reinforcements and Sir Garnet Wolseley was ordered to take over command from Chelmsford.
Cetshwayo, meanwhile, was anxious to cease hostilities and end the slaughter.
He knew that there would be no more A Zulu warrior's weapons Each warrior carried a shield made of hide, decorated with his regiment's colours.
His traditional weapons included a heavy ironwood club, 3 ft long, and a short, broad-pointed stabbing spear.
British medal tally Eleven Victoria Crosses were awarded for gallantry at Rorke's Drift—the most ever awarded for a single action.
Chelmsford, though, rejected all peace overtures from Cetshwayo and was anxious to crush the Zulus before Wolseley could arrive and steal his thunder.
The showdown took place on July 4, 1879, at the Zulu capital of Ulindi.
Here, a British force of some 4,200 men armed this time with two Gatling guns and artillery, as well as the usual rifles, formed a hollow square formation, mounted troops covering the sides and rear, and awaited the Zulu attack.
At least 15,000 Zulus soon surrounded the British in typical horn formation, stamping their feet and banging their shields as one.
But this time when they attacked, none got close enough to use a club or stabbing spear.
Hundreds were killed by rifle and machine-gun fire, or by canister shot.
Many were then chased down by British cavalry, who exacted revenge for Isandhlwana by butchering the wounded.
The Zulus were routed, their chief was taken prisoner, and their nation was defeated.
AFTER Following the defeat of the Zulus, the British took control of all southern Africa.
BRITISH IMPERIAL RULE After the Battle of Ulindi, Cetshwayo was exiled to Cape Town and later visited Britain.
Arguments between rivals for the throne led to civil war the same year.
In 1897 Zululand became part of Natal, which joined the independent Union of South Africa in 1910.
THE BOER STATES In 1880 Transvaal rebelled against British rule and defeated the British in 1881 at Laing's Neck and Majuba Hill before Britain recognized its independence.
After defeat in 1902, they eventually joined the Union of South Africa.
In 1905 neighboring Swaziland, under Transvaal's control since 1895, became a British protectorate.
What should have been a routine imperial victory became a drawn-out affair that revealed the limits of British military power.
T he failure of the Jameson raid in 1895 poisoned relations between the Transvaal and Britain.
The British, however, continued to put pressure on the governments of both the Transvaal and the Orange Free State, who felt threatened by Britain's support of the Uitlanders and by its perceived imperialism.
In response, both states declared war on Britain in October 1899 with the aim of forcing a negotiated settlement.
The British had close to 25,000 soldiers in the region when war broke out, but quickly called on a large standing army stationed elsewhere in the empire.
They were well armed and BEFORE -\ Relations between the Boers and Britain had been tense ever since the British took over the Afrikaans-speaking Cape Colony in South Africa in 1814.
THE BOER REPUBLICS In response to the Emancipation Act and attacks by local tribes, Boers began to leave the Cape Colony in 1835 and set up the independent republics of the Orange Free State and Transvaal.
THE FIRST BOER WAR The Transvaal was bankrupt by 1877 and threatened by the Zulus.
Britain, worried about German colonial expansion into the region, annexed the Transvaal in return for defending it against the Zulus.
The Treaty of Pretoria, signed in April, restored the state's independence.
THE JAMESON RAID The discovery of gold in the Transvaal in 1886 attracted thousands of Uitlanders to the region.
The Transvaal government refused to give them voting and other rights, which led to unrest.
Their experience of close formation fighting in wars around the world since 1815 was not, however, that relevant or useful when faced with the highly mobile and well-armed Boers.
In contrast, the Boers avoided set-piece I The British stretcher-bearer at Spion Kop was Mohandas Gandhi, the future leader of India who had organized the Indian Ambulance Corps in South Africa during the war to care for the wounded. battles, preferring hit-and-run tactics.
They could call on around 83,000 men of fighting age, of whom around 40,000 were fighting at any one time, but they had no trained army.
Instead, they had a local militia system grouped into mounted commando units that varied in strength according to the population from which they were recruited.
Although it was a legal requirement that all adult men own a rifle, many Boers did not, or at least not a modern Boer armband The Boers were not professional soldiers and did not have uniforms.
The militiamen who fought the British wore armbands such as this one so that they could be identified on the battlefield.
A nation relieved The relief of Mafeking caused ecstatic joy in Britain, out of all proportion to its significance.
For a time the expression ""to Maffick"" embodied celebrating extravagantly. one, so President Paul Kruger of the Transvaal ordered 37,000 rifles and ten million cartridges from Krupps, the German manufacturer.
The Mauser model 1895 rifle was extremely accurate at long range and superior to the British Lee-Metford magazine rifle.
The Boers also had a small quantity of modern French and German field artillery.
Under siege At the start of the war fast-moving Boer columns advanced out of the two republics, besieging Colonel Robert BadenPowell and his troops at Mafeking and the garrison at Kimberley, while a 15,000-strong Transvaal force invaded British-run Natal and besieged Ladysmith.
The British, commanded by Sir Redvers Buller, sent out three columns to relieve the sieges.
The first column, a force of around 10,000 men with 16 guns, advanced northwest from the Cape toward Kimberley and overcame Boer l resistance at the Modder River at the end of November 1899.
However, it was then defeated by the Boers, led by Piet Cronje, at Magersfontein outside Kimberley on December.-11 On the 9th the second column, which headed north from the eastern Cape to relieve Mafeking, had been defeated at Stormberg.
On December 15 the third column heading from Durban in Natal and led by Buller himself, encountered the Boers, led by Louis Botha, at Colenso.
The British third column numbered around 21,000 w Second Boer War Dates 1899-1902 Location South Africa The Second Boer War Boer riflemen in a trench Although the British were superior in number, trench warfare and modern weaponry reduced their effectiveness.
This type of warfare was a prelude to what would happen in the Great War of 1914-18. men but was driven back by the 6,500 Boers concealed in difficult terrain.
Boer casualties, at around 50, were negligible, as they had been in the previous two encounters.
The three defeats suffered by the British during this ""Black * \\ Week"" led to a JL* rapid change in command.
Buller, who retained his local command, was replaced by Field Marshal Viscount Roberts, with General Kitchener as his chief-of-staff.
The two rapidly reorganized the British forces to counter Boer mobility, and Buller made another attempt to finally relieve Ladysmith.
He divided his force into two; one, led by General Warren, attempted to take control of the commanding heights of Spion Kop to the west of Ladysmith, the balance being held in Magazine clip allowed Buller to retreat.
The long war Meanwhile, Roberts had helped free Kimberley in mid-February and then decided to strike at the Boer capitals.
A 6,000-strong British force led by Kitchener trapped a slightly smaller Boer force on Paardeberg Hill and attacked it directly, suffering more Boer weapons The Mauser C-96 pistol and the Mauser 95 rifle were both used by the Boers.
Faced with such harsh measures, the Boers capitulated, signing a peace treaty in May 1902.
COLONEL BADEN-POWELL, IN A DESPATCH SENT TO FIELD MARSHAL VISCOUNT ROBERTS, 1900 The Boer War had a huge impact on those on both sides of the conflict.
AGREEING THE PEACE The treaty signed at Vereeniging on the Transvaal-Orange Free State border was lenient on the Boers.
The two Boer republics accepted British sovereignty and the promise of future self-government, which both republics gained in 1907.
The Boers were also compensated £3 million for restocking and repairing their farms.
Both Boer republics eventually joined with Cape Colony and Natal to become part of the Union of South Africa, founded in 1910.
MILITARY REFORMS It had taken the British more than 500,000 troops to defeat a far smaller number of Boers.
Richard Haldane, Secretary of State forWarfrom 1905 to 1912, createda British Expeditionary Force ready to fight overseas at any time, and a Territorial Force that amalgamated all voluntary local militia forces into a single home defense force.
The wisdom of these reforms was proved in the opening months of World War 1260-61 » SOUTH AFRICAN WAR MEDAL INTERNATIONAL DIPLOMACY The war had revealed Britain to be isolated diplomatically, with most nations supporting the Boers.
What had once been a deliberate policy of ""Splendid Isolation"" from European affairs now became a liability.
Britain therefore moved to secure an alliance with Japan in 1902 and an entente, or understanding, with France in 1904 that settled outstanding colonial differences between the two nations.
In 1906 the first in a series of confidential military conversations took place between their military staff in order to determine a common strategy in the event of a war against Germany.
An entente with Russia, similar to that with France, was signed in 1907. reserve.
On the night of January 24, 1900 2,000 men scaled the hill but discovered in daylight that they could not dig in, had no sandbags, and, worse, were overlooked by Boer artillery.
The British came under heavy fire, which they could not return, but reinforcements allowed them to keep the hill despite a Boer attempt to scale the hill and engage them at close quarters.
By the evening both sides were exhausted and withdrew, the Boers then regrouped taking the abandoned summit and than 1,000 casualties before Kitchener withdrew.
Roberts then took command and subjected the Boers to an artillery barrage before they submitted.
He then marched on Bloemfontein, the Orange Free State capital, which he took on March 13 before heading north to Transvaal to take Johannesburg on May 31 and Pretoria on June 5.
As Roberts forged ahead, the siege of Mafeking, which had been in progress since the start of the war, was over.
Defended by Colonel Baden-Powell, the town was relieved on May 17, 1900.
They sabotaged rail communications, attacked isolated outposts, and ambushed British troops.
The British responded by starting a scorched earth KEY MOMENT THE FIRST CONCENTRATION CAMPS After the British had burned Boer farms and destroyed their crops to deny Boer fighters food and shelter, General Kitchener set up a series of refugee camps to accommodate Boer civilians who had become displaced.
Known as concentration camps—the first time this term had been used anywhere in the world—the 45 camps housed in the region of 100,000 Boers, mainly women and children.
A similar number of Black Africans who lived in Boer areas were placed in another 64 camps.
Conditions were appalling and food rations meagre, leading to the deaths from starvation, disease, and exposure of 27,927 Boers, of whom 24,074 were under 16—half the Boer child population.
An estimated 15,000 Africans died, although these deaths were never properly recorded.
Almost every day he kept a diary recording the battles, marches, and hardships he endured.
The diary, which lay unread until it was rediscovered by his great-grandson almost a century later, gives a fascinating personal view of what it was like to fight in the war.
F rederick Roseblade was bom in Northampton, England, in 1869 and worked in the local shoe trade as a clicker, someone who chooses and cuts the leather pieces used in the upper part of a shoe.
On January 16, 1891, aged 21, he signed up for 12 years in the British Army, serving in the Oxfordshire Light Infantry.
In 1899 he sailed from Southampton to join the British, Australian, and other imperial troops fighting in the Boer War and was promoted to sergeant while on board ship.
The diary starts on December 21, 1899, the day before Frederick Roseblade sailed to war, and records in great detail his actions and thoughts from when he arrived in Cape Town on January 14, 1900, through to September 1900.
Devastating defeats The Boer War had started in October 1899, when the Orange Free State and Transvaal declared war on Britain.
Events went badly for the British, the Boers besieging Mafeking, Kimberley, and Ladysmith and, in ""Black Week'' The retiring sergeant This card is possibly from the men of Roseblade's regiment, wishing him good luck in civilian life.
In the photograph Roseblade is wearing the Queen's South Africa Medal and the King's South Africa Medal.
The Queen's South Africa Medal Roseblade's own medal is lost, but would have had three of the clasps on this example, showing he had fought at Paardeberg, Driefontein, and in Transvaal.
His also had a Kimberley clasp. in December 1899, defeating three columns of troops sent to lift the sieges.
The British commander, General Sir Red vers B uller, was relieved of his command and replaced by Field Marshal Viscount Roberts, with General Kitchener as his chief-of-staff.
Roberts advanced toward Kimberley and then headed east to capture the capital of the Orange Free State, Bloemfontein.
Into action On February 12, Roberts' columns left Enslin in the Northern Cape to march to Bloemfontein.
Each day started early, around 5:00am, the troops covering around 10 miles by mid-morning before it became too hot to march.
On February 15, Roseblade records meeting Kitchener, who was encouraging his men as they moved heavy guns to the top of a koppie, a small hill rising out of the veldt, in order to shell Boer positions.
On February 18, Roseblade took part in the bloody battle of Paardeberg.
The Boer army led by General Piet Cronje was attempting to retreat across the Modder River but had found its way blocked by British cavalry led by Brigadier General John French, who had raced back after successfully lifting the siege of Kimberley.
Kitchener ordered a frontal attack on the Boer positions on Paardeberg Hill, in which Roseblade took part.
As the casualties mounted, Roseblade held his position as the British pounded the enemy with heavy guns.
ROSEBLADE ON THE AFTERMATH OF PAARDEBERG, FEBRUARY 28, 1900 Day-by-day account of the war Frederick Roseblade kept his war diary in a small notebook, writing his neat entries on every page.
A different kind of war That day at Paardeberg was the fiercest fighting Roseblade and his regiment experienced on their tour of duty in South Africa.
On February 27, Cronje and his army of 4,000 were finally forced to surrender to the vastly superior British force.
Thereafter, Roseblade played a less dramatic role in the war as the Boers avoided pitched battle and waged a guerrilla campaign against Lord Roberts' troops.
The diary continues to record various skirmishes with the enemy, but it is dominated by descriptions of long marches, cold, hunger, and thirst.
Roseblade got back to England in August 1902, just after the war had ended.
He was discharged on January 15, 1903, having completed 12 years' service, and went back to his trade in Northampton, where he married in February 1908.
Rivers were frequently polluted by the bodies of dead men, horses, and mules from earlier battles.
Dysentery killed many British troops on Lord Roberts' march to Bloemfontein.
Teddy Roosevelt's Rough Riders The Rough Riders were one of three voluntary cavalry regiments raised in 1898 during the SpanishAmerican War.
They were also called the Weary Walkers as they invariably fought on foot.
By the end of the 19th century the United States had become a major naval and trading power in the Caribbean and the Pacific.
AMERICAN EXPANSION In 1867 the United States purchased Alaska from the Russian government for $7. million, confirming its role as a Pacific power.
In 1867 it annexed the island of Midway, in the central Pacific, and gained rights to open a naval base at Pearl Harbor, Hawaii.
THE SPANISH EMPIRE By the end of the 19th century the Spanish Empire had shrunk to just Cuba and Puerto Rico in the Caribbean, the Philippines in eastern Asia, and Guam and other islands in the western Pacific.
Discontent with Spanish rule led to a war for independence, from 1868 to 1878, and a further uprising that began in 1895.
ANTI-SPANISH SLOGAN Spanish-American War Although known to history as the Spanish-American War of 1898, the conflict could, more appropriately, be called the Spanish-American-Cuban-Filipino War, as four different parties were involved in a conflict that occurred in two places on opposite sides of the world.
T he Cuban rebellion of 1895 was caused by growing discontent with incompetent Spanish rule and resentment against restrictions placed by Spain on Cuban trade.
Aiming to isolate the rebels from the rest of the population and to cut off their supplies, he set up a series of fortified towns , protected by Spanish troops, in which to intern the rural population.
Intended as havens, these towns were effectively concentration camps in which, within a year, some 300,000 Cubans died of starvation and disease, an atrocity that caused an outcry in the US, where Cuban emigres were agitating for intervention.
Some politicians believed that Cuban independence would increase trade between the two nations and thought it their duty as democrats to support the island's struggle for independence.
The ship had arrived at the end of January, allegedly to offer protection to the 8,000 American citizens in Cuba.
A United States naval enquiry was unable to pin responsibility on anyone in particular, but Spanish culpability was assumed, which gave the Americans the justification for military action that they required.
The United States Congress called for war against Spain, which began on April 21.
The United States Asiatic Squadron, which lacked a base of its own in the Far East, was ordered to proceed from its anchorage off China to engage the Spanish in the Philippines.
Commanded by Commodore George Dewey, the six warships and three support vessels entered Manila Bay on the night of April 30, opening fire on the moored Spanish fleet at dawn the next day.
Despite concerns about lack of ammunition, and facing attack from shore batteries, the United States made swift work of the Spanish, destroying six of their seven ships by midday; the seventh was scuttled by its captain.
With the Spanish navy neutralized, United States and Filipino troops overran the Philippines, but collaboration between the two allies ended on August 13 when the United States took the Philippine capital, Manila.
Determined to keep the port as a base for their fleet, the Americans prevented Filipino troops from entering the city, an event that outraged the Filipinos and led to the Philippine-American War . salute.
Captain Glass informed the officer that they were at war, then took him prisoner and sent him back to the island under escort to discuss surrender terms.
The next day the 54 Spanish infantry stationed on the island were disarmed and Guam was taken.
The Caribbean In Cuba the United States planned to capture the city of Santiago de Cuba, in the far southeast, and to destroy the main Spanish army and fleet stationed there.
On July 1 some 15,000 United States troops and 4,000 rebel Cuban forces attacked Spanish positions at El Caney and San Juan Hill in the hills overlooking Santiago.
The United States force included regular infantry and cavalry regiments, AfricanAmerican regiments (notably the Buffalo Soldiers), and the 1st Volunteer Cavalry, known as the Rough Riders.
The latter were recruited, trained, and led by Theodore Roosevelt, who had recently resigned as Assistant Secretary to the Navy in the United States government to fight in the war.
That main attack was difficult, as the heat was intense and the Spanish, secure in their trenches on the hill, were excellent marksmen.
The Rough Riders took the first target, the smaller Kettle Hill, during the day, and eventually United States infantry managed to cut through the barbed wire surrounding the Spanish positions and take San Juan Hill.
USS Maine commemorative plate The sinking of the USS Maine in Havana harbor in 1898 became a rallying call for Americans to support the war against Spain.
THE AMERICAN PHILIPPINES In August 1898 11,000 United States troops arrived in the Philippines to replace the departing Spanish.
The ensuing war with Filipino rebels left 1 million Filipino civilians dead.
The United States won the war in 1902, but resistance continued until 1913.
The island became independent in 1902, the United States gaining a perpetual lease on the naval base at Guantanamo Bay.
The new Cuban constitution gave the United States the right to supervise Cuban affairs, but the Americans relinquished this in return fora trade deal in 1934.
THE EXPANDING EMPIRE The year after the war ended, the United States gained control of the eastern Samoan islands in the south Pacific.
United States support for Panama in 1903 secured Panama's independence from Colombia, and the new government gave the United States ownership of a thin strip of land across the isthmus on which to build the Panama Canal.
V At sea the United States navy and marines secured Guantanamo Bay as a base in early June, and the United States fleet sailed on to blockade the main Spanish fleet anchored at Santiago de Cuba.
On July 3 the six ships of the Spanish fleet tried to evade the blockade but were caught and either destroyed or grounded by United States firepower.
To the east, on Puerto Rico, a squadron of 12 United States ships bombarded the capital, San Juan, on May 12 and blockaded its harbor.
Approximately 3,300 United States troops landed in July and encountered some resistance, but military actions were suspended when peace was agreed on August 12.
The number of United States casualties during the naval attack on the Spanish fleet in Manila Bay.
In the western Pacific Captain Henry Glass on board the cruiser USS Charleston was ordered to capture the island of Guam.
When he arrived on April 20, he fired a few cannon rounds at Forta Santa Cruz, and a Spanish officer, not knowing that war had been declared, came out to ask for some gunpowder so that he could return the American The Battle of Manila Bay George Dewey's United States Asiatic Squadron destroyed the Spanish fleet at Cavite naval yard in Manila Bay.
The Spanish commander, Patricio Montojo, anchored his ships at harbor to give his men a better chance of escape.
Following civil war in 1863-68, Japan's restored imperial regime built a powerful navy and modern army, and pursued an aggressive foreign policy.
The Russo-Japanese War The first major war of the 20th century, this 1904-05 conflict propelled Japan to the front rank of modern world powers.
Japan employed tactics and weapons that were next seen in World War I, NEW LANDS and its victory was the first, in modern times, of a non-Western nation over a European one.
Between 1871 and 1900 Japan acquired an empire in east Asia, gaining the Ryukyu and Bonin islands in the Pacific, and the Kuril Islands to the northeast of Japan.
GROWING TENSION Russia viewed Japan's influence over Korea with great concern, while Japan was alarmed when Russia secured a lease from China on the Liaotung Peninsula of Manchuria in 1898 and built a naval base there at Port Arthur.
When Russia stationed troops throughout Manchuria in 1900 and built a railroad linking Port Arthur to Siberia, the tension heightened.
LATE 19TH-CENTURY JAPANESE TELESCOPE I n 1903 armed conflict between Russia and Japan became inevitable when Russia refused to carry out an agreement undertaken in the Boxer Rebellion of 1900 to witlidraw from Manchuria.
Russia sought a warm-water port with access to the Pacific for its navy and maritime trade—Russia's recently built port of Vladivostok on the Sea of Japan was ice-bound in winter—so Russia had no intention of leaving Port Arthur.
In February 1904 Admiral Togo Heihachiro launched a surprise night-time attack on Russia's First Pacific Squadron at Port Arthur.
Ten Japanese destroyers fired their Whitehead torpedoes at the Russian ships, but no ships were actually sunk.
With Russian searchlights sweeping the sea, the attack had to be called off.
Japan blockaded the port, but had no choice now but to plan a long land siege of Port Arthur.
There followed four months of bloody fighting in a new Thousands of Japanese died in a hail of Maxim machine-gun fire in repeated attempts to take this strategic hill.
The Japanese launched mass infantry attacks against Russian troops dug in on hilltop positions heavily fortified with barbed wire, after first pounding the Russian positions with heavy guns.
The key hill was the highest one—203 Meter Hill—overlooking the harbor.
Meanwhile, on August 10, 1904, the Russian First Pacific Squadron had boldly steamed out of Port Arthur into the Yellow Sea to join the rest of the Russian fleet at Vladivostok.
The Japanese Fifth Army crossed the mountains to the west of the city and attacked the Russian left flank before the main Japanese assault began against the Russian centre and right flank.
The ensuing bloody battle raged for 19 days, with the Japanese held back by withering Russian machine-gun fire.
Both sides used forward observers linked by telephone to rear gunners, so they could direct them to fire on targets out of their sight.
At last the stalemate broke as the Russian troops, unable to resist the flanking Japanese, withdrew to the north.
With all Manchuria now in its hands, Japan had won the land war decisively, despite great losses.
End of an era Japan's victory over Russia in the 1904-05 war ended centuries of European assumption of racial superiority.
It was gained largely because the Japanese forces were better led, trained, and motivated than the Russians.
China leases Port Arthur to Russia Feb 8,1904: Japanese bombard Russian fleet in Port Arthur harbor KEY Japan and Korea QING Russia CHINA To Russia 1898, to Japan 1905 Frontiers 1895 Japanese advance/landing Route of Russian Baltic Fleet 1905 Railroad line Japanese victory and later that day four Japanese battleships and two cruisers caught up and attacked.
In the rapid exchange of fire that followed, Togo's flagship, the Mikasa, one of the most advanced battleships in the world, was struck many times, but greater damage was done to the Russian flagship, the Tsesarevich, when two shells hit her bridge, killing Rear Admiral Vitgeft and all his senior officers.
Eventually, with night falling and no hope of escaping the Japanese ships, most of the Russian ships returned to Port Arthur.
Russian troops Fushan RUSSIA occupy Manchuria Vladivostok 'alu River V Apr 27-May 1,1905 Yellow Sea ' Wonsan Seoul KOREA 1905: Japanese protectorate 1910: Japanese crown colony Sea of Japan ■Japanese Sea Aug 14,1904 Kyushu Honshu JAPAN Tok v° Yokohama Russians had lost a battleship and two cruisers.
Four of their ships, including the Tsesarevich, found sanctuary in neutral ports, where they were held for the rest of the war.
Neither would the small Russian fleet that was stationed at Vladivostok.
This fleet had steamed into the Sea of Japan to meet the squadron but was chased back by the Japanese with the loss of a cruiser.
The war on land While the siege of Port Arthur was taking place, Japanese troops overran Korea, then, pushing aside a Russian force on the Yalu River, moved into Manchuria in May 1904.
At Liaoyang in August, 125,000 Japanese faced 158,000 Russians reinforced with a corps that had come in on the Trans-Siberian Railway.
The Japanese aggressively repulsed two Russian assaults, but the results were indecisive, as the Japanese lost some 23,000 men and the Russians around 18,000.
General Kuropatkin, retreated north to the Manchurian capital of Mukden.
Here, in February-March 1905, the major land battle of the war took place.
The forces involved were vast, with THOUSAND Russians were killed at the Battle of Mukden.
JAPAN AND KOREA After the war Japan assumed responsibility for Korea's foreign policy and dominated Korea's economy.
UNREST IN RUSSIA Russia's failure led directly to revolt at home, as discontent with the war—combined with Tsar Nicholas ll's refusal to allow reforms, the increasing distress among industrial workers, and the over-taxed rural peasantry—saw protests break out in January 1905.
The tsar made some concessions after a imperial Russian general strike, but the crest revolt went on into 1906.
Two months later Togo inflicted a crushing defeat on the Russian fleet in the Tsushima Strait between Japan and Korea —a defeat that forced Russia's government, now facing a workers' revolt at home, to seek a humiliating peace treaty.
AFTER The war seriously weakened Russia and strengthened Japan's influence in East Asia.
PEACE TREATY United States mediation led to the signing in September 1905 of the Treaty of Portsmouth, by which Japan and Russia both agreed to leave Manchuria, while Russia handed over the Liaotung Peninsula to Japan, as well as the southern half of the island of Sakhalin, north of Japan.
Russia's ambitions in East Asia were at an end, Japan now dominated the region, and the United States had emerged as a world power prepared to intervene and mediate in the affairs of other countries around the world.
KEY BATTLE Tsushima The war between Russia and Japan reached an epic climax at the end of May 1905 with the two-day naval battle in the Tsushima Strait between Japan and Korea.
The battle of Tsushima was the greatest and most costly encounter at sea since Trafalgar on the other side of the world almost exactly a century earlier.
It was also the first, and last, great naval action of the ironclad, pre-dreadnought era.
T he outbreak of war between Russia and Japan saw most of the Russian fleet stationed over 20,000 miles away, in the Baltic Sea.
The decision was taken to send most of these ships halfway round the world to engage the Japanese.
They left port on October 15, 1904 under the command of Admiral Rozhdestvenski and headed out across the Baltic.
After seven months Rozhdestvenski's fleet crossed the Indian Ocean to reach Van Fong Bay in French Indochina, and prepared for battle.
It consisted of eight battleships, eight cruisers, nine destroyers, and three smaller craft.
This was an impressive number but their quality was dubious, with most vessels obsolete in design and suffering from inferior leadership and gunnery when compared with Admiral Togo Heihachiro's Japanese fleet of 4 battleships, 27 cruisers, 21 destroyers, and 16 torpedo boats.
Ready and waiting By the time Rozhdestvenski reached Van Fong Bay, Port Arthur had fallen to the Japanese and the Russian fleet trapped there had been captured.
Running short of coal, Rozhdestvenski opted for the most direct and risky route there, through the Tsushima Strait, where Togo and his fleet lay in wait.
Immediately informed by the new radio technology, Togo prepared his attack.
Using his greater speed and tactical awareness, he maneuvered his fleet into a line while the Russians, suffering from confused orders and poor seamanship, remained huddled in a group.
Togo rules the waves The Japanese used their better speed, training, and range-finding technology to deadly effect.
Their high-explosive shells smashed into the Russian ships, with devastating effect.
Four Russian battleships were sunk, Rozhdestvenski's flagship Knyaz Suvorov was hit, and the Russian admiral himself was seriously wounded, yielding command to the inexperienced Admiral Nebogatov.
Japanese destroyers and torpedo boats continued the assault through the night and at 10:30am on May 28, Nebogatov surrendered those ships under his immediate command while the Japanese continued to hunt down the rest.
Twenty-eight Russian ships had entered the strait, but only three made it to Vladivostok.
Of the rest, 17 were sunk, 5 were captured, and 3 headed south for the Philippines. , KnyazJ Suvoro\ s (Dslyabya Japanese inflict more damage on disorganized Russian fleet Russian line reforms and heads north_ Togo turns fleet to bring it parallel with the Russians Japanese pursuit continues through night __ In fog and smoke \ the two fleets lose sight of each other.
AI ex ci i l ^fijTOGO * |T| ROZh Japanese turn to avoid torpedoes Russian battleship Oslyabya sunk.
Within a few decades, further wars stripped the empire of almost all its European and African territories and caused great instability throughout the region.
The decline of the Ottoman empire accelerated during the 19th century as its peoples struggled for independence and Russian influence rose across the Balkans.
EUROPEAN LOSSES The Ottoman empire lost its first European domains in 1817, when Serbia gained autonomy.
Pro-Ottoman Egyptian forces retook the country in 1825, but when the Ottomans rejected mediation with Russia in 1827, Britain and France, sent a combined fleet that destroyed the Egyptian navy at Navarino.
Britain and France supported the Ottomans and attacked Russian-held Crimea.
The war ended in 1856 with an Ottoman victory, but it was only a temporary reprieve. rowing nationalism and a desire for independence led to uprisings against Ottoman rule in Bosnia and Herzegovina in 1875 and Bulgaria in 1876.
Its ""Bulgarian atrocities"" outraged European opinion and gave Russia the excuse to declare war on behalf of its fellow Orthodox Christians in July 1877.
A Turkish force led by General Osman Pasha marched north to reinforce and defend the town, but on learning that the town had been bombed into submission before it could be relieved, he occupied the Bulgarian town of Plevna in July and quickly increased its fortifications by setting up gun emplacements for his modern Krupp artillery.
General Schuldner's Russian army was unaware of what Pasha was doing and when the Russians were ordered to occupy the city, they were not in a position to do so.
A lengthy siege began, the 400,000-strong Ottoman army surrounded by 100,000 Russians.
After many unsuccessful assaults, Russian reinforcements eventually tipped the balance, and Pasha surrendered in December.
Russian forces then headed for Constantinople, causing the Ottoman sultan to sue for peace.
Greater Bulgaria The peace treaty was signed at San Stefano, outside the Ottoman capital, in March 1878.
Its terms created a large, autonomous Bulgaria, although the country was to be occupied by Russian troops for two years, with an outlet Siege of Adrianople This series of battles, led primarily by the Bulgarians and aided by Serbia, proved to be the decisive actions of the First Balkan War.
El First and Second Balkan Wars Dates 1912-13 Location Macedonia, Greece, Albania, Bulgaria, Aegean Sea U Russo-Turkish War Dates 1877-78 Location Romania, Bulgaria El Italo-Turkish War Dates 1911-12 Location Libya Massacre at Montkrik The Ottoman empire dealt severely with its enemies, as this depiction of the massacre at Montkirk in Serbia illustrates.
Both sides carried out similar atrocities. through Macedonia to the Aegean Sea.
Serbia, Montenegro, and Romania received their independence, while BosniaHerzegovina was granted self-rule, and Russia gained territory on both sides of the Black Sea.
News of this treaty caused concern among the major European powers, as it created a large pro-Russian state at the heart of the Balkans, giving Russia huge influence throughout the region.
European diplomats hurriedly met in Berlin and in July enforced a new settlement.
Under the revised agreement Bulgaria was reduced in size and divided into three separate regions, Austria-Hungary occupied Bosnia-Herzegovina, Russia handed over its gains on the western shore of the Black Sea to Romania, and in a secret clause Britain occupied Cyprus.
The outcome was to have long-lasting effects, for the Ottoman empire was severely weakened and Bulgaria was embittered at losing so much territory.
Greece took the province of Thessaly in 1881, while the island of Crete, though effectively under Greek control, became self-ruled in 1898.
In 1908 the Young Turks reform movement—a group of exiled liberals— took power in the Ottoman empire after widespread army mutinies and forced the sultan to reintroduce the liberal constitution of 1876 and convene parliament.
With the empire in turmoil as liberal reformers and traditional Islamic leaders tussled for power, its enemies pounced.
Austria-Hungary annexed Bosnia-Herzegovina, while Bulgaria, having already recovered part of its lost San Stefano lands, now declared full independence.
The final decline In 1909 hardline Islamic elements staged a coup in support of the sultan.
When Albania rose up in revolt in 1911, Italy took the opportunity to seize Libya in North Africa, bombarding Tripoli and other coastal ports and defeating Ottoman armies at Derna and Sidi Bilal in 1912.
Targets were also bombed from the air for the first time when an Italian pilot dropped grenades from his aircraft onto the Ottoman camp near the Taguira oasis.
The Italian navy then threatened Constantinople before withdrawing to seize the Dodecanese Islands, including Rhodes, in the Aegean.
The war with Italy gave Serbia, Montenegro, Bulgaria, and Greece the opportunity to form an alliance and, in October 1912, attack Ottoman-controlled Macedonia.
The Allies were able to muster approximately 340,000 troops, with a similar number in reserve, and had the advantage of Greek naval control in the Aegean Sea, which prevented the movement of Ottoman soldiers to the Balkans.
They also had the benefit of superior leadership, although 240,000 Ottoman troops matched them in courage and stamina.
As the Greek army moved north, defeating the Turks at Venije in November, the Serbs moved south, forcing the Ottomans to evacuate the Macedon capital of Skopje and retreat to the heights of Monastir.
Here, on November 5, the Serbs attacked the recently reinforced Ottoman army but were repelled with great losses.
However, the Turkish center was so weak that a renewed Serbian frontal attack broke through.
As the Greeks approached from the south, Ottoman resistance collapsed and nearly 20,000 soldiers were killed or captured.
Four days later the strategic Ottoman garrison of Salonika surrendered to the Greeks.
To the east the Bulgarians moved into Thrace and besieged Constantinople, while a joint Bulgarian and Serbia force seized Adrianople.
By the provisional Treaty of London, signed in May 1913, the Ottoman empire lost all its European possessions to the four victors except for a narrow strip of land alongside the Turkish Straits, and Albania, which was declared an independent state.
I Italians bombed the Turkish railway station of Karaagac in October 1912 and then used bombs with x-shaped tails and impact detonators during the siege of Adrianople in 1913.
Bulgaria, however, felt aggrieved about its limited gains in Macedonia and in July attacked Serbia and Greece.
The Romanians advanced towards Sofia, the Bulgarian capital, while the Ottomans regained Adrianople in Thrace, thus preserving a foothold in Europe.
Bulgarian resistance quickly collapsed, and by the Treaty of Bucharest, signed in August, it had lost most of its Macedonian gains of the first war as well as some territory to Romania.
YOUNG TURK ENVER BEY, AT A RALLY IN SALONICA, MACEDONIA, JULY 23, 1908 Mosaic signature of Abdul Hamid Abdul Hamid II was the 34th Sultan of the Ottoman Empire but he inherited a power in decline.
WAR IN THE BALKANS AFTER The effect of the first and second Balkan Wars was felt almost immediately, as the wars soon turned global.
SARAJEVO Serb nationalists had opposed the Austrian takeover of Bosnia-Herzegovina in 1878 and sought to incorporate the province into a greater Serbia.
On June 28,1914, Serb nationalist Gavrilo Princip assassinated the heir to the Austrian throne in the Bosnian capital, Sarajevo.
The Austrians blamed the Serb government and declared war at the end of July.
The third Balkan War soon became global, as European alliances came to their allies' support, which resulted in gavrilo World War 1260-61 ». princip's pistol THE OTTOMANS AT WAR The Ottoman empire entered World War I alongside Germany and Austria against Russia, in the hope of regaining some of its lost territories.
Although successful in repelling an Anglo-French attack at Gallipoli in 1915, the Ottomans were weakened by the Arab revolt in 1916 and by British advances through Mesopotamia and Palestine, finally asking for peace in the last weeks of the war.
The Ottoman empire collapsed in 1922 and a Turkish republic was established in 1923.
THE RED CRESCENT After witnessing the aftermath of the battle of Solferino in 1859, Henri Dunant founded the Red Cross movement.
His aim was to provide neutral and impartial help to relieve suffering in times of war.
While the red cross emblem has no religious meaning, the symbol reminded soldiers from the Ottoman empire of the crusaders of the Middle Ages and so, in 1876, in countries where the population was largely Muslim, the emblem of the red crescent was adopted as an alternative.
Most Allied bombing raids in Italy were designed to disrupt German communications.
Elsewhere in Europe bombers targeted industrial complexes and the civilian populations of cities.
ERA OF THE WORLD WARS 1914-1945 World War I and World War II had their origins in the mistrust between Germany and its rivals in Europe.
Both wars spread to involve other theaters of war beyond Europe, and World War II became an even wider conflict when Japan launched an attack on the United States and its allies in the Pacific.
BRITISH TORPEDO, WORLD WAR II ERA OF TH E WORLD WARS 1914-1945 B etween 1914 and 1945 the world's major powers twice clashed in total war.
The entire resources of modern states were devoted to the destruction of their enemies with little or no moral limit on the means employed.
Together, World War I and World War II probably cost at least 70 million lives.
World War I The war that broke out in 1914 was one that European states had long anticipated.
The principal combatants— France, Britain, Russia, and Germany—soon found themselves in an attritional stalemate.
Once trenches were dug, the defense held the advantage over the offense.
Industrialized Europe was able to supply its millions of soldiers with unprecedented firepower, and massive casualties were inevitable.
The deadlock extended to the sea, where submarines and mines unexpectedly inhibited the operations of the mighty battle fleets.
The strategic situation changed when the United States entered the war in 1917, bringing the stalemate to an end.
New offensive tactics were developed with better coordination between advancing infantry and artillery.
Tanks and aircraft, though still primitive, provided a glimpse of a more mobile form of warfare to come.
Although Europe was the crucial battlefield, war spread to other theaters, notably the Middle East where Ottoman Turkey fought as Germany's ally.
Hopes that this might have been the ""war to end wars,"" however, soon proved vain.
In the postwar chaos, movements arose in Europe embracing aggressive, nationalist militarism—Fascism in Italy, Nazism in Germany.
Conflict renewed In Asia in the 1930s Japan began a campaign of expansion at the expense of China.
The end of World War I proved to have been merely a truce in an ongoing global conflict.
World War II began in 1937 in China, 1939 in Europe, and 1941 in the Pacific.
Tanks and motorized infantry provided the mobility that World War I armies had lacked, with improved aircraft supporting them as aerial artillery.
Both sides used strategic bombing to disrupt the enemy's industrial production and demoralize civilian populations.
Aircraft carriers revolutionized naval warfare, ending the reign of the battleship, and amphibious operations were developed on an unprecedented scale.
The changing face of war Germany and Japan won stunning early victories, but in the long run they had no answer to the superior productive power and human resources of the United States and the Soviet Union.
World War II was fought with equipment more advanced than, but not radically different from, that used in World War I But, as the conflict drew to a close, technological developments were transforming the military scene.
The first jet aircraft, experiments with guided weapons, ballistic missiles such as the German V2, and above all the dropping of atomic bombs on Japanese cities, marked the start of a new era in warfare.
B-l 7 bombers en route to Germany The United States 8th Airforce, stationed in Britain from 1942, flew daylight raids, targeting factories, oil refineries, airfields, and other strategic installations in Nazi Germany.
Until long-range fighter escorts were introduced in late 1943, the missions suffered heavy losses.
German Jagdpanzer, World War II The Jagdpanzer, or tank destroyer, was an anti-tank gun mounted on a tank chassis with heavy sloping armor at the front.
JULY APRIL Austria-Hungary declares Germany makes first effective war on Serbia. use of poison gas at second AUGUST battle of Ypres.
Allied troops, including ANZAC forces, Germany declares war on land at Gallipoli.
Russia and France; German troops enter Belgium; Britain declares war on Germany.
Germans drive British and French out of Belgium and defeat Russians at Tannenberg.
APRIL Anglo-Indian troops surrender to Turkish forces at Kut in Mesopotamia.
MAY British and German fleets meet in the North Sea in the indecisive battle of Jutland.
NOVEMBER Battle of the Somme ends, with over half a million casualties.
APRIL Failure of the French Nivelle offensive on the Aisne is followed by mutinies in the French army.
JUNE 1919 Treaty of Versailles imposes territorial losses, arms limitations, and financial reparations on Germany.
United States recruiting poster ft German offensive 1918 MARCH Treaty of Brest-Litovsk gives Germany control of large area of former Russian empire.
OCTOBER British troops begin an attack on German forces at Passchendaele.
A German and Austrian offensive at Caporetto drives the Italian army into flight.
AUGUST British-led offensive on the Amiens front initiates final phase of the war on the Western Front.
DECEMBER The Bolsheviks open peace negotiations with Germany at Brest-Litovsk.
NOVEMBER Germany signs an armistice and fighting stops on the Western Front.
France begins construction of the Maginot j Line on its border with Germany.
NOVEMBER 1921 The Washington Naval Conference opens; the major naval powers agree limitations to fleet sizes.
USS Texas, a World War I battleship » World War I gas shell MAY 1925 In Morocco, Abd el-Krim's Rif rebellion is crushed by the Spanish and French Foreign Legions.
APRIL 1930 The London Naval Treaty, agreed by the major naval powers, sets new limits on naval forces. leader of the Kuomintang Nationalists, enters into JUNE 1922 In Ireland civil war follows an agreement between Britain and Irish republicans that ends the Irish War of Independence.
The Soviet Union joins the attack on Poland, which is defeated within four weeks.
OCTOBER The British battleship Royal Oak is sunk by a German U-boat in Scapa Flow.
DECEMBER The German battlecruiser Graf Spee is scuttled after battle of the River Plate.
SEPTEMBER 1938 German claims on the Sudetenland bring Europe to the brink of war, but agreement is reached at the Munich Conference.
FEBRUARY The German Afrika Korps under En/vin Rommel arrives in North Africa.
Jk ^ Japanese poster celebrating victory over Western powers FEBRUARY Singapore Island falls to the Japanese.
Germany changes strategy and starts bombing campaign against London and other British cities—the Blitz.
NOVEMBER United States bombers begin daylight raids on Japan from bases in the Marianas.
Japanese pilots carry out mass kamikaze attacks on Allied fleet. f; Mustang, United States fighter escort on bombing raids ^ Soviet sniper's rifle NOVEMBER British torpedo aircraft attack the Italian fleet in harbor at Taranto.
MAY In Italy the German Gustav FEBRUARY Axis forces in Tunisia surrender Line is finally broken with an Allied bombers destroy to the Allies.
Engaged in an arms' race, the two blocs drew up plans for fighting one another.
Outbreak of World War I EUROPE'S ALLIANCES France and Russia had allied with each other in 1894.
Britain formed a Triple Entente with France and Russia from 1907, and developed military cooperation with France.
Eager to strike the rising force of Slav nationalism, the AustroHungarian government blamed Serbia for the archduke's assassination and declared war on July.
Efficient rail networks allowed countries to move troops rapidly to assembly points near the frontiers.
EUROPE All the major European powers went to war in the summer of 1914 with plans for rapid offensives in pursuit of swift victory.
Generals were convinced that all-out attack would triumph over defense.
They were proved wrong, although Germany came close to striking a decisive blow in France. neutral Belgium, while fighting a holding action in the east.
Committed to this plan, German leaders brushed aside last-minute peace moves that might have interfered with their military deployment.
The country declared war on Russia on August 1 and on France on August 3.
Despite having a secret agreement to aid France in a war with Germany, Britain's Liberal government would have had difficulty 12 MILLION The number of reservists at hand to the French, Germans, Russians, and Austro-Hungarians in 1914. leading the country into the war had it not been for the German invasion of Belgium.
It was as a treaty guarantor of Belgian neutrality that Britain declared war on Germany on August 4.
Flag-waving crowds greeted the declarations of war in all the combatant capital cities.
Although many people did German occupation of Belgium German soldiers occupy Brussels on August 20 1914.
The invasion ensured Britain's entry into the war. not share this enthusiasm, few opposed the war at its outset.
Political divisions were set aside for the moment—in Germany, for example, the Russian threat drove most opposition Social Democrats to support the war effort.
On the whole, the rapid mobilization of mass armies was achieved with great efficiency.
In Britain 750,000 men volunteered for military service within two months of the outbreak of war.
Thousands of trains—11,000 in Germany alone by mid-August— working to precise timetables, carried about six million men to railheads near the frontiers.
The British Expeditionary W ithin just one week, AustriaHungary's attack on Serbia became a general European conflict.
All the continental powers were caught up in an arms' race with elaborate hopes to expand their armies whenever war threatened.
Hundreds of thousands of reservists (men who had previously been given military training) were called up from civilian life.
This process of mobilization took time and was complicated; but no nation wanted to be left behind when its enemies sent their troops into the field.
On July 30 Russia announced plans to mobilize its army in support of Serbia.
Interpreting this mobilization as a threat, the German military leadership set in motion their long-established Schlieffen Plan for winning a war against Russia and France.
The Germans anticipated that Russia would be the slowest nation to mobilize its massive armies.
Faced with a war on two fronts, Germany planned to overpower France in a lightning offensive mounted through Eastern Front Date 1914 Location East Prussia, Poland, and the Carpathian Mountains n Western Front Date 1914 Location Belgium and northeastern France BRITAIN London North Sea Dover Bruges English Channel Dieppe Rouen Zeebrugge “ Ostend Calais | \ r 1 ry Ypres Brussels Boulogne Messines J Courtrai Neuve-Chapelle* Jr ^ Tournai loos.
C,™ Maps NETHERLANDS Antwerp 100km Diisseldorf Cologne Coblenz Key %, Albert % Amiens Mondidier Compiegne Chantilly Versailles Paris FRANCE Germany Allied states Neutral states Frontiers 1914 German advance Aug-Sep 1914 Furthest extent of German advance Front line Nov 1914 Major battle Force —a small professional force in contrast to the mass conscript armies on the Continent—shifted 100,000 men across the Channel and deployed them near the Franco-Belgian border.
At first the German offensive in the west, based as it was on optimistic assumptions, came surprisingly close to success.
Implementing their Schlieffen Plan, German forces advanced swiftly over Belgium, overcoming the resistance of forts at Liege and Namur with heavy Krupp guns.
The BEF, finding itself in the line of the German advance at Mons, was forced to retreat alongside its French allies.
Meanwhile, large-scale French offensives in Alsace and Lorraine were hugely costly failures, the supposed elan of France's soldiers proving no match for heavy machinegun and artillery fire.
Failure of the Schlieffen Plan Helmuth Johann Ludwig von Moltke, Germany's chief of general staff, now began to advance his forces south from Belgium, intending to surround the French armies engaged in eastern France.
Days of marching exhausted his footsore infantry, and his supply lines, dependent upon horse-drawn transport, became overextended.
The line of advance also exposed his right flank to the Paris garrison.
General Joseph Joffre, pulled forces back from the eastern frontier to confront the invading soldiers, while General Joseph Gallieni, in charge of the defense of Paris, sent an army to attack the German flank.
The combined counter-offensive, Germany's attack on France and Belgium To avoid striking France's border defenses head on, the Schlieffen Plan provided for France to be attacked via neutral Belgium.
In the event, German troops overran much of northern France but failed to reach Paris.
East Prussia, Germany hastily transferred two army corps from the Western Front—a contributory factor in the failure of the Schlieffen Plan.
General Erich Ludendorff, achieved an overwhelming victory at Tannenberg in East Prussia at the end of August.
They killed or injured some 40,000 Russian troops, and took some 100,000 prisoner.
Meanwhile, Germany's Austro-Hungarian allies suffered reverses against the Russians in the Austrian province of Galicia, and also failed to overcome the Serbs.
Race to the Sea On the Western Front in September 1914, there was still clear space for maneuver between the Aisne and the northern coast of France.
SHAWYER OF THE RIFLE BRIGADE, AUGUST 1914 known as the First Battle of the Marne, drove the Germans back to the Aisne River in northeastern France.
Believing that the collapse of the Schlieffen Plan meant that the war was lost, von Moltke suffered a nervous breakdown and was replaced as Germany's principal commander by Erich von Falkenhayn.
Meanwhile, on the Eastern Front, German calculations had been upset by the unexpected speed of Russian mobilization.
Faced with the Russian forces advancing into its province of Scarlet and blue—France's army in 1914 French troops went to war in 1914 in colorful and all-too-visible uniforms and soft hats.
Soon they and all armies would be wearing duller shades of camouflage clothing, topped with protective steel helmets.
A F T E sides clashed and then dug themselves into defensive positions to protect themselves from each other.
Stalemate The Germans fought successfully to overcome remaining Belgian resistance around Antwerp, but ran into French and British forces in Flanders in October.
There followed a series of vicious battles, known collectively as the First Battle of Ypres, which lasted into mid-November.
The sheer desperation and savagery of the fighting was typified by the deaths of 25,000 German student volunteers.
The onset of winter toward the end of 1914 brought a lull in the fighting on all fronts, with hopes of a rapid end to the war utterly dashed.
However, both sides still intended to fight until victory was won; few considered trying to make a compromise peace.
The fighting left German troops in control of almost all of Belgium and a swathe of northern France.
THE COST OF FIGHTING Casualties by the end of 1914 were tragically high.
Around one-third of the British soldiers sent to France had been killed.
Russia and Austria-Hungary each counted more than a million dead, wounded, or taken as prisoners of war.
ADAPTING TO MODERN WEAPONRY A contributory factor to the very high casualties in 1914 was the lack of adequate head protection for soldiers.
In 1915-16 steel helmets such as the British Brodie and the German Stahlhelm were universally adopted.
BRITISH STEEL HELMET WITH SHRAPNEL DAMAGE POLICY OF FEAR Ideas about civilized behavior in war had been disregarded.
The actions of German forces in Belgium outraged world opinion, and influenced the future policy of the United States.
Although atrocities were exaggerated by Allied propaganda, the Germans did pursue a policy of Schrecklichkeit to cow popular resistance.
V NORTHWEST EUROPE Millions of men fought and died on the Western Front between 1915 and 1917, with no apparent decisive result.
The front line in late 1917 had moved little from its position three years before.
A t the start of 1915 the opposing armies recognized the urgent need to mobilize maximum military and industrial resources for a long conflict.
Already France was struggling to find sufficient manpower for both factories and the front.
Britain created mass armies out of volunteers before resorting to conscription in the spring of 1916.
It also vastly expanded its war production—British output of shells, for instance, rose from 6 million in 1915 to 76 million in 1917.
German manpower had to be split between the Eastern and Western fronts.
Trench troops German soldiers wearing gas masks defend a trench in 1916.
Despite their new resources, the generals puzzled over how to win a war in which both sides were entrenched and maneuver had become impossible.
Through 1915 the French launched offensives in Artois and Champagne, the British at Neuve Chapelle and Loos, and the Germans at Ypres, to little effect.
A war of attrition In 1916 more troops, guns, and shells only served to increase the slaughter.
In the summer Britain's volunteer New Armies were blooded in a vast Allied offensive on the Somme.
The fighting here continued into November; at Verdun the battle lasted from February to December.
The Germans probably lost at least 800,000 dead and wounded, but British and French casualties in the two battles totalled over a million.
There were mistakes of generalship on all sides but the immensity of the losses was directly related to the size of the armies engaged, the duration of the battles, and the quantity of munitions.
Over the top At the Somme in 1916, Canadian troops emerge from their trenches with bayonets fixed.
BEFORE The failure of either side to achieve a decisive advantage by the end of 1914 left opposing forces dug into trenches on the Western Front.
IMPERIAL TROOPS By 1915 the British and French empires were becoming an important source of manpower on the Western Front—now virtually a continuous line from the north coast of France to neutral Switzerland—and elsewhere.
British Indian and French North African troops fought in the key battles of 1914.
Troops from Australia, New Zealand, and South Africa were initially used in Africa and the Middle East, but from 1916 became a highly respected presence on the Western Front.
ADVENT OF CHEMICAL WARFARE Although the land battles were dominated by the ever-increasing artillery forces on both sides, new weapons were also coming into use.
Chemical warfare began on a small scale in 1914, when France experimented with tear gas and Germany fired shells containing a chemical irritant.
The first lethal gas used was chlorine, released by the Germans at the Second Battle of Ypres in April 1915.
Other gases, including phosgene and mustard gas, followed and were eventually employed on a wide scale by both sides, causing large numbers of casualties.
GERMAN LIEUTENANT ERNST JUNGER, WRITING OF THE SOMME, SEPTEMBER 1916 Howitzers had shorter barrels than other artillery guns.
They were ideal for trench warfare because their shells flew in a high trajectory, dropping on top of a concealed enemy.
Aftermath of combat at Passchendaele Through 1917 persistent rain and the effects of artillery bombardment turned the Flanders battlefield into a wasteland of mud.
AFTER I _ J The stalemate on the Western Front led to a search both for new tactics that might deliver the elusive breakthrough and for alternative strategies for winning the war.
TANK WARFARE Tanks were first fielded by Britain at the Somme, but they were too slow and vulnerable to be effective.
More than one-third were lost in the first day's fighting and it proved impossible to exploit the initial breakthrough.
Nevertheless, Cambrai did point to the effective use of tanks by the Allies in 1918.
ALTERNATIVE STRATEGIES The Allies sought alternatives to the Western Front stalemate in fighting elsewhere, but only reproduced static trench warfare in new locations.
In 1918 the outcome of the war would be decided—as generals like Haig had always said—by great land battles in France.
Despite the evolution of the war into brute attrition, a decisive breakthrough was still the ultimate goal.
General Robert Nivelle was given command of the French Army in December 1916, promising an offensive that would win the war.
But when he launched his attack the following April it failed completely.
Nivelle was succeeded by Philippe Petain, the hero of Verdun, who focused on rebuilding morale.
Meanwhile, German forces, now under Hindenburg and his deputy, Ludendorff, settled for the defensive, even sacrificing territory in withdrawing to the Hindenburg Line.
Only Field Marshal Douglas Haig, the commander of the BEF, remained committed to a breakthrough, launching the Third Battle of Ypres in June 1917.
His forces made some progress but became bogged down in the Flanders mud, finally taking Passchendaele in November at immense cost and to no decisive effect.
A test of endurance Despite the repeated failure of offensives, warfare on the Western Front was not simply futile mass slaughter.
Armies strove to improve their fighting methods in search of a decisive advantage and experimented with new techniques and tactics.
The use of artillery in support of infantry improved, as did cooperation between air and land forces.
But the chief quality required of a soldier was endurance under near-intolerable conditions.
In trench warfare, however, howitzers were often mounted on siege platforms for firing.
About one When war broke out in Europe in 1914, it also ignited conflicts in the Pacific, Africa, and the Middle East, although much of the fighting was on a relatively small scale.
WAR IN THE FAR EAST Britain's ally since 1902, Japan declared war on Germany on August 23,1914.
It occupied German-ruled Pacific islands and fought a brief campaign to seize the German stronghold of Tsingtao on the Chinese coast.
Togo fell to the Allies at the start of the war and German South-West Africa was invaded and occupied by South African forces by mid-1915.
Any German resistance in Kamerun ended in 1916, but in German East Africa General Paul von LettowVorbeck fought an inspired guerrilla campaign and remained undefeated at the end of the war.
The Turkish military government of Enver Pasha had aligned itself with Germany before the war.
Britain had military control of Egypt, nominally part of the Ottoman empire, and deposed its pro-Turkish khedive, Abbas Hilmi, in December 1914.
Egypt served as a base for Allied operations in the eastern Mediterranean and its Suez Canal was a vital imperial lifeline.
The Wider War While stalemate prevailed on the Western Front, warfare raged across Southern and Eastern Europe, from the Italian Alps to the Baltic, and around the Ottoman empire from Gallipoli to Iraq.
Less advanced states with a doubtful hold on their people's loyalty began to collapse under the strain of modern war.
T he entry of the Ottoman empire into the war as an ally of Germany opened up new arenas for British, French, and Russian forces, in which political and military gains might offset lack of success in Europe.
A seemingly simple plan was conceived for Tnnmal British and French . warships to force a passage through the Stab in the back A French magazine depicts Serbia attacked from behind as it resists Austria-Hungary and Germany.
Dardanelles and bombard the capital, Constantinople , to bring about an Ottoman surrender.
But the warships came to grief on a combination of Turkish mines and land guns, forcing the Allies to change their plans.
Attacking the Ottoman empire A force of 75,000 soldiers, including Australian and New Zealand volunteers in the ANZAC Corps, was landed on the Gallipoli Peninsula on April 25,1915.
The landings were almost a success, but confusion and hesitation allowed the Turkish defenders to corner the Allied troops in narrow beachheads.
Fresh landings at Suvla Bay in August momentarily revived the campaign, but Turkish commander, Mustafa Kemal (who would later rule Turkey as Kemal Ataturk), determinedly resisted all Allied efforts.
The stalemated Allied force was evacuated in January 1916. / k The approximate percentage of casualties suffered by both sides in the Gallipoli campaign—a soldier had roughly a one in three chance of escaping unscathed.
A seaborne invasion of Ottoman-ruled Iraq by British and Indian troops in 1915 also led to initial disaster when the force was besieged at Kut and obliged to surrender in April 1916.
But in the Caucasus, Turkish forces were defeated by the Russians, who then invaded Anatolia.
The Turkish response was to launch a massacre of Armenians under the cloak of brutal deportations, costing more than one million men, women, and children their lives.
The Ottomans' Arab subjects revolted in 1916, aiding a British advance from Egypt into Palestine the following year.
The Turks suffered severe setbacks in 1917, Baghdad falling to the British in March and Jerusalem in December.
Defeated again by the British at the battle of Megiddo in September 1918, the Turks sought an armistice. theaters Serbians had held out in 1914, but in the fall of 1915 they faced a joint offensive by German and AustroHungarian forces, while also being invaded by Bulgaria; Serbia was inevitably overrun.
Italy entered the war in 1915 on the Allied side and fought a border war against Austria-Hungary at the foot of the Alps.
A series of failed offensives produced nothing but casualties until six divisions of experienced German troops effected a breakthrough at Caporetto in October 1917.
The Eastern Front Although Russia's opening attack on Germany was defeated at Tannenberg in September 1914, initial advances further south against the Austrians were more successful.
Both sides were badly trained, ill-equipped, and often incompetently commanded, yet the Russians captured much of Austria's province of Galicia later in 1914.
The Eastern Front was never as static as the Western Front, because the armies were spread out over a much larger area.
The Russians suffered heavy casualties in a series of battles against the Germans in 1915, losing large areas of territory in what are now Poland, Belarus and Lithuania.
However, the Russian armies still fought on and achieved by far their greatest success of the entire war with an offensive mounted by General Alexei Brusilov against the Austro-Hungarians in Galicia in the summer of 1916.
Brusilov's forces advanced some 60 miles before German troops arrived to halt their progress.
Romania, tempted to enter the war on the Allied side by the prospect of imminent victory, was also crushed by German forces in late 1916.
Revolution in Russia Brusilov's offensive had entailed huge casualties—probably half a million men killed or wounded.
The new Provisional Government tried to keep fighting, but in July the disastrous failure of the Kerensky offensive left the army in disarray.
Mutiny and desertion were rife as revolutionary soldiers' committees challenged the authority of officers.
The Bolsheviks signed an armistice with Germany at Brest-Litovsk in December and the following March reluctantly agreed to a punitive peace treaty giving up large areas of the former Russian empire. half or o Ottoman Turkish uniform Ottoman troops wore Germanstyle uniforms, apart from the distinctive kabalak helmet.
The Eastern Front Although pressed back by the Germans, Russia did not concede any decisive amount of territory until the Bolshevik revolution of October 1917 definitively undermined its war effort.
LAWRENCE An archeologist before the war, in 1915 Thomas Edward Lawrence was recruited as a British intelligence officer, based in Cairo.
Adopting Arab dress and customs, he fought alongside Feisal ibn Hussein, the future king of Iraq, in the Arab revolt of 1916-18 against Ottoman rule.
Lawrence and the Arab irregulars proved exceptionally gifted at guerrilla warfare and contributed to the defeat of the Turks in Palestine and Syria in 1918.
Lawrence felt that promises made to the Arabs in the war were not kept by the Allies in the postwar settlement.
The last Ottoman sultan was deposed in 1922 and Turkey became a republic.
Britain and France took control of the former Ottoman territories of Palestine and Syria.
Meanwhile, air warfare developed in all aspects, from fighter combat to strategic bombing.
BRITISH DREADNOUGHTS Germany's drive to challenge British dominance at sea began under Admiral Alfred von Tirpitz in 1898.
This provoked Britain to build ever bigger and more powerful battleships, beginning with HUS Dreadnought, launched in 1906.
The ship so outclassed all earlier battleships that these were dismissively referred to as pre-dreadnoughts.
The naval arms race now became so intense that by the outbreak of war in 1914, Germany had 24 modern dreadnoughts and battlecruisers to Britain's 34.
USE OF AIRCRAFT The first ever air attack was carried out in 1911 by an Italian plane in Libya.
In August 1914 the flimsy flying machines of all the combatants totalled just 500.
As the ship approached Ireland, it was struck by a torpedo fired by German submarine U-20.
The sinking of the Lusitania turned public opinion in the neutral United States decisively against Germany.
Germany claimed that the liner had been transporting war material; there was in fact some small-arms ammunition in the ship's hold.
I n 1914 the world's greatest naval power, Britain, entered a war that it had to win on land.
The Royal Navy was able to maintain a trade blockade of Germany, but although this severely weakened the Germans in the long run, it could not be decisive.
Alternatively, a naval catastrophe could have driven Britain out of the war.
Germany knew that if it could win command of the sea through the defeat of the British fleet, Britain would be unable to supply its army in France and might even be open to invasion by German land forces.
The Kriegsmarine sought opportunities to wear down the British fleet, in the hope of one day meeting it on equal terms and contesting maritime superiority.
It had to maintain its superiority over the Kriegsmarine, while also keeping vital British trade routes open.
If it failed to do this, Britain's war industries would soon collapse and its people starve.
Although the Royal Navy easily stopped merchant shipping from reaching German ports, it could not maintain a close blockade to prevent The most serious problem for the Royal Navy was the existence of new weapons that undermined the value of its large surface warships.
Fear of these hidden hazards severely limited Jellicoe's ability to maneuver.
The submarine menace Britain soon disposed of any German surface warships that threatened its ocean trade, but when U-boats began unrestricted attacks on merchant ships in February 1915, their success was alarming.
Fear of bringing the United States into the war, as a result of American civilian deaths on passenger ships, led to the reining in of U-boat attacks in 1916, but Germany resumed full-scale submarine warfare in February 1917.
Over the next six D Actions involving main British and German fleets Dates 1914-18 Location North Sea H U-boat activity in the Atlantic Dates 1915-18 Location Western approaches to Britain H Mediterranean Dates 1914-18 Location U-boat activity throughout the Mediterranean.
Clashes between Italy and Austria in the Adriatic and between Turkey and Russia in the Black Sea Bristol F-2B Fighter The Bristol Fighter was a two-seater introduced by Britain's Royal Flying Corps on the Western Front in 1917.
As well as operating in the fighter role, the F-2B served as a reconnaissance, bomber, and ground-attack aircraft.
WINSTON CHURCHILL ON ADMIRAL SIR JOHN JELLICOE The observer in the rear cockpit had a Lewis gun to defend against an enemy attack from above and behind.
The main offensive weapon was a fixed, forward-firing Vickers machine gun operated by the pilot.
The east coast of Britain was bombarded by German surface raiders in December 1914.
However, the Royal Navy had excellent signals intelligence, which gave warning of later German sorties.
As a result, the main British force, Admiral John Jellicoe's Grand Fleet, was able to surprise its considerably smaller German equivalent, the High Seas Fleet, when it made a rare venture out to sea at the end of May 1916.
The resulting encounter, now known as the battle of Jutland, revealed deficiencies in the Royal Navy—for example, in ship and shell design, fire control, and night fighting.
Yet although British losses of men and ships were heavier than their opponents' at Jutland, the battle was to confirm the Royal Navy's command of the sea, for the Germans could only fight a holding action, fleeing once in contact with the Grand Fleet's battleships. months hundreds of Allied merchant ships were sunk, before the belated adoption of a convoy system decisively turned the tide.
War in the air Aircraft were primarily an adjunct to armies on the ground.
They quickly proved their worth for reconnaissance in the mobile fighting of 1914 and became even more vital in that role Biplane construction with two pairs of wings braced by wires and struts became almost universal because, although creating drag, it was far more robust than contemporary monoplane designs.
Despite its name, the Bristol Fighter was a multi-purpose aircraft, as suitable for reconnaissance and ground attack as for air combat.
The two-wheel main undercarriage was not retractable so it created a great deal of drag that slowed the aircraft down.
Forced to fly at high altitudes to escape interception, the airships had lost their effectiveness by the end of 1916.
The development of ever larger multi-engined airplanes allowed the German strategic bombing campaign to continue.
From June 1917 both London and Paris were raided by German Gothas and R-planes.
British, French, and Italian airplanes also launched raids against enemy cities late in the war.
Although small-scale by later standards, these air attacks were by no means entirely ineffectual—in Britain more than 5,000 people were casualties of air raids in World War I AIRCRAFT CARRIERS Seaplanes operated from warships throughout World War I, and the first true aircraft carriers, with a flat deck for take-off and landing, emerged in 1918.
The first purpose-built aircraft carriers, Britain's Hermes and Japan's Hosho, were built in the early 1920s.
After the war, Italian General Giulio Douhet argued that air power could win a future war on its own.
Relegating armies and navies to a minor defensive function, fleets of heavy bombers would destroy cities and industries until the enemy surrendered.
This view was adopted in the 1920s by air commanders such as the American General Billy Mitchell and Britain's Sir Hugh Trenchard. once the trenches were dug.
Flying over enemy lines, the airmen photographed trench systems, ""spotted"" for artillery— observing where their shells fell—and reported on troop movements.
They also dropped small bombs on targets such as stations and railyards.
A number of aircraft were fitted with guns so that they could shoot down enemy reconnaissance aircraft and bombers, and before long these aircraft were fighting one another.
Civilians desperate for an alternative to the grim industrial warfare of the trenches were gripped by the idea of war in the air.
Hastily trained airmen had, at times, a life expectancy measured in weeks rather than months.
Tens of thousands of aircraft were rapidly put into service; the construction of aircraft moved from craft workshops to mass production in factories.
Targeting cities from above In addition to ongoing land campaigns, aircraft were used for strategic bombing.
German Zeppelin airships bombed the city of London for the first time in May 1915.
These huge machines inspired terror in the civilian population, but soon proved hopelessly vulnerable to British airplanes using The two-bladed propeller was driven by a Rolls Royce Falcon VI2 engine, cooled by a radiator in the nose.
THE WESTERN FRONT BY NIGHT Nights in the trenches were usually quiet, a time for bringing fresh troops, ammunition, and supplies up to the front line under cover of darkness.
In some sectors, however, there were regular raids aimed at disrupting the enemy's movements.
This painting by Paul Nash, Britain's official war artist during World War I, shows a mule train trying to cross a shattered landscape of burned trees and flooded trenches lit up by an artillery barrage.
RUSSIA DEFEATED The Bolsheviks came to power in October 1917 and withdrew Russia from the war.
The peace treaty of Brest-Litovsk was imposed on Russia by the Germans in March 1918.
The treaty confirmed German control of vast swathes of Central and Eastern Europe formerly part of the Russian empire.
The Russian defeat released large numbers of German soldiers for transfer to the Western Front, but also undercut popular support for the war in Germany, which had been motivated largely by fear of Russia.
Many German workers were also attracted by the ideals of the Russian Revolution.
But neutral America was already a major source of supplies and finance for Britain and France.
On April 6 Wilson asked Congress to declare war on Germany, which it quickly did.
In January 1918 Wilson issued his Fourteen Points, war aims based on freeing territories won by Germany and establishing self-determination for subject nationalities of European empires.
Appointed German chief-of-staff in August 1916, he supplanted the civilian government as director of the country's war effort.
With Ludendorff, his principal assistant, he led Germany’s futile offensives in 1918.
President from 1925 until 1934, he did nothing to prevent Hitler from rising to power.
The Germans advanced menacingly toward Paris, then were relentlessly driven back toward their own frontier.
With its armies retreating, its allies collapsing, and revolution brewing at home, Germany signed an armistice on its enemies' terms.
Field Marshal Paul von Hindenburg, and his deputy, General Erich Ludendorff—in practice the dominant figure—took control of their country, subordinating Germany's economy and society to the needs of war production.
But their gamble on unrestricted U-boat attacks only resulted in the United States now joining the war.
Despite the collapse of Russia, Germany was bound to lose the war once United States resources of manpower and industrial production were brought to bear on the Western Front.
The United States had to recruit, train, and equip a mass conscript army virtually from scratch.
The commander of the American Expeditionary Force, General John Pershing, refused to allow troops arriving in Europe to join the British and French armies at the front, instead methodically building up an independent army.
In spring 1918 Hindenburg and Ludendorff staked everything upon a last titanic offensive that might win the war before General Pershing's men were ready to join the battle.
Germany's spring offensive Germany's Kaiserschlacht, or Michael Offensive, was launched on the Somme on March 21, 1918.
Germany had increased its troop strength on the Western Front by 30 percent before the offensive, mostly through transfers from the now quiet Eastern Front.
But the Germans had also developed new tactics to achieve a breakthrough in depth.
Their role was to punch holes in the enemy lines and infiltrate in depth, bypassing strongpoints to maintain momentum and wreak havoc in the enemy's rear.
British defenses were shattered by a hurricane artillery barrage as the stormtroopers attacked.
When a follow-up offensive in Flanders opened in early April, there were fears the Allied armies might crack.
For the first time the British and French forces were brought under a single Supreme Commander, France's Marshal Ferdinand Foch.
America needs you The image of Uncle Sam in James M Flagg's now famous poster captivated the American public.
As German casualties in successive offensives rose toward a million, the fresh American troops began to arrive, first blooded in June at the battle of Belleau Wood.
On July 15 a German offensive was held and then thrown back in the second battle of the Marne.
Then, on August 8, Canadian and Australian infantry spearheaded a large-scale Allied offensive at Amiens.
Ludendorff called it ""the black day of the German army"" and declared that there was no further hope of Germany winning the war.
Germany accepts defeat Over the next three months the Allies attacked and advanced steadily, taking back all the lost ground and breaking through Germany's Hindenburg Line (a defense system in northeastern France) into territory the country had held since 1914.
In September Pershing led half a million United States troops in the battle of St.
Mihiel and even more in the MeuseArgonne Offensive in the last weeks of the war.
Many German soldiers resisted, but there were signs of war-weariness and low morale—many surrendered.
Meanwhile, Austria-Hungary was on its knees, its army retreating in Italy and threatened from the Balkans by German prisoners of war From the summer of 1918 German soldiers surrendered in ever-increasing numbers.
Some 350,000 were taken prisoner in the last three months of the war, decisive evidence of demoralization. 4 * jr T * * r I _ German stormtroopers German shock troops advance during the spring offensive of 1918.
The stormtroopers were used to break through the weak points in the Allied line and penetrate in depth, forcing the enemy to withdraw.
Both AustriaHungary and Bulgaria would soon seek an armistice, as would Ottoman Turkey after heavy defeats inflicted by British empire forces in Iraq and Palestine.
They declared their acceptance of his Fourteen Points as a basis for peace. 6,250,000 “ military casualties in the war, of whom about two million died.
Britain and France insisted that any armistice must be based on tough terms; Pershing argued against negotiating an armistice at all, believing that the war should continue until the Germans were totally defeated.
In the event, Germany was told that it had to cede much of its military arsenal and allow Allied occupation of the Rhineland in return for an end to the war.
Sailors of the High Seas Fleet mutinied, triggering revolutionary outbreaks in German cities.
A nation reduced to starvation by the Allied blockade had lost faith in its leaders.
The country was declared a republic on November 9; Kaiser Wilhelm abdicated and fled the country.
AFTER The war destroyed the German, Russian, Ottoman, and Austro-Hungarian empires.
Europe's borders were redrawn, resulting in the creation of a number of new states.
GERMAN RESENTMENT The Versailles Treaty, imposed on Germany after its signing in France on June 28,1919, forced the country to disarm and was harsh in territorial terms.
But Germans resented the ""war guilt"" clause declaring them responsible for the war and the victors' demand for the payment of huge financial reparations as well as coal, agricultural products, and even horses and cows to replace those people killed.
THE LEGION OF HONOR MEDAL OF FRANCE THE PRICE OF WAR Some 9 million troops had died, including 2 million Germans, 1. million Russians, 1. million French, and some 900,000 from Britain and its empire.
Of 116,000 United States troops who lost their lives, thousands died in the ""Spanish flu"" epidemic at the war's end.
Civilian losses are impossible to estimate, but a figure of 6 million is credible.
A late-medieval siege gun was immobile and could only be fired a few times a day.
Today, self-propelled guns firing every few seconds can hit precision targets far beyond the line of sight with explosive munitions.
There were smaller, hand-held versions of the gun which were really muskets.
Q This mid-15thcentury veuglaire is a breechloader made in Burgundy, France.
Veuglaires usually had a removable chamber, so spare chambers could be readied for firing, Q Mons Meg was a bombard made by the Duke of Burgundy's artillery artificer, Jean Cambier, in the 1450s for King James II of Scotland.
Q The French 12-pounder cannon was introduced by Jean-Baptiste de Gribeauval in the 1770s and used until the end of the Napoleonic Wars.
JJ The soixante-quinze field gun, a French 75mm , was revolutionary when introduced in 1898.
With hydraulic recoil, it could fire up to 30 high-explosive or shrapnel rounds a minute.
Q The Skoda 5. in howitzer was a Czech-made gun used by the Central Powers in World War I Firing explosive shells in a high trajectory, howitzers were ideal for trench warfare.
Q The German 88mm flak gun proved to be as effective against tanks as it was against aircraft.
The new revolutionary government was engaged in armed struggle from the very start.
THE END OF AN ERA The uprising of February 1917 that overthrew Tsar Nicholas II set up a Provisional Government.
The coup was masterminded by Leon Trotsky, leader of the Petrograd Soviet (revolutionary committee), and armed workers and revolutionary former soldiers played a prominent role.
Alexander Kerensky, head of the Provisional Government, called on the army to regain control, but it failed, confirming Lenin's grip on power.
Now Azerbaijan, Poland, Belarus, Ukraine, Lithuania, Latvia, Estonia, Georgia, Armenia, and Finland became nominally independent German satellites.
The Russian Civil War The collapse of the Russian empire in 1917 triggered a complex series of interlocking conflicts that lasted into the 1920s and are estimated to have cost 13 million lives, mostly civilian victims of famine and of the massacre and depredation practiced by all sides in the Civil War.
A fm EASTERN EUROPE AND ASIA m Q Russian Civil War Q Japanese Invasion Dates 1917-21 Dates 1918-22 Location Mainly Location Region around European Russia Vladivostok 0 Russo-Polish War Dates 1919-21 Location Ukraine and Poland t the time of the Brest-Litovsk Treaty that took Russia out of i World War I, Lenin's Bolshevik revolutionary government controlled the cities of Petrograd and Moscow, but its hold on the rest of Russia was fragile or non-existent.
The Bolshevik People's Commissar for War, Leon Trotsky, founded the Worker's and Peasant's Red Army in February 1918, initially based on the Red Guards who had helped bring the Bolsheviks to power.
Foreign involvement The situation was complicated by the presence of foreign troops.
In spring 1918 some 30,000 Czechs, who had been taken prisoner by the Russians while soldiers in the Austro-Hungarian Army, were traveling along the TransSiberian Railway toward the Pacific port of Vladivostok, from where they intended to join the Allied forces in France.
Local clashes with the Bolshevik authorities en route flared into full-scale fighting.
The Czechs soon controlled a swathe of Siberian territory, allowing Admiral Alexander Kolchak to establish himself as head of a Siberian-based anti-Bolshevik Russian government.
The northern ports of Murmansk and Arkhangelsk were occupied primarily by the British; Japanese and American troops took control of Vladivostok; and the French landed forces at Odessa on the Black Sea.
These interventions were in part motivated by a desire to prevent weapons and munitions sent to Russia for use against Germany falling into the wrong hands.
But Allied governments also wished for the overthrow of the Bolshevik regime in order to prevent its ideas of revolution spreading to their own countries.
The intervention was in fact deeply unpopular with working-class movements in Britain and | France, and with many of the military personnel sent to Russia.
A mutiny by ^fcV, T * . lit Soviet commemorative poster Celebrating the third anniversary of the Bolshevik Revolution, this poster underlines how power was won and held, gun in hand.
French sailors at Odessa in April 1919 underlined the severity of the problem and most of the foreign troops had left by the end of that year.
But Britain and France continued to supply and encourage the White armies.
Factionalism and terror Unopposed intervention by foreign forces was possible because of the chaos that dominated Russia in 1919.
As well as the Cossacks and the White armies— which included not only the combined forces of Kolchak and Denikin, but also armies formed by General Pyotr Wrangel in the Caucasus and General Nikolai Yudenich in Estonia—there was a peasant ""Black Army"" led by anarchist Nestor Makhno that established a formidable presence in Ukraine.
The war was conducted with almost inconceivable savagery, crude terror serving as a weapon on all sides.
Much of the strategy focused on extracting grain from peasants to feed men and horses—the side that got the grain would win, the peasants always lost.
Fought over wide distances with few * 1 fl THE RUSSIAN CIVIL Starving peasant children The Russian people suffered untold hardships during the Civil War and its aftermath.
The famine in the Volga region in 1921-22, partly caused by war and revolution, killed five million people. were able to exploit the disunity of the enemy, and defeated various groups one by one over the next two years.
Commanded by 26-year-old Mikhail Tukhachevsky, the Red forces won back Siberia from Kolchak in the course of 1919—the admiral was captured and shot in February 1920.
The Reds also triumphed over General Denikin in southern Ukraine, after his army had been weakened through clashes with Makhno's Blacks.
In October, however, the Bolsheviks almost lost Petrograd to Yndenich's 20,000-strong army.
Trotsky prepared a desperate defense of the city and Yudenich halted in the outskirts, withdrawing the following month.
Marshal Josef Pilsudski, leader of the Polish forces, was eager to establish his country's borders as far east as possible.
Aided by anti-Bolshevik Ukrainian Nationalists, Polish forces tanks or aircraft involved, it was the last major war in which the cavalry was an offensive force.
Creation of the Red Army The survival of the Bolshevik regime depended upon Leon Trotsky's ruthless organizational genius, which forged the Red Army into an effective instrument of war.
The ranks were filled by peasants conscripted at gunpoint, and thousands of former tsarist officers were recruited as ""military experts"" to lead the forces.
Discipline was enforced by terror, with the families of officers held as hostages to ensure their loyalty.
Although they were surrounded by enemies, the Reds /~v/~v/-'v The number of ^UU^UUii foreign soldiers present at some time in Russia during the Civil War.
The men came from 13 different countries. invaded Belarus and the Ukraine, occupying Kiev and Minsk with ease.
The Red Army launched a counterattack in June, spearheaded by Semyon Budyonny's First Cavalry Army.
The Russians managed to sweep the Poles back across the border, and had pursued them to the gates of Warsaw by August.
Aided by a French military mission, the Polish forces regrouped, fought back, and claimed a historic victory.
Meanwhile, the last of the White generals, Wrangel, had launched an offensive from the Crimea.
However, once the fighting in Poland ended, he was doomed and had to retreat to the coast.
The Red Army then turned on Makhno's forces, which were brutally crushed.
This marked the end of the Civil War as a serious contest for power, although scattered fighting—some of it savage— continued until Vladivostok fell to the Red Army in October 1922.
Foreign intervention Allied troops, including Japanese, American, and British, parade through the Russian Pacific port of Vladivostok.
Preyed upon by soldiers, who conscripted their sons and stole their grain, peasants ceased to grow crops.
Worsened by drought, the collapse of the harvest led to a famine in 1921 that killed millions.
DECLINE OF THE RED ARMY Civil War hero Tukhachevsky played a leading role in modernizing the Red Army in the 1930s.
He was an advocate of ""deep operations,"" which involved the combined use of tanks and aircraft.
In 1937 he was one of a number of men arrested and shot as part of Stalin's Great Purge of likely opponents.
REVOLUTIONARY RULE Russia's new government established its rule over much of the pre-war Russian empire, regaining most of the territory lost under the Brest-Litovsk Treaty.
However, it had to accept the loss of land to Poland and the independence of the Baltic states and Finland.
JAPAN THE AGGRESSOR Japanese encroachment began with the First Sino-Japanese War of 1894-95, giving Japan control of Taiwan and Korea.
During World War I Japan gained the German concession in China's Shandong province.
UNREST IN CHINA China became a republic in 1912, but authority was fragmented until the Kuomintang Nationalist government of Jiang Jieshi extended its rule over much of the country in 1926-28.
It failed, however, to crush the Chinese Communists in 1927, who survived as rural guerrillas at war with the Nationalists.
PLANS FOR A JAPANESE EMPIRE The Sino-Japanese War Simmering conflict between Japan and China flared into full-scale war in 1937.
The Japanese invasion of China can be seen as the beginning of World War II in Asia, for the war it started was only ended through the defeat of Japan by the Allies in 1945. n September 18, 1931, Japanese army officers arranged for part of the track on the Japaneseowned South Manchurian Railway to be blown up.
Claiming the explosion to have been the work of the Chinese, Japanese forces seized control of the city of Mukden.
Fighting spread south to the port-city of Shanghai with its various foreign enclaves.
Here, clashes between Chinese troops and Japanese marines guarding the city's foreign settlement became the pretext for a Japanese aerial and naval attack on of Manchuria.
There, the Japanese installed Pu Yi, China's deposed last emperor, as ruler of the new puppet state of Manchukuo.
Nationalists and Communists Jiang Jieshi's Chinese Nationalist government used the truce with Japan to strengthen its forces with the aid of military advisers from Nazi Germany.
It also exploited the opportunity to launch a crushing offensive against the Chinese Communists.
In 1934 the Communist Red armies were forced to retreat to Shaanxi province to avoid annihilation, with Mao Zedong leading EAST ASIA a — Q Occupation of 0 Sino-Japanese War Manchuria Dates 1937-45 Dates 1931-33 Location Northern, Location Northern central, and coastal China Chinese province of | Manchuria From 1932 the government of Japan effectively came under military control as ultranationalist army officers pushed for an aggressive foreign policy, seeking to turn China into a subordinate part of a Japanese empire in Asia.
JAPANESE ""THREE ALLS"" ORDER TO ARMY UNITS IN CHINA, 1940 JAPANESE SOLDIERS IN TRAINING the Chapei residential area—an action that brought widespread international criticism and condemnation.
From January to May 1933 Japanese land forces from Manchuria started to push south of the Great Wall, scattering Chinese armies and threatening Beijing.
But the drift to war was then paused by a truce that left Japan securely in control Battle of Wuhan Entrenched Japanese infantry look on as their artillery bombards the defenses of Wuhan during the fighting in the now famous Long March of some 8,000 miles from Jiangxi.
Chinese patriotic sentiment and hostility toward Japan was still strong, however, and in late 1936 both Nationalists and Communists tentatively formed a ""united front"" against the Japanese. now became the focus for the rapid escalation of the conflict into a fullscale Sino-Japanese war.
The Chinese attack in Shanghai had not succeeded in overrunning the Japanese defensive perimeter.
Japan countered with amphibious landings of troops supported by naval and air bombardment.
By the beginning of October 200,000 Japanese soldiers were engaged in War resumed A contingent of Japanese troops was stationed in Beijing under the terms of the treaty imposed on China by the foreign powers after the Boxer Uprising in 1901.
On July 7, 1937, there was a confused outbreak of fighting between these Japanese forces and local Chinese soldiers at the Marco Polo Bridge to the southwest of Beijing.
The incident could easily have been contained, but both sides reinforced their troops and the fighting spread.
The Japanese Kwantung Army had been spoiling for a fight and now occupied the entire region around Beijing and Tianjin.
Jiang Jieshi replied by ordering an attack on the Japanese garrison in Shanghai.
The city Folding bipod Japanese type 96 light machine-gun This model entered service in time for the invasion of China in 1937.
The combined firepower of Japanese aircraft, warships, and artillery inflicted heavy casualties—around a quarter of a million Chinese soldiers were killed or wounded—yet the Chinese fought a determined defensive battle.
Japanese commanders had expected an easy victory and were shocked by the ferocity of the resistance they encountered.
AMERICAN SUPPORT FOR CHINA As relations between the United States and Japan worsened through 1940-41, the United States increasingly backed the Chinese Nationalists.
United States pilots were authorized to join the American Volunteer Group, which provided air cover for the Chinese in Chongqing.
CHINA'S ROLE IN WORLD WAR II From December 1941 to the end of World War II, China fought as one of the Allied powers.
This ruthless ""Rape of Nanking,"" along with the earlier bombing of Shanghai, helped turn world opinion sharply against the Japanese.
Jiang Jieshi's armies retreated westward along the Yangtze River and on to Wuhan.
A large and complex series of battles was fought here in late summer of 1938.
Chinese ground troops were supported by elements of the Soviet air force sent by Josef Stalin. ruled Burma.
In fact, he was not even able to protect his provisional capital against repeated Japanese bombing raids.
A number of Communist armies based at Yanan in Shaanxi, carried out a series of attacks on Japanese positions in 1940, known as the Hundred Regiments Offensive, but these brought terrible retribution upon peasants in areas of Communist 15 MILLION A low estimate of the number of Chinese who died as a result of the war in 1937-45. when Jiang Jieshi proved reluctant to attack the Japanese.
Japan r r ’ rr:\ i JAPANESE GOVERNMENT 10 CENT NOTE USED IN POW CAMPS treated the Chinese with great brutality, employing biological weapons to spread cholera, typhus, anthrax, bubonic plague, and typhoid dysentery.
This intervention marked an important diplomatic shift, for Nazi Germany had dropped relations with Nationalist China in favor of a rapprochement with Japan, while Stalin feared Japan's ambitions on the Soviet Union's eastern border.
Despite this aerial assistance, the Chinese were again forced to withdraw westward, this time to Chongqing in the mountains of Szechuan.
This remote city would be Jiang Jieshi's provisional capital for the rest of the war.
By the end of 1938 Japan had won control of the whole of eastern China, which it proceeded to form into various puppet entities under the nominal rule of a range of Chinese collaborators.
The Nationalists consolidated their position by building a supply road linking Chongqing through daunting terrain to BritishAir attacks on Chongqing Chongqing, the provisional Nationalist capital, was attacked by Japan in 1939.
The sight of Chinese civilian suffering helped turn American opinion against Japan. military activity.
The Japanese moved through the countryside, destroying entire villages and killing every living being—human and animal—in sight.
Japan held all the regions of China that, from its point of view, were worth having.
Since neither the Communists nor the Chinese Nationalists would give in, Japan found itself committed to a long-term struggle that tied up around 40 percent of its armed forces.
Threatened with Japanese encirclement, Chinese forces withdrew from Shanghai and retreated to the relative safety of the Nationalist capital, Nanking.
Rape of Nanking Exhausted, disorganized, and short of ammunition, Chinese soldiers failed to hold fortified strongpoints between Shanghai and Nanking.
The capital was attacked by the Japanese on December 9 and occupied four days later.
Japanese troops ran amok, killing at least 40,000 civilians and fleeing soldiers, and raping Carrying handle WESTERN MEDITERRANEAN j|J 1914-1945 The Spanish Civil War The Spanish Civil War began with a revolt of right-wing army officers against a left-wing government elected in 1936.
MOROCCAN REBELLION In 1920 Berbers in the Rif region of Spanish Morocco rebelled against colonial rule.
Led by Abd el-Krim, they inflicted a severe defeat on the Spanish at Annual in 1921.
Over the following two years, Spanish and French forces crushed the Rif revolt.
The Spanish Army of Africa, comprising Spanish Foreign Legion and Moroccan troops, emerged as a battle-hardened force under officers such as General Francisco Franco.
POLITICAL UNREST IN SPAIN In 1930-31 mounting unrest in Spain led first to the deposition of Primo de Rivera and then the overthrow of the monarchy.
However, the democratic republic born of this peaceful revolution degenerated into a fierce political battleground, with fascist, anarchist, socialist, and monarchist movements in contention.
A full-scale workers' revolt in the northern province of Asturias was crushed by the army in 1934.
E lections in Spain in February 1936 brought to power a Popular Front government—a coalition of liberal and left-wing parties.
Over the next few months there were many outbreaks of violent disorder promoted by both the right and left wing.
On July 17 a group of Spanish generals, including Francisco Franco, attempted to seize power in a military coup.
They controlled the Army of Africa in Spanish Morocco, but were less successful in mainland Spain, where the coup failed in the face of resistance by loyal paramilitary forces and workers' militias.
The Nationalist revolt was saved from defeat by Nazi Germany and Fascist Italy.
Luftwaffe Junkers Ju-52 transport aircraft were sent to ferry troops from North Africa to southern Spain—the first military airlift in history.
The division of Spain between the Popular Front's Loyalist Republicans and Nationalist rebels was complex, both politically and geographically.
The Republicans included Basque and Catalan separatists, and every shade of left-wing group from the moderate socialists to communists, anarchists, and Trotskyists, all often bitterly hostile to one another.
The Nationalist side ranged from Catholic conservatives to fascists and monarchists, but was held together by the dominant personality of General Franco, who gradually imposed himself as undisputed leader.
From the outset, the war was marked by massacres and atrocities on both German medal The Spanish Cross was awarded to the Germans who served on the Nationalist side in Spain.
The war gave German forces invaluable combat experience. sides, but the killings carried out by the Nationalists were more systematic and claimed a far heavier toll in lives.
Despite Republican forces being made up primarily of irregular militias, there was little guerrilla warfare.
The style of combat was conventional and often static in the manner of World War I, with entrenched infantry confronting one another for long periods on immobile fronts.
The ""modern"" element in the fighting— aircraft and tanks—mostly came from foreign forces.
Some 50,000 Italians and 12,000 Germans, as well as contingents from Portugal, were sent to fight for the Nationalists.
A much smaller number of military personnel sent by the Soviet Union made a vital contribution to the Republican cause, organizing air and armored forces.
Some 40,000 foreign volunteers fought for the Republic in the International Brigades, organized by the communists.
Britain, France, and the United States followed a policy of non-intervention, imposing an arms embargo that, in practice, favored the Nationalists.
An army pressing toward the capital from its northern headquarters at Burgos was halted by Republicans in the Guadarrama mountains, but Franco's Army of Africa, marching up from the south, looked unstoppable.
After relieving a Nationalist garrison that had been besieged by Republican militias in Toledo, in November it pushed into the suburbs of Madrid.
The Republic fights back The Republican government fled to Valencia, but makeshift militia forces and International Brigade volunteers, backed by Soviet tanks and aircraft, held firm.
Madrid was battered by a heavy air and artillery bombardment, but it did not fall.
Republican morale was further lifted when, early in 1937, the International Brigades fought the Army of Africa to a standstill in the Jarama valley east of Madrid.
In March a Nationalist offensive was beaten at Guadalajara by Republican forces that included anti-fascist Italians of the Garibaldi Battalion.
THOUSAND were victims of massacres, the majority carried out by the Nationalist rebels.
In response to the Nationalist failure to win a quick victory, Nazi Germany strengthened its predominantly aerial forces in Spain.
These high-performance machines outclassed the Soviet aircraft on the Republican side.
In the spring of 1937 German and Italian air support enabled the Nationalist armies to take control of northern Spain, including the Basque country—it was during this campaign that the infamous bombing of Guernica took place.
The Republicans made an offensive at Brunete outside Madrid in July, but it was a costly failure—Republican forces Divided Republic This communist poster calls on the Republicans to stop their war of words and unite in the armed struggle.
In fact, under orders from the Soviet Union, the communists put a high priority on crushing rival political factions on their own side. made an initial breakthrough but were unable to exploit it quickly enough and were hammered by a Nationalist counter-offensive.
The same thing happened at Teruel in Aragon from December 1937 to February 1938.
In a battle fought in harsh winter weather, Republicans first seized the city, then lost it to a Nationalist counter-offensive, in which the superiority of both manpower and materiel was decisive.
Losing no time, Franco followed up the victory at Teruel with a drive east to the Mediterranean, cutting off Catalonia from the rest of the Republican-held areas.
Although severely weakened by in-fighting, the Republicans launched their final offensive on the Ebro in July 1938.
As the fighting dragged on over the following months, their forces, inferior on the ground and in the air, suffered heavy losses.
The Nationalists occupied Barcelona in February and Madrid in March, bringing the war to an end. fJ* THE SPANISH CIVIL WAR KEY MOMENT BOMBING OF GUERNICA In spring 1937 aircraft of the German Condor Legion were supporting the Nationalist offensive in the Basque country, bombing targets behind the enemy front line.
Publicized worldwide, the attack became a symbol of the destructive power of aircraft and, more specifically, of the Luftwaffe.
He entered into negotiations with the Nazis, meeting Hitler at Hendaye in October 1940, but the two sides failed to agree terms for Spain's entry into the war.
FATE OF THE DEFEATED For those fighting for the Republic, defeat was a catastrophe.
Some 50,000 were executed; many more were held prisoner for years and used as slave labor.
A few escaped capture and maintained a low-level guerrilla campaign into the 1950s.
About half a million Republicans fled across the border into France when the war ended.
Republican soldiers Militiamen prepare for action in Andalucia in September 1936.
The Republicans were often short of war supplies, including bullets for their World War l-vintage bolt-action rifles.
T he oldest form of war propaganda is the glorification of the heroic leader.
Paintings and reliefs on the palaces of Ancient Egyptian pharaohs and Assyrian kings celebrate their glorious victories, representing the ruler and his army in triumph and the humiliated enemy either slain or enslaved.
Victorious Roman generals and emperors staged highly dramatic triumphs—victory celebrations and marches during the course of which a defeated enemy was executed.
These ancient celebrations of victory in war confirmed not only the prestige and power of the individual leader but also of the entire system—the empire, its army, and its gods.
In modern times, depiction of the enemy killed Propaganda The main purposes of propaganda in warfare are to persuade one's own men to fight, to demoralize the enemy, and to generate support for the war effort on the home front.
Mass media from the printing press to television and the internet have expanded the distribution of propaganda, but it is as old as warfare itself. or humiliated is no longer seen as good propaganda.
In general, more democratic times have seen the ordinary soldier celebrated as much as the leaders, and sacrifice stressed as much as, or more than, glory.
Propaganda circulates these ideas, making them known to friend and foe.
In the 4th century bce, Alexander of Macedon presented his campaign against the Persians as advancing Greek civilization against barbarians, stage-managing a visit to Troy to identify himself with the Greek heroes of the Homeric age.
In medieval times, religious war was preached by Christian popes and Muslim caliphs.
The pulpit as well as the mosque provided platforms for the statement of war aims.
In the 18th century, American and French revolutionaries fought in the name of freedom and human rights, their beliefs proclaimed in speeches in assemblies and published in newspapers and tracts.
In the 20th century, fascism, communism, and democracy became major subjects of propaganda, each promising liberation from the others, and modern technology provided the means of reaching a larger audience than ever.
Vilifying the enemy Slandering the enemy is as established a function of propaganda as glorifying one's own cause.
Publicizing the enemy's crimes and massacres or ridiculing their cultural and racial characteristics are also standard aspects of propaganda.
During the religious wars of early modern Europe, when Protestant fought Catholic, the use of the printing press made it possible to distribute to a wide public images of a vicious enemy.
MLi'C^ 12 ttv PROPAGANDA Pope Urban preaches crusade Pope Urban II promised wealth and salvation to those who fought to avenge the alleged atrocities perpetrated by the Muslims in Jerusalem.
During the French Revolutionary Wars and the Napoleonic Wars , the British cartoonists portrayed the French as covetous and malnourished.
Japan's attack on Pearl Harbor in December 1941 provoked a similiar response in World War II when American propagandists' representation of the Japanese was clearly racist.
A poster of Che Guevara in the 1960s had the same function of enlisting troops for a global Marxist revolution.
Managing information From the mid-19th century, liberal states had to contend with the war journalist and photographer.
Since that time, keeping control of what people see and hear has become increasingly important, as has broadcasting a biased version of events to the enemy.
World War II was perhaps the conflict in which propaganda was at its most effective, playing a large role in the success of states in mobilizing their populations for total war.
In contrast to the situation in World War II, during the Vietnam War in the 1960s, the United States suffered an almost total loss of official control, and even influence over how the war was presented to its people back home.
This was not so much the direct effect of television—even though it was the first televised war—as a consequence of a mistaken belief by those in power that the media would voluntarily support a national war effort.
After Vietnam, military authorities effectively clawed back control over war coverage.
Today, in the age of digital photography and the internet, it has become even more difficult to suppress unwanted coverage of events, yet spin-doctors show little sign of losing the battle to keep official views in the forefront.
At the same time, terrorist movements are devoted to the idea of ""propaganda by the deed,"" carrying out military actions with the sole purpose of publicizing a cause and influencing world opinion.
Recruitment posters A major function of propaganda has always been to recruit men to fight.
The appeal by Pope Urban II for the First Crusade in the late 11th century was a striking example of successful voluntary enlistment.
The World War I recruitment poster is a good example of the propagandist's art.
The images of Lord Kitchener saying ""Your Country Needs You"" in Britain, and of Uncle Sam with ""I Want You for the United States Army"" in America, are simple, direct, and aimed at the most basic instinct of national solidarity.
The posters of Stalinist Russia in World War II drew Joseph Coebbels and radio propaganda Nazi propaganda minister Joseph Goebbels was a master of radio broadcasting, which was one of the key propaganda mediums of the 1930s and 40s.
Sponsored by the War Office, it fosters British patriotism and graphically portrays the horrors of trench warfare.
Information about the progress of the war is controlled by government agencies.
GERMANY THE AGGRESSOR Overturning the Versailles Treaty, Hitler expanded German armed forces and marched troops into the demilitarized Rhineland in 1936.
When a last-minute deal at September's Munich Conference averted war, Hitler occupied Czechoslovakia's Sudetenland region.
Britain and France rapidly rearmed but hoped that Hitler would be ""appeased” by these territorial gains.
By March 1939, though, German forces had occupied Prague, and Czechoslovakia ceased to exist.
THE GERMAN-SOVIET PACT Britain and France responded by guaranteeing Poland against German aggression.
Hitler wanted a return of Danzig to Germany and adjustments in the border territories, but the Poles refused to accept any of these demands.
While Germany prepared to invade Poland, the Western democracies tardily sought to make an agreement with the Soviet Union.
But the Soviets instead chose to do a deal with Hitler's Nazis, their ideological enemies.
The signature of the GermanSoviet Pact on August 23,1939, inevitably cleared the path to war.
But Britain remained undefeated and the Soviet Union refused to succumb to the shock of Blitzkrieg.
In theory, the declaration of war by the Western Allies placed Hitler in a perilous situation.
With the majority of German armed forces thrown into the invasion of Poland, Germany's western border was weakly defended.
But France was committed to a defensive strategy based upon the supposed impregnability of the Maginot Line border fortifications built in the 1930s, and Britain's army was very small.
The British and French planned a three-year war of attrition and blockade, but failed to provide the Poles with military assistance of any kind.
In mid-September, with the Germans already at the gates of Warsaw, the Soviet army invaded Poland from the east.
On September 28 Germany and the Soviet Union divided the defeated country between them.
Hitler now instructed his commanders to prepare immediately for an attack on France and Belgium.
Although a British Expeditionary Force took up its KEY MOMENT DUNKIRK In May 1940 the British Expeditionary Force was cut off by the rapid German advance from the Ardennes, and troops fell back on the port of Dunkirk.
While French and British troops held a defensive perimeter, evacuation of the British troops by sea began on May 25.
While under constant air attack, men were taken off from the port itself and the beaches outside the town.
Royal Navy warships bore the brunt of the operation, although hundreds of volunteer civilian vessels joined in—small local boats ferrying men from the beaches to larger vessels offshore.
French and Belgian troops joined the British in the last few days of the evacuation, which ended on the night of June 3-4.
Almost 340,000 soldiers were evacuated in total, 220,000 of them British, but they were forced to leave most of their weapons behind.
VICHY FRANCE Milan Marseille Trieste „ , , Toulon / Bel § rade > YUGOSLAV im Corsica *7 Sofia Rome a a Sardinia Minsk USSR Stalingrad SA ROMANIA Bucharest Cauct YUGOSLAVIA Tl,-V ALBANIA BULGARIA Tirane asus Black Sea TURKEY FRENCH NORTH AFRICA Sicily Malta GREECE Athens > Crete Dodecanese Islands ~~ Cyprus SYRIA The occupation of Europe At its height, German command of Europe stretched from the Atlantic to the Caucasus.
Despite talk of creating a ""New Order"" in Europe, Germany never advanced beyond the crudest exploitation of the countries under its control. position on the left of the French line, the Allied armies were content to stay on the defensive.
Throughout the winter of f 939^0 the only war that raged was in Finland; invaded by the Soviets on November 30, the Finns held out fiercely until March.
An armistice was finally agreed on March 12 and Finland avoided occupation or being turned into a vassal state.
The Allies prepared naval and land forces for an intervention in neutral Norway, aiming to cut off supplies of Swedish iron ore shipped to Germany from Norwegian ports.
On April 9, 1940, they occupied Denmark and began landings in Norway by sea and air, quickly capturing airfields in both countries.
The Allies countered with their own landings on Norway's coast and inflicted considerable losses on the German Navy.
But on land the Germans were superior in leadership, organization, and equipment, and they also gained command of the air.
Key Greater Germany Axis powers and satellites of Germany Vichy France and colonies Territory occupied by Germany and satellites Dec 1941 Allied states Neutral states Frontiers Dec 1941 Fall of France On May 10 the Germans launched their offensive in France and the Low Countries.
Hitler had adopted a plan, proposed by General Erich von Mannstein, for a swift thrust through the Ardennes region of southern Belgium.
The tanks would break the Allied line and head westward, encircling the Allied forces in Belgium.
The German invasions of the Netherlands and Belgium held the attention of the Allied commanders, while General Heinz Guderian's tanks surged out of the Ardennes, pressing on to the Channel coast.
The Luftwaffe established command of the air, and Stuka dive-bombers wreaked havoc among retreating infantry and civilian refugees.
VOperation Barbarossa German troops advance into the Soviet Union in summer 1941.
Hitler intended the conquest of the USSR to be another quick victory; supplies and equipment were inadequate for a long campaign.
TECHNOLOGY BLITZKRIEG Blitzkrieg, literally ""lightning war,"" was the name given to the technique used by the German forces in their great successes of 1939-41.
Tanks and mechanized infantry broke through weak points in the enemy's defenses and advanced at speed to cut communication lines.
Aircraft, notably Stuka dive-bombers, acted as aerial artillery in support of the tanks.
Blitzkrieg depended heavily on causing the collapse of enemy morale and, subsequently, a total breakdown of command and control.
After the evacuation of Allied troops from Dunkirk, Britain's prime minister, Winston Churchill, urged his country to fight on.
Mussolini only just had time to bring Italy into the war before France surrendered to the Germans on June 21.
Northern and western France came under German military occupation, with a collaborationist government led by Marshal Petain operating from Vichy.
He toyed with plans to invade Britain while, over the south of England, his Luftwaffe fought the Royal Air Force.
But by fall 1940, the Germans were bombing British cities and Hitler was looking east to the Soviet Union for new conquests.
Detailed planning for the invasion of the USSR began in September 1940.
But German forces were distracted the following spring by problems in the Balkans; the Italians had invaded Greece from Albania in October and required assistance.
The Eastern Front The German invasion of the USSR, known as Operation Barbarossa, began on June 22, 1941.
Hitler expected another swift victory and his troops were not equipped for winter warfare.
On a far larger scale than any operation Hitler's forces had previously attempted, it involved three million German troops and a further million from Germany's allies.
Stalin had refused to believe the reports of German military preparations and his forces were caught off-guard.
Once again German armies rapidly out-fought and outmaneuvered their enemies.
Hundreds of thousands of THOUSAND The number of German soldiers killed in the campaigns of 1941.
The fall rains, followed by a bitterly cold winter, exposed serious supply problems in German armies still dependent on horsedrawn transport.
Thrown forward in suicidal counter-offensives, the Soviets suffered appalling casualties but still managed to push the Germans back from the outskirts of Moscow.
By the end of 1941 the period of lightning victories was over, and Germany now faced a long war of attrition in the east.
HITLER SPEAKING TO SENIOR OFFICERS BEFORE OPERATION BARBAROSSA, MARCH 30, 1941 Germany was now supreme in Europe but overstretched strategically.
Exploiting its conquered territories was essential to sustaining the war effort.
GERMAN RULE IN EUROPE The Nazi leadership saw its country as short of food and manpower.
The Germans used prisoners of war and civilian workers from all over Europe, treating many with appalling brutality.
In addition to killing Europe's Jews, the Nazis planned to leave 30 million ""surplus"" people in Poland and the Soviet Union to starve to death or die of disease in order to release food supplies for Germany.
VICHY POSTER RECRUITING WORKERS FOR GERMANY Americans in the desert An M4 Sherman tank rolls through the North African desert in 1943.
Although outclassed by German tanks in armor and firepower, the Sherman was produced in large numbers for the British and American forces.
EUROPE AND NORTH AFRICA BEFORE L_ Well before the entry of the United States into the war in December 1941, President Franklin D Roosevelt had made his country an ally of Britain in all but name.
MUNITIONS AND WAR MATERIALS Roosevelt declared the United States neutral at the start of the war, but changes to United States neutrality laws soon allowed American factories to begin supplying munitions to Britain and France.
The United States also began a limited build-up of its 45 BILLIONTl™ in dollars of United States Lend-Lease aid to all of its allies during the war.
Reverse Lend-Lease from the Allies to the United States amounted to some $8 billion. armed forces, introducing conscription in 1940.
The Lend-Lease program, initiated in March 1941, supplied Britain and other allies with war materials they did not have the money to pay for.
AMERICA ENTERS THE WAR The United States remained officially at peace until the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor on December 7,1941.
Conveniently for Roosevelt, Hitler promptly declared war on the United States in support of Japan, an Axis ally.
The Turning Tide By 1942 Germany was at war with the United States, the Soviet Union, and the British Empire, which were vastly superior in manpower and resources.
Yet the Germans kept the upper hand at first, threatening to establish an unassailable hold on Europe before American strength was brought to bear.
H Eastern Front Dates 1941-43 Location Western USSR B North Africa Dates 1940-43 Location Egypt, Libya, Algeria, and Tunisia El Italian Campaign Dates 1943 Location Sicily and southern Italy I n 1942 the Soviet Union cottld fairly claim to be sustaining the brunt of the land war against Germany with only limited help from its Western allies.
Although the British were engaged against both Germany and Italy in the North African desert, there was no comparison with the scale and ferocity of the battles on the Soviet front.
Hitler and Stalin, took over supreme command of their armed forces and mercilessly drove them into a combat to the death.
Russia's ""Great Patriotic War"" Stalin rallied the Soviet people after the great defeats of 1941 during Germany's Operation Barbarossa, appealing more to traditional Russian patriotism rather than Communist ideology.
Discipline in the army and on the home front was also brutally enforced by the secret police.
Germany had overrun most of the USSR's industrial areas, but new factories were improvised beyond the Urals and began turning out large quantities of simple but highly effective weapons, notably the superb T-34 tank.
A series of attacks ordered by Stalin in the first half of 1942 failed disastrously, leaving the Soviet armies exposed to a renewed German advance.
Hitler directed his main thrust south toward the Caucasus, aiming to cripple the Soviet war machine by capturing the oil fields at Baku.
But he was distracted by another objective, the city of Stalingrad on the Volga.
The German Sixth Army entered Stalingrad but failed to subdue its defenders in the ferocious battle that ensued.
Meanwhile, General Georgi Zhukov organized a vast encirclement from late November that trapped and destroyed the German forces inside the city.
By the time the German Sixth Army surrendered at Stalingrad in January 1943, American troops were facing a THOUSAND The number of tanks and armored vehicles made in the USSR in 1942.
HUNDRED The number of tanks and armored vehicles made in Germany in 1942. baptism of fire in North Africa.
The fighting in the Mediterranean theater had begun with Italy's entry into the war in June 1940.
A Soviet poster calls lor the extermination of Hitler's invading armies.
The Soviet state mobilized its people for the war effort with a mix of exhortation and terror.
Cocking handle Soviet PPS 43 submachine gun Introduced in the middle of the war, the PPS 43 was highly effective, sturdy, and, above all, easy to manufacture in large quantities.
General Erwin Rommel in February 1941 presented an altogether stiffer challenge.
While the Royal Navy battled to keep the sea route from Gibraltar to Malta and Alexandria open, Britain's Eighth Army struggled to stop Rommel's tanks from overrunning Egypt and threatening the Suez Canal.
To Hitler the desert war was a sideshow, and the Americans took a similar view.
But the British, pessimistic about their chances of a successful seaborne invasion of France, persuaded the United States to land forces in North Africa as offering an Folded stock immediate prospect of engaging an enemy army.
On October 23, 1942, British general Bernard Montgomery began an offensive at El Alamein, which drove Rommel's forces out of Egypt.
On November 8 Allied forces under the United States general Dwight D Eisenhower landed in French North Africa in Operation Torch.
The German and Italian forces were soon trapped in Tunisia between those of Eisenhower and Montgomery.
In May 1943 the Axis forces in North Africa surrendered; some 200,000 Germans and Italians were captured.
Germany's last attacks in Russia The titanic struggle on the Eastern Front raged unabated.
In February 1943 the Germans fought back in fierce battles for the city of Kharkov.
With some 2,000 tanks engaged, the battle at Kursk was the largest armored encounter in history.
Despite heavy losses, the Soviet forces repulsed the Germans and followed up with a counter-offensive that drove the enemy back into Ukraine and Belarus by winter.
The Americans wanted to invade France as soon as possible, but British leaders persuaded them that this was not feasible in 1943.
Instead, victory in Tunisia was succeeded by an invasion of Sicily in July.
Marshal Pietro Badoglio, signed an armistice when Allied troops landed in mainland Italy in September.
But the Germans swiftly took over the defense of the Italian peninsula.
By the year's end Allied forces were stuck in front of the Gustav Line, the strong defensive position passing through the ancient abbey at Monte Cassino.
The contrast between the fighting in 1942^43 and the earlier Blitzkrieg phase of the war was pronounced.
The offensive power of armored troops had been subdued by anti-tank guns and tank-busting aircraft.
Whether at El Alamein, Kursk, or Monte Cassino, massed artillery firepower and dogged foot soldiers were as crucial as tanks in battles that resolved into attritional trials of strength.
The tide of war had turned, but the Allies would find no easy route to victory.
BRITISH COMMANDER BERNARD MONTGOMERY Bernard Law Montgomery was the most successful British commander of World War II, always popular with his troops because of his care not to throw away their lives.
Commanding the Eighth Army in the Western Desert in August 1942, he raised troop morale with his flamboyant presence and resisted pressure from Churchill to begin a premature offensive.
He commanded the land forces at D-Day but was downgraded as American generals came to the fore.
Montgomery demonstrated an unusual boldness in planning Operation Market Garden in September 1944, the airborne assault that failed at Arnhem.
Allied armies ground forward on the Eastern and Italian fronts in the first half of 1944, enjoying an increasing advantage over the Germans in men and materiel.
DEADLOCK ENSUES On January 22,1944, Allied forces were put ashore at Anzio, between the Gustav Line and Rome.
The destruction of the monastery at Monte Cassino by Allied bombers in February also achieved nothing.
On the Eastern Front in 1944 Soviet forces outnumbered the Germans by two to one.
Pushing the Germans back in a series of large-scale offensives, their advance ran out of steam just short of Warsaw in late July.
United States GENERAL MARK CLARK ENTERS ROME, JUNE 1944 KEY BATTLE Stalingrad In 1942 German forces advancing across the Soviet Union were ordered to capture Stalingrad, an industrial center on the river Volga.
Defended to the death by Soviet soldiers, the city turned into a trap in which an entire German army was caught and crushed.
Stalingrad was the first major defeat for Hitler's forces on the Eastern Front, one from which they never fully recovered.
T he city had already been reduced to ruins by Luftwaffe air attacks before the German Sixth Army under General Friedrich Paulus began fighting its way into Stalingrad in September 1942.
General Vasilii Chuikov, in command of the Soviet 62nd Army, had orders to hold the city at any cost.
His troops fought the advancing Germans street by street and building by building with the Volga River at their backs.
Supplies were ferried across the river by night to Soviet soldiers who turned ruined factories and apartment buildings into fortresses, each of which had to be taken at a heavy cost in time and lives.
To prevent the Germans from exploiting their superiority in artillery and aircraft, Chuikov had his men ""hug"" the enemy, the two sides sometimes fighting inside the same building.
Even though German forces reached the River Volga in November they could not dislodge Red Army resistance.
The trap is sprung Meanwhile, Soviet commander Georgi Zhukov had prepared a masterly counterstroke.
On November 19, Soviet forces to the south and north of Stalingrad broke through a defensive perimeter weakly held by Romanians and other Axis allies.
Within four days they had closed their pincers behind Paulus's army, leaving him encircled.
Hitler ordered Paulus to stay put and fight on, supplied by air, but the Luftwaffe did not have sufficient transport aircraft.
In December the Soviet forces around the city fought off a German attempt to break through and relieve the trapped army.
The German troops ran short of food, ammunition, and fuel, as Zhukov tightened the noose.
All hope gone By the third week of January the German Sixth Army was doomed.
Suffering from frostbite and malnutrition, the Germans could barely hght on.
Paulus appealed to Hitler for permission to surrender but it was refused.
Instead, Hitler promoted Paulus to Held marshal to instill resolve, but on January 31, Paulus surrendered.
Within the service, factions argued over whether to devote resources to submarines or surface warships.
Admiral Erich Raeder, navy commander-in-chief until late 1942, instead backed Plan Z to build a fleet of battleships and aircraft carriers.
SONAR DETECTION The Royal Navy believed that it had found the way to overcome the U-boat threat.
By 1939 it had a sonar device known as ASDIC to track submerged U-boats and depth charges to sink them.
However, the reliance on ASDIC ignored the fact that German U-boats spent as much as 90 percent of their time on the surface— and for surface detection, sonar was useless.
BRITISH NAVAL MINE WITH SINKER J The Battle of the Atlantic As a country utterly dependent upon imported food and raw materials—including all of its oil—Britain was uniquely vulnerable to naval blockade.
Had the Germans succeeded in closing the Atlantic trade routes, the British would have been defeated and the United States shut out of the war in Europe.
Not only did they deprive the Royal Navy of French support, but they also gave Germany bases on the Atlantic coasts of Norway and France, from which the Germans could launch sorties into the Atlantic and, following the entry of the Soviet Union into the war, threaten convoys bound for Russia's Arctic ports.
From June 1940 the Royal Navy also had to fight the Italian Navy in the Mediterranean.
The threat to Allied shipping German surface warships suffered huge losses off Norway in spring 1940, but in the early war years they had given Britain some scares.
The heavy cruisers known as ""pocket battleships,"" Admiral Graf Spee and Admiral Scheer, were both deployed with some success raiding commerce ships.
However, Graf Spee was put out of action following the battle of the River Plate in the South Atlantic in December 1939.
The breakout of the powerful battleship Bismarck into the North Atlantic in May 1941 threatened Allied shipping, but after sinking the battle cruiser HMS Hood, the Bismarck was tracked and sunk by a group of Allied battleships, aircraft carriers, and cruisers.
The battleships Scharnhorst and Gneisenau were both out of action by the end of 1943.
However, Donitz's U-boat fleet came close to victory in the battle of the Atlantic.
Several major British vessels were sunk in 1939, but it was only after the U-boat bases moved to Brittany from June 1940 that the Germans mounted a full-scale campaign against Allied shipping.
The British adopted a convoy system for merchant ships in 1939, yet did not have enough escort ships to protect them properly.
Donitz deployed his U-boats in groups known NORTH ATLANTIC 1 r □ □ E Q U-boat campaign El Attacks on Arctic Dates 1940-41 convoys Location Western Dates 1942-43 approaches to Britain Location Arctic Ocean Q U-boat campaign Q Wolf pack attacks Date 1942 on convoys Location Eastern Dates 1942-43 seaboard of United States Location Mid-Atlantic < * 15 MILLION™."" of Allied shipping sunk in the course of the battle of the Atlantic.
In one five-day period in October 1940, a wolf pack sank 32 ships in two convoys.
The Royal Navy responded by increasing the number of escorts and improving the training of its men and equipment.
By March 1941 these incremental changes reached the point where they tipped the balance.
Defending the convoys A Royal Navy destroyer on convoy escort duty attacks a submerged German U-boat with a depth charge during the battle of the Atlantic.
The Canadian Navy expanded and the United States, officially neutral, helped to protect the convoys in the western Atlantic.
Unexpectedly, the United States entry into the war in late 1941 gave the German U-boats a new opening.
In the first half of 1942, the U-boats operated off the United States east coast, where there was no convoy system.
From summer 1942 German U-boats again concentrated in the mid-Atlantic, exploiting the ""air gap"" beyond the range of Allied shorebased patrol aircraft.
The climax came in March 1943, when ENIGMA In World War II all forces had to encipher radio messages, since these were easily intercepted by the enemy.
The Enigma machine was used by German forces as an encryption device; every U-boat, for example, had its own machine on board.
The machine automatically encrypted a message typed on the keyboard and its settings were changed daily.
An operator could also use his own Enigma machine and the daily settings to decode messages that had been received.
The reading of German naval messages is credited as a major contribution to the defeat of the U-boats, although Germany's intelligence was at times equally successful at cracking British naval ciphers.
WINSTON CHURCHILL, IN HIS MEMOIR, ""THE SECOND WORLD WAR"" U-boats sank 480,000 tons of Allied ships in the Atlantic, raising real fears that Britain's lifeline would be severed.
The Allies had steadily improved their equipment for the detection of U-boats, and their codebreakers intermittently succeeded in reading the transmissions of German navy Enigma machines.
Donitz briefly withdrew his U-boats from the Atlantic; when their operations resumed later in the year, the U-boats were no longer a threat to the Allied war effort.
The outcome of the battle of the Atlantic appeared to show the failure of the U-boat, but by the war's end the submarine was evolving into a far more effective weapon.
All German submarines were ordered into the Channel to combat the invasion fleet, yet their impact was negligible.
In return for the sinking of a handful of Allied vessels, 26 U-boats were lost.
NEW, IMPROVED VESSELS The types of U-boat employed in the battle of the Atlantic were ""submersibles,"" rather than true submarines, and could not operate for long periods under the sea.
In 1943 Germany developed the Type XXI submarine, which was capable of operating submerged for days.
Owing to production problems, however, only two Type XXIs saw active service, but the design was the precursor of modern submarines.
The War in the Air Throughout World War II aircraft played a vital role in the land and sea war, but they also fought autonomous air campaigns, carrying out strategic bombing and contesting air superiority.
Germany, Britain, and the United States all sought decisive advantage through air power alone.
Of the many possible uses of air power, the bombing of cities was the focus of most attention in the run-up to World War II— both as strategy and moral conundrum.
Heavy Japanese bombing of Chinese cities «282-83 was also widely condemned.
In both cases, air raids conducted against defenseless targets led to exaggerated expectations of destruction in a war between major powers.
THE ALLIES PREPARE DEFENSES Fear of German air power led Britain in particular to concentrate planning and resources on air defense.
Britain's Royal Air Force developed a radar early warning system and produced new high-performance fighters.
Despite the denunciation of the bombing of cities and their civilian populations by political leaders in Britain and the United States, both countries were keen to develop strategic bombing forces.
To help the German Army's Blitzkrieg ground offensives of 1939 and 1940, the Luftwaffe bombed Warsaw and Rotterdam, but an exclusively aerial campaign only began with the Battle of Britain in the summer of 1940.
Battle of Britain Hermann Goring, commander-in-chief of the Luftwaffe, was ordered by Hitler to drive the RAF from the skies ""in the shortest possible time"" as a prelude to an invasion of Britain.
Fleets of German bombers with Messerschmitt fighter escorts, flying in daylight from bases in northern France, attacked a range of targets, including airfields and factories.
Alerted by radar, ground controllers scrambled RAF fighters to meet the intruders.
The head of RAF Fighter Command, Hugh Dowding, had a clear concept of the battle as an attritional struggle, in which the goal was to keep his aircraft and pilots in being as an effective fighting force.
Their objective was to crush the RAF and degrade Britain's military and economic capacity to make war; only later did Hitler hope that attacks on cities would also produce demoralization among the population.
The first German daylight bombing raids on the city of London were made on September 7, 1940, and in later raids Bomb disposal In the aftermath of a German air raid on London during the Blitz in 1940, a bomb disposal squad gingerly lift an unexploded device from its crater.
For its part, the RAF initially had few resources to combat night bombing but soon began putting radar-equipped night fighters into service.
The RAF also began night bombing raids on Germany in 1940, but at first ineffectually.
British RAF commanders were eager advocates of strategic bombing, but were singularly ill-prepared for it.
Early raids showed that daylight attacks were suicidal, yet Bomber Command was not equipped for night fighting.
At first its bombers could not even locate cities in the dark, let alone the specific factories or railyards that were their targets.
Changing tactics From February 1942 Bomber Command generally gave up its attempts at precision attacks and adopted an ""area bombing"" strategy that aimed to lay waste whole cities and kill or demoralize their civilian inhabitants.
The policy was implemented under the leadership of Air Chief Marshal Sir Arthur Flarris.
Four-engine Lancaster and Flalifax bombers entered service, carrying heavier bomb loads, and various navigational devices that allowed bombs to be dropped with some accuracy.
The Germans responded by developing effective night defenses, their anti-aircraft guns and night fighters taking a heavy toll of British bomber crews.
But with hundreds of RAF bombers taking part in a single raid, German cities suffered grievously.
Raids on Hamburg in July 1943, for example, started a firestorm that killed 40,000 people.
Mustang fighter Later versions of the North American P-51 Mustang had the range to escort Allied bombers to Germany and back.
During 1942 the United States Army Air Force started its own bombing campaign, first from bases in eastern England and later also from North Africa and Italy.
The Americans believed that their B-17 and B-24 bombers were fast enough and had enough defensive firepower to carry out mass daylight raids without prohibitive losses.
They also had the Norden bombsight, a proto-computer that was meant to allow them to hit specific industrial targets—although accuracy proved hard to achieve under combat conditions.
German fighters and AA guns savaged the massed bomber formations; the United States lost 60 bombers on a single day in August 1943.
What was needed was a fighter aircraft with sufficient range to escort the bombers deep into Germany.
Once long-range variants of the P-51 Mustang arrived in late 1943, the balance of the air war over Germany was transformed.
Air victory In mid-1944 the Allies established almost total air superiority over the Germans.
Although Hitler's war production minister, Albert Speer, achieved little less than miracles, relocating industrial plant underground and cruelly coercing maximum productivity from forced labor, the Bomber poster A British poster encourages citizens to invest their money in government bonds to fund the building of bombers.
Technological developments late in World War II—such as jet aircraft and the atom bomb—ensured no air war of quite the same kind would ever be fought again.
NEW TECHNOLOGIES The first atom bomb, developed in the United States in the Manhattan Project, was dropped on Hiroshima on August 6,1945.
Nuclear bombs and warheads gave an apocalyptic destructive power to bomber aircraft and missiles.
The most successful was the Messerschmitt Me 262, used to intercept bombers attacking Germany from July 1944.
The 12,500 The explosive power, in tons of TNT, of the atomic bomb dropped on Hiroshima on August 6, 1945. first operational Allied jet, the British Gloster Meteor, was used chiefly to intercept VI flying bombs over southern England.
THE COST OF STRATEGIC BOMBING Disputes about the morality and effectiveness of strategic bombing have continued ever since the war.
Current estimates calculate that 420,000 German civilians and 70,000 non-Germans were killed.
British and United States bomber crews suffered among the highest percentage casualties of any Allied armed forces in the war.
Aircraft and artillery desperately needed at the fronts were diverted to air defense.
Supplies of fuel, successfully targeted by the Allied air campaign, were also much reduced.
The devastation of German cities in the final months of the war—including the horrific destruction of Dresden in February 1945—reached a point where no further obvious strategic purpose was being served.
The morality of such attacks has increasingly been questioned in the years since the end of the war. the German bomber force took heavy casualties.
By October the Luftwaffe had abandoned their attempts to win daylight command of the air in favor of the night bombing of cities.
Known as the Blitz, this campaign continued throughout the winter, until intensive bombing ended in May 1941 when the majority of German aircraft were shifted to support the invasion of the Soviet Union in Operation Barbarossa.
The Luftwaffe had not been as well prepared for strategic bombing as for tactical air strikes in support of an army 66,000 The number of bomber crew from United States 8th Air Force based in England killed, wounded, or captured in 1942-45—one in three of all the aircrew of the ""Mighty Eighth."" campaign, and did not possess a fourengine heavy bomber.
But the Germans had developed effective techniques for night navigation, using radio signals to guide bombers to their targets.
A single raid on Coventry in November 1940 destroyed a third of the city's housing.
Some 43,000 civilians were killed during the Blitz, by far the heaviest losses to air attack that the world had TECHNOLOGY GERMANY'S ""VENGEANCE WEAPONS"" Germany responded to the devastation of its cities with the ""vengeance weapons""— the VI flying bomb and the V2 rocket.
The Vis were unpiloted jet aircraft, packed with explosives and controlled by a primitive guidance system.
Beginning in June 1944, thousands of these simple but effective devices were fired at London and later also at Antwerp.
Arriving by day and night in all weathers, they caused substantial damage and casualties, although anti-aircraft guns and fighter aircraft soon became skilled in shooting them down.
However, there was no defense against the V2 ballistic missiles, first used in September 1944, again primarily against London and Antwerp.
Fortunately for the Allies, large numbers of these missiles went astray, missing urban areas altogether; their launch sites were also priority targets for Allied air attacks.
THE TEHRAN CONFERENCE The ""Big Three"" Allied leaders—Roosevelt, Stalin, and Churchill—met for a conference at Tehran in November-December 1943.
Here, Churchill and Roosevelt agreed to mount an invasion of France in spring 1944, satisfying the Soviet demand for The number 3 MILLION of military personnel assembled in the UK under Eisenhower's command for the invasion of Europe. a ""second front"" in Western Europe.
PLANS FOR DECEPTION The Germans prepared for a seaborne invasion, strengthening their coastal fortifications in 1944.
However, a successful Allied deception plan led the Germans to believe that Calais was more likely to be the invasion point than Normandy.
The Fall of Hitler By summer 1944 Germany was battling against overwhelming odds, but the Nazi regime did not collapse and the German armies kept on fighting.
The war in Europe only ended when Soviet soldiers raised their flag in the heart of Berlin, where Adolf Hitler had killed himself a few days before.
Victory celebrations Soviet and American troops meet at Torgau on the Elbe River in central Germany on April 25,1945, to celebrate their victory over the Nazis.
Wooden stock; most had a simpler metal type A merican, British, and Canadian forces under General Dwight D Eisenhower landed on beaches in Normandy, northern France, on June 6, 1944.
The D-Day landings clearly showed the material superiority of the Allies—in industrial output, manpower, and organizational ability.
American forces suffered heavy losses on one of the five landing beaches, codenamed Omaha.
The failure of an attempt by German officers and bureaucrats to assassinate Hitler in July ensured the survival of Nazi rule and a fight to the death.
Paris was freed on August 25, by which time the Allies had landed in southern France, thus opening up a new front.
The Germans still had to keep the largest part of their forces on the Eastern Front to face the Soviet's huge army.
From late June into August, the Soviets won a crushing series of victories in Belarus and the Ukraine.
Liberating Europe As the end of the war approached and occupied countries were liberated, a number of political disputes surfaced.
Allied advances into Germany in 1945 German forces were overwhelmed by a simultaneous onslaught from east and west.
The Soviets and the Western Allies did not race one another to occupy territory but followed an agreed strategy.
Most countries had governments-inexile but not all of them commanded popular support.
General de Gaulle's London-based Free French forces succeeded in establishing control of France at the liberation, despite the substantial Communist element in the internal French resistance movement.
In Yugoslavia various monarchist and communist resistance groups vied for Allied support, the Communist Josip Broz Tito winning out.
In Greece a monarchist government-in-exile was only able to regain control with the support of the British Army.
Italians were split three ways, some fighting with the Allies on behalf of the Italian government, others joining Mussolini as support to the German forces, and partisans fighting Sten gun and Tokarev pistol The Sten gun was a cheap, but effective, British 9mm submachine gun, much used by resistance fighters in Europe.
Fallen eagle Russian soldiers observe a fallen Nazi symbol in the mins of Berlin after the fall of the city to the Soviet army in May 1945.
The Allied victory in Europe resulted in the division of Europe—and of Germany—by the ""Iron Curtain"" between Communist and non-Communist states. under Communist leadership for the liberation of northern Italy.
In August 1944 the Polish Home Army, loyal to the London-based government, staged an uprising in Warsaw.
Soviet forces, within sight of the city, dropped supplies and allowed a Polish division to fight its way in.
Despite their best efforts, the uprising was soon crushed by German troops. people suffered desperately, especially at the hands of Russian soldiers, but sympathy was in short supply as the overrunning of camps such as Auschwitz revealed the mass murder practiced by the Nazi regime under the cloak of war.
Advancing American and Soviet troops met amicably on the Elbe River on April 25.
By agreement between the Allies, the costly honor of taking Berlin fell to the Soviets.
On April 30, as Soviet forces fought their way into the German capital.
On May 2 German commanders surrendered in Italy, and in Germany on May 4.
Attempting to repeat the success of May 1940, he launched an offensive through the Ardennes region of Belgium.
But by February 1945 this so-called Battle of the Bulge was over and the scene was set for the final act.
Soviet forces entered Germany from the east, closing in on Berlin, and in March the Western Allies crossed the Rhine.
The German THE AFTERMATH Some of the most prominent Nazi leaders were tried for war crimes at the Nuremberg trials from 1945-46 by the International Military Tribunal.
Changes to European borders were far slighter than after World War I The Soviet Union kept the Baltic states and eastern Poland, while Poland took over a vast area of pre-war Germany.
THE COLD WAR During 1945-48 Communist-led governments ruled all Soviet-occupied areas in Eastern Europe, while democratic governments aligned with the United States returned in Western Europe.
United States GENERAL DWIGHT D EISENHOWER When General Eisenhower commanded Allied forces in North Africa in November 1942, it was his first combat assignment.
He had several temperamental generals under his command, such as Patton and Montgomery, yet proved an ideal boss.
As Supreme Allied Commander during the Normandy landings and later campaigns in Europe, he kept his bickering subordinates under control and liaised comfortably with political leaders.
WITNESS TO WAR Wartime Odyssey As well as Red Cross food parcels, British POWs in Germany received personal parcels from relatives and friends.
It was in one of these that Lance-Corporal Les Kerswill was sent a pair of well-made boots by his mother.
T \T I wenty-year-old Les was one of the tens of thousands of young men sent to France in late 1939 to join the British Expeditionary Force.
Early one morning, just after Christmas, the men of his battalion—4th Battalion the Royal Berkshire Regiment, stationed in Reading— were woken up and given orders to prepare to leave immediately.
From Reading they traveled by train to Southampton, where they embarked on a crowded troopship to Cherbourg.
Les would not return to England until the very last day of the war in Europe, in May 1945.
In northeastern France, the Berkshires lived under canvas, in farm buildings, and even in an empty chateau as they prepared to counter the threat of German invasion.
On May 10, 1940, they were ordered forward in the attempt to stop the German advance through Belgium.
Constantly on the move, plugging gaps in the line, they were bombed and strafed by Stukas and fought a number of short, bloody actions with the enemy.
Captured Outmaneuvered and outgunned, the British retreated to the beaches of Dunkirk.
Les was among those detailed to make a last-ditch stand against the Germans to give the rest of the British forces time to make their escape.
Some 340,000 troops—British and French—were shipped back to safety in England.
As the German bombing intensified, Les, who had been wounded by a piece of spent shrapnel, could see Dunkirk burning behind him.
He and his few remaining comrades had been in action now for three weeks and, exhausted by their efforts, fell asleep in a ditch.
Les was imprisoned in a series of camps in Germany, where he worked in a variety of jobs, ranging from digging ditches to working in a schnapps distillery.
It was there that he received the Red Cross parcel with new boots from his mother.
His own army boots had long since fallen to pieces and he was making do with wooden clogs.
As the Soviets advanced westward into Poland, the opportunity arose to put the boots to good use.
The Germans often had to transfer prisoners away from battle zones and on one such occasion Les and a friend managed to escape.
March to freedom In the winter of 1944-45, Poland's roads were filled with all kinds of people on the move.
Keeping out of the way of the retreating Germans were refugees, deserters, and escaped prisoners of war.
Almost all were Royal Berkshires cap badge The Chinese dragon commemorates the exploits of the regiment in the First Opium War of 1839-42. moving west or south ahead of the advancing Soviet armies.
Germans detailed to escort prisoners were more concerned with saving their own skins.
Scrounging food from farmers and sleeping in barns and cowsheds, he A mark on the leather upper is a souvenir of a night spent on a Czech farm.
When Les tried to put his boots on again in the morning, they were frozen solid.
The leather was burned when the farmer's wife put them on her stove to thaw.
Les in his uniform before the war Many of Les Kerswill's memories of his wartime escape are still astonishingly vivid, although he is sometimes uncertain about the exact order in which the events happened. and his companion, ""Lofty"" Harris, had to rely on their wits and the kindness of local people.
From Poland they eventually found their way into Bohemia— the part of Czechoslovakia annexed by Hitler in 1939.
By the time they reached Bavaria in southern Germany, the Russians were close behind, while the Americans were advancing rapidly from the west.
At Regensburg the two men were taken in by the United States 3rd Army and treated to huge meals of frankfurters and beans.
After helping the Americans to interrogate German prisoners, Les was flown to Reims in France, then back to England—just in time for VE Day, May 8, 1945.
LES KERSWILL, DESCRIBING HOW HE SURVIVED ON HIS WALK FROM POLAND The original hobnails on the soles of the boots survived the journey more or less intact.
Les’s mother had chosen well when she bought these military-style boots to send to her son.
They show obvious signs of wear and tear, but are remarkably well preserved.
The hee s of the boots British prisoners after Dunkirk German soldiers march their captives off to camps in Germany.
Initial lightning victories failed to give the Japanese the impregnable strategic situation they sought, and a vigorous American reaction gradually turned the war around, until Japan was fighting a desperate defense against mounting odds.
J apan's war plan was to capture the British and Dutch Southeast Asian colonies—Malaya, Singapore, and the Dutch East Indies —and the American-controlled Philippines.
At the outset the main threat to Japan's plans, the United States Pacific Fleet, would be crippled by a huge surprise attack on the naval base at Pearl Harbor in Hawaii, buying the Japanese time to establish a far-flung defensive perimeter in the Pacific.
The Japanese leaders hoped that the US—which they saw as a nation lacking in martial spirit—would be daunted by Japan's strong position and, instead of marshaling their superior resources, make peace on terms favoring Japan.
Pearl Harbor Although the Americans knew that war with Japan was imminent, they were utterly unprepared when the Japanese aircraft carriers struck the naval base early on December 7, 1941.
Eight United States battleships were sunk or disabled and Jungle war in New Guinea Allied troops in New Guinea had to fight in intolerable conditions, although survival was often even harder for their poorly supplied Japanese enemies.
Such an attack, delivered before a declaration of war, was a blow the Americans would never forget or forgive.
Japan's attacks in Southeast Asia were synchronized with the Pearl Harbor raid, with troop landings in Malaya and air strikes on United States bases in the Philippines.
Japan's troops were well trained and equipped for fighting in jungle terrain, and were ably supported by aircraft.
They advanced rapidly through Malaya and in mid-February 1942 forced the surrender of the British base at Singapore, a mortal blow to British prestige in Asia.
Japanese landings in the Philippines were equally successful, trapping American and Filipino troops in the Bataan peninsula.
General MacArthur, was ordered to leave before the majority of the soldiers surrendered in April.
The Japanese Navy brushed aside Allied warships attempting to defend the Dutch East Indies, which were then Q r\ percent of the torpedoes launched U vj by Japanese aircraft in the attack on Pearl Harbor in Hawaii struck an American ship.
BEFORE A Japan's military-dominated government was convinced that only the creation of an empire in Asia would give it the resources to be one of the world's major powers.
With France and the Netherlands defeated and Britain under siege, Japan saw an opportunity to take over European colonies in Southeast Asia, rich in oil, rubber, and other strategic materials.
Japan signed the Tripartite Pact with Germany and Italy in September 1940.
The Japanese Army leadership favored further expansion from Manchuria into Mongolia and Siberia, but a short border war with the Soviet Union in 1938-39 ended in defeat at the Battle of Khalkin Gol.
Japan signed a non-aggression pact with the Soviet Union in April 1941.
Stalin, facing a potential German attack, needed security in the East, while Japan redirected its attention toward Southeast Asia.
JAPAN JOINS THE AXIS Germany's victories in Europe in April to June 1940 had a profound impact on Japanese PREPARATIONS FOR WAR The United States stood as a major obstacle to Japanese expansionism, backing China against Japan and protesting vehemently in August 1940 when Vichy France allowed Japanese troops to establish bases in northern French Indochina.
The United States responded by imposing an oil blockade on Japan and demanding Japan's withdrawal from Indochina and China.
In October 1941 General Tojo Hideki became prime minister of Japan and began to prepare for a war in Southeast Asia and the Pacific.
By the end of May 1942 the Japanese had also taken most of Burma from the British.
These successes were exhilarating for the Japanese, but there were soon signs that their strategy was failing.
The raid on Pearl Harbor had not destroyed the United States Navy's aircraft carriers, which were fortuitously at sea at the time.
American cryptographers had also managed to break Japanese naval codes, giving the United States command an inestimable advantage.
Japan's first defeats As the Japanese moved to extend their defensive perimeter to include the Solomon Islands and New Guinea in May 1942, they were met by the United States carriers in the Coral Sea.
This battle ended in a draw but was followed by a more decisive encounter at Midway in June.
Four Japanese carriers were sunk, a defeat from which Japan's naval aviation never recovered.
From August 1942 Japanese and American forces fought a ferocious series of battles for control of Guadalcanal in the Solomons.
Samurai poster A samurai scatters the Allied fleet, the flags of Japan's Axis allies behind him.
Despite their alliance, the Japanese and Germans made no real effort to coordinate their strategy.
General MacArthur led an Australian and American thrust through New Guinea and the Solomon Islands, aiming eventually to return to the Philippines.
Admiral Chester Nimitz began an ""island-hopping"" campaign by the United States Navy and Marines across the Central Pacific.
This offensive relied on the largest shipbuilding program in history, providing the United States with The Japanese never had time to consolidate their rapidly won Southeast Asian empire, although they managed to hold onto most of it until the end of the war.
SUPPORT FOR JAPAN The Japanese referred to their conquests in Asia as a ""Co-Prosperity Sphere,"" styling themselves as leaders of an Asian liberation from European colonial rule.
This idea won some followers—the Indian National Army and Burmese nationalists fought on Japan's side—but mostly Asians suffered brutal oppression and exploitation.
DUjUUU Dutch, and British Empire prisoners of war taken by the Japanese from 1941-42.
About one-third of them died in captivity. an overwhelming superiority in aircraft carriers and a vast fleet of landing craft for amphibious operations.
The Japanese knew that they lacked the industrial and manpower resources to match the United States.
The readiness of Japanese troops to fight to the death ensured that the war would be fought at mounting cost.
At Tarawa in the Gilbert Islands, in November 1943, United States Marines had more than 1,000 men killed taking a small coral atoll defended by some 3,000 Japanese, only 17 of whom survived to be taken prisoner.
LOSS OF MERCHANT SHIPPING From 1943 Allied submarines began to take a heavy toll of Japanese merchant shipping, making it impossible to transport essential materials to Japan.
Eighty percent of Japanese merchant shipping was sunk by the war's end.
THE WAR CONTINUES Allied forces fought in New Guinea and the Solomons into 1945, and invaded the Philippines from 1944.
Jun 4-6,1942 Hawauai Pearl Harbor ""f on * Sunda Strait/' //\ /r> Feb 28, 1942 ^ ' T^r Britain , NEW Kwajalein ij.
The Allies bypassed these gains, heading directly for Japan in 1944-45.
The war ended with the apocalyptic destruction of Japanese cities from the air.
I n spring 1944, the Japanese Army was still able to mount offensives in Asia.
Lasting from April through to December, Operation Ichi-Go was the largest-scale Japanese campaign against China's National Revolutionary Army since 1938.
In China the Japanese troops carried all before them; in Burma their soldiers were defeated and driven back southward.
But neither outcome was strategically significant, for growing naval and aerial superiority in the Pacific allowed the Americans to thrust directly toward Japan.
America's Pacific advance In June 1944 the United States Navy and Marines opened a campaign to seize the Mariana Islands with landings on Saipan.
In desperation, Japanese admirals sought to bring their still powerful battleships and cruisers into play for a final epic showdown.
In October, when United States naval forces massed to support landings in the Philippines at Leyte Gulf, every available Japanese warship was sent to attack them.
After the defeat at Leyte Gulf, Japan's position was objectively hopeless, but the determination of its soldiers never wavered as the United States pressed island by At the start of 1944 Japan still held large areas of Asia, but its position in the Pacific was desperate and a powerful American secret weapon was nearing completion.
ALLIED SUPERIORITY The balance of naval forces in the Pacific was turning against Japan by 1944— the United States launched 90 aircraft carriers in 1943-44, while Japan launched seven.
The new American naval aircraft were superior to their Japanese counterparts and their pilots were better trained.
Early on in the war the Japanese mainland was protected from Allied air attack by sheer distance.
United States bomber aircraft launched from carriers attacked the capital, Tokyo, in April 1942 , but this was a one-off.
A sustained bombing campaign had to wait for the introduction of the very long-range B-29 Superfortress in the summer of 1944.
ATOMIC WARFARE In the early war years Britain, Germany, Japan, and the United States were all aware of the possibility of creating an atom bomb.
Only the United States devoted the necessary resources to nuclear research and development in its Manhattan Project.
The bomb was originally intended for use against Germany, but at a meeting between Roosevelt and Churchill in September 1944, it was agreed that if Germany had surrendered by the time the device was ready, it might be used against Japan.
Up to 90 percent of the buildings in the city were destroyed or badly damaged. island closer to mainland Japan.
The United States Marines became more experienced at carrying out opposed landings, utilizing a range of new amphibious vehicles and tactics, but even when backed up by naval and air bombardments, they found Japanese resistance harder and harder to overcome.
The taking of the islands The United States taking of Saipan saw some 13,000 casualties.
Iwo Jirna, an island of volcanic rock, was taken in February-March 1945 at a cost of 26,000 casualties.
The next target was Okinawa, one of the Ryukyu Islands and officially part of Japan itself.
These intense battles, fought in confined spaces with no possible retreat, ended in the near annihilation of the Japanese defenders.
On both Saipan and Iwo Jima more 21,700 The number of Japanese soldiers and sailors killed in the battle for Iwo Jima in February-March 1945. than 95 percent of enemy troops died.
Japanese commanders adopted a policy of no surrender, instructing their troops to launch suicidal banzai charges; United States soldiers were not able to take prisoners.
A massive Allied naval force was assembled to support the assault on Okinawa, with a significant Royal Navy contingent joining the United States Fifth Fleet.
Stationed within range of airbases on the Japanese mainland, the Allied warships were assaulted by aircraft— used by the Japanese to mount suicide attacks.
Although these inflicted some losses, they failed to disrupt the plans.
One of the fundamental objectives of the Allied forces in the seizure of the islands was to bring Japan under aerial bombardment.
In July 1944 American B-29 bombers began raiding Japan from Nationalist-controlled China, but the extreme range of Japan's mainland limited the B-29s' effectiveness.
It was not until October 1944 that a sustained campaign of bombing would become possible, when airbases were built on the Marianas.
Attacking by daylight at high altitude, the bombers had difficulty locating their targets.
In March 1945, under General Curtis LeMay, the B-29s adopted new tactics, assaulting Japanese cities at low altitude by night and mostly dropping incendiary bombs.
A raid on Tokyo on March 9 ignited a massive firestorm, killing up to 80,000 people.
The defeat of Germany in May 1945 and the fall of Okinawa the following month left Japan facing certain defeat.
The high cost of peace The B-29 bombers were devastating Japan's virtually defenseless cities while an Allied naval blockade threatened the Japanese people with starvation.
The United States Army was preparing for an invasion of Japan, with landings on Kyushu planned for November.
The Japanese government 100,000 Raising the flag on Iwo Jima f United States Marines raise the Stars and Stripes on JK&.w Mount Suribachi, Iwo Jima, February 23 -*— ■— 1945.
Subduing Japanese resistance on the island took five weeks. r Marianas.
It called on Japan to surrender absolutely; the Japanese government rejected it.
Three days later the city of Nagasaki was hit and Soviet forces invaded Manchuria.
On August 14 Emperor Hirohito of Japan told his government that they must ""bear the unbearable"" and consent to Allied terms.
KAMIKAZE The Japanese air forces started using suicide tactics to attack Allied warships in October 1944.
Outnumbered and outclassed, the Japanese pilots were no longer able to cause significant damage with bombs and torpedoes.
Kamikaze units were an elite at first, but during the battle for Okinawa in 1945, suicide tactics became a cynical form of warfare.
Hundreds of young, barely trained men were presented with headbands that depicted the rising sun before being flung into battle.
Few would penetrate the United States fleet defenses and succeed in crashing their aircraft onto an enemy warship.
The kamikaze sank some 50 Allied ships, but at the cost of around 4,000 pilots’ lives.
EMPEROR HIROHITO, SURRENDER BROADCAST, AUGUST 15, 1945 AFTER The approximate number of Japanese soldiers killed in the battle for the island of Okinawa in April-June 1945. was split, though.
The ""war party"" believed a suicidal fight to the death would salvage Japan's spirit; the ""peace party"" wanted an armistice that would keep the enemy off Japanese soil—a deal the United States would never have conceded.
At the Allied Potsdam Conference in July 1945, the Soviet Union agreed to join in the war against the Japanese.
Meanwhile, atom bombs, tested in New Mexico on July, 16 were sent to the Japan formally surrendered on board USS Missouri in Tokyo Bay on September 2, 1945.
THE AFTERMATH After the war Japan was controlled by General Douglas MacArthur.
Some Japanese leaders, including General Tojo Hideki, were tried as war criminals, but Emperor Hirohito was left on the throne.
Estimates vary widely from 80,000 to 140,000 for Hiroshima and 35,000 to 70,000 for Nagasaki.
The Nazis murdered millions of their own and other countries' citizens.
The British death toll was around 350,000, including more than 60,000 civilians.
Their task was to reinforce other British troops and the Afghan police in the ongoing battle against Taliban forces active in the region.
This never came to nuclear conflict, but conventional wars continue across the globe, especially in Africa and the Middle East.
CONFLICTS AFTER WORLD WAR II 1945-PRESENT A fter World War II, the United States and the Soviet Union emerged as the world's two superpowers, and instead of disarming they embarked on a headlong arms race that saw the development of awesomely powerful nuclear arsenals.
These arsenals and other high-tech equipment were developed for use in a third world war that never happened.
The United States intervened militarily on a large scale against communist movements in North Korea and later in Vietnam, but the practice of ""limited war"" prevented escalation to a superpower conflict.
This mode of warfare, widely adopted by anti-colonial movements, used advanced infantry weapons such as the AK47 and the RPG7 rocket launcher.
Against guerrillas the major powers' arsenals proved largely ineffectual, although the helicopter gave mobility and firepower to counterinsurgency forces.
Decolonization left a range of festering regional disputes in its wake.
In particular, the creation of the state of Israel gave rise to a series of Israeli-Arab wars that were testing-grounds for state-of-the-art conventional weaponry mostly supplied by the superpowers, who inevitably backed rival sides in any regional conflict.
By the 1980s cumulative changes in military technology had transformed the battlefield.
Missiles were . ubiquitous, computers and sensors made ^ * effective, and stealth technology (which renders SAS desert combat vehicle aircraft, ships, and Named the Pink Panther after submarines invisible to its camouflage, this vehicle is used radar, infrared, and sonar by the UK SAS in desert operations, detection systems) made some attack forces all but invulnerable to less sophisticated defenses.
When the ending of the Cold War changed the rules of the strategic game, the United States was able to demonstrate the superiority of its arsenal of cruise missiles and smart bombs in the demolition of the Iraqi army in 1991.
The post-Cold-War world proved to be no more peaceful than the old one, however.
Wars continued to proliferate, although they did not escalate into conflicts between the major powers.
The collapse of the Soviet Union was followed by widespread nationalist conflicts, the Middle East remained chronically unstable, and warfare in Africa was endemic.
The electronic battlefield Interventions in Iraq and Afghanistan in the 21st century showed again that, once war descended to the guerrilla and terrorist level, major powers had little advantage on the ground over enemies equipped with up-to-date infantry weapons.
In response to public dismay at even light casualties, the United States sought to increase the distance between killer and killed by deploying unmanned drone aircraft to attack enemy targets, their operators sitting hundreds of miles away in perfect safety.
Meanwhile, international terrorists, only too ready to die for their cause, used suicide tactics to target soldiers and civilians.
Mujahideen victory in Afghanistan Ahmed Shah Massoud's mujahideen capture Bagram from the Taliban on October 20,1996.
The town is a key junction between the Panjshir Valley and Kabul, the capital of Afghanistan.
Predominantly American UN forces drive the invaders back, but then China intervenes on the side of the North.
Threat of war between the United States and the USSR is averted when the Soviets withdraw their missiles from Cuba.
RPG used by mujahideen against Soviets in Afghanistan A Che Guevara 1964 Gulf of Tonkin incident leads to heavy United States involvement in Vietnam.
Country is sucked into conflict on its eastern border between Rwanda and Hutu refugees.
Submarine-launched missiles Because submarines are difficult to detect, submarine-launched nuclear missiles, like this United States Trident, gave nations the ability to retaliate quickly to a surprise attack, deterring such an attack being made in the first place.
PLANNING FOR PEACE In 1945 the three main Allied wartime leaders— Churchill, Roosevelt—and Stalin met, first at Yalta in the Crimea, and then at Potsdam outside Berlin to plan the postwar world.
They agreed a four-way division, with France, of Germany and Austria, settled the new eastern and western borders of Poland, and allowed the USSR a free hand in Central Europe.
I The distance in kilometers I UU , across Sovietdominated East Germany, between West Berlin and West Germany.
BERLIN DIVIDED Although the German capital, Berlin, fell to Soviet troops in 1945, and was within the Soviet zone of occupied Germany, it was agreed that the city would be divided between the four Allies.
The Western Allies would be able to reach Berlin from West Germany along road, rail, and air corridors through the Soviet zone.
The Cold War After the hot war of World War II, a Cold War of ideas and propaganda broke out between the former allies of the Communist East and capitalist West.
The Cold War kept the peace in Europe for 50 years but sparked conflict in other continents and threatened an annihilating nuclear exchange. he end of World War II in Europe brought peace but not security.
Soviet troops had freed the east from Nazi rule, while American and other Allied troops had liberated the west.
The two sides faced each other along a frontier nicknamed the Iron I MUTUALLY ASSURED DESTRUCTION The form of nuclear stalemate in which each side has the ability to destroy the other, even after being attacked first.
The USSR helped to set up Communist states in the east by 1948, while democratic governments resumed control of the liberated countries in the west.
The Marshall Plan In 1947 United States President Truman promised to help any country being threatened by a Communist takeover.
He pledged immediate aid to Greece, then enduring a bitter civil war between royalists and Communists.
The Marshall Plan was open to any country in Europe, but only those in the West accepted.
The Communist bloc formed Comecon, the Council for Mutual Economic Assistance, in 1949, tying their economies to the Soviet Union.
The USSR feared a reunited Germany, while the United States and its Allies wanted to rebuild the country as a peaceful, pro-Western state.
Their differences came to a head in 1948, when the Western Allies merged their zones and introduced a new currency for West Berlin.
The USSR responded by cutting road and rail links between the city and the West.
With the city facing starvation, the Western Allies began to airlift up to 13,000 tons of supplies into the city every day.
The airlift lasted almost a year, until the USSR ended the blockade in May 1949.
The Berlin blockade showed that, while both sides would stand their ground, neither wanted to face armed confrontation.
Nuclear weapons The Soviets exploded their first nuclear bomb in 1949, ending the United States nuclear monopoly.
Both sides then developed increasingly powerful thermonuclear weapons in the 1950s.
Nuclear weapons were initially designed to be dropped from aircraft but in 1957 the USSR tested the first intercontinental ballistic missile; unlike bombers, these missiles were impossible to intercept.
Both the United States and the USSR deployed numbers of these weapons and, from the 1960s, versions launched from submarines.
A system of deterrence gradually developed; neither side could use its nuclear weapons for fear of a devastating counter-strike.
PRESIDENT HARRY TRUMAN, ADDRESSING CONGRESS, MARCH 12, 1947 KEY MOMENT THE CUBAN MISSILE CRISIS On October 14, 1962, a United States U-2 spy plane photographed a Soviet missile site under construction in Cuba, just 90 miles (145 km) from the United States.
President John Kennedy imposed a naval blockade on Cuba and demanded the removal of the missiles.
The world waited anxiously as the two sides faced each other down, the USSR refusing to comply unless the United States removed missiles from Turkey.
A deal was reached on October 28 that saw the Soviet missiles removed in return for a United States promise not to invade Cuba.
KGB CAMERA CONCEALED IN A GLUE STICK 4.5mm barrel I y u Hidden camera Secret services Spies on both sides of the Cold War were equipped with disguised, concealed, and miniaturized equipment with which to take photographs, record voices, and eavesdrop on their opponents without their knowledge.
STASI PEN CONTAINING HIDDEN MICROPHONE KGB LIPSTICK PISTOL Reel-to-reel tape uprising in Hungary in 1956, built a wall to seal East Berlin from the West in 1961, and crushed new reforms in Czechoslovakia in 1968.
Alliance systems tied countries everywhere to one side or another, despite the growth of a non-aligned movement headed by, among others, India and Yugoslavia.
Aware that deterrence might fail catastrophically, both sides tried to reduce tension.
Treaties made during the 1960s limited nuclear testing and sought to prevent the spread of nuclear weapons to new countries.
The United States and the Soviet Union agreed to limit their nuclear arsenals in 1972, the first stage in a process known as detente.
Tension between the two sides over human rights abuses in the East, the placing of a new generation of shorterrange Soviet and United States missiles in Europe, STASI MINIATURE RECORDER and the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan in 1979 turned detente into deep freeze during the 1980s.
A new era The United States response under President Ronald Reagan was to raise military spending by 50 percent.
The Soviet economy was unable to compete with the new level of American military developments, but the resulting confrontation continued until Mikhail Gorbachev came to power in the USSR in 1985.
Committed to a reform of his country through policies of glasnost and perestroika , he began a series of summit meetings with Reagan that removed all intermediate-range missiles from Europe, relaxing military tensions across the continent.
However, Gorbachev's reforms also meant that Communism weakened its hold in the USSR and across Eastern Europe.
With the collapse of the USSR in 1991, the Cold War came to an end. f » The Cold War ended as Communism collapsed across Europe and the Soviet Union itself began to disintegrate.
Opposition parties were legalized in Hungary, while the Polish elected the first non-Communist government in Eastern Europe since 1948.
Hungary opened up its borders to the West, thus tearing the Iron Curtain open.
The Berlin Wall— the hated symbol of the divided city—was torn down in 1989, and East and West Germany were reunified in October 1990.
A PIECE OF THE BERLIN WALL THE USSR Gorbachev's attempts to reform the USSR led to growing unrest and demands for independence from the country's 15 individual republics.
Hardline Communists staged a coup in August 1991, but were defeated by Russia's new leader, Boris Yeltsin.
One by one, the republics declared independence, forcing him to resign as president on Christmas Day 1991, bringing the USSR itself to an end.
Huge armies fought massive battles in a war little known in the West but which has continued to have a huge impact right up to the present day.
Nationalists and Communists collaborated to some extent in fighting the Japanese, but both also prepared for a later struggle over the control of China.
I before_ War had raged almost continuously in China since the 1920s, as first rival warlords fought for power, and then Mao Zedong's Communists challenged the Nationalists.
Nationalist army enters Kweilin Continued fighting between Nationalists and Communists, and then Chinese and Japanese, left many towns and cities in the populous east of China in ruins.
CIVIL UNREST In 1911 Sun Zhongshan's Nationalist party overthrew the Qing dynasty and declared China a republic.
Rival warlords fought for power until his eventual successor, General Jiang Jieshi, established a national government with its capital at Nanjing in 1928.
His rule was challenged by the Chinese Communists led by Mao Zedong, who set up a Soviet republic in Jiangxi province, but after Nationalist pressure forced them to abandon it in 1934, their troops and their families set out on the Long March to a new base in the northern Shaanxi province.
T he renewal of the Chinese Civil War after Japan's surrender at the end of World War II saw the Communists begin with most of the advantages.
The Communists had led popular resistance to the Japanese occupation and had gained expertise in guerrilla warfare.
Their arsenal was now increased with enough weapons for 600,000 troops, seized from the Japanese by the Soviet forces that had occupied the province of Manchuria at the very end of the war, before handing the arms and, in effect, the province over to the Communists.
In contrast, the Nationalist army had mainly held the rural south and west and increasingly lacked the support of the people.
The army quickly seized the coastal cities from the Japanese as they departed, helped by a United States sea and air lift that transported 500,000 Nationalist troops into central and northern China.
The Nationalists had been allies of the United States during the war and expected that alliance to continue in peace.
In October 1945, as both sides tried to consolidate their territory, peace talks sponsored by the United States ambassador failed to find any agreement.
The Nationalist army then moved The number of days it took the Communists to defeat the Nationalists at the battle of Xuzhou. north, only to find, in January 1946, that its progress into Manchuria was blocked by a US-negotiated ceasefire.
The rival armies now regrouped before hostilities were renewed in earnest in spring.
The five-million-strong Nationalist army lined up across northern China, cutting Manchuria off from the rest of the country, while other divisions attacked Communist strongholds to their south and west.
CHINESE PTRD anti-tank rifle Manufactured in the USSR during World War II, the PTRD was supplied in large quantities to Chinese Communist forces during the Civil War.
It was most effective when used against light armored vehicles. smaller offensives, killing or capturing some 400,000 Nationalist troops during 1947 and obtaining some useful heavy guns.
In late 1947 the Communist Fourth Field Army under Lin Biao took the offensive in Manchuria.
His troops split the Nationalists into distinct pockets and picked them off one by one until they captured Mukden in November 1948, the last Nationalist garrison in the province of Manchuria.
The decisive battle The biggest formal battle of the war began in September 1948.
Led by Ch'en Yi, the Communists' Third Army moved east, out of Shaanxi province, and into Shandong province south of Beijing, pushing the Nationalist's Seventh Army, led by Du Yuming, south toward the Huai He River.
In theory, he had some 500,000 men available, but many Nationalist troops were disloyal and at least four divisions in the center of Du's line changed allegiance to the Communists, joining the total of 800,000 troops who defected during the course of the war.
With the enemy center now disintegrating, the Communists attacked the two wings during November and December, cutting their communications, surrounding their troops, and bombarding them into surrender.
The battle was won on January 10,1949, when the Communists at last took Xuzhou.
The situation was so bad for the Nationalists that Jiang Jieshi ordered his air force to bomb his own lines, killing many of his own troops, to prevent arms and equipment from falling into Communist USSR hands.
The defeat was disastrous for the Nationalists, who lost 250,000 men, among them the commanders of two army groups.
The Communists were now on the offensive, with far greater firepower, mobility, numbers, and popular support than the Nationalists, who were ill equipped and poorly led.
Nationalist forces defeated; Jiang Jieshi withdraws Beijing Jan 1949 '■** Shenyahg Nov 1948 , Mauser automatic pistol Many unlicensed copies of the German Mauser C96 pistol were manufactured in China in the first half of the 20th century and were used by both sides in the Civil War. where it was welcomed as the one force that could bring the long years of war and occupation to an end.
The fall of Beijing brought the Communists control of all north and east China.
In April Communist troops began to move south, taking the Nationalist capital, Nanjing, without a fight, on April 24 and then the commercial city of Shanghai on May 27.
Faced with defeat and mass desertions, in July the Nationalist leaders decided to flee to the offshore island of Taiwan, taking the nation's art and treasure collection and gold reserves.
On October 1, 1949, Mao Zedong stood on the Gate of Heavenly Peace in Beijing and announced the formation of the People's Republic of China.
Other than that, China has rarely intervened directly in the affairs of other nations.
China exploded an atom bomb in 1964, becoming the world's fifth nuclear power.
Since 1949 Communist China has exercised growing power and influence in the world.
Mao Zedong's revolutionary zeal inspired revolutionaries in other countries.
TAIWAN At the end of the Chinese Civil War, Nationalist forces controlled only Taiwan and a few small offshore islands.
Neither Nationalist Taiwan nor Communist China recognized the other, Taiwan claiming to be the legitimate government of all China and holding China's seat in the United Nations until expelled in 1971.
A defense treaty with the United States in 1954 guaranteed Taiwan's independence.
Relations with China remain tense to this day, although direct air and shipping routes were established in 2008.
FOREIGN RULE Following the First Sino-Japanese War of 1894-95, Korea gained independence from China, but soon became the subject of intense economic and political rivalry between Russia and Japan.
In 1910 Japan formally annexed Korea, ruling it until Japan's defeat in World War II in 1945.
The Korean War DIVISION At the end of the war, the United States and USSR agreed that Soviet troops would occupy Korea north of the 38°N parallel, while American troops occupied the south, pending the establishment of a unified, independent, democratic Korea.
Soviet troops remained in place until the establishment in Pyongyang in September 1948 of the Soviet-backed Korean People's Democratic Republic.
United States troops remained until June 1949 to support the newly formed Republic of Korea, set up in Seoul in August 1948.
UN attempts to reunite the country failed when the USSR did not support all-Korean elections.
Border incursions by the rival sides increased tension on the peninsula.
The North Korean invasion of South Korea to reunite the divided peninsula was the first major open battle of the Cold War, pitting former allies—the US, USSR, and China—on opposite sides.
The war lasted for three years and ended in stalemate, the unity of the divided country still not achieved today.
E quipped with arms from the USSR and with a tacit agreement from Communist China to send military support if required.
North Korea made a surprise dawn attack on South Korea on June 25, 1950.
Statements made by senior American figures suggesting that the United States might not defend South Korea against such an invasion may have played a part in inspiring the move.
Seven infantry divisions and one armored division headed south, capturing the South Korean capital, Seoul, within three days.
Maximum range 25,700 yd Many of the North Korean troops had fought in the recent Chinese Civil War; they were skilled and experienced fighters and had the advantage of operating on home territory.
The South was ill prepared for the attack and appealed for international support.
The United States pushed a resolution through the United Nations Security Council—the USSR was boycotting the council (and was thus unable to use its veto power), while the pro-US Chinese Nationalist government of Taiwan occupied China's UN seat—and gained approval to lead an international force to stop the 4 attack.
United States general Douglas Ammunition load 20 rounds Korean War Dates 1950-53 Location North and South Korea MacArthur, then commander of the post-World War II occupation forces in Japan (the closest sizable body of United States troops), was appointed commander.
The first UN troops arrived on July 1, but were immediately pushed back by 23 ft barrel North Korean forces.
Throughout July and August the UN and South Korean troops retreated to a defensive perimeter line around the port of Pusan in the far southeast.
General Walton Walker, did not at first have enough troops to defend this line but made good use of intelligence to warn him of North Korean attacks and concentrate his forces against them.
The arrival of reinforcements, British troops included, by the end of August helped to stabilize the situation, while bombing raids and naval bombardment against the North Korean supply lines restricted their army's effectiveness.
By early September MacArthur was confident he could hold Pusan and therefore went over to the offensive.
Searching North Koreans Soldiers from the United Nations forces search capture North Korean troops during the very successful September 1950 landings at Inchon.
The battle for Seoul proved to be more intense, as the North Koreans fought to the death despite having fewer numbers.
On September 26, X Corps met up with the forces driving up from Pusan and soon cleared South Korea of its northern invaders.
Chinese intervention General MacArthur now asked for permission to invade the North.
President Harry Truman worried about provoking a Chinese response but gave his approval.
He was right to have fears, for as UN troops began to head up the TECHNOLOGY JET FIGHTERS The Korean War was the first war in which jet fighters played a major role and the last major war in which propeller-powered fighter planes were involved.
At the outset of the war, North Korea achieved air superiority with Soviet-made MiG-15 fighters, some of which were actually piloted by experienced Soviet Air Force pilots, but the introduction in December 1950 of the United States F-86 Saber gradually tilted the balance toward the UN forces.
The first aerial combats in history involving jet aircraft took place between these jets over the Yalu River.
Although rival claims of success are hard to verify, the American pilots gradually established air supremacy over the Koreans.
They had to fight their way south, suffering heavy losses of men and equipment.
In the east, meanwhile, an attacking force of United States Marines also found itself under pressure and made a fraught retreat.
In January 1951, a new surge of Chinese and North Korean troops pushed the UN forces south of Seoul.
GENERAL DOUGLAS MACARTHUR, MARCH 20, 1951 Tracks produced a top road speed of 24 mph peninsula, taking the northern capital of Pyongyang on October 12, clashes began with Chinese soldiers who had crossed the frontier.
From this time on, MacArthur regularly disobeyed orders and publicly disagreed with the less aggressive policies of the Truman administration.
MacArthur did not take the first reports of Chinese involvement too seriously, because he assumed they were not part of a major armed incursion, and on November 24 ordered a final assault up to the Yalu River border with China in an attempt to bring an end to the war.
Two days later his Eighth Army came under attack from massed Chinese infantry units that were hidden in the mountains.
MacArthur gave the order for the troops to retreat but they found their way blocked by Chinese forces who had closed in behind them. weeks of the war, a new United States ground commander.
General Matthew Ridgway (who assumed supreme command in 1951), stopped the retreat.
He drew up his forces on a line across the peninsula and slowly pushed north, using artillery and air firepower to take enemy positions.
The Chinese responded to ""Ridgway's meatgrinder"" with wave after wave of human attacks, beaten back at huge cost.
After three months of heavy fighting, UN troops stabilized the front along the pre-war border.
The previously mobile war settled down to a static stalemate, with the sides exchanging artillery fire and initiating a small number of infantry engagements.
Peace talks were started in July 1951 and dragged on for another two years, until an armistice ending the war and setting up a demilitarized zone between the two sides was eventually agreed on July 27, 1953.
Korea remains divided and heavily militarized to this day, with North Korea's nuclear and missile programs seen as threatening by the rest of the world.
North and South Korea are still technically at war with each other, as no peace treaty has ever been signed, while their common border is the most heavily fortified international frontier in the world.
In 1972 the two governments pledged to seek unification of the peninsula through peaceful means.
Their heads of state met in Pyongyang in 2000 but relations between North and South are still poor.
TWO STATES North Korea is still ruled by a repressive Soviet-style veterans memorial, regime.
Fearful of invasion from the south, North Korea conducted a nuclear test in 2006 and has also developed missile technology.
In stark contrast, South Korea has prospered economically to become one of the strongest free-market economies in the region.
Decolonization in Southeast Asia The Japanese invasion of Southeast Asia in 1941-42 swept away the European colonial empires.
In 1945 the European powers expected to resume their rule, but faced nationalist revolts in almost every country.
In little over a decade, the nationalists had won and the region was free from European rule.
The British arranged a truce in November 1946 that provided for a United States of Indonesia linked to the Dutch crown.
But it was not long before the two fell out again, causing the Dutch powers to launch punitive police raids in July 1947.
A US-brokered ceasefire began in December 1947, but collapsed in September 1948, when the Dutch launched powerful attacks against the Laminated wooden stock nationalists.
The Dutch bombed Jakarta heavily in December 1948, but worldwide protests forced them to agree to convene a conference in The Hague in August 1949 to settle the colony's future.
On December 27,1949, the Dutch handed over power to Achmad Sukarno as president of the new republic.
Vietnam As in Indonesia, Viet Minh nationalists in Vietnam took advantage of the brief lapse of power that arose following the defeat of Japan in 1945 to declare an Rear sight r SOUTHEAST ASIA \ L Q Indonesia El Malaya Dates 1946-49 Dates 1948-60 Location Chiefly Java and Sumatra Q Burma Dates 1948-96 B French Indochina Dates 1946-54 Location Vietnam and Laos E F O R E Nationalist groups campaigned against European colonial rule in Southeast Asia after the 1920s.
In July 1941, Japan occupied French Indochina, including Laos and Cambodia.
Vietnamese nationalists and Communists formed the Viet Minh resistance movement under Ho Chi Minh in order to fight the occupation, receiving help from the United States.
When Japan surrendered in 1945, the Viet Minh declared Vietnam independent under Ho Chi Minh’s leadership.
In 1942 Japan invaded Southeast Asia, taking the British and Dutch colonies.
The Japanese were largely welcomed as liberators from colonial rule and many nationalists collaborated with them.
In August 1945, the PNI seized power and on the 17th declared Indonesia independent. independent republic in the northern city of Hanoi.
In March 1946, the French signed an agreement with Ho Chi Minh that recognized Vietnam as a free state within an Indochinese federation and allowed French troops to return to the north of the country.
However, this agreement soon broke down when the French decided to keep control of Cochin China in southern Vietnam.
In November 1946, French soldiers attacked the Viet Minh-held port of Haiphong, killing 6,000 people.
France had better weaponry and naval support, and called on troops from the Foreign Legion and from the French army in Europe.
The Viet Minh army, led by General Giap, drew on considerable local support in the north and received military supplies first from the Chinese Nationalists and then, after their victory in 1949 in the civil war, China's new Communist government.
In the early years of the war, the French quickly took control of all the major northern cities, sending assault teams to attack Viet Minh bases.
In response, the Viet Minh fought a classic guerrilla war, attacking French targets but avoiding set-piece battles.
In 1949 the French installed Bao Dai, local emperor of the French Vietnamese province of Annam, as emperor of an independent Vietnam.
Bao Dai's government was recognized by France, Degtyarev 7.62mm light machine gun Soviet-manufactured weapons, such as this World War ll-era light machine-gun, were supplied to North Vietnam and then passed on to the Viet Cong guerrilla fighters operating in the South. the US, and other Western countries, but failed to gain widespread support in Vietnam or among its neighbors, as Bao Dai was felt to be a French puppet.
The war soon turned into a stalemate, with the French holding the northern cities and a few outposts, while the Viet Minh held control of the northern countryside.
After World War II he took command of the Viet Minh army and led it to victory against the French at Dien Bien Phu in 1954.
He remained in charge against the Americans and their allies in the Vietnam War and achieved the unification of the country under Communist rule in 1975. a Viet Minh force was trapped on open ground at Vinh Yen, north of Hanoi, and annihilated—were then reversed by Viet Minh victories in 1952-53.
In an effort to break the stalemate, the French attempted to engage the Viet Minh at Dien Bien Phu.
The French defeat there, in May 1954, effectively brought an end to the war.
Malaya Although the Japanese occupation stimulated nationalist opposition to British rule in Malaya, the British returned unopposed to power in 1945.
In 1948 Britain set up a federation of Malay states, but resentment by ethnic Chinese at Malay dominance fueled a Communist guerrilla campaign waged by the Malayan Races Liberation Army that broke out the same year.
Nationalist and anti-Communist struggles led to bitter conflicts in Vietnam and elsewhere.
INDONESIA VIETNAMESE GENERAL VO NGUYEN GIAP, INTERVIEW, 1999 British imposed a state of emergency and began a jungle war.
British use of helicopters and specially trained jungle warfare troops, their establishment of protected villages to guard local people, their close supervision of foodstuffs to cut off guerrilla supplies, and the failure of the guerrillas to convince the mainly Malay population that communism would benefit them, all contributed to a British victory.
In 1957 Britain accelerated plans to give Malaya independence, denying the guerrillas an anti-colonial platform.
Burma Opposition to British rule in Burma led some Burmese people to welcome the Japanese as liberators in 1942.
Leading nationalists Aung San and U Nu set up a puppet government, but both later helped British and Indian forces to evict the Japanese.
In 1946 the British agreed to grant Burma independence, which was achieved under U Nu in January 1948.
The new republic faced an immediate rebellion by Karen and other separatist groups, followed by a Communist insurrection.
The army under Ne Win took power in 1962 and set up a dictatorship, cracking down on dissent.
Separatist groups had seized two-fifths of the country by 1976 but a government offensive effectively ended the rebellions by 1996.
Aung San Suu Kyi led political opposition to military rule, which continued into the 21st century.
The army under General Suharto brutally crushed a Communist revolt in 1965.
Indonesia also fought a repressive campaign in East Timor until the island gained its independence under supervision of the United Nations in 2002.
VIETNAM France recognized the independence of Vietnam in the Geneva Accords of 1954.
AUNG SAN SUU KYI MALAYSIA In 1963 Malaya, Singapore, and the British colonies on Borneo formed the Federation of Malaysia.
Britain helped Malaysia fight a border war with Indonesia on Borneo until 1966.
British troops of the Special Air Service The use of helicopters to carry troops specially trained in jungle warfare to remote areas helped the British defeat the Communist insurgency in Malaya in the 1950s.
FTkii It KEY BATTLE Dien Bien Phu The French colonial rulers of Vietnam planned the crucial battle of Dien Bien Phu to break the stalemate in their war with the Viet Minh guerrillas seeking independence.
Their intent was to entice what they thought was a largely peasant army to join a battle in which French firepower would win the day.
On November 20, 1953, the first of 16,000 French regulars, Foreign Legionnaires, and loyal Vietnamese troops parachuted in, driving out the defending Viet Minh and fortifying a series of outposts up to 4 miles away from the airstrip.
The Viet Minh commander, General Giap, reacted by quickly surrounding the strip and building up his strength.
On March 13, 1954, the main Viet Minh assault began, quickly taking the outlying Gabrielle and Beatrice outposts.
The northern outpost of Anne-Marie fell when its previously loyal T'ai tribal defenders melted away or defected on March 17.
Viet Minh artillery on the hills and machine guns nearer the base now covered the airstrip so that all French supplies had to be parachuted in and were vulnerable to attack or capture.
The Viet Minh artillery proved to be highly effective, shooting down 62 French planes and damaging another 107.
After a lull in the fighting, the Viet Minh renewed their assault at the end of March.
One by one the French outposts were overrun, the result of effective mining, artillery fire, and finally direct assault.
The French did have some successes, setting their 105mm howitzers to zero elevation and firing into Viet Minh troops attacking Dominique on March 30 while another French force near the airstrip opened fire with anti-aircraft guns, forcing a Viet Minh retreat.
The final days The French success in recapturing part of the Eliane outpost on April 11 undermined Viet Minh morale, for they had suffered high casualties—up to 6,000 dead, 10,000 wounded, and 2,500 captured by that point—and had no adequate medical services for the wounded.
On April 22 the Viet Minh took the initiative again, overrunning Huguette and now commanding almost all of the airstrip.
The final assault began on May 1, with Soviet Katyusha rockets used for the first time.
On May 6 the Viet Minh detonated a mineshaft dug under Eliane and blew away its defenders.
The next day, the remaining French positions were captured, the Viet Minh taking 11,721 French soldiers prisoner.
Only 73 men of the original French garrison managed to escape to Laos; the rest of the garrison was dead.
Ho Chi Minh led the Communist-controlled Democratic Republic of Vietnam in the north; Ngo Dinh Diem led South Vietnam.
In 1956 North Vietnam authorized southern Communists to begin an insurgency, sending cadres to the south to organize guerrilla war in 1959.
Their arrival marked the official start of United States military involvement in Vietnam.
TECHNOLOGY AGENT ORANGE Agent Orange was a defoliant used by the Americans to destroy vegetation in Vietnam, its name deriving from the orange-striped barrels in which it was shipped.
Agent Orange killed plants, stripping all vegetation from the land, denying cover to enemy soldiers.
However, the spray included chemical compounds that were poisonous to humans.
Of the 4. million Vietnamese exposed to Agent Orange, 400,000 died or suffered disabilities, while 500,000 children were born with birth defects.
Indispensable air power The helicopter was used extensively in Vietnam for the first time in the history of warfare, carrying out attack missions, transporting large numbers of troops, and flying the wounded to aid stations.
The Vietnam War The United States sent troops to South Vietnam in order to prevent the country falling under Communist control.
The war was the lengthiest, most brutal, and most unpopular war American troops had ever fought, and ended in their withdrawal and the eventual defeat of their objectives.
I n May 1961, President John Kennedy sent the first American troops—400 United States Army Special Forces (the Green Berets)—to South Vietnam to train its army in guerrilla tactics.
Kennedy was concerned about rising Communist strength across Southeast Asia and saw South Vietnam as an important bulwark against this.
By the time of his death, in November 1963, Kennedy had increased troop numbers to 16,300.
By mid-1964 the Communists were clearly gaining ground in South Vietnam and they seemed set to take control of the country unless the United States massively increased its military support.
On August 2, USS Maddox clashed with North Vietnamese torpedo boats in the Gulf of Tonkin near North Vietnam's coast.
President Lyndon Johnson used the incident to gain Congressional authorization ""to take all necessary steps, including the use of armed forces"" to assist South Vietnam.
DL/Oj I of United States air attack sorties against North Vietnam flown during Operation Rolling Thunder.
Immediate retaliatory air strikes against North Vietnamese ports and their naval facilities led in March 1965 to Operation Rolling Thunder, a bombing campaign that aimed to destroy North Vietnam's will to fight, by attacking its transport network, air defenses, and industrial base.
The first United States Marines came ashore in South Vietnam in March to protect the airbases used in Rolling Thunder.
Further units—from Australia, New Zealand, the Philippines, South Korea, and Thailand—joined them.
Ruling out an invasion of North Vietnam as too costly and risking a confrontation with China and the Soviet Union, the United States preferred to use its massive firepower to mount search-and-destroy missions against Communist-controlled areas in South Vietnam, while bombing the North.
South Vietnamese troops were sidelined in this conflict, as their morale was low and leadership poor.
In contrast, both the North Vietnamese Army and the Viet Cong were disciplined fighters.
Among them were a spike plate that broke in two to penetrate the lower leg, and a grenade detonated with a trip wire. supplied with weapons brought down the Ho Chi Minh and Sihanouk trails through neutral Cambodia and Laos.
They used local knowledge and support to surprise the Americans, before melting away into the jungle.
Their sniping skills and use of booby traps proved effective against the United States troops, unused to guerrilla warfare.
The Tet Offensive In mid-1967 General William Westmoreland, United States commander in Vietnam, saw ""light at the end of the tunnel"" and hoped American soldiers could withdraw within two years.
Events proved him wrong in January 1968, when the Viet Cong launched the Tet Offensive.
The offensive struck targets across South Vietnam, aiming to incite a popular uprising.
The Viet Cong even managed to attack the United States embassy in the South's capital, Saigon.
Mapping the war The Chinese supplied the Viet Cong with cases to hold maps.
This map shows the details of transport routes and the location of enemy bases.
The rising death toll—more than 14,000 in 1968 alone—added to the anger.
In March the increasingly unpopular Johnson announced that he would not seek re-election and sought peace talks with North Vietnam.
Communist-controlled areas bombed by United States Vientiane r 1954: North-South Demarcation Line agreed at Geneva Conference THAILAND NORTH VIETNAM Hainan Khe Sanh Jan-Apr 1965 Hamburgei May 1969 1 / Aug 1964: North Vietnamese attacks reported on United States destroyers.
Gulf of Tonkin Resolution, commits United States forces to war (Ion Thien Sep 1966 L Dai Do Apr-May 1968 ^ Quang Tri 'jig.
At the same time, Nixon expanded the bombing campaign against Viet Cong bases and supply trails in Laos and Cambodia.
United States and South Vietnamese forces then briefly invaded Cambodia in 1970, hoping to block the supply routes.
United States civilians are Can Tho •-< evacuated by helicopter from Bien Hoa"" A ** embassy rooftop.
A F T E The Paris ceasefire agreement provided for talks between North and South Vietnam on the future of the country, but the hostilities continued after the Americans had left.
UNITED VIETNAM In March 1975, the North Vietnamese finally overwhelmed the south, capturing Saigon in April and bringing an end to the war.
Vietnamese Army launched a full-scale invasion of the south with Sovietsupplied tanks and heavy artillery.
The attack was initially successful, giving North Vietnam control of large areas of the south, but was turned back by July.
In January 1973, the United States and North Vietnam signed the Paris Peace Accords and agreed on a ceasefire.
CAMBODIA In 1975 Khmer Rouge guerrillas seized control of Cambodia and implemented a revolutionary restructuring of its society; over one million Cambodians were murdered in the process.
Vietnam invaded Cambodia in 1979 and installed a pro-Vietnamese government.
WAR WITH CHINA North Vietnam had support from both the Soviet Union and China during its war with the United States, but turned more toward the USSR in 1978.
The Vietnamese invasion of Cambodia led the Chinese to invade Vietnam briefly in February 1979.
Prisoners were allowed matches and pencils only toward the end of their captivity.
The soap provided by the guards was for personal hygiene and for washing clothes.
It was a precious commodity and small fragments were carefully pressed together to form a larger piece.
Home-made bamboo clothespins Matches were banned for most of the time Schulz was in prison.
Prisoners were allowed to smoke but had to wait for a guard to light their cigarettes for them.
After interrogation and torture, his treatment improved, but conditions were basic as is evident from the few possessions that a prisoner was allowed.
After college, he joined the Naval Aviation Cadet Program in January 1956.
He was commissioned as an Ensign in the United States Navy in April 1957.
Shot down and captured On November 16, 1967, while on his second tour of duty operating off USS Coral Sea, Schulz flew a mission to a target near Hanoi, the capital of North Vietnam.
The mission came under surface-to-air missile attack and his plane was hit.
He and his fellow crew member ejected and landed safely in North Vietnam.
As required by the Geneva Convention governing the treatment of prisoners of war, Schulz gave his name, rank, serial number.
Homecoming This is how Lieutenant Commander Schulz looked on his first day back in the US, March 16,1973, when he was reunited with his family at an airbase in California. and date of birth.
His interrogators wanted more, asking for information about the target his mission was attacking.
When he refused to answer, he was subjected to the first of three sessions of torture.
Forced to sit on the floor with his legs straight out in front of him, his head was pushed down so that his nose touched his knees while his arms were pulled up behind him.
The pain was excruciating, as if the ligaments in the backs of his legs were being ripped out of his body.
This method of torture was specifically designed to leave no scars, unless the interrogators made a mistake.
Learning to lie When eventually forced to answer, Schulz named old targets.
When his interrogators asked from which carrier he had flown from, he again gave false information.
When Schulz refused to answer, he was tortured again, this time suffering a dislocated jaw and shoulders.
He was eventually released on March 13, 1973, and returned home to continue his naval career, retiring from the United States Navy in 1987.
Revolutionary Wars in Latin America The United States' fear of communism in its ""backyard"" led it to intervene in the internal affairs of Latin American and Caribbean nations throughout the Cold War, supporting right-wing and military governments against left-wing opponents.
Its main focus was the revolutionary government of Fidel Castro in Cuba.
Castro had previously tried to depose Batista in 1953 when he launched an attack against the Moncado Barracks, but he was arrested and sent to prison.
Released in an amnesty two years later, he fled to Mexico, where he founded the 26th of July Movement, named after the date of the failed attack.
In Mexico he met other Cuban exiles, as well as Ernesto ""Che"" Guevara, a revolutionary from Argentina who shaped Castro's political beliefs.
Castro's second attempt at seizing power started disastrously, when most of his small band was quickly killed or taken prisoner.
E F O R E The United States has regularly intervened in the politics of the Caribbean and Central America to protect its own investments and prop up friendly governments.
AMERICAN INTERVENTION The Mexican Revolution that began in 1910 destabilized the country, causing the United States to send military missions in 1914 and again in 1916-17 in support of the moderate Venustiano Carranza.
Further south, instability in Nicaragua caused the United States to station marines in the country from 1916-33, while United States ownership of the Panama Canal Zone led it to send troops to Panama City in 1914 to keep the order.
In 1954 the Central Intelligence Agency backed a coup against President Jacobo Arbenz Guzman's socialist government of Guatemala.
In the Caribbean political upheavals saw United States Marines occupy Haiti from 1915-34 and the Dominican Republic from 1914-24.
The island became independent in 1902, but the new constitution gave the United States the right to intervene in Cuban affairs.
The United States gave up this right in return for a trade deal in 1934. including Castro and Guevara, began a guerrilla war, linking up with other resistance groups on the island.
A government offensive launched in May 1958 was unsuccessful, Castro's forces winning victories against Batista's far larger army, which suffered mass desertions among its poorly trained conscripts.
Castro now took advantage of the situation, invading central Cuba ""| The number of revolutionaries who landed with Fidel Castro * / I in eastern Cuba on December 2, 1956.
No more than 20 survived initial clashes with government troops. and seizing many towns, including Santa Clara, which was taken after bloody house-to-house fighting.
Among the Cubans, discontent with Batista's corrupt regime was growing.
Urban insurrection, including strikes and terrorism, weakened his grasp on power.
Above all, Batista lacked the support of the American government, which was not prepared to intervene to keep him in office.
On January 1, 1959, President Batista fled into exile in the Dominican Republic.
Seven days later, Young Sandinista soldiers The Sandinista Liberation Front—named after Augusto Sandino, who fought the United States occupation of Nicaragua in 1927-33—was founded in 1961 and overthrew the Somoza dictatorship in 1979.
Castro was initially opposed to communism and wooed the United States, hiring a public relations firm to organize a charm offensive when he visited the United States in April.
However, his restrictions on foreign land ownership, his expropriation of United States companies' assets, notably those of the United Fruit Company, and his decision to buy oil from the USSR, caused the United States to break diplomatic relations.
Castro increasingly turned to the Soviet Union as the United States steadily withdrew its support from Cuba.
In response, the new United States government under President Kennedy organized an invasion of Cuba by 1,400 CIA-trained exiles.
Kennedy hoped that discontent with Castro was substantial enough for Cubans to welcome a United States invasion, but he was wrong.
When the force landed at the Bay of Pigs, on April 17, 1961, it was met by the Cuban armed forces, and was crushed within just three days.
Castro's response was to embrace communism, prompting the United States to impose a trade and travel embargo against Cuba that continued into the start of the 21st century.
A further flashpoint arose in 1962, when Cuba allowed the Soviets to install nuclear missiles on the island.
The crisis was resolved by an agreement that the missiles would be removed in exchange for a United States pledge not to invade the island.
Exporting the revolution Castro and Guevara were committed to world revolution, believing that small groups of dedicated fighters, as in Cuba, Viva Cuba Posters praising the revolution have done much to inspire the Cuban population and increase support for Castro's government.
Many of the posters reflect the armed struggle that first overthrew Batista's government. could be the focus for popular discontent leading to dramatic, profound change.
Guevara also suggested that the power of the United States could be negated by a number of ""Vietnams"" occurring simultaneously.
FIDEL CASTRO, FACING TRIAL FOR ARMED REVOLT, 1953 REVOLUTIONARY WARS Combating dissent Repressive military governments in both El Salvador and Guatemala faced popular insurrections from left-wing guerrilla groups.
Here, an El Salvador government unit prepares for an anti-guerrilla operation in 1984. uprising in Bolivia in 1967.
America's response to this revolutionary activity was to back anti-Communist groups, governments, and individuals with military aid and technical assistance.
However, from 1946 to 2001 the United States military trained more than 61,000 Latin American soldiers and policemen in counter-insurgency tactics at the School of the Americas in Panama, including future military dictators Leopoldo Galtieri of Argentina and Manuel Noriega of Panama.
Social unrest, poverty, and repressive military governments led to a surge of discontent across the Americas during the 1960s and 70s.
Guerrilla groups formed in Uruguay, Argentina, Peru, El Salvador, Guatemala, and Brazil.
A left-wing government was elected in Chile but was then overthrown in a bloody CIA-backed military coup.
Only in Nicaragua was the Cuban model more fully replicated, when the Sandinista rebels overthrew the Somoza dictatorship in 1979.
The United States channelled covert aid to the ""Contra"" rebels, a process that was continued by United States officials after the Sandinistas won re-election in 1984 and Congress cut off the Contras' funding.
A secret plan to sell arms to Iran and hand the revenue over to the Contras caused a major political scandal in 1986.
The United States continued to support the Contras until the Sandinistas lost power in the elections of 1990.
The vicious civil war that raged in Nicaragua during the 1980s was seen elsewhere, in Guatemala and El Salvador, where the US-backed governments used death squads against opponents.
Murders were common, one paramilitary unit killing human rights campaigner Archbishop Oscar Romero in his cathedral in San Salvador, capital of El Salvador, in 1984.
The end of the Cold War in the 1990s, together with United States support for human rights and the acceptance of elected left-wing governments, ended many of the insurrections.
On the other side, many groups abandoned their belief in revolutionary struggle and embraced democracy as a path to power.
AFTER — Cuba has exported its revolution around the world, sending its well-trained armed forces to support a number of friendly, like-minded governments abroad.
Cuba also supported the socialist government of Maurice Bishop in Grenada after 1979.
More recently, Cuban doctors have worked in Venezuela in return for much-needed oil imports.
Cuban reliance on Soviet support ended with the collapse of the USSR in badge of the 1991, causing widespread FARC CUERRILLA economic hardship on the island.
In 2006, in poor health, Fidel Castro passed power to his brother, Raul.
COLOMBIA Colombia has the longest-running armed conflict in the Americas.
Government troops, left-wing guerrillas , and right-wing paramilitaries have fought for power since the mid-1960s.
The hostilities have been fueled by the profits from the cocaine trade.
The colonial powers ruthlessly suppressed uprisings against their rule, yet within 30 years almost the entire continent had received its independence, although not always in peaceful circumstances.
FRENCH PRIME MINISTER PIERRE MENDES-FRANCE, NOVEMBER 12, 1954 remained until 1960.
Reports vary, but it is thought that as many as 12,000 to 20,000 Kikuyu lost their lives, while being responsible for the deaths of 2,000 African civilians themselves.
LOCAL REVOLTS Major revolts broke out against the British in Kenya and Nigeria in 1906, while 75,000 natives were killed in the Maji-Maji revolt in German East Africa in 1905-07.
The Herero and Nama uprising in German South-West Africa in 1904-07 was met with savage reprisals, the defeated tribes driven into the desert, where they died of thirst.
The German suppression of this revolt is now deemed to be the first act of genocide in the 20th century.
MOROCCO In 1912 Spain and France agreed to divide Morocco between them.
A major revolt broke out in the Rif mountains in 1914 against Spanish rule.
This was followed by another in 1921, when Muhammad ibn Abd el-Krim decisively defeated a much larger Spanish army at Annual.
In 1922 he set up an Islamic Republic, defeating a further Spanish force at Sidi Massaoud in 1924.
His revolt was finally ended in 1926 at Targuist by a 250,000-strong Spanish-French force, which was led by France's World War I hero, Marshal Philippe Petain.
W hite settlement in the British East African colony of Kenya was opposed by many of the Kikuyu people.
In 1948 they organized secret groups, soon known as Mau Mau, to drive white farmers off Kikuyu land.
The planned killings and arson attacks began in October 1952, prompting the British to proclaim a state of emergency and deploy troops.
The British also arrested Jomo Kenyatta, a future president of independent Kenya, on suspicion of leading the revolt, even though he had denounced the movement.
A Mau Mau massacre of more than 80 Africans at Lari in the Rift Valley, in March 1953, led to widespread revulsion among the Kikuyu themselves, as well as from other Kenyan tribes.
The Mau Mau revolt was eventually crushed in 1954, although the state of emergency Mau Mau prison camp The British interned around 150,000 Kikuyu in concentration camps during the Mau Mau rising.
Conditions in the camps were grim and many people died of cholera and other diseases.
Algeria had been a French colony since 1830 and many of its inhabitants were white French settlers who wished to remain part of France.
A constitutional crisis erupted in France that led to the collapse of the Fourth Republic and the return to power of the wartime Free French leader, General Charles de Gaulle.
It was assumed that de Gaulle would support continued French rule in Algeria, but when he came out in favor of a limited settlement in 1959, the settlers turned against him.
An insurrection broke out in January 1960 and de Gaulle was greeted with riots when he later visited Algiers.
Under the leadership of General Raoul Salan, former leader of the army in Algeria, the terrorist Organization de l'Armee Secrete began its own campaign against the FLN, staging a second coup in April 1961.
Events led to the introduction of a state of emergency being declared in both Algeria and France.
By now the French army had lost control of all Algeria except the major cities, while the conflict was tearing French society apart.
De Gaulle began secret negotiations with the FLN in Switzerland, in December 1961, and eventually offered Algeria the choice of integration into France, self-rule, or full independence.
When a referendum tUBKfsrnim ""Algeria is French"" Algerian settlers wishing to remain part of France had wide support in mainland France itself.
The AK47 The Soviet-designed AK47 assault rifle has become the most popular gun in the world, with more than 70 million produced.
It has been the weapon of choice for guerrilla movements around the world. overwhelmingly backed independence, the French government handed power over to the FLN and Algeria became independent in July 1962.
Independence By this time, all but one of the remaining French colonies in Africa had received its independence, most in 1960.
That same year, Belgium gave independence to its vast Congo colony, with Rwanda and Burundi following in 1962.
Britain had also started to relinquish control, giving independence to Ghana in 1957, making it the first independent black state in Africa.
Nigeria and Somalia followed in 1960, with Sierra Leone and Tanzania joining them in 1961.
The only exception to this was Southern Rhodesia, where the white settlers refused to accept black majority rule, illegally declaring independence in 1965.
A lengthy guerrilla war broke out, and it was 15 years before majority rule was finally accepted, in 1980, when the country became independent as Zimbabwe.
However, FLN attacks boosted the group's standing in the country and increasingly united Arabs and Berbers behind its campaign.
In 1956 the FLN was strong enough to switch its campaign to the capital, Algiers, planting bombs at the offices of Air France and two other sites on September 30.
The campaign swiftly gained momentum, with more than 8,000 bombings or shootings a month and a general strike in 1957.
France's 10th Parachute Division under General Jacques Massu gained police powers in Algiers, which it deployed savagely against alleged FLN members and their supporters.
On May 13, 1958, Massu seized power from the French authorities in Algeria with support from elements in THE SUEZ CRISIS In July 1956 President Gamal Abdel Nasser of Egypt nationalized the Suez Canal.
Britain resented loss of control over the canal, while France objected to Nasser's support of FLN guerrillas in Algeria.
The two nations colluded with Israel to attack Egypt, invading the canal zone in October supposedly to keep warring Egyptian and Israeli forces separate from each other.
International pressure forced Britain and France to withdraw, a fiasco that ended their imperial pretensions in Africa.
KEY MOMENT While most European countries gave up their African colonies, Portugal tried to maintain its empire.
Resistance to colonial rule began in Guinea-Bissau, the Cape Verde Islands, and Angola in 1961, and Mozambique in 1964.
The cost of the colonial wars that resulted almost bankrupted Portugal and led to a revolution in 1974 that overthrew the authoritarian government in Lisbon and established democratic rule.
All four colonies, as well as Sao Tome & Principe, were independent by 1975.
A F T E Three colonies now remained in AfricaWestern Sahara, Namibia, and Eritreaeach of them having to fight for their independence from other African nations.
WESTERN SAHARA Spain's withdrawal from its colony of Western Sahara in 1976 led Morocco and Mauritania to occupy and partition the country.
Polisario Liberation Front guerrillas waged war against both occupying nations, forcing Mauritania to withdraw its claim in 1979, whereupon Morocco occupied the whole country.
Guerrilla warfare continued until a UN ceasefire in 1991; the future status of the country remains contested.
NAMIBIA Former German South-West Africa was mandated to South Africa in 1920.
SWAPO (South West Africa People's Organization) fighters seeking independence started a guerrilla war against South African rule after racist apartheid laws were introduced in 1966.
ERITREA Eritrea was a former Italian colony united with Ethiopia in 1952.
The Eritrean Liberation Front began guerrilla warfare in 1963, uniting with Ethiopian democrats to overthrow the autocratic Mengistu regime in 1991.
Rhodesian army patrol Rhodesian security forces fought a vicious 14-year bush war against guerrillas of the Patriotic Front, led by Robert Mugabe among others, before black majority rule was achieved in 1980 with Mugabe as prime minister.
Civil wars, often based on ethnic divisions, military coups, border disputes, and interference from the two superpowers or former colonial rulers, have cost millions of lives and blighted the development of this poor continent.
T he somewhat hasty independence of the Belgian Congo in June 1960 created chaos.
Within days, the army mutinied and thousands of white Belgian citizens became refugees.
That July, the southern copper-rich state of Katanga declared its independence and employed European mercenaries to protect it.
UN secretary general, Dag Hammarskjold, was killed in an accidental plane crash on a peace mission to Katanga in 1961.
Earlier in the year the prime minister, Patrice Lumumba, had been assassinated.
By now the country had broken into four virtually independent states, which were eventually reunited under central rule through the use of United States arms, UN and Belgian troops, and white mercenaries.
He ruled the renamed state of Zaire as a ruthless dictator, draining the national treasury for his own use until his overthrow in 1997.
Biafra In Nigeria, independent from Britain since 1960, the Ibo of the southeast dominated both the military and the central government, but felt threatened 1997 and fighting resumed in 1998.
In 2002 government troops assassinated Savimbi, which put an end to the war.
South African interventions South Africa's racist policy of apartheid, or separate development, in place since 1949, had a huge impact throughout the region.
JONAS SAVIMBI, LEADER OF UNITA IN ANGOLA, 1975 BEFORE Europe's African colonies often had to struggle for their independence, and their colonial masters did little to prepare them for self-rule when the time came.
The handover of power was usually peaceful, although major guerrilla wars broke out in Kenya, Algeria, and four Portuguese colonies against their colonial ruling powers.
Most African countries had no experience of self-rule or any form of multi-party democracy.
The Belgian Congo, for example, held its inaugural, local elections in 1957 and was then given only BELGIAN TROOPS LEAVE sjx mQnths to prepare THE CONGO, 1960 , , for full independence in 1960.
Almost all the Belgian civil servants who ran the country left in the weeks leading up to independence, without training the local people to take over in their place.
The rival superpowers sought to extend their influence and power by involvement with the new African states. when moves to strengthen the central government led to anti-Ibo massacres in 1966.
The next year, the Ibo governor, Odumegwu Ojukwu, declared the oil-rich eastern region independent as Biafra.
Britain and the Soviet Union supported the central government, while France and Rhodesia backed the rebels.
Biafra held out until a naval blockade, Soviet arms, and starvation led to its surrender in 1970.
Angola One of Africa's longest civil wars took place in Angola, after its independence from Portugal in 1975.
Jonas Savimbi, UNITA's founder, rejected this and resumed guerrilla war.
A further agreement created a new government of both MPLA and UNITA, but this collapsed in Rhodesia also fomented a civil war in Mozambique to prevent Somora Machel's government supporting the struggle for majority rule in their countries.
War raged in Mozambique during the whole of the 1980s until the ending of apartheid in South Africa led to peace in 1992.
The Horn of Africa Border disputes and civil war have frequently destabilized the Horn of Africa.
In 1977 war broke out when Somalia invaded the ethnicSomali Ogaden region of Ethiopia.
MilkorMGLMk 1 South Africa developed this six-shot revolver grenade launcher for its campaigns in Angola and elsewhere.
Cylinder holds six 40mm grenades The United States supported Somalia, while Soviet and Cuban troops backed Ethiopia.
Border disputes between Ethiopia and its former colony, Eritrea, also erupted into war in 1998.
In 1991 Somalia collapsed into civil war as rival clans and warlords struggled for supremacy.
Two of its northern regions splintered off, while the country's central government disintegrated.
Tensions in Sudan between the Muslim north and the animist and Christian southern region led to a lengthy war of independence in the south as soon as the country gained independence in 1956.
A peace deal was signed in 1972 but fighting resumed in 1983 when Sharia, or Islamic law, was introduced across the whole country—including the non-Muslim southern region.
A comprehensive peace agreement came into force in 2005, establishing a power-sharing government.
RWANDA 1962-65, 1994 2002 1960-65,1977-78,r* BURUNDI 1962-65, 1994 1992-93,1996-97, 1998-2003 2004-06 4)% 1964, 1977-78 SOMALIA from 1991 TANZANIA Frontiers 1990 Disputed frontier Interstate war Civil war Post-colonial Africa Few countries in Africa have managed to avoid warfare, civil wars, coups d'etat, or famines since gaining independence from colonial rule.
ANGOLA ^1975-91, 1992-94, 1998-2002 COMOROS >* 1997,1999 and local tribes has caused thousands of deaths, despite the constant presence of peacekeeping forces.
West Africa A chaotic and complex civil war erupted in Liberia in 1990 that spilled over into neighboring Ivory Coast and Sierra Leone.
The three wars were marked by great brutality, with many of the rebel groups using child soldiers to mutilate their opponents.
The war in Sierra Leone finally ended in 2001 when a large UN and British force restored order.
War crimes courts were set up in Sierra Leone in 2002 and Liberia in 2007 to try the rebel leaders.
INDIAN OCEAN ZAMBIA MALAWI NAMIBIA #4 ZIMBABWE ^ MOZAMBIQUE m 2002 MADAGASCAR BOTSWANA SOUTH AFRICA A 1964-94 , ,1980-92 SWAZILAND Rwanda, Congo, and Zaire Ethnic tensions in Rwanda between the minority Tutsi and majority Hutu erupted in genocidal violence in 1994 when extreme Hutus killed some 800,000 Tutsis and moderate Hutus.
The Tutsi-dominated Rwandan Patriotic Front subsequently defeated the Hutu government, prompting some Africa remains a war-torn continent, with many long-running conflicts unresolved.
In the wake of war, abject poverty, disease, and oppression are all too widespread.
SOMALIA Somalia has been without a stable government since civil war broke out in 1991.
Rival warlords ignored a limited UN peacekeeping intervention in 1992, while a United States attempt in 1993 to create a base for humanitarian relief ended in disaster with United States and Somali casualties.
Attempts to set up a new government in 2004 failed when it was overthrown by militias allied to the Islamic Courts Union that sought to institute Sharia law.
Fearful of an Islamic state on its borders, Ethiopian forces attacked the ICU in 2006.
Today, Somalia remains a ""failed state,"" with international intervention limited to attempts to prevent Somali pirates holding ships for ransom in the Indian Ocean. us TROOPS IN SOMALIA, 1992 SUDAN The peace agreement that ended the civil war in 2005 set up a power-sharing government uniting the north and south of the country.
A six-year period of transition will lead to a referendum in the south on secession in 2011.
V, two million Hutus to flee to refugee camps in neighboring Burundi, Zaire, Tanzania, and Uganda.
In 1996 clashes broke out in eastern Zaire as Hutu militia forces launched raids against Rwanda and attacked local Tutsis.
The Tutsis fought off the Hutu militias and then allied themselves with rebel Zaire leader, Laurent Kabila, to end 5.
MILLION-number of people who have died in the Democratic Republic of the Congo's civil war since 1996.
But Kabila failed to bring peace to Zaire, causing the Tutsis to rebel against him in 1998.
Rwanda and Uganda backed the rebellion, while Angola, Zimbabwe, Chad, Namibia, and Sudan sent troops to support Kabila.
A peace deal was reached in 2002 and all but the Rwandan troops withdrew from the by now-renamed Democratic Republic of the Congo.
A further coup against the new Congolese leader, Kabila's son, Joseph, in 2004 brought renewed war.
South Asian Wars PARTITION The British announcement in 1945 that it supported the early independence of India as a united state divided Muslims from Hindus.
Many Muslims feared Hindu domination of the new state and wished to set up their own independent, Muslim nation of Pakistan.
Lord Mountbatten, the last British viceroy, decided in June 1947 to partition the empire between the two new states of India and Pakistan and to bring independence forward from June 1948 to August 15,1947.
Millions lost their lives during the massacres that accompanied India and Pakistan's transition to independence, and millions more became refugees as Hindus and Muslims fled to safety in their respective states.
FLAG OF PAKISTAN Since independence from Britain, a number of South Asian states have fought a series of wars.
The conflict between India and Pakistan has been by far the lengthiest, and has become potentially the most dangerous, as both states are now in possession of nuclear weapons.
M24 Chaffee This US-made tank from 1944 was used in the 1971 Indo-Pakistan War, when Pakistani Chaffees fared badly against more modem Soviet-made Indian T-55s.
Caterpillar tracks faced with rubber track blocks Armor plate 1 -in thick of India.
The Bengalis of East Pakistan had little in common with the Pakistanis of the west—other than their religion—and felt economically exploited by the government in West Pakistan.
From 1954 the Awarni League, led by Sheikh Mujibur Rahman, pressed for autonomy, winning a major electoral victory in December 1971.
Pakistan's government twice postponed calling a new assembly and imprisoned Rahman, which prompted a general strike in East Pakistan.
Then, on March 26, Rahman declared East Pakistan independent as Bangladesh, and set up a governmentin-exile in Calcutta, India.
It comes from the Urdu words pak and stan . guerrillas fought the Pakistan Army.
Possibly 1 million Bengalis were killed in the war, with another 10 million fleeing to safety in India.
Indian support for the rebels led the Pakistan Air Force to launch a preemptive strike against Indian airfields on December 3.
The Indian Army invaded Bengal, while tank battles broke out along the border with West Pakistan.
Pakistan's army was quickly defeated, surrendering unconditionally on December 16.
Rahman was released from prison and returned to lead his country to independence.
T he decision of the Maharajah of Kashmir to join India in 1947 provoked conflict between the region's Muslim tribesmen, fighting to join Pakistan, and Hindus from around Jammu in the south, who wanted to stay in India.
Both India and Pakistan moved armies into the province, India denouncing Pakistan as the aggressor and appealing to the United Nations for support.
In January 1949, the UN established a demarcation line between the two sides that left Kashmir divided.
The end of British rule left many of India's borders and territories unclear.
The Muslim Nizam of Hyderabad (its sovereign—from the Urdu Nizam-ulMulk, literally ""administrator of the realm"") wished to keep his largely Hindu state independent.
The Indian Army invaded in 1948 and forced the state to join the Indian Union.
Five French territories joined the Union in 1954, and the Portuguese colonies of Goa, Daman, and Diu were later annexed by force in 1961.
New Kashmir conflict In 1962 Chinese troops crossed over India's mountainous northern borders.
The Indians were ill prepared but, after brief fighting, the Chinese forces left the northeastern region but remained in occupation in the Alcsai Chin area.
India's defeat by China encouraged Pakistan to renew its Kashmir conflict.
In 1965 troops from both sides poured over their common borders in Kashmir, Punjab, and the Rann of Kutch in the far south.
Fighting with tanks, artillery, and jet fighters continued for most of the year until a truce was negotiated by the Soviet Union in Tashkent in 1966.
The birth of Bangladesh When originally created in 1947, Pakistan consisted of western and eastern parts separated by 1,100 miles Q First and Second Indo-Pakistani Wars Dates 1947-48,1965 Location Kashmir and the India-Pakistan border H Sino-lndian War Date 1962 Location Points on border between China and India 13 Third IndoPakistani War Date 1971 Location Chiefly Bangladesh Q Tamil Separatist Movement Dates 1983-present Location Sri Lanka KASHMIR British India included a number of semiindependent princely states, which were allowed to decide which new country to join.
The Hindu Maharajah of Kashmir hesitated before deciding to join India in October 1947, despite the fact that more than three-quarters of his people were Muslim and wanted to join Pakistan.
Sri Lankan soldiers on patrol Sri Lankan troops patrol outside their capital, Colombo, after Tamil Tiger rebels sent light aircraft on suicide missions against government targets in early 2009. declared it a republic.
Sikh Nationalists seeking an autonomous state in the Punjab, and separatist movements in the eastern provinces of Nagaland and Mizoram have all threatened the unity of India.
The biggest conflict in the region took place in Sri Lanka between the majority, mainly Buddhist, Sinhalese and the minority Hindu Tamils of the north and east who have been striving to establish an independent homeland.
A civil war began in 1983, with the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam seizing territory in the north of Sri Lanka and conducting attacks against several government targets.
India's government tried to arbitrate in 1984 and intervened militarily in 1987, as it feared the war might involve its own Tamil population in Tamil Nadu state.
Indian troops left in 1990, but the violence continued throughout the 1990s.
A ceasefire was agreed in 2001 but did not last long, as residual mutual suspicions caused the government of Sri Lanka to resume hostilities.
Up to 100,000 people, including many civilians, have died in this war to date.
GOLDEN TEMPLE SIEGE During 1984 Sikh extremists demanding an autonomous Sikh state in the Indian province of Punjab took over the Golden Temple in Amritsar—Sikhism's holiest shrine—and used it to store weapons.
The threat of civil war in the Punjab led the Indian prime minister, Indira Gandhi, to send in troops to the temple and to 37 other Sikh shrines, on June 5, to expel the militants.
Four months later, two of Gandhi's Sikh bodyguards assassinated her in revenge.
Anti-Sikh riots across India killed 3,000 Sikhs in retaliatory attacks.
AFTER Relations between India and Pakistan have remained strained up to the present day.
Existing tensions have been worsened by Pakistan-based Islamic extremist groups.
NUCLEAR CONTEST India conducted a nuclear test in 1974, which was later followed by Pakistan in 1998.
The ownership of nuclear weapons by the two nations, hostile to each other, makes any discord hold implications for the world.
The first war following the feat of nuclear status by both states took place in the Kargil district of Kashmir in 1999, when Pakistani soldiers and Kashmiri militants entered Indian Kashmir.
The Pakistani government blamed the fighting on independent Kashmiri insurgents, but Pakistani paramilitary forces were involved.
India has blamed Pakistan for not cracking down on extremist groups based in the country.
Israel has remained embroiled in conflict ever since, fighting three subsequent major wars and engaging in an increasingly bitter struggle with the Palestinian people.
Both the Zionists and Arab nationalists were disappointed that World War I did not lead to the independence that they thought had been promised by the Allies.
ZIONISM AND THE ARAB REVOLT During World War I, British leaders encouraged the Ottoman empire's Arab subjects to rise in revolt in the hope of winning independence after the war.
However, in 1917 British Foreign Secretary, Arthur Balfour, promised support for the establishment of a Jewish national home in Palestine.
The World Zionist Congress had called for this in 1897, partly in response to anti-Semitism in Russia, where many Jews lived. fisn non Appr ° ximate numberofJews living in Palestine at independence in 1948, ten times as many as in 1918.
THE BRITISH MANDATE After World War I, Britain ruled Palestine under a League of Nations mandate.
Tension between Jews and Palestinians rose as Jewish immigration increased.
Britain suppressed a major Palestinian revolt in 1936-39, but also restricted Jewish immigration, a move resisted by militant Jewish groups.
In November 1947, the United Nations decided to partition Palestine into Jewish and Arab states.
The Arab League rejected this plan as contrary to the wishes of the majority of the local population.
Demilitarized zone held by UN 1982: Israeli invasion of southern Lebanon to drive out PLO and Syrian troops Mediterranean Sea Haifa LEBANON Beirut Damascus SYRIA Port Said GAZA STRIP Gaza A richo Amman O Suez \1975: Demilitarized zone held by UN after 2nd Sinai agreement Tel Aviv > VVEST Jaffa BANK Jerusalem J| ench Hebron 7 Dead Sea Beersheba ISRAEL JORDAN Negev i Desert Arab-lsraeli wars 1967-82 In the aftermath of the Six-Day War and the Yom Kippur War, Israel gained control of formerly Arabor Palestinian-held territory.
The next day, troops from the armies of Egypt, Transjordan (to be renamed Jordan in 1949), Syria, Lebanon, and Iraq attacked.
The Arabs claimed that they were seeking to establish a unified, religiously neutral state of Palestine in accordance with the wishes of the nonJewish majority of the population; Jews took note of anti-Semitic statements by some Arab leaders.
Although they were initially probably better-equipped, the Arab forces had no common strategy or command.
The Israelis, meanwhile, felt they were fighting for their lives and had a strong and unified command.
The Jewish militia, Haganah, was well trained and disciplined, and had bought arms from Europe, as well as receiving enough aid to equip itself with artillery, ammunition, and a small navy and air force.
By the end of the war, the Israeli forces also greatly outnumbered those of their Arab opponents.
Two weeks of bitter fighting saw the Israelis halt the Arab offensives and gain ground.
In further periods of fighting, interspersed with truces, the newly established Israel Defense Force enlarged Israel's land corridor east to Jerusalem and captured new territory in Galilee in the north and the Negev in the south.
The war ended in January 1949 with Israel occupying all of the old British Palestine mandate except the Gaza Strip, taken over by Egypt, and the West Bank, taken over by Jordan.
Israel now held a substantially larger area than in the 1947 UN partition plan.
The approach to war and the war itself were marked by atrocities on both sides.
Many Palestinians were forced from their homes during the conflict, mostly settling as refugees in Gaza and the West Bank.
In subsequent years a similarly large number of Jews migrated 750,000 The approximate number of Palestinians forced out of their homes and made refugees during fighting for the creation of Israel in 1948-49.
Canal—owned mainly by the British government and French investors— provoked Britain and France to collude secretly with Israel.
The plan was for Israel to invade Sinai, supposedly to forestall an Egyptian attack, giving Britain and France the pretext to seize the canal, while keeping the warring Israelis and Egyptians apart.
Israel attacked Egypt on October 9 and, following Nasser's refusal to accept a ceasefire, British and French forces attacked Egyptian bases.
Then, on November 5, they occupied Port Said at the entrance of the canal.
Widespread condemnation of the attack from the United States and other nations, and a collapse in the value of the British pound, forced both the French and the British governments to suspend operations on November 7.
This squalid event marked the end of any major British or French imperial role in the region.
Israeli forces were successful in lifting the blockade of Eilat and reducing attacks from Gaza.
The Six-Day War The Suez crisis of 1956 made the Egyptian president an Arab hero for successfully standing up to British and French forces.
Nasser bolstered his armed forces with Soviet arms, while Israel bought state-of-the art aircraft from France and tanks from Britain and the United States.
Through the mid-1960s Israel and Syria also clashed brought under its control after gaining territory during the Six-Day War in 1967 especially fiercely along their border.
Claiming that Israel was preparing an invasion of Syria, Nasser forced the UN Sinai peacekeepers to withdraw in May 1967 and, along with Jordan, Iraq, and Syria, massed troops along Israel's borders.
On June 5, 1967, the Israeli air force launched a series of devastating raids against its enemies, virtually destroying the Egyptian, Syrian, and Jordanian air forces.
Its troops also occupied the entire West Bank, gaining control of the whole of Jerusalem for the first time, and seized the Golan Heights from Syria, advancing 30 miles The number of toward Damascus, Palestinians Israel the Syrian capital.
When the fighting stopped on June 10, Israel had doubled the size of its territory, gained new defensible borders along the Suez Canal, the Jordan River, and the Golan Heights, and had removed the threat of enemy guns bombarding its cities.
Yom Kippur The Six-Day War brought Israel military success but no better security, as none of the neighboring states would trade peace in return for lost territory.
Egypt, in particular, was humiliated by the outcome of the war and its loss of Sinai, and waged a three-year campaign of raids and artillery fire across the Suez Canal.
On October 6, 1973, its new leader, Anwar Sadat, planned a surprise attack against Israel in alliance with Syria to coincide with the Jewish holy day of Yom Kippur.
Egyptian troops crossed the canal and headed into Sinai, supported by surface-toair missile batteries and portable anti-tank missiles that limited the traditional Israeli strengths of air and tank power.
By October 9, the Egyptians had overstretched their lines of supply and outreached their defensive air cover and so ground to a halt.
Supplied with new United States equipment, the Israelis went on the offensive on October 16.
The Israelis broke through between two Egyptian armies and crossed to the west bank of the Suez Canal, encircling the Egyptian Third Army on the east bank.
A UN ceasefire on October 24 ended the Yom Kippur War, the fourth and, to date, final attempt by the Arab states to invade and overthrow Israel. willingly and unwillingly to Israel from their homes in Arab countries.
All these events have left a legacy of bitterness that persists in the 21st century.
The Suez Crisis Following the 1948-49 war, border clashes and terrorist and counterterrorist operations continued.
The new Egyptian government under President Gamal Abdel Nasser was also seeking to end the long-standing Anglo-French involvement in his country.
In 1955 Egypt closed the Gulf of Aqaba, thereby blockading Eilat, Israel's only outlet to the Red Sea.
The subsequent Egyptian nationalization, in 1956, of the Suez TECHNOLOGY MIRAGE FIGHTER The Mirage INC supersonic fighter aircraft was manufactured by Dassault Aviation in France and sold to the Israelis, for whom it played a major role in the Six-Day War of 1967.
The single-seater, medium-weight interceptor was armed with twin 30mm cannon capable of firing air-to-air missiles.
It proved particularly effective fighting against the Soviet-made Mikoyan-Gurevich MiG-17s and MiG-2 Is of the Syrian air force, as well as providing cover for attacks on Egyptian and Syrian aircraft on the ground.
Later Mirage variants were designed both as multi-role fighters and as reconnaissance aircraft.
Those in Israeli service included some aircraft bought from France and others designed and built in Israel.
Israel kept much of the land it had captured and Palestinians fought to create a nation of their own.
PEACE TALKS President Anwar Sadat of Egypt visited Jerusalem in 1977, marking the first recognition of Israel by an Arab head of state.
LEBANON Palestinian exiles set up the Palestine Liberation Organization in Jordan in 1964 to bring together Palestinian political parties.
In 1970 the PLO moved its headquarters to Beirut, in Lebanon, which was home to more than 300,000 Palestinian refugees.
The PLO used the country as a base from which to fire rockets at northern Israel.
International outrage forced Israel to withdraw from the city, leaving a residual force in the buffer zone that eventually withdrew in 2000.
INTIFADA From the 1980s Israel established Jewish settlements in the West Bank, and extended its control of Jerusalem.
Palestinians living in Israeli-occupied territories launched an uprising, the first ""Intifada,"" against Israeli rule in 1987.
Israel and the PLO recognized each other in the 1993 Oslo Accords and began moves toward Palestinian self-rule in Gaza and the West Bank.
Political changes on both sides and I INTIFADA Arabic word literally meaning ""shaking off,"" but usually translated as ""rebellion"" or ""uprising"" and commonly used to refer to the Palestinian crisis that started in 1987. continuing terrorist attacks and military clashes meant that progress was slow.
The war was the biggest air-naval contest since World War II and went on to have an enormous impact on both countries, and on the Falklands themselves.
Britain, though, was 7,440 miles away to the north and had only a detachment of 68 marines on the islands—which was prompt to surrender—and an ice patrol ship armed with two 20mm guns to protect « The ownership of the Falkland Islands in the South Atlantic Ocean has long been contested between Argentina and Britain.
DISPUTED OWNERSHIP The two countries' claims date back to the late 17th and early 18th centuries.
Argentina sent a ship to the islands to proclaim its sovereignty in 1820 and established a settlement in 1828.
The British objected to this and expelled the Argentinians in 1831-32, establishing their own sovereignty in 1833.
THE ARGENTINIAN JUNTA In 1976 the Argentine army overthrew the elected government of Maria Peron and established a three-man military junta.
It brutally suppressed human rights, but inflation soon crippled the economy.
In 1981 General Leopoldo Galtieri became president, but his economic policies met little success.
BRITISH WEAKNESS British proposals for a negotiated settlement on the future of the islands were scrapped after parliamentary criticism in 1980, but Britain then announced the withdrawal of its only naval presence in the South Atlantic and refused the islanders full British citizenship.
Argentina saw these moves as signaling a lack of British interest in the Falklands.
In Britain the foray created a political crisis, as the Conservative government of Margaret Thatcher was accused of having neglected the islands and of sending out the wrong signals to Argentina about their future.
The task force The British government responded by organizing a task force of 30 warships plus auxiliary and transport vessels, including the converted cruise liner SS Canberra, and 6,000 troops to recover the islands.
Falklands, in which all Argentinian ships and planes would be attacked.
As the task force headed south across the Atlantic, marines and special forces troops from the Special Air Service and Special Boat Service recaptured South Georgia on April 25.
British Westland Wasp helicopters attacked and hit an Argentinian submarine, ARA Santa Fe, with AS-12 anti-ship missiles, forcing it ashore.
The 16-hour round trip from Ascension Island required the bombers to be refueled mid-flight by RAF tanker planes.
Although a remarkable achievement, the attacks proved to be of limited effectiveness.
Closer-range sorties by Sea Harrier jets launched from HMS Hermes dropped cluster bombs on Stanley and the airstrip at Goose Green.
None of the Falkland airports could support jets, so the Argentinian fighters and attack aircraft had to operate from the mainland, targeting the incoming task force with bombs and missiles.
JORGE LUIS BORGES, ARGENTINIAN NOBEL LITERATURE LAUREATE, FEBRUARY 1983 missile weapons, anti-aircraft guns, and Sea Harrier fighters.
The missiles each carried a 3 lb (1. k warhead detonated by a contact fuse.
Later versions were fitted with a more effective laser-controlled proximity fuse.
British Rapier surface-to-air missile launcher In service since 1971, the Rapier provided air defense for British forces at San Carlos Water.
The attack was later much criticized, as the ship was outside the exclusion zone and sailing away from the Falklands at the time.
The losses convinced the Argentinian naval commanders to return their remaining vessels to port for the rest of the conflict.
Two days later an Argentinian Dassault Super Etendard aircraft sank HMS Sheffield with an Exocet missile.
Landings The first British landings on the islands took place on May 14, when the SAS raided Pebble Island, and destroyed Argentinian ground-attack aircraft at the airstrip.
A week later, 4,000 men of 3 Commando Brigade landed around San Carlos Water on the opposite side of East Falkland island from the main Argentinian base at Stanley.
British troops were now vulnerable to nightly bombing raids, while air raids sank four British ships in the area.
British troops first headed south to attack the Argentinian Twelfth Infantry Regiment holding Goose Green.
The two-day struggle ended in a British success on May 28, enabling troops to march on Stanley.
To the south, British forces moving toward Stanley came under Argentinian air assaults, incurring casualties from hits on two landing ships, RFA Sir Galahad and Sir Tristram, on June 8.
Despite this setback, British forces were in a position on the night of June 11 to launch an attack against the defended ring of high ground around Stanley.
Two days later they captured Mount Tumbledown, the last defense line around the town.
The following morning, 14 June, the Argentinian garrison surrendered, their poorly motivated conscripts no match for the highly trained British troops.
THE FALKLANDS WAR » After the conflict, Argentina saw an end to military rule, while Britain's international reputation grew.
GALTIERI AND THATCHER Failure in the Falklands caused Galtieri to resign in June 1982.
Democratic elections ended eight years of military rule in 1983 and Argentina has been a democracy ever since.
Margaret Thatcher's Conservatives had first been elected in 1979, but had lost popularity over economic issues.
Victory in the Falklands War helped her easily win re-election in 1983 and again in 1987.
The prestige of Britain rose around the world as a result of its recapture of the Falkland Islands.
THE FALKLANDS Since the war, Britain has maintained a sizable military garrison on the islands and has invested in their economy.
Revenue from fishing licenses and tourism, as well as military expenditure, has boosted local income.
Britain and Argentina restored diplomatic relations in 1992 but continue to disagree about the islands' future—Britain supporting the islanders' wish to remain British while Argentina continues to claim the islands.
MARGARET THATCHER TECHNOLOGY EXOCET MISSILE The Exocet is a French-built anti-ship missile that can be fired from ships, submarines, or aircraft.
In 1982 the Argentinians had many ship-launched MM.38 Exocets but these were unsuited for aircraft operation.
They only had five air-launched AM.39s, but used them effectively to sink the destroyer HMS Sheffield and the transport ship Atlantic Conveyor.
Most warships of the period were not well equipped to fend off such attacks.
Although the Exocet that hit HMS Sheffield did not actually detonate, the energy of the missile on impact and its unused fuel that then exploded, caused enough damage to destroy the ship.
The first versions employed multiple barrels that were pre-loaded with bullets and rotated into place by hand.
Later versions featured a single barrel and used the recoil force of each shot to expel the spent cartridge and insert a new one.
The brass bullet cartridges dropped down into six barrels arranged around a cylindrical shaft that were revolved by handoperated crank.
During the Franco-Prussian War the French version of the gun , became the first rapid-firing weapon to be deployed by an army in combat.
IQ The Maxim machine-gun of 1884 was the first self-powered, singlebarrelled machine-gun, using energy from the recoil force to expel each spent cartridge and insert the next one. [|g This Browning Ml917 machine-gun of 1912 adopted a simpler method to the Maxim for harnessing the gun's recoil to eject and reload bullets.
Q The design for the Hotchkiss MLE was bought from Baron von Augezd in 1893 and modified |Q AMERICAN GATLING GUN many times to correct an overheating fault.
Q This US-designed 1912 Lewis gun was adopted by the British Army in 19 1 5.
Air-cooled and gas-operated, this gun remained the main light-support weapon until superseded by the Bren.
Q The Bren was named because it was developed in 1937 in Brno, Czechoslovakia, and modified at Enfield, London.
It served as the British Army's principal light-support weapon until the 1970s.
IQ The M60, the United States Army's 1960s replacement for the Brownings, was a general-purpose, gas-operated machine-gun.
Q This FN Minimi was designed to accept both a fixed magazine or disintegrating-link belts.
Q The L86A1 light-support weapon was developed in the UK in 1986 and used the same caliber ammunition as the L85A1 assault rifle.
Q This MG43, developed in Germany in 2001, is a conventional light machine-gun with an action based on a rotating rather than a roller-locked bolt.
THE BIRTH OF AFGHANISTAN In the mid-19th century, Afghanistan found itself caught up in the ""Great Game""— the struggle between Britain and Russia for control of Central Asia and India.
Britain unsuccessfully invaded in 1839-42 and again in 1878-81, before agreeing with Russia in 1895 to make Afghanistan a neutral buffer state between them.
The pro-Soviet Afghan force resisted this move, overthrowing the president in 1978, and setting up a Communist government.
TECHNOLOGY STINGER MISSILE One of the most important weapons the mujahideen used against the Soviets was the US-supplied FIM-92 Stinger infraredhoming surface-to-air missile.
The missile, which first entered service in 1981, is small, and light enough to be fired from the shoulder of a single operator and can hit helicopters and aircraft up to 15,750 ft away.
The missiles proved highly effective against Soviet transport planes and helicopter gunships, restricting the Soviets’ ability to move around the country or reinforce their troops.
Wars in Afghanistan The Soviet occupation of Afghanistan in 1979 marked the start of war and insurgency in the country that continues 30 years later.
What was once a backwater has now become the focus of much international attention and the scene of a bitterly contested ongoing conventional conflict and anti-terrorist struggle.
I n late 1979, the Communist Afghan government had introduced reforms that brought turmoil to the country.
The USSR could not allow Communism to fail in Afghanistan nor could it risk civil war on its borders.
It thus staged a coup to install a new leader, who ""invited"" Soviet help.
Opposition to the Soviet occupation of Afghanistan was led by the mujahideen , an Islamic group that had been established in 1975.
After the Communist government was set up, in 1978, they had received weaponry and training from the United States.
The mujahideen also had the advantage of a friendly local population and knowledge of the mountainous terrain.
They held the main towns but were unable to subdue the countryside despite their deployment of aerial bombardments and heavy artillery.
By 1985 the mujahideen were waging successful guerrilla campaigns in every province.
In 1988 the Soviet leader, Mikhail Gorbachev, concluded Soviet involvement in the war and withdrew his 175,000 troops the next year, leaving President Mohammad Najibullah's Communist government to fend for itself.
To everyone's surprise, it managed to hold on until the mujahideen finally entered the capital, Kabul, in April 1992 and overthrew the Communists.
The Taliban The mujahideen, however, were united only by their opposition to the Soviets.
Anxious about tribal conflict crossing its border, Pakistan began to support the Taliban , a fundamentalist Islamic group that wanted to see a return to the original teachings of the Koran.
Led by Mullah Mohammed Omar, the Taliban swept through the country in 1994-95 before seizing power in Kabul in September 1996.
Many Afghans welcomed the Taliban, because they brought peace and stability, but as the Taliban were mainly Pashtun, they were unsuccessful in uniting the country, especially those areas that remained controlled by the mujahideen Northern Alliance of Tajiks, Uzbeks, and Hazaras, among others.
Afghanistan became home to a large number of foreignborn Muslim fighters under the Taliban, and groups who wished to wag e jihad against supposed enemies of Islam.
The most important of these groups was al-Qaeda, set up by Osama bin Laden some time after 1988.
The group attracted volunteers from across the Arab world as well as Europe and set up training camps along the border with Pakistan.
Its militants launched attacks against United States embassies in East Africa in 1998 and against the USS Cole in Aden in 2000.
The United States demanded that the Afghan government close down all al-Qaeda training camps and hand over bin Laden and other Talibans for trial.
When the Afghans refused, United States and British Special Forces linked up with Northern Alliance troops fighting in the north in October 2001, while United States and British aircraft launched bombing missions from air bases in Uzbekistan, Pakistan, and Tajikistan.
The areas they targeted most were in the Tora Bora Mountains east of Kabul, where B-52 bombers pounded the caves and underground bunkers known to be in use by the Taliban and al-Qaeda.
Small numbers of United States Marines arrived in late November T CENTRAL ASIA 1 "" ^3 Q Soviet invasion B War in of Afghanistan Afghanistan Dates 1979-89 Dates 2001-present Location Afghanistan Location Afghanistan and border with Pakistan War with the USSR Soviet armored vehicles struggled in the rough and mountainous terrain of Afghanistan and made easy targets for the well-armed mujahideen guerrilla fighters. to help with the capture of Kandahar in early December.
The brief campaign was notable in United States military history for its use of special forces and air power without the need to deploy a large force of ground troops.
THE KARZAI GOVERNMENT In December 2001, an interim government led by Hamid Karzai, a moderate Pashtun, took power and drafted a new constitution that was agreed upon in January 2004.
Karzai won the subsequent presidential election but his government failed to win control over the whole country and became increasingly ineffectual and corrupt.
THE TALIBAN REVIVAL Neither Mullah Omar nor Osama bin Laden were captured in the war.
The Taliban regrouped and started a new campaign in 2003, funded with money from the annual opium harvest, the raw material of heroin.
After January 2006, NATO troops arrived to help United States forces but the Taliban continued to expand its control over most of the country outside Kabul and the north.
Al-Qaeda and other militant Islamic groups consolidated in the mountainous border regions of Pakistan, from where they mounted terrorist attacks against regional and international targets.
The Obama administration announced plans to strengthen United States forces in the region in 2009.
MILLION irr of Afghan civilians who sought refuge in Pakistan during the Soviet occupation.
Gulf Wars The Iraqi government faced strong opposition from Shi'a Muslims and Kurds.
Saddam Hussein decided to invade Iran—in the throes of its Islamic revolution—to unite his country behind him.
He expected a quick victory, but the Iran-lraq War and subsequent Gulf War severely weakened his power.
T he pretext for Iraq's war against Iran, which began in 1980, was the disputed ownership of the Shatt al-Arab waterway between the two countries that leads into the Gulf.
Iran and Iraq had clashed over the waterway in the early 1970s but reached an agreement in 1975.
Now, the fall of the Shah, the new Islamic government's antagonism to the US, and its subsequent purges of Iran's armed forces all suggested that Iran might be weak.
The result was an opportunistic attack on September 22, 1980, that Saddam hoped would topple E F O R E From the 1960s onward, rival territorial claims, differences between Islamic sects, and the impact of outside influences created political tensions between the Gulf states.
KUWAIT When Kuwait received its independence from Britain in 1961, Iraq renewed its historic claim to the country as its 19th province; Britain sent troops to guard the border.
Kuwait later sided with Iraq in its war with Iran, as it too feared Iranian intentions in the region.
Saddam Hussein overthrew a Ba'ath predecessor to become president in 1979.
Saddam brutally ruled this mainly Shi'a country through its governing Sunni minority.
He viewed the Iranian revolution with concern, as he feared it might spread to Iraq.
Border disputes with Iran and Iraqi support for Iranian separatist groups increased the tension between them.
IRAN In 1979 the corrupt pro-Western Shah of Iran was overthrown in a popular Islamic uprising that brought Ayatollah Khomeini to power.
Iran became the world's largest theocracy and a leading center of Shi'a Islam, threatening not only Iraq, but the other Sunni kingdoms around the Gulf.
SUPPORTERS OF AYATOLLAH KHOMEINI the Iranian government, enlarge Iraq's oil reserves, and establish his leadership in the Gulf and wider Arab world.
The Iraqi air force attacked ten airfields but failed to destroy the Iranian air force on the ground.
The Iranian response against selected Iraqi cities began the first of five ""wars of the cities'' that took place during the conflict.
Offensives by both sides in 1985 and 1986 failed to break the stalemate, as neither side had sufficient artillery or air power to support large-scale ground “The great duel, the mother of all battles has begun.
SADDAM HUSSEIN, BROADCAST ON BAGHDAD STATE RADIO, JANUARY 17, 1991 divisions crossing Iran's southern border, to besiege Khorramshahr and Abadan, one division invading in the center to block a potential Iranian invasion route, and another division in the north to protect the Iraqi oil complex at Kirkuk.
Stalemate The Iraqi invasion soon stalled in the face of vigorous, if disorganized, Iranian resistance.
Iran retaliated with air strikes against targets in Iraq, including oil installations and the capital, Baghdad.
Its air force quickly gained air superiority, while the Iraqis did not have enough bombers to be effective against a country the size of Iran.
Saddam's hopes that opponents of the Ayatollah's government would rise against it were dashed, as Iranian nationalism led people to rally round their government and resist the Iraqis, not welcome them.
An Iranian counterattack in March 1982 recovered lost territory, and Iraq withdrew its forces in June, agreeing to a Saudi Arabian plan to end the war.
Iran refused to compromise, however, insisting on the removal of Saddam from power.
They were met by a vastly increased Iraqi army—approaching one million strong—and entrenched in formidable border defenses, who repelled the attack with coordinated small arms and artillery fire and by the use of gas, a regular feature of the Iraqi war effort.
In 1984 Iraq launched an air bombardment of 11 Iranian cities to force the country's government into advances.
The rest of the war consisted of both sides bombing each other's cities and exchanging Scud missile attacks.
Iraqi chemical attacks in 1988 against Kurdish targets in both Iran and Iraq enraged the Iranians but they did not have the means to continue the war and agreed a ceasefire on August 20.
The pre-war territorial status quo was restored, although at the cost of perhaps a million lives and two much-weakened economies.
Crucially, however, Iraq had received support from many Western and Arab countries, including funding Operation Desert Storm The coalition attack on Saddam Hussein's Iraq combined air and missile attacks with a devastating ground advance mounted from Saudi Arabia.
As in the First Gulf War, an air campaign was followed by a brief ground offensive.
This time coalition forces went all the way to Baghdad to achieve ""regime change,"" but many aspects of the campaign were controversial and the United States had fewer coalition partners than in 1990-91.
Burning oil installations Control of oil resources was a major factor in each war.
Both sides attacked oil refineries during the Iran-lraq War, and in the Gulf War Saddam's troops destroyed Kuwaiti installations when forced to retreat. from oil-rich Kuwait, one of its biggest creditors.
In its impoverished state, Iraq looked to Kuwait to solve its problems and cancel its debts.
Unwisely confident that the West would not intervene, Saddam Hussein sent his troops to invade and occupy Kuwait on August 2, 1990.
The Gulf War The UN imposed economic sanctions on Iraq, while the United States put together a coalition of 31 nations, including Saudi Arabia and the Gulf States, to liberate Kuwait.
The combined ground and air forces assembled in Saudi Arabia and naval units were deployed in the Gulf.
A five-week aerial bombing campaign began on 17 January 1991, when eight United States AH-64 Apache and two MH-53 Pave Low helicopters destroyed Iraqi radar sites near the Saudi Arabian border.
These were just the first of more than 100,000 sorties flown over Iraq, with little loss, in which some 88,500 tons of bombs were dropped, devastating the military and civilian infrastructure of Iraq.
Most of the bombs were of the traditional gravity type, but smart bombs and cruise missiles were also used effectively against selected targets.
More than 2,000 tons of smart bombs were dropped on Baghdad and other targets by United States F-l 17 Stealth bombers.
Iraq responded by launching a number of Scud missiles against Israel in the hope of provoking Israel to retaliate—an action that Saddam trusted would peel Arab support away from the Allied coalition.
Armed with supplies of American defensive missiles, however, Israel did not respond to these attacks and the coalition remained intact.
The coalition's ground campaign began on February 24 when American troops from the 2nd Armored Cavalry Regiment entered Iraq just to the west of Kuwait.
To their north, the United States XVIII Airborne Corps thrust into the sparsely defended desert of southern Iraq, their left flank protected by the French Sixth Light Armoured Division, their right by the British 1st Armoured Division.
Two days later Iraqi troops began to leave Kuwait, setting fire to its oil fields as they left.
The number of coalition troops killed by friendly fire in the First Gulf War.
These attempts range from religious restrictions and codes of chivalry to the criminalization of certain acts in war.
Today, in an era that has seen global war and systematic genocide, the ethics of war have never been more closely scrutinized.
T he earliest known attempts to regulate warfare appear in religious texts.
In the early 7th century ce, Abu Bakr, the first Muslim caliph, laid down ten rules for the conduct of his army on the battlefield, including injunctions not to kill children, women, or old men, nor the enemy's livestock unless for food.
These rules were expanded from the 9th century onward to include the treatment of diplomats, hostages, and prisoners of war, the protection of women, children, and civilians, and the right of asylum.
Despite religious instructions, conduct in war was (and still is) much more a matter of custom than the result of adhering to written laws.
There was also no actual law among the ancient Greek city-states Respect for prisoners Saladin’s troops take Christians prisoner in the Holy Land during the Third Crusade.
Saladin treated his prisoners humanely in accordance with Islamic law. implying that all wars should be settled in a single battle, but that was how their wars tended to be fought, since neither side could afford heavy casualties or the attrition of a sustained campaign.
Child soldiers The use of children to fight wars, particularly widespread in Africa, was outlawed by a UN protocol of 2000.
Nevertheless, perhaps as many as 300,000 children are currently fighting in wars around the world.
Justification of war In the Christian era, theologians, notably Augustine of Hippo and later Thomas Aquinas, developed the theory of the just war—a war that can be justified according to certain philosophical or religious criteria of justice.
More recently, a third law, jus post bellum, has been added concerning the end of a war, including the prosecution of war criminals.
These laws seek to define, for example, a just cause for war, its military necessity, the probability of its success, and the proportionality of waging a war—that is, the anticipated benefits against the expected evils.
Such laws are of course highly contested, not least by pacifists who believe that no war can ever be just.
Attempts have also been made to control warfare through spiritual sanction.
Ethics of War ETHICS OF WAR Battle of Solferino The lack of medical attention given to the wounded at the battle of Solferino in 1859 inspired Henri Dunant to found the International Red Cross. use of certain modern technologies, such as hollow-point bullets that expanded on entering the human body.
It also supported the peaceful settlement of international disputes through the use of international commissions of inquiry, and set up the Permanent Court of Arbitration in The Hague, the world's first institution for resolving international disputes.
A brave, if over-ambitious, attempt to outlaw war altogether was made by the Paris Peace Pact of 1928, better known as the Kellogg-Briand Pact after the United States secretary of state and the French foreign minister who drafted it.
It failed in that aim, but was significant for later developments in international law and was used against Nazi leaders charged with war crimes at Nuremberg in 1945.
The horrors of World War II provided the impetus for the establishment of the United Nations in 1945.
Its founding charter dedicated the organization to the maintenance of international peace and security, a role it has interpreted by introducing a number of conventions and agreements that, among other things, limit certain types of weapon, define war crimes, and seek to prevent and punish acts of genocide.
These agreements carry considerable weight and are, in theory, enforceable in national and international courts of law.
Immunity from violence was given to non-combatants who could not defend themselves.
This idea, and the later adoption of truce days, slowly spread across Western Europe and survived until the 13th century.
Christian values of right conduct and charity also informed European knights, who were meant to fight according to unwritten codes of chivalry that governed their conduct and behavior, although such codes were often abandoned in the heat of battle.
The first work dedicated specifically to the justification of war appeared in Poland in the early 15th century.
The scholar and jurist Stanislaw of Skarbimierz's sermons, De bellisjustis , put forward a theory to justify Poland's war against the Teutonic Knights.
In the early 1500s, the Spanish theologian Francisco de Vitoria justified the Spanish conquest of the Americas.
His views had a major influence on Hugo Grotius, the 17thcentury Dutch lawyer whose three volumes on the conduct of war are the first legal code of warfare and form the basis of modern international law.
Grotius claimed that wars are justifiable if based on self-defense, reparation of injury, or punishment, and that once Landmark in the history of war The Geneva Convention of 1864 was the first of four such conventions covering the care of the wounded and the treatment of prisoners of war and civilians. a war has begun both sides are bound by certain rules regardless of whether their cause is just or not.
International treaties The laws put forward by medieval and Renaissance thinkers were entirely theoretical, and there was no effective means of enforcing them.
That changed in the mid-19th century when the heavy casualties caused by increasingly mechanized warfare prompted tentative steps toward enforceable laws.
Two peace conferences at The Hague, in 1899 and 1907, produced conventions that broke new ground in setting out not only the rules of war but also some methods of resolution and enforcement.
Petersburg Convention renounces the use of fragmentary, explosive, or incendiary ammunition.
MODERN LAND MINE WWI GAS SHELL BALKANS AND THE CAUCASUS Post-Communist Wars Chechen capital in ruins Intense Russian shelling of Grozny, the capital of Chechnya, in 1994-95, and again in 1999-2000, reduced much of the city to rubble.
The collapse of Communism in Eastern Europe and the break-up of the USSR and Yugoslavia released nationalist and ethnic rivalries in each country as age-old antagonisms and divisions re-emerged.
Bloody wars broke out in the Caucasus and Yugoslavia that are still a source of trouble today.
T he nations of the Caucasus were incorporated into Russia's empire during the 19th century but were never fully reconciled to, first Russian, and then Soviet, domination.
The enclave of Nagorno-Karabakh was officially part of, and totally surrounded by, Azerbaijan but was historically part of Armenia and was almost entirely Armenian in terms of population.
Its regional parliament voted to join Armenia in February 1988, prompting widespread ethnic violence as Azeris were expelled from Armenia and Armenians forced out of Azerbaijan.
In January 1990, the Azeri Popular Front won an election held in Azerbaijan and declared not only its independence from the USSR but also war on Armenia.
But as the USSR broke up, both Armenia and Azerbaijan declared their independence.
In 1992 Armenian Nagorno-Karabakh irregulars occupied the narrow border region between Armenia and the province, linking the two together.
Despite peace talks being held in 2001, the future of the enclave remains unsettled today.
Georgia Georgia declared independence in 1991 but immediately faced ethnic separatist movements in three provinces.
South Ossetians wishing to remain Russian by joining the republic of North Ossetia fought Georgian troops in November 1991 until a ceasefire was arranged in July 1992.
Russian peacekeeping forces occupied a buffer zone between Georgia and South Ossetia.
The Georgians invaded but were driven out in 1993 after savage fighting.
Chechnya The present-day Russian Federation consists of 83 republics, districts, and other regions.
The Chechen republic in the northern Caucasus has always been fiercely independent and has resented Russian rule since it was conquered in 1859.
In the chaos surrounding the USSR's break-up, Chechnya declared its independence.
In 1994 fighting broke out when Both the USSR and Yugoslavia consisted of federations of partly autonomous republics with many peoples held together in a single state under Communist rule.
THE SOVIET UNION The Union of Soviet Socialist Republics consisted of 15 separate republics, the largest of which was the Russian Federation.
YUGOSLAVIA At the end of World War II, the Communists under Yosip Broi Tito took power in Yugoslavia.
Tito reorganized the multi-ethnic country into a federation of six republics held together by his strong leadership.
Slovenia and Croatia both elected non-Communist governments, while the Serbian government of Slobodan Milosevic became increasingly nationalist.
In 1991 Milosevic refused to accept a Croat as federal president, causing Slovenia, Croatia, and Macedonia to declare their independence from Yugoslavia.
Russia sent troops to intervene, who shelled the city and seized it in early 1995.
The Chechen rebels fighting for independence then took to the mountains and conducted guerrilla warfare against Russian targets.
The siege, one of the longest in modern times, killed 12,000 people and wounded 50,000, 85 percent of them civilians.
Food, electricity, and water supplies were cut off, while Serb snipers picked off residents in the streets.
The siege attracted worldwide humanitarian attention, and was only lifted when peace talks ended the Bosnian war.
AFTER The conflicts in the former Soviet republics and Yugoslavia have yet to be resolved.
Ethnic rivalries remain intense and fears of Russian empire-building persist.
SERBIA AND KOSOVO After the war, Kosovo came under United Nations administration.
In 2008 the Assembly of Kosovo declared the province independent, but it was not recognized by Serbia or Russia.
Many prominent Serbs have been indicted for war crimes, including Slobodan Milosevic, who died during his trial in 2006, and Radovan Karadzic, former president of Republika Srpska.
RADOVAN KARADZIC, FACING HIS ACCUSERS IN THE HAGUE GEORGIA In August 2008, fighting broke out again between Russia and Georgia over South Ossetia.
Georgian troops attempted to retake the breakaway province, but Russia sent in tanks and bombed targets inside Georgia.
At the same time, Russian troops stationed in Abkhazia invaded western Georgia.
Many hundreds of thousands of Albanians fled their homes as Serbs conducted widespread ethnic cleansing in the province.
When Serbia subsequently refused to accept peace terms, NATO planes bombed the region in an 11-week campaign.
It was only after this prolonged bombardment that Serbia ended its attacks on Kosovo and began to withdraw its troops.
SLOBODAN MILOSEVIC, ON ENDING KOSOVO'S AUTONOMY, JUNE 28, 1989 . nor the Russian Army had been willing to accept defeat in Chechnya.
Russian troops invaded the republic again in October 1999 and heavily bombed Grozny, causing many casualties and forcing some 200,000 citizens to flee.
In response, Chechens seized hostages in a Moscow theater and subsequently fought an increasingly bitter battle in the province itself with Russian troops.
A new constitution was agreed in 2003 that gave Chechnya greater autonomy within Russia and a pro-Russian president installed in what was widely seen as a rigged election.
Yugoslavia The break-up of Yugoslavia in June 1991 was contested by Serbia, whose people were the dominant ethnic group in the country.
The Serb-controlled Yugoslav Army fought a one-week battle to stop Slovenia leaving the union before a ceasefire was declared.
Fighting with Croatia lasted until January of the following year, when the Yugoslav Army withdrew, although its troops remained in Serb-majority areas of Croatia until they were evicted by the Croat army in 1998.
The successful departure from Yugoslavia of Croatia and Slovenia led multi-ethnic BosniaHerzegovina to fear for its future, for in March 1991, Serb and Croat leaders had secretly agreed to divide Bosnia between them.
In March 1992, Bosnia Yugoslav soldier's cap The Serb-led Yugoslav Army fought during the 1990s to keep the former Yugoslavia united under Serb control. declared independence, prompting its Serb population to set up their own independent Republika Srpska.
The United Nations imposed sanctions against Serbia and established six safe havens for Muslims in Bosnia.
But the UN failed to protect these areas, allowing Serbs to overrun them in 1995, killing some 8,000 Muslims at Srebrenica.
NATO then bombed Serb positions, forcing Serbia to agree a peace treaty with Bosnia and Croatia that divided the region between Serb and Muslim-Croat states.
Kosovo In the former Yugoslavia, Kosovo was a southern Serbian province inhabited mainly by Kosovar Albanians.
Albanian fighters in the Kosovo Liberation Army first confronted Serb forces in January 1998, prompting the Kosovan refugees Around 600,000 Kosovans fled for safety in Macedonia and Albania after Serbia began a policy of murderous ""ethnic cleansing"" against them in 1999.
The US, UK, and France enforced ""no-fly zones"" in the north and south of the country to protect these minorities.
The UN also imposed a trade embargo on Iraq, leading to as many as 500,000 deaths from malnutrition and disease.
In 2002 President George W Bush identified Iraq, along with Iran and North Korea, as part of an ""axis of evil"" that aided terrorism.
WEAPONS OF MASS DESTRUCTION After 9/11 the United States government accused Iraq of hiding weapons of mass destruction (nuclear, chemical, or biological weapons) from UN inspectors.
The UN's own experts were unable to find any evidence of weapons of mass destruction, stating that Iraq was complying with UN resolutions.
A UN INSPECTION TECHNOLOGY TALON ROBOT The Talon is used to move and dispose of live grenades and bombs.
A soldier uses a digital control unit to direct its movements from a safe distance.
United States troops have used the Talon since 2000, first in Afghanistan, then working for ground troops in Iraq.
TALON The Occupation of Iraq The invasion of Iraq by US, UK, and other forces in March 2003 to overthrow Saddam Hussein produced a quick military victory.
While the invasion itself was well planned and executed and its aims were clear, the political and security implications of a lengthy occupation presented more complex problems.
PRESIDENT GEORGE W BUSH ON SADDAM'S GOVERNMENT, JANUARY 29, 2002 The insurgents were mainly Saddam loyalists and Iraqi nationalists upset at their loss of power, but dissent soon spread to Sunni clerics and their followers.
In 2004 the insurgency spread to Sh'ia clerics and radicals who, inspired by neighboring Iran, saw United States troops in particular as an anti-Islamic force.
As the security situation deteriorated, foreign fighters and the newly created al-Qaida group in Iraq contributed to the violence as a way of attacking the USA. 23 for the city of Nasiriyah, situated near bridges over the Euphrates River.
A firefight with pro-Saddam elements broke out before United States troops took the city.
To the south, after two weeks of heavy fighting, British troops fought their way into Iraq's second city, Basra, on April 6.
In the north, special forces and United States airborne brigades supported the Kurdish capture of Kirkuk.
On 5 April United States troops raided Baghdad airport to test the city's defenses.
The next day, troops entered the city itself, crushing resistance with attack helicopters and aerial bombardment.
The city was occupied fully by Coalition forces on April 9, with statues of Saddam Hussein toppled throughout the city and his image removed from all public buildings.
Tikrit, birthplace of Saddam Hussein and his main power base, was captured on April 15, the last major city to fall to Coalition forces.
MILLION Iraqi refugees later fled to neighboring countries. increasing heat.
Little thought, however, had been given to Iraq's post-war administration.
The country had no history of democratic politics and was split between a Muslim Sh'ia majority previously persecuted by Saddam, a Sunni minority he had used to control the country, and Kurdish separatists in the north.
The one institution that had united the country—the pro-Saddam army—was immediately dismantled.
The Coalition therefore had to set up a provisional authority to govern the country until democratic elections could be held and a new government formed.
The shift from liberator to unwanted occupier was swift, as Iraqis turned against Coalition forces.
The force, which assembled in Kuwait and the Gulf, was supported by at least 70,000 Kurds from the north of the country.
The invasion The war began on March 20, 2003, with explosions in Baghdad detonated by Coalition special forces already in the capital.
Troops invaded from the south, with amphibious forces seizing oil installations around Basra and the Al-Faw peninsula to prevent them from being destroyed or used in environmental warfare.
The first major battle took place on March SOUTHWEST ASIA , p—| Invasion and occupation of Iraq Dates 2003-present Location Iraq Saddam was captured on December 13 and later put on trial for crimes against humanity.
Insurgency and sectarian killings The invasion was declared over at the end of April, 2003.
Widely used by the insurgents in Iraq, it fires a variety of warheads, the most powerful of which can easily penetrate the armour of a tank.
The main areas of conflict were in the poor Sh'ia sections of Baghdad and other cities and around Fallujah in the center of the Sunni triangle.
Two bitter battles for Fallujah took place in 2004, the second, in November, lasting 46 days.
The United States military described the battle as the heaviest urban combat it had been involved in since Vietnam.
While United States troops and installations were the main targets, Sunni suicide and car bombers also targeted Sh'ia mosques and other civilian meeting places in an attempt to stir up sectarian hatred.
By 2006, 33 people a day on average were being killed in Baghdad alone.
The violence resulted in the ethnic cleansing of many cities, the Sh'ia majority driving Sunnis out of their homes and establishing control at their expense.
In order to suppress the rising violence, 20,000 additional United States troops were sent to Iraq in early 2007 to contain the situation.
This ""troop surge"" appeared to work, reducing violence across the country, although Sh'ia dominance over their rival Sunnis probably contributed more.
The reduction in violence allowed the United States to start withdrawing troops, slowly handing over security duties to the reconstituted and re-equipped Iraqi army and the government of Iraq's 18 provinces to locally elected politicians.
AFTER -IA The occupation of Iraq by Allied troops was scheduled to end in 2009, although the security situation in the country was far from secure and its future uncertain.
WITHDRAWAL In 2008 United States and Iraqi governments approved a Status of Forces agreement, agreeing that United States forces would leave Iraqi cities by June 30,2009, and that all United States forces would leave the country by the end of 2011.
On January 1,2009, the United States handed over the Green Zone security region in the center of Baghdad to Iraqi security forces.
Britain announced that its troops would all withdraw by the end of July 2009.
However, doubts remained that all United States troops would leave the country by the required date, with some possibly remaining as a residual force, by agreement with the Iraqi government.
Blazing the trail to Basra A Royal Marine fires a Milan guided missile at an Iraqi position after British troops, along with United States Marines, had landed on the Al-Faw peninsula in southern Iraq on the night of March 20/21, 2003.
THE COST OF OCCUPATION The death toll during the invasion and occupation of Iraq is hard to estimate, as many deaths went unreported.
The Iraqi death toll between March 2003 and 2009 may have been around 1. million people, almost five percent of the population.
In Afghanistan, the Taliban regained strength as the United States concentrated its military efforts in Iraq. * k ' iAt.
The event depicted is legendary, but the armor and weapons are of the 13th-14th centuries, the era of Mongol domination of the region.
This section gives a comprehensive chronological catalog of all the major wars fought between 3000 bce and the present.
Included are brief accounts of the most important individual battles with statistics of the forces involved and the casualties suffered, where known.
Hammurabi increased the power of Babylon through cleverly making and breaking alliances.
Having gained control of much of southern Mesopotamia, he turned on his former allies.
Conflict with the Hyksos resumed in the early years of the 18th dynasty.
Repeated Theban campaigns finally drove the Hyksos from their capital at Avaris.
The first documented use of chariots by the Egyptians was recorded during this conflict.
Our knowledge of the earliest battles of humanity is incomplete and reliant on the surviving accounts available.
Many conflicts between ancient peoples have certainly gone unrecorded by history.
In many cases, little more than the names of wars, battles, and generals have survived the passing of centuries.
This was the era of such legendary commanders as Harnesses, Darius, Alexander, Constantine, Hannibal, Pompey, and Caesar.
Even today HAMMURABI students of military history begin with the campaigns of their famous ancient forebears.
They pioneered advanced military technology, such as horse-drawn chariots and composite bows.
In the last years of the Egyptian 17th dynasty, disputes between the kings of Thebes and the Hyksos rulers of northern Egypt expanded into open conflict.
By the end of the 17th dynasty, the Hyksos were beginning to suffer their first real reverses.
Senusret III campaigned against the Nubians and established Egypt's borders.
He then went on to build a chain of fortresses to secure Egypt against raids and invasions.
Eannatum, ruler of the city-state of Lagash, led his forces against the neighboring city of Umma to resolve a border dispute.
Chariots were used as transport but the battle was fought on foot by dense masses of spearmen.
He led an army over 5,000 strong, armed with bronze hand weapons and composite bows.
War in the Ancient World 3000 BCE-500 CE MYCENAEAN RAIDS 1550-1150 BCE Forces Varied.
The Mycenaeans were a warrior people who built fortress cities from which they launched trading and raiding expeditions Mycenaean forces raided Egyptian and Hittite cities (in modern Syria and Turkey), and conquered Crete.
EARLY ISRAELITE CAMPAIGNS C.1400 BCE After the Exodus from Egypt (thought by some scholars to have been1450 bce), the surviving Israelites wandered into Canaan, seeking a home that they could make their own.
They were repulsed, but drew out the defenders and defeated them in the field with light infantry.
An alliance of city-states in northern Canaan sent a force to halt the Israelite invasion.
The Israelites counterattacked, catching their foes unaware and routing them with a fearsome head-on assault.
The battles detailed in the Sanskrit epic known as the Mahabharata are thought to represent the conflicts of the time rather than describe actual events.
They do indicate how Indian wars were fought in the period, that being mainly on foot with some chariots for the nobility.
One of the largest chariot battles ever recorded, the outcome at Kadesh is unclear, with both sides claiming victory.
There is some archaeological evidence to suggest that the siege did, in fact, take place.
The origin of the Sea Peoples remains unclear, but they raided the shores of Egypt's Mediterranean coast.
This led to the world's first recorded sea battle, between the Sea Peoples and an Egyptian fleet.
According to Egyptian accounts, the Sea Peoples were decisively defeated.
Many Shang dynasty troops refused to fight and 170,000 Shang slaves, who had unwisely been armed, decided to fight for the Zhou dynasty instead.
The more disciplined Zhou overran their enemies and massacred loyal Shang troops afterward.
LATER ISRAELITE CAMPAIGNS 1240-874 BCE Once the Israelites became established in their Promised Land, their fortunes fluctuated considerably.
After finally defeating the Canaanites, they were forced to defend their new lands against a succession of external threats.
Murder of King Priam and his son Polites This detail from an Athenian vase shows Neoptolemos, Achilles' son, killing King Priam during the sack of Troy.
The Egyptian pharaoh Thutmosis III took a huge gamble, leading his forces through a narrow pass where they could easily have been trapped.
Goddess Greek Chinese/Korean Camulus God Celtic Hachiman God Japanese Hungarian Aztec Hindu Hindu Mars God Roman Egyptian war goddess This statue depicts Sekhmet, the war goddess of Upper Egypt.
She has the head of a lioness, an animal admired by the ancient Egyptians as a fierce hunter. attack caused panic among the Philistines, who were either massacred or forced to flee the battlefield.
Besieging the city of Jebus (modern-day Jerusalem), the Israelites gained access by a surprise assault.
Syrian forces advanced on Samaria and laid siege before an Israelite field force could be mustered.
Subsequently, the Israelites attacked the siege camp while the Syrian leaders were drunk and routed their army.
Casualties No reliable estimates, but some sources put Syrian casualties as high as 127,000.
As the Syrians prepared for a renewed invasion of Israel, the Israelites launched a pre-emptive campaign.
The Canaanites were better equipped than the Israelites, but their chariots were bogged down.
Having been invaded by Midianite people front the east, the Israelites sent a small elite force to startle the sleeping Midianite army in its camp.
After a campaign against the Philistines, the Israelites were brought to battle at Mount Gilboa.
The Philistine army stormed Israelite positions, and Israel's King Saul committed suicide.
The Israelite leader Jonathan discovered a secret path that outflanked the Philistine position.
Satellite navigation First developed for the United States Navy, satellite navigation gave naval forces superb navigational accuracy and eventually led to true precisionguided missile technologies.
Self-propelled torpedoes Arguably an Austrian invention, the self-propelled torpedo offered a largely silent and almost invisible anti-ship weapon, and later gave the submarine its principal firepower.
Naval radar Maritime radar not only revolutionized navigation, but also led to the development of radarcontrolled naval gunnery, dramatically improving the accuracy of fire over long ranges.
Steam catapult The United States Navy's development of the steam catapult was the breakthrough that enabled aircraft carriers to develop into the influential fighting systems they are today.
Naval ram Introduced by the ancient Greek and Roman navies, a bronze ram enabled a vessel to puncture an enemy ship below the waterline, providing the means to sink another ship in the days before naval firepower.
Naval mines Possibly first invented by medieval Chinese naval officers, naval mines became a great threat during the 20th century, enabling a navy to control enemy shipping lanes.
Armor plating Korean Panokseon-class ""turtle ships"" had iron protection on the upper deck and hull.
Its armies were well trained and often considered unbeatable in the field.
The Assyrians therefore had to become adept at siege warfare to overcome the defenses of enemies who would not come out to fight.
As Assyria grew in power, an alliance of 12 states was formed to counter its expansion.
The two sides met in the largest battle the world had yet seen, involving chariots, cavalry and infantry.
Assyrian bow and arrow This is a reproduction of the type of bow and arrow that may have been used by Assyrian warriors1350 bce.
While the Assyrian forces under Shalmaneser III ravaged the countryside all around, the Syrians held out in their capital.
Damascus was not taken, but several other cities were obliged to offer tribute to the Assyrian empire.
A coalition of states was formed to resist the expansion, including Israel and Damascus.
Unwilling to fight in the field, the allies took refuge in their fortresses and cities, which were assaulted one by one.
Location Judaean mountains between Mediterranean Sea and Dead Sea, Israel.
After all the other cities of Judah were taken, Jerusalem came under siege by the Assyrian army.
Some accounts claim a plague weakened the Assyrian army; others suggest the city was relieved by allies from Africa.
A tower carrying archers and fitted with battering rams was transported to the wall up a specially built ramp.
While campaigning against the Elamites, the Assyrians were attacked by a coalition of Elamite and Chaldean forces.
The resulting battle at the Diyala River must have been very costly, as the Assyrians suspended offensive operations for a year.
In order to punish the people of Susa for joining an alliance against them, AshurbanipaTs Assyrian armies utterly destroyed Susa, pulling down buildings, looting, and sowing the land with salt.
This was standard practice, and induced many other cities to surrender without a fight.
After years of conflict with Assyria, the Elamites were weakened by an Assyrian attack on Babylon, which failed, and by civil war.
The Assyrian army advanced into Elam and laid waste to the country, eliminating the Elamite threat for good.
With the Assyrian empire in decline, and its forces facing constant harassment from tribes along its frontiers, Egyptian forces besieged Ashdod, finally capturing it from Assyria after a 29-year siege.
Taking advantage of the weakness of Assyria, which was dealing with revolts as well as Egyptian incursions, the Medes and Babylonians tried unsuccessfully to attack the Assyrian capital, Nineveh.
While most of the Assyrian force were defending Nineveh, the Babylonian and Medean armies moved to quickly capture Assur, the original capital of the empire.
As Assyrian military power waned, the allied forces of Babylon and the Medes moved against them.
Despite setbacks, the allies were able to capture the Assyrian capital, Nineveh, after a three-month siege.
Meanwhile their left wing had smashed its opponents, forcing the Chu to make a hasty retreat.
The Assyrians were caught in the middle of the conflict and were gradually crushed into insignificance.
Marching through Palestine to bring relief to their Assyrian allies, the Egyptians were confronted at Megiddo by an army from Judah under King Josiah.
After the fall of Nineveh, the Assyrian capital moved to Carchemish, which was taken by Babylonian forces.
A joint Egyptian-Assyrian operation to recapture the city was totally defeated.
Casualties No reliable estimates, but extremely high on the Egyptian side.
Exploiting the victory at Carchemish, the Babylonians pursued the fleeing Egyptians.
The resulting battle inflicted massive casualties on the disorganized Egyptians, ensuring total Babylonian victory.
Abandoned by its Egyptian allies, Jerusalem suffered a siege for 18 months.
With his people starving, Zedekiah, king of Judah, confronted the Babylonians near Jericho but was utterly defeated.
It assembled multi-ethnic forces composed of conscripts and mercenaries with varying skills, and welded them into effective and disciplined armies.
After a long period of rule by Assyria and Media, the province of Persis revolted, starting a war that lasted two years.
Led by Cyrus the Great, the Persians became independent and founded an empire.
After disrupting the Lydians with archery, the Persians successfully counterattacked.
The native Babylonians revolted against their unpopular King Nabonidus, and Cyrus took Babylon without further fighting.
Taking advantage of the death of the pharaoh, Persian forces invaded Egypt.
The much weaker Egyptian army, bolstered by mercenaries, made a stand at Pelusium but was comprehensively defeated.
EARLY ROMAN WARS C.509-C.458 bce Early in its existence, Rome used a military system heavily influenced by that of the Greek city-states, as it fought against neighboring tribes for survival and against rival cities for dominance.
This semi-legendary Roman battle cannot be precisely dated due to the lack of records from this time.
Both Rome and its Latin neighbors used Greek tactics, with a phalanx supported by lighter troops.
Roman cavalry dismounted and joined the fighting on foot, resulting in victory.
A force from the Aequi tribe was camped near Mons Algidus, threatening Roman territory.
An army sent to remove the threat became surrounded, but after rescue by another Roman force they crushed the Aequi.
After suffering heavy losses the Persian fleet fled to the island of Samos.
The Persians would not fight at sea, so the Greeks came ashore and defeated them in a land battle, burning the Persian ships afterward.
A Spartan-led Greek coalition defeated the Persians, depriving them of their last stronghold in Thrace.
However, tyrannical conduct by the Spartan leader led the allies to realign themselves with Athens.
Thus was formed an alliance known as the Delian League, which became the basis for the Athenian empire.
Troops from Greece took part in the fighting, paving the way for the Greco-Persian wars, which began soon afterward.
An attempt by the Persian-backed tyrant of Miletus to capture Naxos led to a long siege, which was broken off when Persian supplies and money ran out.
The Ionian rebels were assisted by ships from several islands, creating a large fleet under a weak command.
One of the allied factions accepted a Persian bribe not to fight, causing others to drop out as well.
The Persian fleet won a decisive victory over those that elected to fight.
Resistance by the Greek city-states was countered by the Persians in stages.
Some city-states repelled the invaders while others allied themselves with Persia.
The result was a drawn-out struggle that resulted in the Greek city-states remaining outside the Persian empire.
Rather than resist, the Eretrians took refuge within their city walls and were besieged.
Rather than wait for their reinforcements, the outnumbered Greeks charged and forced the Persians to make a hurried re-embarkation.
Finally outflanked and surrounded, the heroic Spartans fought to the death.
Responding to a Persian landing, Greek forces met the Persians on the coast at Hemp and linen body armor This reproduction composite body armor is called a linothorax, meaning linen torso.
Storms destroyed part of the Persian fleet and gave the Greeks a fighting chance to hold the straits of Artemisium.
After three days of piecemeal actions the Greeks were forced to withdraw to Salamis.
Luring the Persian fleet into the narrow channel between the island of Salamis and the mainland, the Greeks attacked and defeated the Persians in a seven-hour battle.
Taking advantage of a bungled Greek withdrawal, the Persian army attacked the Spartans on the Greek right wing.
The Spartans were able to hold out long enough for their allies to return to the field.
In classic hoplite style, both armies began trying to envelop the left flank of the other.
Although the Spartan line was broken, the Spartans defeated the enemy left flank before turning to attack their center, inflicting a general collapse and rout.
Athenian forces besieging Syracuse were themselves blockaded by a Spartan fleet reponding to the Syracusans' request for help.
Drawing out the Spartan fleet, the Athenians launched an ambush that resulted in the total destruction of the Spartan force.
The powerful Athenian fleet was almost totally destroyed, and Athens was finally forced to sue for peace.
Outnumbered and outfought by the more flexible Celtic warriors, the Roman phalanx broke and was massacred.
Subsequently, the rigid phalanx formation was abandoned in favor of the tactically more flexible legion.
Egypt revolted against Persian rule and was granted Athenian assistance.
The Persians were defeated on land at Pampremis and at sea near Memphis.
In an attempt to retake Pylos from , the Athenians by land and sea, a Spartan force was cut off on Sphacteria.
Ambushed by a Boeotian army allied to Sparta, the Athenians were hard pressed but had gained the upper hand until Boeotian cavalry appeared on the Athenian flank.
Vienna Austria October 1529 ce The Austrian garrison prevented the Muslim army of Suleiman the Magnificent from capturing Vienna, halting the spread of the Ottoman empire into central Europe.
Cajamarca Peru 16 November Francisco Pizarro defeated the Incas and opened the 1532 way for Spanish hegemony in South America.
Waterloo Belgium June 18, 1815 Napoleon's defeat brought the French domination of Europe to an end.
Huai-Hai China November 1948Mao Zedong's Communists defeated the Nationalist January 1949 Army in a massive land engagment, enabling the final Communist takeover of China.
William the Conqueror Norman 1027-1087 Defeated the English army and became king of England in 1066.
Napoleon Bonaparte Corsican/ French 1769-1821 Revolutionized the nature of warfare itself, and inflicted major defeats on most opposing European powers and alliances for more than a decade.
Adolf Hitler Austrian/ German 1889-1945 Although he led his nation to eventual ruin, in 1939-42 he conquered most of western and southern Europe, parts of North Africa, and Soviet territories up to Moscow and deep into Ukraine.
Georgy Zhukov Russian 1896-1974 A key figure in Germany's defeat in World Alexander the Great Like other Macedonian kings, Alexander the Great is often depicted wearing a lion skin as a symbol of his strength and royal lineage.
However, domineering Spartan policies led the city of Thebes to end its alliance with Sparta.
Theban opposition to Sparta led to a war between the two city-states and their allies.
A Spartan force attacking Haliartus was repulsed, then driven off by a Theban army marching to relieve the city.
The Spartan army counterattacked but eventually had to disband and return home.
War II, Zhukov helped stop the German capture of Moscow, crushed the Sixth Army at Stalingrad, and then drove a Soviet advance to Berlin itself.
The Spartan phalanx then outfought those of the Thebans and allies, driving them from the field.
A Theban force penetrated the Spartan line and began to ransack their camp.
The Thebans tried to break out to rejoin their allies but met the Spartan phalanx head-on and were defeated.
A force consisting of light Athenian troops harassed a much more heavily equipped force of Spartan hoplites with missile fire.
Unable to get close enough to use their weapons, the Spartans eventually broke and fled.
Despite the inexperience of its crews, the Spartan fleet achieved some success at first, but was then rapidly overpowered by the Athenian-Persian force.
By massively reinforcing his left flank and holding back forces from his weak right, the Theban leader Epaminondas broke the Spartan right.
Again using a powerful left-flank phalanx, Epaminondas broke the right of the enemy line.
However, he was killed in the fighting and little was made of the victory.
During China's warring states period, the state of Qi sent a force into Wei, forcing the Wei to break off the siege of Handan and march homeward in haste.
This drew the Wei into an ambush, which resulted in their utter defeat.
Roman forces and their Samnite allies clashed with rebel Campanians and Latins.
The Macedonian army drew out the opposing hoplites and broke them with a counterattack.
Alexander extended his father's conquests as far afield as Egypt and even India.
Alexander opted for a reckfess head-on attack against a Persian army on the far bank of the Granicus River.
His cavalry forced a crossing, followed by his infantry, and surrounded the Persian forces.
The battle of Hydaspes Alexander's conquests took him far into South Asia.
While attacking the main Persian army, which was holding a fortified position behind a river, Alexander's infantry was fought to a standstill, but his Companion cavalry broke through and put the Persian emperor Darius III to flight.
Alexander's forces built a causeway out to the island city, allowing their siege engines to get into effective range.
Battering rams mounted on galleys were used to attack the walls, and the city was stormed.
Using the siege engines employed at Tyre, Alexander's troops were able to gain access to the city.
It took several assaults to finally overwhelm the defenders, but once the city was taken the way to Egypt lay open.
Outnumbered four to one, the Macedonians staked all on a strike at the Persian emperor, Darius.
As light forces struggled to hold the flanks, the main body pushed forward and put Darius to flight.
Persian forces held a narrow pass against Alexander's army for a month, inflicting heavy losses.
Led to an alternative route through the mountains, Alexander's army then advanced on the city of Persepolis.
After a stealthy crossing of the Hydaspes river, the Macedonians advanced along the banks against the surprised Indian army.
Outflanked by cavalry, and under heavy attack, the Indian army broke and fled.
Taught to handle sword and spear Combat training: War games that often resulted in fatalities.
Learned poetry and song; read war theory British SAS : Period of basic training: 30 weeks Endurance exercises: The one-month selection phase involves extreme endurance marches, culminating in a 40-mile mountain trek carrying a 55-lb bergen rucksack, plus rifle and full gear, to be completed in under 24 hours.
Mountain and wilderness survival training plus a six-week jungle survival course.
Victory over the Samnites was critical to the expansion of the Roman republic from a city-state to the dominant power in Italy.
The battle of Mons Gaurus was the most significant of these actions, though there was no long-term decisive outcome.
Sealing both ends of the pass with felled trees, the Samnites rained missiles on the trapped Romans from above until they surrendered.
In the Second Samnite War the Romans established the practice of taking territory after crushing their enemies.
Having captured much of the Samnites' territory, the Romans won a decisive victory at Bovianum, forcing the Samnites to seek peace on whatever terms they could get.
After a few years of peace, a third war broke out between the Romans and Samnites.
The Samnites were seeking to retain territory near Naples and prevent total domination by Rome.
By attacking one of two Roman forces, the Samnites hoped to defeat it before the other arrived.
The battle was going well for the Samnites when a flanking Roman detachment was mistaken for the second Roman army.
The Roman force's right was successful against the Samnites, but on the left the cavalry was broken by a chariot attack.
In the center, the Roman infantry fought on doggedly to ensure ultimate victory.
As the Romans pushed into Aquilonia, the Samnites scraped together an army by conscripting every available man of fighting age.
After a determined stand this force disintegrated, with the survivors seeking refuge in Aquilonia itself.
The city was stormed soon afterward, ending Samnite resistance in the region.
Chandragupta Maurya raised a powerful professional army, which he used to carve out an empire in northern and central Tribal warriors The tribes of Samnium, a region of southern Italy, were opponents of Rome.
This 4th-century fresco from Paestum illustrates the weapons and equipment used by Samnite warriors.
India while in his 20s, in the manner of Alexander the Great, whom Chandragupta had supposedly met in India.
Chandragupta attacked and conquered the Macedonian satrapies left behind by Alexander when he had returned westward.
Battling for control of Alexander the Great's former empire, his former generals Antigonus and Seleucus clashed at Ipsos.
The wars are named after Pyrrhus, king of Epirus in Greece, who gave his name to a ""Pyrrhic victory,"" which is one gained at too great a cost.
Encountering war elephants for the first time, the Roman cavalry was driven off in panic and the Greek phalanx pushed the Roman infantry back across the Siris River with heavy losses on both sides.
Hurriedly devising anti-elephant tactics, the Romans clashed with a force of Greeks and their Italian allies under King Pyrrhus.
Succeeding in driving the beasts back into their own phalanx, the Romans took advantage of the confusion and counterattacked, forcing Pyrrhus's army to retreat.
A Carthaginian army was sent to break the siege, bringing on a pitched battle, which the Romans won.
The Romans made up for their naval inexperience by the use of the corvus, a ramp that allowed legionaries to board enemy craft and fight a land action at sea.
PERSONAL ARMOR THROUGH THE AGES Roman armor This is a reproduction of a lorica segmentata, a type of armor made of fitted strips of iron, worn by Roman legionaries of the 1st century ce.
While the main forces clashed, transports in the Roman rear were attacked by the Carthaginian wings.
The victorious Roman battle squadrons returned to drive off the attack.
The main Roman force was fought to a standstill by elephants while the cavalry of the Carthaginians drove off its opposite numbers.
No further Roman expeditions were made into North Africa during the war.
Drawing out the Carthaginian elephants with an advance force of light infantry, the Romans routed them with javelins, following up with an infantry charge in the ensuing confusion.
The Roman fleet was ambushed by a Carthaginian force hidden behind a headland.
Most of the Roman ships were rammed and boarded, resulting in a heavy defeat.
After the disaster at Drepana, the Romans rebuilt their fleet with better vessels and conducted extensive training.
Drawing out the Carthaginian fleet by blockading Lilybaeum , the Romans shattered the opposing fleet by using ramming tactics.
Cut off from Sicily by Roman sea power, the Carthaginians agreed a peace settlement.
During a period of almost continuous conflict between China's feudal kingdoms, known as the Warring States period, a desperate attempt by Zhao forces to escape a two-month Qin siege ended in massacre.
Zhao troops who were not killed in the battle surrendered, and were executed in their thousands.
After failing to conquer the kingdom of Kalinga, Emperor Asoka launched a second campaign and inflicted brutal reprisals, before renouncing war and converting to Buddhism.
Seleucus I Seleucus 1 , one of Alexander’s generals, also called Nicator, founded the Seleucid empire, which rivaled that of Rome.
WEIRD WEAPONS Weapon Period Description Battle pigs 4th century bce The Romans and the Greeks are both said to have used pigs, coated in incendiary fuel and set alight, to alarm and disrupt attacks by war elephants.
Ninja claws From 7th century bce The Japanese neko-te consisted of claw-like metal fingernails attached to leather bands that were worn on the fingers or as a clawed glove.
The ""nails"" were sometimes dipped in poison for performing silent assassinations.
Iron fan From medieval period The Japanese tetsu-sen was configured like a standard hand fan but made of sharp-edged rigid iron blades.
Bat bombs 1942-45 During World War II the United States government funded a plan to fit bats with tiny incendiary devices, then release them over Japan to start massive fires.
Balloon bombs 1944-45 This Japanese weapon consisted of a bomb fitted to a balloon, the whole device carried across the Pacific Ocean on prevailing winds.
Love gas 1990s The United States Air Force Research Laboratory at Wright-Patterson Air Base in Ohio attempted to develop a gas that would fill enemy soldiers with uncontrollable lust.
Solar firepower According to the 2nd-century ce writer Lucian, Archimedes focused the sun's rays with mirrors and lenses to set Roman ships alight at the great sea battle of Syracuse.
This 17th-century illustration imagines how Archimedes' solar reflection weapon would have looked in action.
At the end of the First Punic War, mercenary forces hired by Carthage could not be paid.
The dispute escalated into a revolt, with the mercenaries capturing Tunis.
The war went badly for Carthage at first, but eventually those mercenaries who did not defect to the Carthaginian side were defeated.
Violating the treaty that ended the First Punic War, Hannibal besieged Saguntum, a fortified city allied with Rome.
The city asked Rome for help but none came by the time the walls were finally stormed.
Saguntum provided a base for Hannibal's invasion of Italy via the Alps.
A smaller but well-prepared Roman force met a Carthaginian fleet sent to attack Lilybaeum.
Carthaginian ramming tactics were countered by boarding actions by the Romans.
Defeat meant that the Carthaginians were prevented from gaining a base in Sicily.
Hannibal's Carthaginian army marched across Gaul and over the Alps into Italy, taking the Romans completely by surprise.
A Carthaginian force lured the Romans into attacking across the Trebia River, placing them at a severe disadvantage.
Roman forces entered Iberia to engage the Carthaginians there, resulting in a straightforward clash near Cissa.
The Roman force outfought its opponents and defeated them with heavy losses.
The Carthaginian fleet moored off the mouth of the Ebro River, unaware of the Roman fleet nearby.
While Carthaginian crews were foraging ashore, the Romans attacked, causing the Carthaginians to scramble to re-man their ships.
Defeated, the Carthaginians beached their ships and fled to join their land forces.
Light forces and cavalry attacked the Roman flanks and rear as the main body engaged.
Thousands of Romans were either killed or captured in what was a giant ambush.
Worse disaster was averted when Fabius, better known for his tactic of avoiding battle, launched an attack to rescue the embattled legions.
The Carthaginians chose not to continue the engagement against the reinforced Romans.
Drawing the Romans into a reckless frontal attack, the Carthaginian center deliberately gave way while the flanking forces drove off their opposite numbers.
The Roman infantry was then surrounded and killed, in this greatest of Carthaginian victories.
The siege of Syracuse was largely a competition between Roman ingenuity and the genius of the inventor Archimedes, who orchestrated the Syracusan defences.
The outer walls were eventually stormed in a surprise attack, and eight months later the inner citadel fell to the Romans.
Poor scouting caused the Romans to blunder into an ambush, at which point their allies fled the field.
Unhappy with Roman rule, the people of Tarentum conspired to let the Carthaginian army into their city.
Much of the Roman garrison was eliminated but some troops were able to hold out in the citadel.
The result was two severe defeats for the Romans within days of each other.
The survivors were eventually reinforced and, if nothing else, they drew away Carthaginian forces that might have assisted Hannibal in his main campaign in Italy.
Hannibal mounted on a war elephant In 21 8bce, the Carthaginian general Hannibal Barca crossed the Alps to attack Rome, taking with him around 37 war elephants.
On the first, skirmishing escalated into an indecisive but bloody fight.
On the second, the Romans were badly beaten and forced to take refuge in their camp.
On the third day, Hannibal was forced onto the defensive, although the battle itself was not decisive.
Cartagena, also called New Carthage, was blockaded by the Roman fleet while the army made preparations for an assault.
Beating off the first attempt, the city was successfully stormed from both the landward and seaward sides by a second assault.
Thinking the Roman army was only engaging in skirmishing, the Carthaginians did not deploy for a full-scale battle until too late, but most of the Carthaginians got away as the Romans stopped for plunder.
The battle of Grumentum was a prelude to the greater Roman victory at Metarus.
Although the Carthaginians suffered heavy casualties and were forced to retire from the battlefield, Hannibal ensured an orderly retreat to conserve his troops.
Caught on the wrong side of the Metaurus River, the Carthaginians attempted to withdraw but were forced to fight.
The Romans used the Carthaginians' own enveloping tactics at Cannae against them, pulling the center of their line back while the legions on the wings crushed the enemy flanks.
The Carthaginans collapsed under pressure from the Roman flanks and center.
As the Romans advanced on Carthage, a hastily formed army made a stand near Utica.
It was quickly put to rout, forcing the Carthaginians to sue for peace.
They then decided to recall Hannibal's army from Italy, bringing about the battle of Zama.
After allowing Carthaginian elephants to pass between their units, the Roman infantry became involved in a tough fight with Hannibal's veterans.
Seleucus, founder of the Seleucid dynasty, took control of Syria and Iran; Antigonus carved out a kingdom in Anatolia; and Ptolemy founded a dynasty in Egypt.
Ascending to the Seleucid throne, Antiochus III set about pacifying his eastern possessions and then turned against an Egypt weakened by internal conflict.
Although both sides' elephants and cavalry were evenly matched, the Egyptian infantry, trained and led by Ptolemy IV, carried the day.
Victories in the field gave the Seleucids possession of the port of Sidon, but partly in response to Roman demands, there was no invasion of Egypt itself.
The battle of Panium, part of the Fifth Syrian War, was decided primarily by cavalry action.
Seleucid heavy cavalry defeated the lighter Egyptian cavalry on the flanks and then fell on the enemy infantry rear.
Joined by the Carthaginian general Hannibal, the Seleucid empire took advantage of anti-Roman sentiment in Greece to launch a military expedition.
The Seleucids were, however, defeated on land and at sea, and were forced to relinquish their Greek interests.
Han dynasty funerary figures Painted terracotta warriors, made for the funerary furnishings of a Han dynasty tomb , illustrate the style of armor and weapons used by the warriors of ancient China.
Although the Roman left was broken by a cavalry charge, the Seleucid phalanx was disrupted by panicking elephants and flanked by cavalry.
After declaring war on the Seleucids, the Egyptians quickly ran into difficulties.
They appealed to Rome for help, which demanded that the Seleucids withdraw from their conquests, bringing the war to an end. eastern Mediterranean.
A challenge from Macedonia, siding with Carthage, prompted a change in this policy.
Taking advantage of Roman reverses during the Second Punic War, Macedonia gathered allies and launched a campaign to gain territory in Illyria and Greece.
From the Roman perspective the war was a sideshow to the struggle with Carthage, and ended without any major territorial changes.
The Macedonians possessed large and capable ships, forcing their opponents to use a cautious strategy.
Despite losing their own flagship, the Macedonians captured that of Pergamum before heavy losses brought about their defeat.
The forces of Rhodes and Pergamum did not exploit their advantage, however, and the bulk of the Macedonian fleet survived the battle.
Rome's intervention transformed the wars between Macedonia and other eastern European powers.
After some indecisive maneuvering, the Romans advanced aggressively against Philip V of Macedonia, leading to the decisive encounter at Cynoscephalae.
Despite breaching the walls, the Romans were held up for months by a vigorous defense.
Finally disease and starvation weakened the defenders and the Romans could make a successfuf assault.
The survivors were killed or sold into slavery, and Carthage was razed to the ground.
The Macedonian phalanx initially met with success but gradually lost cohesion as it drove forward.
Small units of Romans penetrated the phalanx where their short swords gave them a huge advantage over the Macedonian pikemen.
Having recently been unified under Han rule, China came under attack by Xiongu nomads.
The Han army, attempting to drive off the invaders, was defeated by their skilled mounted archers.
Three wars were fought between 88 and 63 bce between the Roman republic and the kingdom of Pontus (a region running along the eastern Black Sea coast of modern Turkey) under King Mithridates.
In an unexpected encounter, the more flexible Roman force drew out the Macedonian phalanx and used the terrain to break it up before closing to attack from the front and from both flanks.
Macedonian attempts to reduce Roman influence in Greece and to increase their own led to a renewed war.
As Rome's enemies labored uphill toward them, the legionaries used their standard tactics, hurling javelins at close range before charging.
Formed around a band of escaped slave gladiators, Spartacus's army fought a successful guerrilla campaign and trounced two Roman armies before finally being defeated.
The outnumbered Roman forces used the advantage of high ground to dominate the Mithridatic forces, who were routed and fled for the safety of their camp, but were denied entry and overrun with great loss.
Some sources claim that only 12 Roman soldiers were lost in the battle.
Intervening in a dispute between Jewish princes, the Romans besieged Jerusalem.
Julius Caesar campaigned against the Gallic and Germanic tribes (in modernday France), and even raided Britain.
The Romans built a double set of siege lines around the Gauls trapped in Alesia.
But Caesar's crossing of the Rubicon triggered a civil war that changed all that.
By the time the upheaval was over the Roman republic had become an empire.
Lucius Sergius Catilina had conspired with others to overthrow the Roman senate.
When the conspiracy was revealed, Catiline assembled a poorly trained and ill-equipped army, which was destroyed by forces loyal to the senate.
Rapidly marching into Hispania, Caesar defeated an army loyal to Pompey.
Finding its retreat blocked, Pompey's army became besieged in its camp and surrendered to Caesar.
A force sent by Caesar to secure Roman holdings in North Africa from the governor.
However, a reckless advance resulted in an ambush that killed or captured almost all of Caesar's forces.
DYRRACHIUM JULY 48 BCE Caesar deployed a fourth line of battle rather than the usual three, enabling his force to drive off a flanking cavalry attack.
The fourth line then carried out a flanking action of its own, combined with a renewed frontal attack.
Taking advantage of the civil war in Rome, King Pharnaces of Pontus overran Roman and allied holdings in Lesser Armenia.
These could be interlocked to protect groups of soldiers from arrows or other missiles.
Although outnumbered by loyalist forces under their commander Pompey, Caesar advanced toward Rome.
Convinced that Rome could not be defended, Pompey eventually fled Italy, landing in Greece.
There he continued his opposition to Caesar, who pursued Pompey after eliminating his allies.
Caesar made a daring crossing of the Adriatic and besieged Pompey in his camp.
Caesar besieged Thapsus, forcing his V Republican enemies under Metellus Scipio to attempt a relief.
Caesar's archers drove off the Republican elephants, after which the Republican army was outfought and put to flight.
After the battle of Thapsus, the only significant Republican threat to Caesar was in Hispania.
Caesar's army marched to confront the Republicans, bringing about a head-on battle.
After a hard fight the Republican force collapsed, suffering very heavy casualties.
Forces under Mark Antony, an ally of the murdered Caesar, clashed with Republican troops under Brutus, Octavian, and Hirtius.
Antony's force was defeated and Octavian distinguished himself as a commander.
The battle led to a truce between Octavian and Antony and their alliance against the assassins of Caesar.
With their supply chain blocked by Antony and Octavian’s forces, the Republicans under Brutus launched an attack.
While they were occupied to the front they were flanked by troops under Antony and routed.
Antony's alliance with Cleopatra of Egypt led to a clash with Octavian, which saw Mark Anthony's defeat.
Afterward the senate named Octavian ""Augustus,"" and he became the first emperor of Rome.
Allied with Cleopatra of Egypt, he was defeated at Actium and Alexandria.
Blockaded at Actium by Octavian's navy, Antony's ships forced a passage through Octavian's fleet through which Cleopatra's force escaped.
Antony lost his flagship in the defeat, but escaped aboard another vessel with what remained of his fleet.
EARLY WARS OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE 1-60 ce Roman domination of Europe and the lands around the Mediterranean created stability and relative peace for many years.
Troubles on the border were often dealt with by conquest and annexation, pushing the frontiers of Rome ever further out.
Lured into the Teutoburg forest and abandoned by their allies, three Roman legions were harassed for several days before the scattered and weakened Roman survivors were overrun by assault.
Attempts to establish a Roman frontier resulted in a long series of skirmishes with Germanic tribes, with few decisive victories.
There were no further serious efforts to push the frontier beyond the Rhine.
The Druidic holy island of Anglesey fell in 60 and fortifications were built on the Tay river in 80.
ALFRED LORD TENNYSON, BRITISH POET, ""BOADICEA"", 1859 FAMOUS FEMALE WARRIORS Although the fierce Amazons of classical times are almost certainly mythical, a number of remarkable and fearsome female warriors have won their place in military history.
In an attempt to remove Jewish rebels from the formidable mountain-top fortress of Masada the Romans built an enormous ramp up to the walls, and breached them using rams.
While attempting to prevent a Roman crossing of the Medway River, tribal forces attacked the Roman bridgeheads repeatedly but without success.
Eventually enough Roman troops crossed the river to break out of the bridgeheads and repel the Britons.
The Iceni, under the leadership of Queen Boudicca, sacked several Roman towns before being overwhelmed by the might of two Roman legions.
Encountering the Caledonian army, the Roman commander Agricola initially employed his auxiliaries.
The Caledonian chariots were dispersed by Roman cavalry, which then fell on the enemy rear.
Raids by the Dacians prompted a Roman punitive expedition that resulted in a peace settlement.
When the Dacians resumed raiding, a new expedition was launched and the region was conquered.
The decisive battle of the Dacian campaign occurred at Tapae, site of an earlier action against the Dacians.
The Dacians proved to be stubborn opponents, but interpreted a storm as an omen and withdrew, conceding victory to the Romans.
Location Roman empire The politics of the Roman empire resulted in internal conflicts.
The Praetorian Guard and the army became the arbiters of power, both in battle and due to their ability to do away with a candidate who did not live up to his promises.
The conflict ended when Vespasian ascended the throne, beginning a new period of stability.
The rebels were initially successful, but were soon pushed back to strongholds such as Jerusalem and Masada.
The Roman army conducted a methodical siege of Jerusalem, storming a series of defensive positions before taking the Old City.
Warrior Dates Achievements Boudicca60 ce Queen of the Iceni tribe, Boudicca led a revolt against the Romans in Britain in60, destroying several Roman cities and crushing the Ninth legion before she was finally defeated.
Joan of Arcl 412A peasant girl who eventually led the French army against May 30, the English, Joan of Arc won notable victories before being 1431 captured and burned at the stake at the age of 19.
Isabella I 1451-1504 As the queen of Castile, Isabella led her soldiers into battle of Castile against the Moors, fighting alongside Ferdinand of Aragon.
Graine Ni Maillel 530— This piratical Irish princess attacked English ships and 1603 and shores until she was granted her territorial demands by the English queen Elizabeth I in 1593.
Hannah Snell 1723-92 A British woman who disguised herself as a man, Snell joined the Royal Marines and fought in many foreign battles, being wounded 12 times.
Margaret Corbin 1751-1800 Margaret Corbin fought alongside her husband John in the American Revolutionary War, crewing cannon at the battle of Fort Washington in 1776 even after John had been killed at her side.
She herself was wounded, and received a disabled soldier pension from Congress.
In the process she won the Croix de Guerre twice , the British Military Medal and Royal Red Cross, and the Legion d'honneur.
Boudicca and her daughters Boudicca was the warrior queen of the British Iceni tribe who rose against Rome during the 1st century ce.
Her forces burned the Roman settlement of Londinium to the ground in60 ce.
Rome dealt with the Sasanids as equals, though this did not prevent a number of wars between the two empires.
Tension between Rome and Persia over Roman ambitions in the region led to a renewal of conflict in 253.
A large Roman force was defeated at Barbalissos, which permitted the Persians to take the key cities of Antioch and Dura Europos.
Drawn into a naval engagement on the Yangtze River, the forces of Cao Cao chained their ships together for greater stability at the cost of maneuverability.
This made them an easy target for the arrows and fireships of their opponents and they retreated in disarray.
The decisive battle of the campaign took place at Misiche the following year, where the Romans were heavily defeated and the emperor killed.
Sasanid incursions into Roman territory resulted in a Roman campaign to redress the situation.
Initially successful, the Roman army was completely defeated at Edessa, with the capture and death of the emperor Valerian.
Sasanid emperor Shapur II attempted to regain lands lost to Rome and initially met with success.
While besieging Singara he received word of nomadic raids on his provinces and a robust Roman response, and so abandoned the campaign.
Renewing hostilities with Rome, Shapur II received the surrender of several Roman cities.
Amida withstood siege for 73 days before finally succumbing to the Sasanid army, which used siege towers and flaming arrows to overcome the defenders.
In response to the loss of territory to the Sasanid Persians, a Roman army advanced more or less unopposed to the Sasanid capital at Ctesiphon.
Despite a total victory over the Sasanid army, the Romans were unable to take the fortified city before Persian reinforcements arrived and the Romans had to retire.
Retreating from the Persian capital, the Roman army was harassed by Persian skirmishers.
At Samarra a major attack on the Roman rearguard resulted in the death of the Roman emperor Julian.
Rival emperors Maxentius and Licinius challenged his rule, bringing about a civil war.
As Constantine's army advanced on Rome it was attacked by a cavalry force loyal to Maxentius.
Several major cities made demonstrations of loyalty to Constantine soon after.
Having demolished the stone Milvian bridge over the Tiber River, Maxentius, ruler of Rome, advanced across a pontoon bridge to confront Constantine.
Defeated, he retreated by the same route and was drowned when the bridge collapsed.
As Constantine was besieging Byzantium, a fleet loyal to Licinius attempted to contest control of the Hellespont.
An initial clash went badly for Licinius's fleet, which was outmaneuvered in the narrow waters.
As reinforcements arrived, the Licinian fleet was shattered by a storm, granting victory to Constantine.
The Gupta dynasty rulers Chandragupta I and his son Samudragupta attempted to recreate the Mauryan empire.
The Alemanni came close to achieving victory over the outnumbered Romans.
Assisted by heavy missile support, the Roman infantry were eventually able to rout their foes after a hard fight.
Samudragupta ; Kumaragupta I ; and the great general, Chandragupta I . and then attacked their infantry from the rear.
The battle is often seen as the first step in the fall of the Roman empire to the barbarians.
Having killed the western Roman emperor Valentinian II, the Frankish king Arbogast found himself under attack from eastern Roman emperor Theodosius I's forces.
Assisted by gale-force winds along the Frigidus River Valley, the Romans managed to defeat the Franks.
The White Huns carved out a kingdom in Persia and India, expanding it in the early 6th century before being defeated and fading into obscurity.
A diversionary Constantinian force drew some of the Maxentian troops out of the city, and a siege began.
Constantine's army beat off an attempt to raise the siege in a close-fought battle.
During an attempt at negotiations with Ostrogothic and Visigothic armies, fighting broke out with the forces of Valens, the Roman emperor in the east.
The Hun invasions of the Roman empire struck terror into its settled populations.
Throughout the period, infantry demonstrated its ability to fight off even elite cavalry, for example, at the battle of Poitiers in 732.
The period also produced a number of innovative commanders, including William the Conqueror and Ian Zizka, who brought together infantry and cavalry in a variety of battle-winning combinations.
Clovis slew King Alaric II of the the Visigoths in battle and added most of southwest Gaul to his territory.
This era of Muslim expansion ended with the Frankish victory at Poitiers in 732.
After a lengthy archery duel, the Persians drove back the Byzantine heavy cavalry, but were then flanked by Hun horse archers and driven off.
Although the Byzantines' allied light cavalry was unreliable, their heavy cavalry charged as soon as the Vandals came into sight.
Seeing that victory was likely, the allied cavalry then joined the fight.
An aggressive defense using cavalry raids eventually forced the Goths to withdraw, at which point the Byzantines counterattacked.
The veteran Byzantine crews outmaneuvered their inexperienced opponents.
As the Ostrogoths launched a head-on cavalry attack, they ran into flanking crossfire from archers and fell back in disorder.
In 553, an army of 75,000 Franks and Alemanni tribesmen invaded Italy in support of the Ostrogoth campaign for control of the area.
Much of this force dispersed, and the remainder suffered an epidemic of dysentery, leaving barely 20,000 men to face the Byzantines.
The Franks attacked fiercely, but were defeated by repeated cavalry charges into the flanks and rear of their unwieldy infantry.
In 601, the Byzantines fought a series of actions against the Avars, who had been raiding the Balkan provinces for 20 years.
In each case, Byzantine infantry withstood repeated charges from Avar cavalry, who were beaten off with heavy losses.
Byzantine and Persian forces clashed near the ruins of Nineveh, fighting for 11 hours.
The Byzantine emperor killed the Persian leader in personal combat; the Persian army was then routed.
After a period of skirmishing, the Arabs took advantage of a sandstorm to charge the enemy camp.
Blinded by sand, the Byzantines were unable to fight effectively and were slaughtered.
Although outnumbered, the Arab force attacked aggressively and broke the Persian army.
HISTORY'S BLOODIEST BATTLES While almost all battles incur some loss of life on each side, the battles listed below are remarkable for the sheer scale of the casualties.
A large but ill-trained Persian army was defeated by the Arabs in a three-day battle, which led to the Arab conquest of virtually the entire Persian empire.
This naval battle saw the first major use of ""Greek Fire,"" an extremely effective incendiary weapon that was catapulted at the Arab warships.
The few Arab vessels that survived the battle were destroyed in a storm.
Traveling to Kufah to join a rising against the Umayyad caliphate, Husain ibn Ali was cornered by Umayyad forces at Karbala and killed along with his small retinue.
As battle began, much of his army, weakened by feuds within the royal family, deserted, leading to a Berber victory and the rapid Muslim conquest of most of Spain.
Held at bay by the Byzantine army's vigorous defense of the city walls, the Arab force finally gave siege.
But the Arabs were not able to gain entry or to cut off supplies entirely.
After a standoff that lasted for six days, a force of Muslim cavalry attacked an army of Franks, which was under the command of their ruler Charles Martel.
The Franks fought dismounted, arranging themselves in a defensive square formation, and were eventually successful in driving back the Muslim troops, forcing them to retire.
DIRECTORY Emperor Charlemagne This reliquary bust of Charlemagne, the first Holy Roman Emperor , was made in the 14th century.
It contains the emperor's skull and is housed in the treasury at Aachen Cathedral, western Germany.
The Chinese force, composed largely of infantry, was abandoned by its allied cavalry, which defected to the other side.
As a result, the Arab horsemen were able to encircle the Chinese force.
The Bulgars posed the greatest threat to the Balkan provinces of the Byzantine empire throughout the 8th century.
In 756, the emperor Constantine V invaded Bulgar territory, supported by a fleet operating in the Black Sea and Danube delta, and won a decisive victory at Marcellae.
In 800, the pope formally crowned him as ""Emperor of the Romans"" and, 12 years later, his status was formally recognized by the Byzantine emperor.
Charlemagne's attempts to subdue Saxon rebellions against his rule were met with fierce resistance.
By 840, Charlemagne's grandsons were quarrelling over the future of the increasingly unstable empire he had founded.
The eldest, Lothair I, attempted to impose his authority on his brothers, Louis the German and Charles the Bald, who rebelled.
Their army defeated Lothair's forces at Fontenoy, leading to the fragmentation of the empire.
Border disputes between Brittany and the Franks had erupted into open warfare in 845, when the Franks were defeated at Ballon.
In 851, the Bretons Muslim power in Spain quelled Charlemagne's campaign in Spain saw the Franks besiege Barcelona and eventually reconquer Catalonia, checking the Umayyad caliphate at the Ebro River. strength, and skills of Charlemagne's forces eventually prevailed, enabling him to win a glorious victory.
Returning from an expedition against the Muslims in Spain, Charlemagne's army was attacked by lightly armed Basque troops in the Pyrenees.
The rearguard action was the inspiration for the Old French epic poem ""The Song of Roland"". won a futher decisive victory at Jengland, which was instrumental in securing virtual independence for Brittany throughout most of the medieval period.
Up until 793, the Anglo-Saxon kingdoms of England had enjoyed a comfortable sense of security from attack by outside invaders; however, the monastery of Lindisfarne, which was sited on an island off the coast of Northumbria, proved to be vulnerable to Viking raiders.
The monastery's considerable treasures were plundered by the Vikings, who also murdered the monks.
Attempting to reassert the power of Byzantium, Emperor Nicephorus captured the stronghold of the Bulgar leader Khan Krum.
Nicephorus was slain soon after, when his forces were ambushed on a mountain pass.
Having raided Sicify for decades, Arab forces launched a full-scale invasion in 831.
Initially repulsed, the invaders received reinforcements from Spain and besieged and eventually captured Palermo, which became the capital of an Arab emirate for more than a century.
The Vikings sailed down the Bosphorus, burning and pillaging every town and monastery in their way, before besieging the Byzantine city of Constantinople.
They did not take control of the city, however, but simply plundered it and left.
In an attempt to end years of damaging Arab raids, the emperor Michael III assembled three large forces that trapped the Arab army at the Lalakaon River.
The outnumbered Arabs attempted to escape, but the vast majority were annihilated.
This victory enabled the Byzantine empire to re-establish control of Anatolia.
With much of England under his rule, the Viking leader Guthrum led his forces against the remaining Anglo-Saxon stronghold of Wessex.
Alfred, king of Wessex, summoned a substantial army to fight the Vikings at Edington, defeating Guthrum and forcing his withdrawal.
When the Viking assault on Paris failed to seize the city, the Vikings settled in to besiege it.
Ultimately, the Frankish emperor Charles the Fat arrived with a larger army, paid the Vikings a large indemnity, and gave them permission to ravage Burgundy, which was refusing to acknowledge his imperial authority.
From their newly created homeland, the Magyars launched a series of raids deep into western Europe.
A Lombard force under King Berengar of Italy pursued a Magyar army, which had been raiding the Po Valley, as far as the Brenta River.
The Magyars initially attempted to negotiate with Berengar and his troops; however, when the talks eventually broke down, they launched a surprise attack on the Lombard camp and routed Berengar's army.
King Ludwig divided his German army into three separate detachments in an attempt to entrap the Magyar raiders who had been devastating large parts of southern Germany.
The first two detachments to be sent out were themselves trapped and destroyed by the Magyars.
The Magyars then turned on the third force, commanded by Ludwig himself, and completely routed it in a seven-hour battle.
The Magyars again invaded Germany when King Henry I ceased to pay them tribute.
Henry then deployed a weak decoy force in order to lure the Magyars into attacking, at which point his hidden Bavarian and Franconian cavalry ambushed them.
The German troops pursued the Magyar army as far as the Unstrut River, where they effectively destroyed it.
France and Britain, two other major combatants, also fought in their overseas colonies, resulting in actions in India, North America, Africa, and the Caribbean.
Revolutionary and 1791-1815 The French, Russian, British, and Ottoman Napoleonic Wars empires, plus most other European states from Denmark-Norway in the north to Spain in the south.
World War I 1914-18 Europe, Africa, and the Middle East, with fighting also spreading out to China and the Pacific Islands.
Combatant nations, however, included the United States, Canada, India, Australia, and Brazil.
Merciless invader Any soldier or civilian who was unfortunate enough to be captured by the invading forces of the Mongol ruler Genghis Khan was unlikely to be shown any mercy.
Constantine III of Scotland organized an invasion of England in alliance with Welsh, Norse/Irish, and Viking chieftains.
King Athelstan depioyed the Anglo-Saxon army in a strong defensive position, beating off several assaults, before counterattacking and breaking the allied army.
The battle resulted in England becoming the dominant power in the British Isles.
After driving iron-tipped stakes into the bed of the tidal Bach Dang River, the Vietnamese sent out shallow-draft vessels to lure the seagoing Chinese fleet onto them.
The Chinese took the bait, and the trapped ships were then successfully assaulted.
During an attempt to relieve Augsburg, then under siege by the Magyars, the outnumbered Germans were presented with a golden opportunity when the previously elusive Magyar horsemen dismounted to loot the German camp.
The horseless Magyars were routed and, as a consequence, their power was permanently diminished.
The Byzantine army commanded by the emperor John I Tzimisces forced the Rus to withdraw to their fortress of Silistria on the Danube, and began a 65-day siege.
A number of sorties were defeated before the Rus surrendered and agreed to evacuate Bulgaria, which became a province of the Byzantine empire.
The Holy Roman emperor Otto II's forces intercepted the Arab army in Calabria and killed the Emir of Sicily, Abu al-Qasim.
However, the imperial forces were defeated when a hidden Arab reserve charged into their flank.
The Anglo-Saxons unwisely agreed to permit the invading Vikings to come inland from their island camp for a formal battle.
Although the Vikings lost many men in the battle, it was a defeat for the Anglo-Saxons—their leader was beheaded and the army defeated in the ensuing fight.
Facing an Indian army that relied heavily on the shock effect of massed elephants, the Ghaznavid troops managed turn this to their advantage and panic the beasts, causing them to stampede through their own side.
A Bulgar army commanded by Tsar Samuil invaded the Byzantine Balkan provinces and besieged Thessalonika.
Instead of carrying out conventional siege operations, the tsar concealed most of the army in a carefully selected ambush site that was protected by ditches and traps.
He then ordered a feint assault on the city by a small force, which provoked a counterattack.
The Bulgars staged a fake retreat to draw the garrison into the ambush, where it was annihilated.
Tsar Samuil failed to follow up his victory at Thessalonika by taking the city, preferring to loot southern Greece.
Returning from raiding as far south as Corinth, he was intercepted by another Byzantine army at the Spercheios River.
The two armies were camped on opposite banks of the river, which was in full flood; even after several days, it seemed unlikely that either side could cross.
Byzantine scouts eventually found a usable ford, however, and the entire army crossed to launch a devastating surprise attack on the Bulgar camp.
CLONTARF APRIL 23,1014 Forces Irish7,000; Viking and Leinstermen:7,000.
An alliance of Vikings and native Leinstermen was defeated in battie by Brian Boru's Irish forces.
Unable to return to their boats or retire across the Liffey River, the Vikings were slaughtered.
Lured from their fortifications by a diversionary force in the rear, the Bulgars were surrounded and trapped.
Mao Zedong Chinese 1937 Infantry Attacks Erwin Rommel German 1937 Anglo-Saxon sword This is a reproduction of an Anglo-Saxon sword found near Abingdon, England, in 1874.
It has with a silver-inlaid pommel After several inconclusive engagements, the Danish and Anglo-Saxons clashed at Ashingdon.
King Edmund's Mercian contingent fled, causing the Anglo-Saxon army to collapse.
After the death of Tsar Samuil in 1014, the Bulgarian empire became increasingly unstable.
His successor, Ivan Vladislav, continued the war against the Byzantine empire with an attack on Durrachium, but was killed when the garrison made a sudden sortie.
The Byzantines took advantage of the chaos following his death to annex most of the Bulgarian empire.
The Seljuk Turks wore down their opponents by using mounted archers, before closing to a decisive range.
Despite the heroic example of their emperor Masud, the Ghaznavids were defeated after a battle lasting three days.
The pope was taken prisoner, and the Normans went on to increase their power in southern Italy and the Mediterranean.
Two French armies invaded Normandy, advancing on Rouen along both banks of the Seine River.
One of the forces occupied Mortemer-en-Braye, and was in the midst of thoroughly looting the town when it was caught by a surprise attack, launched by a Norman army that had been shadowing its advance.
On hearing of the disaster, the second French army hastily withdrew from Normandy.
A French army invading Normandy attempted to cross the Dives River at the Varaville ford, but barely half the force succeeded before the rising tide made the ford impassable.
The shadowing Norman army then attacked, defeating the remaining French troops who had failed to cross the river.
The battle was the last serious French attempt to overrun Normandy in the lifetime of William, Duke of Normandy.
One of the largest naval battles of the period was fought between a Danish fleet commanded by Svein Ulfsson and the Norwegian fleet under Flarald Flardrada.
The Danish flagship and its escorting vessels were roped together to form a large fighting platform.
Despite being outnumbered, the Norwegians won a major victory, taking more than 70 Danish ships.
Edward the Confessor's death without a dear successor at the beginning of 1066 signalled a power struggle for the English throne.
His rivals were King Harald Hardrada of Norway and William, Duke of Normandy, who became known as William the Conqueror.
Norwegian king Harald Hardrada's invasion of England was initially opposed by a force commanded by earls Edwin of Mercia and Morkere of Northumbria.
The Anglo-Saxons took up a strong defensive position near the Ouse River in Yorkshire, but were defeated by the more experienced Viking army.
He also introduced the tying of severed arteries to military medicine, moving away from cauterization as the favored surgical technique.
By this time chloroform was another major anaesthethic. 19th century American Jonathan Letterman introduced a modem three-stage system of battlefield triage and treatment—field dressing station, field hospital, and large hospital.
World War 1 Blood transfusion developed as a form of treatment, with intravenous rehydration.
Pioneering developments in plastic surgery and reductions in limb amputations.
World Warll Major improvements in anaesthesia, and the treatment of wounds using antibiotics.
Post-World War II New forms of antibiotics to counter penicillin-resistant strains of bacteria.
On hearing of the Viking invasion by Harald Hardrada, King Harold made an exceptionally rapid forced march from London to Stamford Bridge.
He surprised the Viking army, which was encamped along both banks of the Derwent River.
The Anglo-Saxons exploited their local numerical superiority and quickly destroyed the Viking troops on the river's west bank, before fighting their way across a bridge and a nearby ford.
Harald Hardrada formed his remaining men into a circular shield wall, hoping to hold out until he could be reinforced by the troops that had been detached to guard his ships at Riccall.
Repeated Anglo-Saxon charges finally broke the shield wall, and Harald Hardrada was killed just as the reinforcements arrived.
William, Duke of Normandy, invaded England to claim the English throne.
King Harold deployed the Saxon forces in a strong defensive position on Caldbec Hill, to block the Norman army's route to London.
The Saxon shield wall beat off a succession of attacks launched by Norman cavalry and infantry, with the A Norman victory The late 10th-century Bayeux Tapestry commemorates the Norman victory at Hastings in 1066.
In this detail, King Harold Codwinson's Anglo-Saxon infantry confront a cavalry charge by Duke William of Normandy's troops. the use of two-handed axes proving highly effective even against wellarmored knights.
After several futile attacks, part of the Norman force collapsed, and the panic threatened to affect the army.
The crisis was worsened by a rumor that William had been killed, but he rode through the ranks to rally his troops.
He destroyed the Saxon army with a series of feigned retreats, cavalry charges, and archery.
MANZIKERT AUGUST 19 OR 26, 1071 Forces Byzantine:50,000; Seljuk:40,000.
Although the Byzantine center managed to advance as far as the enemy camp, the flanks collapsed under pressure and the reserves withdrew, abandoning the main body to its fate.
This defeat marked the beginning of the decline of the Byzantine empire.
THE SPANISH RECONQUISTA 1084-94 The Reconquista of the Muslim states of the Iberian Peninsula was a slow process with many setbacks.
The capture of Toledo and Valencia marked key stages in an exceptionally long campaign, one that was only finally completed in 1492.
Taking advantage of disunity among the Muslims, King Alfonso VI of Leon and Castile laid siege to the Islamic city of Toledo.
Eventually, the city was starved into surrender, giving Alfonso a important strategic base in central Spain.
A Castilian surprise attack inflicted heavy casualties, but the larger Muslim army rallied and routed much of the Castilian force.
King Alfonso VI of Leon and Castile was wounded and only just managed to escape.
Valencia was taken from a Muslim faction after a long and very bitter siege.Even after the Christian forces razed the suburbs, the inner city held out until starvation forced a surrender.
THE FIRST CRUSADE AND THE DEFENSE OF THE CRUSADER KINGDOMS 1096-1104 In 1095, the Byzantine emperor Alexius I Comnenus appealed to the pope for aid against the Seljuk Turks, who had overrun much of Anatolia following the disastrous Byzantine defeat at Manzikert in 1071.
Instead of raising mercenaries, the pope proclaimed a crusade, with the objective of taking Jerusalem.
Ambushed on the march, the crusaders' heavy cavalry was unable to come to grips with the elusive mounted archers it faced.
The arrival of an additional crusader force forced the Turks to retreat.
After a long siege, the crusaders captured Antioch, only to be besieged themselves.
The discovery of a holy relic (the Holy Lance) inspired the crusaders to launch a sortie that drove off the Turkish army.
Although worn down on the march, the crusader army was able to undertake a successful assault on the city.
Siege towers, catapults, and ""Greek Fire"" were employed to support the assault troops.
The city was then sacked and its Muslim and Jewish inhabitants massacred.
An Egyptian army attempting to raise the siege of Jerusalem halted at the port of Ascalon, on hearing of the fall of the city.
A far smaller force commanded by King Baldwin I of Jerusalem attacked a 10,000-strong Egyptian army invading the newly established crusader states.
The veteran crusader cavalry launched four successive charges, which finally broke the Egyptian force.
Both sides attempted to lure the other into an ambush, but it was the reckless crusaders who took the bait.
They charged into the hands of the main Muslim force and were decisively defeated.
The Norman cavalry achieved some initial success, but was held by the second Anglo-Norman line, which was reinforced with a contingent of dismounted knights.
A hidden detachment of Anglo-Norman cavalry then charged, and the Norman army broke.
The campaign of Alfonso I, the ""Battler"" of Aragon, to capture Zaragoza from the Muslims benefited from siege expertise gained in the Eloly Land.
After a relief attempt failed, the city surrendered. 40 archers in a concealed flanking position, whose fire broke up the rebels' charge.
Despite opposition from a standing army half a million strong, which was assisted by local militias and explosive weapons, the Jurchen captured the city of Kaifeng in a four-month siege and went on to establish the Jin dynasty.
Scots invaded England early in 1138, taking advantage of increasing unrest after Henry I's death in 1135.
The English army drew up on a ridge, with a line of dismounted knights supported by archers.
They shot down most of the unarmored Scots, who then broke after several attacks and took heavy losses.
Henry I intercepted a French force under Louis VI that had invaded Normandy.
This screening force was broken by the first French charge, which plunged on into the dismounted knights, who easily repulsed the attack.
The royalist commander Ralph de Bayeux dismounted some of his men-at-arms to block the road along which the rebels under Waleran, Comte de Mellent, were advancing, but kept a mounted reserve.
He also deployed his Mace heads These three types of medieval mace were all designed to effectively bludgeon an opponent to death.
The warriors wear lamellar armor, made of iron strips bound with rawhide and silk cords.
A Muslim army out of Aleppo arrived with engines for a siege, but found neglected defenses.
A significant achievement was the capture of the Moorish city of Lisbon by a mixed force of English, German, and Flemish crusaders, after storms drove their ships into Portuguese harbors.
Despite early setbacks, when a siege tower became stuck in waterlogged ground and several large catapults were destroyed, renewed efforts breached the walls.
The garrison was massacred, despite promises made in surrender negotiations.
Stalled in the face of a stout defense, the commanders of the largest crusader army in history fell to bickering and were forced to retreat by a relief force.
At first the Christian troops were unable to breach the defenses, but a section of wall collapsed when a siege tower fell against it.
A Welsh army resisting Henry H's invasion of Gwynedd prepared an elaborate earthwork roadblock in a thickly wooded pass at Basingwerk.
Henry ordered feint attacks against the defenses, while he led a detachment to outflank the position.
Location Crema, near Milan, northern ItalyBoth sides made use of atrocities to reduce enemy morale and undertook extensive engineering works, leading to a campaign of tunneling and countertunneling.
A Byzantine army under Andronikos Kontostephanos, the nephew of Emperor Manuel I, intercepted a large Hungarian army near Sirmium.
The Anglo-Norman army supporting Dermot MacMurrough, the deposed King of Leinster, defeated the Irish after fighting its way through a succession of woodland barricades.
The battle marked the beginning of the Anglo-Norman conquest of Ireland.
The last Norse king of Dublin, Haskulf Thorgilsson, returned from exile with a largely mercenary army in an attempt to recapture the city, but the garrison made a sudden sortie and broke his forces.
The rebel army, largely comprising French and Flemish mercenaries, was caught and destroyed by the royalists while fording the Lark River.
After driving the enemy cavalry from the field, the imperial forces, which included no infantry, were unable to penetrate the pikewall of the Lombard foot soldiers.
The returning Lombard cavalry then launched a successful counterattack.
Japanese pole-arm This fearsome weapon is a samurai naginata, a typical Japanese pole-arm, with a wooden handle and a long, curved saberlike blade.
Although Angkor was sacked by the kingdom of Cham in 1177, by 1181 it was once again a powerful state.
THE GEMPEI WARS 1180-85 The Gempei Wars for control of Japan were fought between the powerful Minamoto and Taira families.
The conflicts did much to form samurai culture and allowed the victorious Minamoto to establish the office of shogun, or military dictator, which existed until 1867.
Defeated by the Taira clan, the Minamoto forces and their warrior-monk allies attempted to hold a broken bridge over the Uji River.
The Minamoto army, which included a contingent from the Miura clan, was commanded by Minamoto Yorimoto, who was to become shogun about ten years later.
The Taira general, Oba Kagechika, won a decisive victory through a night attack.
The Minamoto forces forded the Sunamoto River to make a night attack against the Taira army deployed on the far bank but were defeated and pursued back across the river.
Shortly after they were defeated at Sunomatagawa, the Minamoto attempted to check the Taira pursuit at the Yahagi River by destroying the bridge and forming a shield wall.
Despite this, the Taira were able to force a crossing and continued to attack the retreating Minamoto army.
The Minamoto clan stalled its enemies for hours with clever ruses and an archery duel, buying time for a detachment to circle into the Taira rear and attack.
A Minamoto army was being ferried across the Inland Sea to attack the Taira stronghold of Yashima when it was defeated by a Taira fleet.
Many of the Taira ships were lashed together to form large ""fighting platforms"" from which their archers laid down a heavy bombardment, before boarding the Minamoto vessels.
MINAMOTO NO YOSHITSUNE IN ""THE TALE OF THE HEIKE"", 12TH-CENTURY POEM FEATS OF MILITARY ENGINEERING Manhattan Project The aim of this World War II project, conducted mainly by the United States, was to facilitate the production of atomic weaponry.
It was the largest military engineering project in history, employing 130,000 people and costing the modern equivalent of more than US$24 billion.
Ho Chi Minh Trail In 1959-75, North Vietnamese soldiers and laborers created and maintained an elaborate road system stretching for hundreds of miles from North Vietnam through the jungles of Laos and Cambodia.
They used these roads to supply the war effort against South Vietnam and to infiltrate troops.
Despite massive bombing of the trail by the United States Air Force, up to 20,000 Vietnamese troops a month moved along the trail, which featured supply hubs, barracks, and medical facilities.
The Great Wall of China The Great Wall is a series of fortifications that were erected to protect the northern border of the Chinese empire from invasion.
Most of what still stands today was constructed under the Ming dynasty , when around 1 million men were stationed as guards along the entire length of the wall.
Roman roads Roman military roads, essential for suppyling outlying garrisons, eventually laced the Roman world.
The total road network measured 53,819 miles and extended from the coasts of northern Europe to the plains of Central Asia.
The Great Wall of China The Great Wall was not a single piece of construction, but a series of fortifications that were built and improved from the 5th century bce up to the 16th century ce.
The Taira fortress of Fukuryuji was stormed by Imai Kanehira's Minamoto forces, in a daring assault across rice paddies while under heavy fire from the garrison's archers.
Minamoto Yoshinaka's rule was so vicious that his own clan was forced to take up arms against him.
He met defeat after a hard fight at Awazu and Yoshinaka himself was killed.
The cunning Minamoto stalled their opponents with traditional challenges to single combat, while a detachment attacked from the rear.
The small Minamoto force panicked the Taira into abandoning their fortress at Yashima by lighting large numbers of fires.
The treachery of a Taira admiral and an opportune turn of the tide sealed the fate of the Taira clan, with the Minamoto gaining control of the country.
George 1639-C.1795 Madras, India Coastal defense fort Sevastopol From 1783 Crimea Fortified city with coastal defenses Fort Sumter 1827-98 Charleston Harbor, South Carolina Coastal fortification Maginot Line 1930-40 French borders with Italy and Germany (lighter defenses along Belgian border) Border defense network THE DEFENSE OF THE CRUSADER STATES 1177-87 After the failure of the Second Crusade, the crusader states came under increasing pressure from their newly unified Muslim neighbors.
Saladin's overconfident Muslim army spread out to loot and forage, while advancing on Jerusalem.
A sudden crusader attack smashed the disorganized Muslim force and inflicted heavy casualties during a long pursuit.
The crusaders launched an attack on the Muslim camp and were successful in annihilating several groups of raiders.
However, they were, in turn, surprised and comprehensively defeated by the main Muslim force.
A Muslim army invaded the Kingdom of Jerusalem, advancing toward Al-Fule and raiding the surrounding areas.
The sizeable crusader force drove off the raiders and repelled repeated attacks before the Muslims withdrew.
Rashly advancing across waterless terrain, the crusaders became encircled on the twin hills known as the Horns of Hattin.
THE THIRD CRUSADE 1189-92 The Muslim recapture of Jerusalem in 1187 prompted the Holy Roman emperor Frederick I ""Barbarossa"", Richard I of England, and Philip II of France to launch a new crusade.
While it failed to retake Jerusalem, it ensured the temporary survival of the small crusader states.
Beating off relief attempts, a small force of crusaders led by Guy de Lusignan managed to breach the walls of Acre.
Breaching the walls of Acre In 1191, the crusaders, led by Guy de Lusignan, retook control of the city of Acre—the capital of what was left of the kingdom of Jerusalem.
Marching south from Acre, the crusader army led by Richard 1 of England (""The Lionheart"") beat off a near-constant barrage of harassing attacks from Muslim forces, before finally launching a decisive, victorious charge just outside Arsuf.
Following the Battle of Arsuf, the crusaders took Jaffa to act as a base for an attack on Jerusalem.
In July 1192, a Muslim army stormed the city, but the citadel held out until a crusader relief force arrived.
It was expanded as the headquarters of the Knights Hospitaller, until April 1271.
After being defeated at Tarain in 1191, Muhammad of Ghur returned for a second attempt on the same battlefield.
This time, his Turkish skirmishing mounted archers proved decisive, and the Hindu Raiput army was routed.
This battle was a first stage in the expansion of Muslim rule into northern India.
The Castilian knights broke through the center of the Muslim army, but were surrounded and annihilated when their supporting infantry failed to keep up with them.
THE FOURTH CRUSADE AND ITS AFTERMATH 1199-1212 The Fourth Crusade was intended to take Egypt, before launching an attack on Jerusalem.
The ill-led campaign was hijacked, however, by the Venetians and became an operation against the Byzantine empire.
Sidetracked from its mission to the Holy Land, the crusader army was bribed into joining a Byzantine power struggle.
The situation dissolved into chaos, and led to Constantinople being sacked and occupied by the crusaders.
After the sack of Constantinople, the Byzantine successor state of Nicaea was formed in western Anatolia.
Surprised by the crusaders' appearance from an unexpected direction, the lightly equipped Muslim force tried to wear down the crusaders, but was broken by their cavalry reserve.
The jaws of the trap closed, and only 10,000 of the Roman force survived.
Hattin King Guy of Jerusalem ordered 20,000 crusader infantry and 1,200 cavalrymen to attack the Muslim forces of Saladin besieging Tiberias.
He did so against the recommendations of one of his commanders, Raymond III of Tripoli, who argued that the Muslims fought best in the open terrain around the city.
Raymond was right, and the dehydrated crusader force was virtually massacred around the Horns of Hattin.
European sword, 14th century This sword, similar to those used by the crusaders, has a disc-shaped pommel, gently curved quillons , and a diamond cross-section blade that tapers acutely to a thrusting point.
THE ALBIGENSIAN CRUSADE 1209-29 This 20-year-long campaign was initiated by the papacy to suppress the Cathar heresy in the Languedoc region of southern France.
The crusaders besieged Beziers and demanded that the Cathars surrender.
The , entire city was burned to the ground 1 and the population slaughtered.
Besieged by superior forces, the crusaders staked all on a sortie, crushing the enemy cavalry before using infantry to break the siege.
Stirling Bridge John de Warenne, 7th Earl of Surrey, led an English expedition to crush the rebellious Scots.
He chose Stirling Bridge, the worst possible place to cross the Forth river, despite many of his experienced soldiers recommending a wider ford 1 mile away.
Crammed onto the narrow bridge, the English soldiers lost all advantage of numerical superiority; when only half the English army had crossed, William Wallace's Scots attacked.
Tumu The Chinese Zhengtong emperor Zhu Zhen ordered a half-million-strong army under court official Wang Cheng to go out and destroy invading Mongol forces.
The Chinese army marched for an exhausting two weeks, while the Mongols made a tactical withdrawal.
At Datong, Chen decided to turn around and march his army back along an exposed northern route, rather than taking a longer but more protected one.
As they did so, the Mongols turned and went on the attack, which resulted in up to 250,000 Chinese soldiers being killed or captured.
Little Bighorn Lieutenant Colonel George Custer attacked a large Indian encampment in Little Bighorn valley on June 25, 1876.
Dien Bien Phu General Henri Navarre, the French commander in chief in Indochina, deployed French airborne forces to the outpost of Dien Bien Phu in an attempt to interdict Viet Minh operations.
Dien Bien Phu, is completely isolated and ringed by jungle-covered mountains, and the industrious Viet Minh soon had the base encircled and under siege.
In an epic defense, the French held out from November 1953 until May 7, 1954, when they were forced to surrender.
MESSAGE FROM THE BESIEGED CITADEL OF TIBERIAS AFTER THE BATTLE OF HATTIN, 1187 After a long siege, the defenders of Toulouse sortied to destroy a massive siege tower.
A counterattack drove the sortie off, but the crusader leader, Simon IV de Montfort was killed, effectively ending the campaign.
Duke Henry of Brabant was returning from raiding the bishopric of Liege when he was intercepted by a force led by the bishop himself, Hugh of Pierrepoint.
Although Duke Henry's initial attacks were successful, the bishop's forces rallied and won a decisive victory.
In this battle over English possessions in modern-day northern France, one flank of the battle was dominated by cavalry, while the infantry fought their own savage action elsewhere.
THE FIRST BARONS' WAR 1215-17 The war began with a rebellion by a group of English barons against the chaotic rule of King John, but the civil war became a wider conflict when they invited Prince Louis of France to invade, in an unsuccessful attempt to replace John as king of England.
The death of King John and the accession of his nine-year-old son to the throne, as Henry III, undermined support for the French-backed rebellion known as the First Barons' War.
A rebel force besieging Lincoln castle was trapped, and eventually destroyed in fierce street fighting by a royalist relief force.
The French fleet was intercepted by a royalist squadron off Dover while carrying reinforcements for the rebel forces in the First Barons' War.
The royalists attacked from windward, defeating the French with a barrage of crossbow fire and powdered quicklime.
After failing to capture cities for lack of a siege train, Genghis Khan finally obtained one, along with Chinese experts in its use.
Despite this, it took a year of siege to take Zhongdu, which was burned to the ground.
Samarkand, capital of the Kwarezmian empire, was besieged and captured by Genghis Khan's forces, which massacred most of the city's inhabitants and its garrison.
This provoked Genghis Khan into launching the campaign that led to the Mongol victory at the Indus.
N After the Mongol defeat near Ghazni, Genghis Khan led a punitive expedition into the Punjab against the Kwarezmians.
The Mongols destroyed the Kwarezmian army and thoroughly looted the region.
The Mongols sent peace envoys to the joint Russian-Cuman army, but they were murdered.
The Mongols then proceeded to drive off the Cuman force and all but annihilated the Russians.
Genghis Khan personally led the Mongol army, which ruthlessly suppressed the revolt and destroyed the Xi Xia empire.
After sacking Ryazan and Moscow, the Mongols encountered an army led by Yuri n, the grand prince of Vladimir.
This force was overwhelmed and annihilated, and Vladimir sacked, before the Mongols headed south into the Ukraine.
After chasing off part of the Christian German-Polish army with a hail of arrows, the Mongol horsemen lured the Christian knights into charging deep into the Mongol force, where they were surrounded and killed.
The Mongols attacked a fortified bridge across the Sajo River, drawing the Hungarians into defending the crossing.
Under cover of this attack, a strong force forded the river and broke the Hungarians with flank and rear charges.
The province of Drenthe was in revolt against its ruler, Otto II of Lippe, the Bishop of Utrecht.
Otto raised an army to crush the uprising, but allowed his force to be drawn into a marshy area near the village of Ane, where his cavalry could not operate effectively.
This was ideal terrain for the armed peasants who made up most of the rebel force, which attacked and destroyed the bishop's army.
DIRECTORY MOST DESTRUCTIVE WARS IN HISTORY War Dates Location Lowest estimates of military and civilian deaths World War II 1939-45 Global 56 million THE MONGOL CONQUESTS 1214-41 The disparate Mongol tribes were unified by Genghis Khan in the early 13th century and began to establish an enormous empire, the expansion of which continued well after Genghis's death in 1227.
The haubergeon Short-sleeved mail shirts, such as this one, were commonly worn by infantry, from ancient Rome through to the Renaissance in Europe, Africa, and Asia.
Launching an expedition into pagan territory, the Livonian Brethren of the Sword encountered Lithuanian light cavalry equipped with javelins.
These proved extremely effective against the unwieldy Livonian horsemen.
The Swedish army, attempting to gain control of an important trade route, camped before the city of Novgorod.
Before the attack could begin, a Russian army approached the camp under cover of thick fog and launched a successful surprise assault.
As the Teutonic Knights advanced on Pskov, they encountered a Russian force under Alexander Nevski, victor at the Neva.
Nevski's lighter force used its superior numbers and a flanking attack to defeat the heavily armored knights.
The English army commanded by Henry III was attempting to recapture the province of Poitou, which had been seized by France, and had taken up position covering the bridge across the Charente River.
However, the army was outflanked and defeated by a French attack launched from a flotilla of small river craft.
THE FIFTH, SIXTH, AND SEVENTH CRUSADES 1217-54 An equally unsuccessful Fifth Crusade followed the disastrous Fourth Crusade.
In 1229, Emperor Frederick II used the Sixth Crusade as a threat to negotiate the recovery of Jerusalem.
Muslim forces retook the city in 1244, provoking the final major crusade in the region.
A joint crusader-Muslim army engaged a force of Khwarezmian cavalry and Egyptian Mamelukes.
The Muslim contingent was driven off, and the crusaders were surrounded.
After a successful surprise attack on the Egyptian camp, the crusaders unwisely pursued the survivors into the town of Mansurah, where they were ambushed, suffering heavy losses.
After Mansurah, the crusaders retreated to their fortified camp, which was soon besieged by Egyptian forces.
The crusaders attempted to retreat to their main base at Damietta, but were decisively defeated.
Only Granada in southeastern Spain would remain under Muslim rule, until 1492.
In September 1229, James I of Aragon invaded Majorca and quickly drove the local Muslim forces into Palma, which was stormed after a three-month siege.
Civil unrest in the petty states of al-Andalus provided opportunities for the expansion of Castile.
In 1235, a faction in Cordoba opened the gates to a Castilian force that took control of the city but was unable to take the citadel.
King Ferdinand III brought up the main Castilian field army, but the citadel surrendered onlyon June 29, after a bitter six-month siege.
King James I of Aragon opened his campaign against Valencia by capturing a hill near the city Pueyo de la Cebolla, in 1237.
This was fortified to act as a base for future siege operations, despite repeated attacks by the city's garrison.
Not until April 1238 was the king able to assemble a force strong enough to begin assaults on Valencia's defenses, which held out for almost six months.
In the summer of 1247, a powerful Castilian army supported by a fleet on the Guadalquivir River began siege operations against Seville.
The city was one of the great strongholds of Muslim Spain and was finally starved into surrender on November 23, 1248, aftera 15-month siege.
The Teutonic Knights This Polish mural shows three leaders of the Teutonic Knights from the 14th and early 15th centuries.
At the height of it power, the order fought pagan tribes in the Baltic lands of Prussia and Lithuania.
After destroying an army sent to intercept them, the Mongols, led by Hulegu Khan, a grandson of Genghis Khan, surrounded Baghdad using bridges of boats to block access via the Tigris River.
RESTORATION OF THE BYZANTINE EMPIRE 1204-61 By the mid-13th century, the empire of Nicaea had established itself as a powerful Greek successor state to the former Byzantine empire.
It had the ability to challenge the Latin empire of Constantinople that had been established after the Fourth crusade saw the sacking of the city in 1204.
The Nicaean commander Theodore Dukas gathered all the local peasants and their flocks on hillsides behind his forces to give the impression of a huge army, and part of the Epirote contingent deserted to join the Nicaeans.
The Nicaean archers concentrated their fire on the horses of the Achaean knights.
Once most of their horses were killed, the knights were almost defenseless and surrendered, at which point the Achaean infantry broke and fled.
During internecine warfare between two rival Italian factions, the outnumbered Sienese Ghibellines launched a surprise attack that routed the Florentine Guelph cavalry, although the Florentine infantry re-formed and held out until a hidden Sienese detachment broke cover and charged into their rear, ensuring victory.
The defeat at Pelagonia had weakened the shaky Latin empire of Constantinople.
In July 1261, Nicaean emperor Michael VIII Palaiologos sent a scouting force to reconnoitre the city's defenses.
Locals reported that the Latin army and its Venetian fleet were raiding the Nicaean island of Daphnousia.
Seizing his chance, the leader of the scouts infiltrated a small detachment into the city, who opened one of the gates to let in the rest of the force.
The surprise attack thoroughly demoralized the Latin emperor Baldwin II, who fled to the harbor with the remnants of the weak garrison.
On August 15, Michael VIII entered the city to be crowned as emperor of the restored Byzantine empire.
Despite this ploy, the battle was very closely fought, but ended in a decisive Egyptian victory.
The kings of Scotland had tried to buy Kintyre, the Hebrides, and the Isle of Man from Norway.
Believing that Scottish raids in 1262 were a prelude to an invasion, the Norwegians mobilized a large fleet and army to protect the islands.
Landing on the mainland, they were attacked by a larger Scottish army, which almost prevailed before reinforcements arrived.
Chariot The classic two-wheel fighting chariot manned by a driver and an archer combined battlefield mobility with firepower.
Cannon Cannon transformed both warfare and society, making once impregnable castles—typically the center of feudal power—vulnerable to destruction, and giving the means to inflict casualties at extended ranges.
Flintlock mechanism The flintlock mechanism did away with the matchlock's smoldering match and provided a faster lock time (the time from when the trigger is pulled to the moment the main charge detonates), which in turn made the gun more accurate.
Flintlocks were also cheaper than expensive wheel locks, paving the way for the mass production of firearms.
Bayonet The bayonet enabled the soldier to transform his musket or rifle into a form of short pike, through a simple muzzle-fitted blade.
Breech-loading mechanisms Breech-loading artillery mechanisms were first seen as early as the 15th century, but it was not until the 19th century that they finally replaced muzzle-loading mechanisms in both artillery and firearms.
They offered faster reloading rates, greater dependability, and safer firing processes, as well as the ability to achieve higher firing pressures, and hence greater range and accuracy.
Unitary cartridge The Swiss gunsmith Jean Samuel Pauly and French gunsmith Frangois Prelat invented the unitary cartridge—a firearms cartridge containing primer, powder, and bullet in one unit—in 1808, though it was not introduced in the military until the mid-19th century.
Unitary cartridges made efficient breech-loading mechanisms possible, and were also essential for future innovations, such as boltand auto-loading firearms.
Maxim gun Hiram Maxim's machine-gun used the force of recoil to load a cartridge and eject the spent shell, repeating the process as long as the trigger was held down.
Tank The world's first combat tank, the British Mk I, demonstrated the combination of heavy firepower, mobility, and armored protection in one vehicle.
By the 1940s, the tank, alongside artillery, had become the most influential tool of land warfare.
THE SECOND BARONS' WAR 1264-65 Rebellious landowners led by Simon de Montfort, 6th Earl of Leicester, attempted to force King Henry III of England to surrender more power to a parliament of barons.
Despite early successes, including the capture of the king, the barons eventually failed, and de Montfort was killed at Evesham.
The royalist army commanded by Henry III and Prince Edward was attacked by Simon de Montfort's rebels.
Although the rebel's left wing was defeated, the bulk of the royalist force was driven into Lewes, where the king and Prince Edward were captured.
In May 1265, Prince Edward escaped from Hereford Castle, where he had been imprisoned after the battle of Lewes.
A royalist detachment blocked Bengeworth bridge, preventing any escape across the Avon river, forcing de Montfort into a frontal attack on Prince Edward's main army.
Most of the remaining rebels fled when the royalists counterattacked, killing de Montfort and annihilating his army.
Continuing the conflict between Guelph and Ghibelline factions, this battle degenerated into a huge melee.
The Angevins, allied with the Guelphs, won, capturing the Kingdom of Sicily.
The pivotal struggle in the Mongol conquest of the Song took place around Fancheng and Xiangyang.
The Mongols fielded a riverine fleet as well as a powerful siege train for the campaign, demonstrating their great adaptability.
The Japanese were unprepared for the savage and effective fighting style of the Mongols, and all opposition crumbled.
Samurai warriors ride into battle Mongol emperor Kublai Khan attempted to invade Japan in 1274 and 1281.
In both campaigns, his armies were driven back with the help of violent weather.
However, this first invasion was simply a reconnaissance in force and the Mongols soon re-embarked.
The Mongols' horses shied away from Burmese war elephants, so the Mongols dismounted and chased the elephants back into their own ranks with archery.
Fighting for the throne of the Holy Roman empire, the Bohemian army's formation under King Premysl Ottokar II was disorganized by fire from Hungarian mounted archers and then charged by the imperial heavy cavalry.
After a fierce fight, the Bohemian reserves broke, followed by the rest of the army.
Attempting to invade Japan, the Mongols encountered well-prepared and determined defenders.
Llywelyn ap Gruffydd deployed the Welsh army in a strong defensive position commanding a bridge, but the position was outflanked by an English detachment upstream.
The English archers inflicted heavy casualties, allowing their cavalry to break the Welsh army.
Mongol warrior armor A helmet and armor such as this would have been worn by a Mongol warrior.
Made of leather or metal plates stitched to a silk coat, this armor provided lightweight protection for mounted combat.
The Welsh army was prevented from retreating into nearby woods by English cavalry.
An ""arrow storm"" from the English archers disordered the Welsh formation, which was then broken by cavalry charges.
The battle played an important role in breaking Welsh resistance to English rule.
Luring the Angevin fleet away from its safe port, the Aragonese turned to fight and were joined by reinforcements.
This battle was the culmination of a war of succession for the Duchy of Limburg.
Duke John I of Brabant was opposed by Count Henry of Luxembourg and the Archbishop of Cologne.
The count's cavalry nearly won the battle with its first charge, but the count was killed and, after eight hours of fighting, his men broke.
The archbishop's division, was also routed when it was attacked by a force that included rebels from Cologne.
The last crusader stronghold in the Holy Land was besieged by a huge Muslim army.
Siege engines and mining prepared the way for a massive and successful assault, and the garrison could not prevent the walls being breached.
WARS OF SCOTTISH INDEPENDENCE 1296-1326, 1333-1357 The Scottish struggles for independence pitted the courageous but lightly equipped Scottish pikemen, backed up by small numbers of knights, against the more diverse forces of England, which included spearmen and bowmen from England and Wales.
As the far larger English army tried to cross the Forth River, the Scots attacked and caught many English knights trapped in a marsh.
These were bombarded by fire from English archers, until sufficiently weakened to be broken by cavalry charges.
During the formation of the Swiss Confederacy, soldiers of Duke Leopold 1 of Austria were ambushed on a mountain pass by Swiss infantry, who hurled boulders and tree trunks down the slope, before charging in with their halberds.
Robert the Bruce deployed his small Scottish force on a hillside, blocking the road at a point where it ran between marshes.
The Scots also dug triple lines of trenches from the edges of the road to the marshes, to prevent any attempts to outflank their The Black Prince Edward the ""Black Prince"" earned his reputation for valor at the battle of Crecy in 1346, where his force, heavily outnumbered, still gained victory.
Four dense formations of Scottish spearmen advanced uphill into an ""arrow storm"" from English longbows.
During the French invasion of Flanders, the French knights rashly advanced through their own infantry and charged at the emplaced pikes of the Flemish infantry.
The English army was unable to exploit its numerical superiority and was forced into frontal attacks along the road.
At least two cavalry charges were bloodily repulsed by the Scottish spearmen before the English army hastily retreated.
As the English men-at-arms labored to cross the marshy terrain around the Bannockburn stream, the Scots charged down at them in massed pike formations.
This was the decisive battle of the First War of Scottish Independence.
Disease Transmission Effect Example Cholera Via contaminated food and water Chronic diarrhea and vomiting, muscle cramps; death can occur by dehydration within a day In 1817-24 more than 10,000 British soldiers in India died during the first cholera pandemic, along with hundreds of thousands of Indian civilians.
Malaria Parasite spread through mosquito bite Chronic fever and fatigue, vomiting and diarrhea, coma, paralysis, organ failure In 1895, a French campaign in Madagascar resulted in 13 combat deaths and 4,000 deaths from malaria.
Typhus Bacteria spread via body lice High fever, chills, delirium, severe headache, stupor, low blood pressure, skin rash In 1914, one in six people in Serbia contracted typhus, which also killed 70,000 Serbian soldiers Bubonic plague Bacterial disease spread via flea bites or contact with infected tissue Swellings at lymph node sites, vomiting blood, systemic organ failure From1320 to 1340 soldiers helped to carry the plague from Central Asia to Eastern Europe.
The plague eventually killed over 75 million people worldwide and destroyed entire armies.
During an amphibious operation against the pro-French garrison of Cadsand, the Flemish forces formed up on the beach to oppose the landing, but were decimated by longbow fire from the ships and broke when the main force came ashore.
Despite an attempt to buy off the Turks with tribute, the city was taken in 1337, a defeat from which the Byzantine empire did not recover.
Attempting to halt the advance of the Ashikaga clan against the capital, the imperial army was outflanked by naval maneuvers while other forces engaged it to the front.
The Burgundian army besieging Laupen was attacked by a Swiss relief force largely composed of pikemen and halberdiers.
Two of the three Swiss divisions quickly defeated the opposing infantry, while the third held off the Burgundian cavalry, which was then broken by charges against its flanks and rear.
THE HUNDRED YEARS WAR 1337-1453 The death of Charles IV of France with no direct male heir provoked a succession crisis.
The French-Genoese fleet unwisely took up defensive positions with its ships chained together.
The more maneuverable English fleet was able to bring intense archery to bear to assist the men-at-arms in their boarding actions, resulting in the destruction of most of France's fleet.
Arriving tired and disorganized at the battlefield, the French launched several uphill charges at the English lines.
Flaving already suffered heavily from longbow attacks, the French knights were then repulsed in hand-to-hand fighting.
Although he was an exceptional military leader he died a year before his father.
Stirling Bridge In 1297,15,000 Scots under William Wallace defeated a huge English army led by John, Earl of Warenne and Surrey.
The Scottish attacked when the English force was most vulnerable, halfway across the narrow bridge on the Forth River.
The English deployed 20 primitive cannon against the walls of Calais, but these proved ineffective.
The city was eventually starved into submission and became an English possession.
King David II invaded England to support France following Crecy and the fall of Calais.
The Scottish army took up a defensive position, but was stung into attacking by longbow fire.
The English archery and the broken ground resulted in decisive defeat for the Scottish army.
A French army that had invaded Poitou was besieging Saintes when it was confronted by a small English relief force commanded by Sir John Beauchamp, the governor of Calais.
The English took up a defensive formation similar to that used at Crecy.
The bulk of the French army formed up on foot, with cavalry detachments on each flank, but as it deployed it was routed by a flank and-rear attack that was launched by a detachment from the English garrison of Taillebourg.
Canister Lead or iron balls contained within a metal Anti-personnel fire case; the case ruptured when the gun was fired, creating a shotgun effect Gun stones During the 14th century, European artillery fired hand-carved stone shot, such as these examples.
A French army marching on Brest was intercepted by Sir Walter Bentley's Anglo-Breton force, which deployed along a ridge with dismounted men-at-arms in the center of the line flanked by archers.
Most French knights also dismounted, apart from a detachment tasked with attacking the Anglo-Breton right flank.
This detachment scattered the archers facing them, but failed to attack the rest of Bentley's force.
The main French advance was slowed by bramble thickets in front of the Anglo-Breton position and took heavy casualties from the English archers, before breaking when Bentley counterattacked.
After barely managing to repulse French attacks, the English charged and routed the French force after savage fighting.
This battle was one of the three great English victories of the war, the other two being Crecy and Agincourt.
In 1358, the chaos and devastation of the Hundred Years War sparked off a series of French peasant revolts, known as the Jacquerie.
The main peasant army drew up in a strong position on a hillside near Mello, but its commander, Guillaume Cale, was tricked into negotiations and killed by the nobles' commander, Charles of Navarre.
The nobles' forces then attacked and routed the leaderless peasants, after which the rebellion was ruthlessly crushed in several months of bloody reprisals.
The English force drew up on a hillside overlooking the Loch River to await the French army commanded by Charles de Blois.
The French crossed the river and attacked in four divisions, which charged into the English men-at-arms despite taking heavy losses from the fire of English supporting archers.
English longbow archery dominated the battle, causing the Castilian cavalry to retreat and abandon their allies.
The French mercenaries fought on, but without support their defeat was inevitable.
John of Gaunt, Duke of Lancaster, launched a five-month raid into France.
Location Mercq A French force besieging the town of Mercq was surprised by an English relief force from Calais.
The French French defeat at Agincourt At the battle of Agincourt , English king Henry V defeated a French army led by Constable Charles d'Albret.
AN ENGLISH SOLDIER AT AGINCOURT, 1415 crossbowmen were almost out of ammunition after their earlier attacks on the town and were quickly shot down by the English archers, whose fire then routed the remaining French troops.
Led by King Henry V, the English army deployed between two woods with archers on the flanks and dismounted men-at-arms in the center.
Struggling over wet ground, the French suffered heavy casualties from archery, before the English counterattacked and drove the French from the battlefield.
An English raiding party commanded by Thomas Beaufort, Earl of Dorset, was intercepted by a French army at Valmont.
The heavily outnumbered English were forced to overextend their line to protect their flanks and, as a result, repeated French charges finally broke through.
The attackers then began looting the English baggage train, giving time for Beaufort to rally his men in a thickly hedged garden, before slipping away after dark.
The English force then headed along the coast for Harfleur, but were again attacked by the French, who were routed after a fierce battle on the beach.
Sir John Stuart's Franco-Scottish army besieging Cravant redeployed along the line of the Yonne River, to block the advance of an Anglo-Burgundian relief force commanded by the Earl of Salisbury.
The English men-at-arms attacked across the river under covering fire from their supporting archers, while a further attack was made across a narrow bridge.
Seeing that Stuart's men were fully committed, the garrison of Cravant broke out and charged into the rear of his force, which was routed with heavy casualties.
After a successful charge against the English right flank, the French cavalry were repulsed when they attacked the baggage train.
On the other flank, the English broke the opposing cavalry, before surrounding and destroying the Scottish contingent.
The convoy's wagons were formed into a defensive circle that was bombarded by the French artillery.
Before the gunfire could take effect, the Scottish contingent attacked and was repulsed with heavy losses.
Inspired by the arrival of Joan of Arc, the French defenders began capturing strong points by sortie.
The English tried to draw the defenders out into open battle, and abandoned the siege when this failed.
A French army intercepted an English force attempting to raise the siege of Caen.
French artillery fire provoked an English attack that captured the cannon.
The attackers were charged by French men-at-arms, who recaptured the guns, at which point a flank charge by French reinforcements broke the English army.
In the ongoing power struggles in the Alps, the Austrian commander Duke Leopold III dismounted his men-at-arms in order to counter the Swiss halberdiers Attempting to relieve the besieged city of Castillon, the English advanced into the fire of archers to reposition siege cannon.
The French use of cannon was key to the English defeat in this final battle of the Hundred Years War.
The group known as the Red Turbans were part of a revolt against the Mongol Yuan rulers, one which gradually expanded into a formal military campaign.
As an invading Mongol army marched on Moscow to punish the city's cessation of tribute, it was intercepted at Kulikovo.
After hard fighting, the day was won by a Russian flanking counterattack.
Late-medieval plate armor By the 15th century, plate armor, called ""white harness,"" provided total protection and was surprisingly well articulated and easy to wear.
This German ""Gothic"" style armor shows the supreme skill of late-medieval European metalworkers. and pikemen.
They pushed back the Swiss vanguard, but were attacked at the flank and overwhelmed.
The Swiss initially defended ""Ietzinen""— barricades of loose stones blocking the Austrian advance along an alpine valley.
When these were breached, the Swiss withdrew up the mountainside and sent avalanches of boulders rolling down into the enemy lines, before counterattacking and routing the Austrians.
THE CONQUESTS OF TIMUR 1379-1405 Timur claimed that Genghis Khan was his direct ancestor and led a ferocious Central Asian people who were the descendants of the Mongols.
His campaigns in Arabia, India, Persia, and against his rivals were characterized by great brutality, as well as clever planning and sound strategy.
Timur made good use of spies and agents, as well as terror tactics, to persuade his enemies to submit without a fight.
When the people of Isfahan revolted rather than pay tribute to Timur, he ordered his army to storm the city and required each soldier to bring him the severed head of one of its citizens.
Four years after they had met in an incredibly bloody but inconclusive clash at Kondurcha, Timur's forces fought the Mongol Golden Horde under Batu.
This time Timur was victorious, and merciless in the subsequent pursuit.
Brutally putting down rebellions in western Asia, Timur advanced against Syria and shattered a Mameluk army at Aleppo.
The city was then sacked, opening the way for him to advance on Damascus.
Pillaging its way across northern India, Timur's army became so overencumbered with plunder that all Hindu captives, of which there were perhaps 100,000, were slaughtered.
From his capital, Samarkand, Timur founded an empire that stretched from the Caucasus to India.
After failing to contact the forces of Timur, tire tired and thirsty Ottomans found their enemies besieging Ankara.
Desperate for water, the Ottomans had to attack, and were also assaulted from the rear.
The Serbian-led army met the enemy at Kosovo and a confused battle ensued.
Attempting to repel the Ottoman invaders, an initial charge by the Christians was defeated by sharpened stakes and archery.
Nevertheless, the Christians came close to victory, before the Ottomans' Serbian allies joined the fight and tipped the balance.
Led by Owain Glyndwr, the Welsh were able to drive out the English in a protracted guerrilla war.
A sortie into England, with French assistance, failed, and the rebellion was gradually defeated.
A rebellion against the English king Henry IV, led by Harry ""Hotspur"" Percy, almost succeeded, but collapsed when he was killed.
Nevertheless, the rebel archers inflicted heavy casualties on the Royalists.
The Kingdom of Poland and Duchy of Lithuania took on the expansionist Teutonic Order.
The Polish-Lithuanians attacked first and drove off the enemy infantry.
The Teutonic Knights counterattacked with some success, until flanked by a reserve enemy force.
THE HUSSITE WARS 1419-34 The Hussites were a sect inspired by the teachings of Jan Huss, a Czech religious reformer executed for heresy in 1415.
The Hussite general, Jan Zizka, was a military pioneer, developing a battle-winning combination of light field artillery, warwagons, and light cavalry in order to fight off a crusade against them.
Chauchat Widely viewed as the worst machine-gun ever built, the French Chauchat entered service in 1916 and was plagued by jamming problems, shocking recoil, poor layout, terrible build quality, misaligned sights, and erratic spent-cartridge ejection.
The build quality was terrible, but the worst ""feature"" of all was the exposed workings along the side of the gun frame, which meant that the gun could go off if the frame was accidentally squeezed.
Liberator Manufactured in the United States between 1942 and 1945, the Liberator was an unbelievably cheap pressed-steel single-shot handgun.
Poking around in the mechanism with a stick was the only way to extract a spent cartridge.
SA80A1 Although subsequent modifications have turned the SA80 assault rifle into a decent weapon , the initial production batch suffered from parts falling off , constant jamming, an easily knocked magazine-release catch, and awkward arrangement of features.
Rondel dagger The rondel dagger, with its round pommel and disc-like guard, was popular with the aristocracy and gentry in 15th-century England. relief force that had attempted a frontal attack on its heavily defended wagons.
The surrounded Hussites formed their wagons into a coiumn that advanced, hand guns and artillery firing, through the enemy line.
Having escaped encirclement, the Hussites then counterattacked and drove the crusader forces out of Bohemia.
The crusader cavalry unsuccessfully charged the wagenburg and were routed when Hussite cavalry counterattacked.
It seems likely the crusaders mistook the withdrawal of their baggage train for the start of a general retreat and panicked when the Hussites attacked.
In the Ottoman-Hungarian War, the Hungarian and allied Christians used wagons to form a defensive line, offsetting the superior Ottoman numbers, but the Christians lost when their leader was killed.
After battering the walls with cannon and making several assaults, the Ottomans had stretched the defenders thinly.
An initial cavalry charge by the Poles was successful, until a force of Teutonic Knights broke out of the besieged city and attacked their rear.
The conflict was known as the Wars of the Roses from the badges used by each side.
Even after the defeat of Richard at the battle of Bosworth in 1485, Yorkist revolts went on until the end of the century.
Location South of Towton village, between Pontefract and Tadcaster, north Yorkshire, England.
Much of the battle—the bloodiest of the War of the Roses—was fought in a snowstorm.
The Yorkist archers' fire was so effective that the Lancastrians were provoked into a charge leading to an extended melee.
The arrival of Yorkist reinforcements finally broke the Lancastrian army.
During the battle, elements of King Richard's Yorkist army remained unengaged or even switched sides.
The king led a charge at Henry Tudor, hoping to kill him and thereby end the campaign, but became surrounded and was himself slain.
Location East Stoke, near Newark, Nottinghamshire, England The rebels rejected Henry VII as king of England.
The rebel army, largely HISTORY'S LARGEST LAND BATTLES Thermopylae In this famous clash between Greek and Persian, Greek historian Herodotus Persian forces numbering more than two million men.
Battle of Red Cliffs A clash between Chinese warlords pitted the forces of Liu Bei and Sun Quan against those of Cao Cao.
The latter was defeated in a battle involving more than half a million men.
Salsu More than 315,000 Korean and Chinese troops clashed around the Salsu River in Korea after Sui Emperor Yangdi invaded Goguryeo with a million men.
Tenochtitlan Spanish commander Hernan Cortes, commander of up to 80,000 troops defeated up to 300,000 warriors to take the Aztec capital.
Leipzig The biggest European land battle before World War I, this engagement pitted Napoleon's forces against nine states or nations and involved more than half a million men. composed of Irish and German mercenaries, attacked Royalist forces immediately to minimize losses from their archers.
This charge pushed the Royalist vanguard back but the rebels broke after three hours of hard fighting.
The Ottomans had broken into the city the previous day, but were pushed back in fierce fighting, which lasted throughout the night.
At dawn, scattered Hungarian units pursued the retreating Ottoman forces and began attacking the besiegers' camp.
As more Hungarians joined in, the demoralized Ottoman army broke and ran.
Somme More than 3 million troops fought on the Western Front between July and November 1916, with 1 million casualties.
This was the largest battle of World War I and one of the bloodiest of all time.
Kursk In the largest tank battle in history, the combined German-Soviet opposing forces included over 6,000 tanks, 2. million soldiers, and 5,000 aircraft.
Operation Ichi-Go More than 400,000 Japanese troops launched an offensive into southern China in World War II, resisted by equal numbers of Chinese soldiers.
Yom Kippur A three-week battle between Israel and surrounding Arab armies pits more than 400,000 Israeli troops and 2,300 tanks against combined Arab forces of about 200,000 men and more than 3,000 tanks.
Operation Desert Storm A million Coalition soldiers took on a similar number of Iraqi troops—but with overwhelming air and armor superiority—in the battle to eject Saddam's invasion force from Kuwait.
Although the Burgundians had constructed extensive field fortifications, they were surprised and overrun by the sudden attack of the Swiss.
After a systematic campaign to eliminate Moorish strongholds in the region, the Spanish army besieged the city of Granada until it was forced to surrender.
DIRECTORY Early Modern Warfare 1500-1750 AZTEC FEATHER SHIELD The availability of firearms that were easily portable, as well as field artillery, changed the nature of warfare considerably in the early 16th century.
The change was slow, and it took many years for the new weapons to achieve their full potential.
Given the advantage of increased range that muskets offered over swords and pikes, the move from hand weaponry to firearms as the primary weapon for infantry was as inevitable as it was gradual.
ITALIAN WAR OF 1494-98 This was the first in a series of conflicts known as the Italian Wars, taking place between 1494 and 1559.
The wars arose out of disputes over the Duchy of Milan and the Kingdom of Naples, and drew in a number of states.
In the first war, a French force invaded Italy in 1494 deploying siege cannon for what was probably the first time, and took possession of Naples in 1495.
The ""League of Venice""—formed mainly from Italian states—was also an historical first.
Aztec warrior Shown wearing a feathered battledress, holding a tasselled shield, and carrying an obsidian-bladed wooden sword on his back, an Aztec warrior takes hold of a captive's hair in this image from the mid-16th century Codex Mendoza.
The French cannon had little effect due to damp powder, and the action was bloody but indecisive.
ITALIAN WAR OF 1499-1505 Continued French claims to the thrones of Naples and Milan led to a joint French-Spanish expedition to take the cities by force.
Disputes over the division of spoils then led to war between France and Spain, in which the Italian states played a lesser role on each side.
After a preliminary bombardment that breached the walls, the Spanish assaulted the town of Ruvo.
Street fighting went on for several hours even after the walls were taken, but eventually the French force was overwhelmed.
The Spanish forces were deployed in a new way, as mixed units of swordsmen, pikemen, and arquebusiers, enabling them to beat off attacks by the French heavy cavalry.
Cerignola was the first major battle to be won primarily by infantry firearms.
After maneuvering on either side of the Garigliano River, the Spanish crossed by means of an improvised bridge, catching the French by surprise.
WAR OF THE LEAGUE OF CAMBRAI 1508-16 The League of Cambrai was formed to counter the growing power of the Republic of Venice.
Shifting alliances and conflicting interests drew virtually every major power in Europe into a complex conflict that formed the next phase of the wider Italian Wars.
The eventual result was gains for Venice and France, which ended the war as allies despite starting on opposite sides.
This was shattered by French heavy cavalry, who then attacked the Spanish positions from the flank while pikemen assaulted the front.
Such shields were made of iron, brass or wood and provided light-weight protection for a swordsman's free hand, as well as helping him parry during fencing.
After a night march, the Swiss were in position to attack the French camp at dawn.
Catching the French totally unprepared, the Swiss pikemen overran the camp, killing infantry and chasing off cavalry.
The Swiss had expected the shock of their pike charge to overwhelm the enemy, but unexpectedly tough resistance resulted in a long and indecisive battle.
The arrival of French reinforcements forced the Swiss forces to withdraw.
After suffering hardship as a result of a ""scorched-earth"" policy implemented by the retreating Safavids, the Ottoman army defeated the Safavids' cavalry army using a combination of janissaries and artillery.
The Mameluks attempted to halt the Ottoman advance using a fortified position equipped with cannon.
PHILIPPE DE COMMINES, FRENCH KNIGHT AT THE BATTLE OF FORNOVO, 1495 MILITARY AND NAVAL PUNISHMENT THROUGH THE AGES Armed force Offense Punishment Dutch navy, Various ""Keelhauling"", which involved fixing blocks to yardarms on 16th-19th either side of the ship.
The offender was bound to a line centuries passing through the blocks and beneath the ship.
Lead weights were attached to his feet and he was dropped into the water, hauled under the keel, and raised on the other side, where the process was repeated.
Various armies, Misdemeanor; A basic form of punishment in many armies was flogging, or 17th-19th breaches of the the judicial whipping of a man who had committed an centuries code of conduct offense against the regiment's rules and regulations.
Often flogging was administered by non-commissioned officers, with the offender paraded before the formed company, to serve as a lesson to others.
British East Mutiny In 1858, after the Sepoy Mutiny had been crushed, the India Company British revived a punishment for high treason from the time of army, the Mogul emperors.
When the gunners fired their guns, the mutineers were literally blown apart.
United States Army, Various serious As part of the punishment of a soldier found guilty of felony 20th century offences (e.g., crimes by court martial, the convict would often be given a assault, murder) dishonorable discharge from the army.
In addition to a prison sentence and other penalties, this form of discharge could impact on the felon's right to own firearms, his eligibility to vote, and his ability to find employment.
SPANISH CONQUEST OF MEXICO 1519-21 A small number of European troops, assisted by local allies, carried out the Spanish conquest of what is now Mexico.
The Aztec capital, Tenochtitlan, was initially occupied without a fight.
Ousted by a revolt, the Spanish had to fight a campaign in the field before retaking the city by siege.
Intercepted as they tried to escape a revolt in Tenochtitlan by breaking out of the city in the night, the Spanish were caught on one of the causeways and unable to use their horses or artillery.
Only a few of the Spanish and their allies were able to make their way over the causeway and escape.
The Spanish ground down resistance in Tenochtitlan by razing each street as they captured it.
Every night they retired out of the city, pushing in again the next day.
ITALIAN WAR OF 1521-26 The election in 1519 of Charles I of Spain as Holy Roman emperor triggered another round of fighting in the Italian Wars.
This time fighting took place all over Europe, although the decisive action was fought at Pavia in northern Italy, south of Milan.
The Swiss mercenaries in French service in Lombardy were disgruntled because they had received no pay and threatened to return home unless the French commander Lautrec attacked the imperial forces at once.
The Swiss used a head-on advance with their pikes leveled, their standard tactic.
Ffowever, they were halted by obstacles and artillery fire, and then driven off by arquebusiers.
Bicocca is sometimes considered the first engagement in which firearms were decisive.
Battle of Pavia, 1525 At the battle of Pavia on February 24 1525, the pikemen and arquebusiers of the Spanish Holy Roman emperor Charles V destroyed the army of Francis I, king of France.
In autumn 1524 the French king, Francis I, had marched an army over the Alps and occupied Milan.
His troops then besieged Pavia, but an imperial force was sent to relieve the garrison there.
The imperial forces used a night march to get on the French flank, resulting in a confused battle, in which the French were outfought in a series of small local actions.
The following year he signed the Treaty of Madrid, renouncing his territorial claims in Italy.
WAR OF THE LEAGUE OF COGNAC 1526-30 The League of Cognac, led by France and the Papal States, was formed to attempt the removal of Spanish and Holy Roman empire interests from Italy.
BATTLEFIELD MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS Musical instruments have for centuries formed part of the basic equipment of an army going to war.
In the confusion after a battle began, loud notes from horns or pipes, or drumbeats could communicate commands more clearly than other kinds of signaling, such as flags.
Aboard naval warships, drums and specialized whistles, known as boatswain's pipes, were traditionally used to indicate the arrival of visitors or senior officers, to signal the hours of the watch, and to direct sailors to their action stations in combat.
Soldiers were trained to respond to certain notes or combinations of notes blown loudly on copper or iron trumpets.
The notes would indicate attacks, retreats, and other maneuvers around the battlefield.
In the 19th century, a small horn called a bugle became one of the most important signaling devices on American and many European battlefields, helping command the movements of infantry and cavalry alike.
Drums Drums may be among the most ancient of martial musical instruments, appearing in combat almost everywhere, from tribal warfare in Mesoamerica and Africa, to Asia and Europe.
In naval service, the phrase ""beat to quarters"" indicated a particular kind of drum roll that ordered sailors to their posts for a fight where some would load and prepare to fire the ship's guns and others would arm with muskets and ascend the rigging as sharpshooters in preparation for combat.
On land, drums were used to command maneuvers in most European-style armies throughout the 19th century.
Because for several centuries armies relied on musket-armed infantry, the drum was essential to ensure that very large formations of men moved accurately and held ranks as they closed with the enemy.
Fifes Developed from medieval folk instruments, small high-pitched flutes played an important role in signaling infantry maneuvers.
The shrill notes of the fife, coupled with various drumbeats, could deliver complex commands to infantry units that were engaged in combat and were otherwise unreachable through the smoke and terrible noise of battle.
Fifes usually had just six finger holes and typically played in the key of B flat.
Bagpipes Various cultures around the world have developed and still play forms of bagpipes in their folk music.
In some cultures, the bagpipes were pressed into military service in much the same way that the medieval flute became the martial fife.
The bagpipes evolved into a sophisticated signaling device in Scotland in particular, where the instrument became almost a national symbol.
Wooden fife Developed from the 15th century, the fife, such as this wooden example below, became an important battlefield musical instrument.
ZAHIR-UD-DIN MUHAMMAD BABUR ON HIS 16TH-CENTURY CONQUEST OF HINDUSTAN Mercenaries in imperial service mutinied due to lack of pay and forced their commanders to lead a march on Rome.
Florence became an independent republic after the sack of Rome, fighting against the imperial faction.
An Imperial army besieged the city for ten months, and Florence finally surrendered when it became apparent that outside assistance would not be arriving.
The death of the Duke of Milan triggered another round of conflict over the duchy.
French troops captured Turin, but were unable to take Milan, while an imperial incursion into France ended inconclusively.
Ottoman expansion into Europe via the Balkans also met with vigorous resistance, primarily from Austria.
The walls had been breached with mining, cannon, and explosive charges, yet the defenders were able to repel many assaults.
They eventually agreed to surrender the fortress in return for safe conduct.
Crashing through the Turkish horsemen, the Hungarian cavalry came up against a line of cannon chained together to make a barricade.
FIRST PANIPATapril21, 1526 Dagger and sheath This highly decorated dagger, called a khanjar, comes from Mogul-era Rajasthan, India.
Its pommel is shaped like a ram's head and, like the sheath, it is decorated with semiprecious stones.
SPANISH CONQUEST OF PERU 1526-72 Arriving as the Inca empire was divided by civil war, the Spanish conquistadores were able to capitalize on the situation.
Their horses and advanced European weapons to help intimidate the Inca, many of whom joined forces with the newcomers.
A small band of Spanish troops marched across Peru and confronted the Incan emperor.
Treacherously launching an attack during a formal meeting, the Spanish eliminated the Incan leadership.
Installed as a puppet emperor by the Spanish, Manqo Qapac led an initially successful revolt.
Eventually driven away from the capital, he fought a guerrilla war against the conquistadors until his death in 1544.
Further disputes over Milan brought about war between France, now allied with the Ottoman empire, and Spain, the Holy Roman empire, and various allies.
The final round of the Italian Wars saw fighting in several corners of Europe, before bankruptcy and internal problems forced both France and Spain to accept a settlement.
Despite this, Spain remained the dominant power in Italy at the end of the wars.
John from their stronghold on Rhodes was a priority for the Ottoman sultan Suleiman the Magnificent.
After a failed attempt in 1480, the Ottomans besieged the island again in 1522.
Due to the situation in Italy, appeals from Rhodes for help from other European states went largely unheeded.
Goaded into attacking on a narrow front against well-prepared positions, the forces of Sultan Ibrahim Lodi ran into heavy fire from Babur's Mogul army.
Protected by a Genoese fleet, which had already decisively defeated the Ottomans at sea, the imperial army landed in Tunisia.
After taking the port of La Goleta, the imperial forces then advanced on the city of Tunis.
The Art of War by Niccolo Machiavelli Italian 1519-20 CE Machiavelli's The Art of War is a series of dialogs discussing how an army should be trained and deployed.
Machiavelli suggests to his Florentine rulers that Roman practices should be emulated.
Uber die Fechtkunst und den Ringkampf (On Fighting Arts and Tournament ) by Hans Czynner German 1538 This was one of many 15thand 16th-century manuals that helped to codify Renaissance European fighting styles and schools of fencing and other martial arts, for both sport and war.
Together with Plans and Explanations of the Method Generally Practis'd, &c.
English 1764 This was a standard drill book for English King George Ill's forces during the American Revolution.
The manual included musket practice and maneuver exercises to train large groups of men how to move and fight as a cohesive unit.
On War by Carl von Clausewitz Prussian 1816-30 Von Clausewitz's treatise explained the organization, equipment and use of armies and fortifications, and emphasized the role of military strength in achieving political goals.
Short land pattern musket,1750 as carried into battle during the Seven Years War and subsequent conflicts Length overall; 58in ; barrel length 42in ; calibre .75in ; weight 9lb 300ft with a skilled man shooting 3-4 balls per minute Less time needed in training to master compared with the longbow; industrial production outfitted large regiments Costly to produce; the musket required maintenance to reduce the effects of carbon fouling and corrosion of mechanical parts.
WARS OF SULEIMAN THE MAGNIFICENT 1552-71 In his last years, Sultan Suleiman the Magnificent of the Ottoman empire continued to push into the Balkans and to seek naval supremacy in the Mediterranean.
John set up a new fortified The Christian forces enjoyed a considerable advantage in terms of the number and power of their cannon and firearms, which proved decisive in a hard-fought action.
Despite being massively outnumbered, the defenders of Eger put up a determined defense against the wellequipped but weary Ottoman army.
After 39 days, the siege base on Malta, which Ottoman forces attacked in 1565.
The battle for Malta was an epic of siegecraft and courage on both sides, with the fort of St.
At first the war elephants of the combined Afghan/Hindu force were highly successful.
The balance tipped in the favor of the Moguls when a lucky arrow struck and wounded the Hindu general Hemu, was abandoned.
Jean de la Valette's tomb Grandmaster of the Knights Hospitallers, Jean de la Valette successfully resisted Turkish forces during the siege of Malta in 1565.
A massive assault that day overran the defenders; almost all were killed.
Seven men managed to break out and escape, and four more were captured and later released.
FIFTH OTTOMAN-VENETIAN WAR 1570-73 Selim II, successor to Suleiman, launched a campaign to take Cyprus.
The naval battle at Lepanto resulted in a major Ottoman defeat, but this did not change the course of the war.
Learning the location of his enemy’s camp, Oda Nobunaga used woods to cover his approach and attacked from an unexpected direction.
The battle was fought largely in a shallow river, with a force of arquebusiers taking part on the side of Nobunaga.
The Tokugawa force defeated its opponents, then flanked those facing Nobunaga.
The Tokugawa clan hoped to win by use of arquebusiers, but it was overrun by a cavalry charge.
The Tokugawa were able to retreat, however, in reasonable order, reducing the severity of the defeat.
FRENCH WARS OF RELIGION, EARLY BATTLES 1562-73 The rise of Protestantism in France led to a period of conflict known as the French Wars of Religion.
The Protestant Huguenot cavalry achieved initial success, throwing the Catholic Royalists into confusion.
Royalist reserves tipped the balance, although the majority of the Huguenot force was able to retire from the field, resulting in a Royalist victory.
This event led to new outbreaks of violence in which Catholic priests were massacred.
The Huguenot force was defeated as a result of a surprise cavalry attack from an unexpected direction.
Catching the royalist force by surprise, the Huguenot attack initially went well.
A determined stand by royalist infantry redressed the balance for a time, until a flanking movement forced a royalist withdrawal.
The predominantly Protestant city of La Rochelle refused to accept a royal governor and came under siege.
Eight Mogul warriors In this 16th-century image, the Mogul emperor Babur leads his cavalry in a charge against a Rajput coalition army.
Both Babur and his grandson Akbar won decisive victories at Panipat, near Delhi, India. costly assaults were made before a settlement permitting Protestantism in La Rochelle was signed.
Managing to offend several rival sultans enough that they allied against him, the Hindu king Rama Raja was overwhelmed by their forces.
THE DUTCH REVOLT 1568-1609 The Dutch Revolt began as an uprising against Spanish rule in the Low Countries, resulting in the formation of the Dutch Republic.
The first stages of the war ended with a 12-year truce beginning in 1609.
Caught on the peninsula of Jemmingen with the river at their backs, the Dutch rebel army was outmatched in terms of firepower and discipline.
As their numbers grew, these so-called ""Sea-Beggars"" defeated Spanish naval forces in coastal waters.
After much deliberation, the city of Haarlem declared for the rebels and was subsequently besieged by the Spanish army.
A relief army was defeated in July 1573, and with supplies exhausted the city surrendered on July 13, 1573.
Unable to survive a conventional gunnery engagement against the heavier Spanish ships, the rebel Dutch force tried to board.
A Dutch attack on October 5 was beaten off with heavy losses, but six days later favorable winds helped the Dutch to gain a victory. numerous foreign mercenaries under an English commander, led to a costly defeat and the loss of the city to the Spanish.
Held by a strong Spanish force, the city of Breda was taken by stratagem.
A force of 70 Dutch troops hid in a peat boat, which they had been informed was never searched, thus gaining entry to the city and taking the garrison by surprise.
While preparing to besiege Nieuwpoort, the Dutch were attacked by a Spanish force.
After the initial Spanish attack had been repulsed from their strong position, the Dutch launched a cavalry charge, which drove off part of the Spanish army.
Spanish successes elsewhere on the field were also countered by the cavalry, resulting in a Spanish collapse.
Deploying arquebusiers in front of his main force, Oda Nobunaga used their fire to break up the Takeda charge.
Once the attack had stalled, Nobunaga's force counterattacked and broke the Takeda force.
Breakout from Nagashino At the battle of Nagashino , future shogun Tokugawa leyasu’s arquebusiers defeated the rival samurai Takeda dan.
Here, Tokugawa’s ally Katsutaka Torii tries to break out from the besieged castle.
After two years of bloody but indecisive fighting, new Spanish leadership undertook the gradual reduction of the outer defenses.
Once Spanish artillery was established close to the remaining defenses, the Dutch surrendered.
Dutch rebels opened the dykes to flood the Spanish siege lines around Antwerp.
The Spanish responded by building a bridge across the flooded area and establishing strongpoints on the dyke tops.
Caught by surprise in an unfinished defensive position, the rebel army was quickly routed.
The spring thaw made many roads impassable because of mud, however, which forced the Spanish to abandon some of their artillery as they withdrew.
Poor leadership of the Dutch force, which contained Renaissance rapier This Spanish swept-hilt sword has an unsharpened section of blade called the ricasso (below the hilt), for precise handling.
Catching the demoralized rebel Dutch army in retreat, a force of Spanish cavalry launched a charge that triggered a general panic.
The Spanish attacked a Dutch force composed mainly of foreign mercenaries, who were awaiting reinforcements and had entrenched themselves.
After some skirmishing, a general Spanish assault was launched, which was beaten off, although the Dutch were not able to exploit the victory.
A campaign of mining and countermining under the walls gradually wore down the defenders, although the cost to the Spanish was heavy.
Seeking to subjugate the last of the Rajputs , the Moguls launched a campaign against Mewar.
Leading a mixed force of Portuguese troops and European mercenaries seeking to conquer Morocco, King Sebastian of Portugal was met by an Ottoman-style army as he pushed inland.
Occupying a hill with his arquebusiers, Toytomi Hideyoshi faced the army of Akechi Mitsuhide, a self-appointed shogun.
As Hideyoshi’s arquebusiers drove off attempts to storm their position, the forces of Hideyoshi enveloped the enemy's flanks.
Marching rapidly to the relief of Shizugatake, whose forces were then under siege by forces loyal to Shibata Katsuie, Hideyoshi's army arrived much sooner than expected.
ANGLO-SPANISH WAR 1587-1604 From 1587 to 1604, England and Spain were involved in an undeclared war fought largely at sea.
The conflict was a heavy drain on both treasuries, forcing a negotiated settlement.
Sir Francis Drake led an English fleet into Cadiz harbor and attacked the ships there.
Their goals were diplomatic and naval, securing tribute for the emperor, while suppressing piracy and otherwise showing force.
It resulted in Bismarck being sunk in deep water off the Atlantic coast of France.
Route of the Armada This detailed map, made in 1588, shows the route traveled by Spain's ""Invincible"" Armada during its ill-fated 16th-century expedition to conquer England.
The damage inflicted on Spain was not great, but the exploit was an impressive feat of seamanship and daring.
After a running engagement in the English Channel, the Spanish fleet anchored off Calais.
An attack by fireships forced the Spanish to sea in disarray and allowed the English fleet to make a decisive attack.
Hoping to take advantage of heavy losses sustained by the Spanish fleet, an English expedition was launched against Corunna and Lisbon, with a view to taking the Azores as well.
Bad weather and stubborn Spanish resistance caused the operation to fail, with heavy losses.
This was initially conceived as part of a larger campaign of conquest, but came to an end in 1593.
A second invasion was launched the following year, resulting in a war that continued until 1598.
Simultaneously attacking the castle at Busan and the harbor forts, the Japanese launched an assault covered by arquebus fire.
After the collapse of the defense, all surviving troops and civilians were massacred.
With no effective counter to the fire of Japanese arquebuses, the Korean garrison could not prevent an assault.
A vigorous Korean counterattack failed, despite heavy hand-to-hand fighting.
Once the fort was taken, the garrison and civilian population were massacred.
The fortress of Dongnae threatened the Japanese bridgehead in Korea and was attacked quickly after their initial landings.
The outmatched garrison put up a stout defense, but lacked the equipment and training to withstand the Japanese assault.
Seeking to halt the Japanese advance on Seoul, the Koreans offered battle FRENCH WARS OF RELIGION, LATER BATTLES 1587-98 The French Wars of Religion continued, as attempts at finding a settlement collapsed into more violence.
Henry IV instead tried to end the conflict by force, but eventually realized that conversion to Catholicism represented his only real chance to rule a united country.
The wars of religion ended with the Edict of Nantes in 1598, which granted tolerance to Protestants.
Weakened by arquebus fire from the infantry, the charge fell apart on contact with the Huguenot cavalry.
The Huguenot army included many mercenaries funded with English and Danish money.
A Catholic force defeated part of the army, and some mercenaries entered into negotiations with the Catholics.
Yl SUN-SIN, KOREAN ADMIRAL, ON THE BATTLE OF HANSANDO, 1592 Badly outnumbered, the Royalist army retired into Arques and fortified itself.
After beating off several assaults in very bloody fighting, the Royalists were relieved by a force sent from Britain, forcing a Catholic retreat.
Rushing to counter a Spanish incursion into France, the small Royalist army caught its opponents by surprise and inflicted a temporary defeat.
This was exploited by a deception, where local peasants simulated reinforcements moving up.
Advancing on the city of Gao, the Moroccan force was met by a much larger Songhai army.
The Moroccans' muskets proved decisive; most of the Songhai fled when fired upon.
Edo period castle, Japan Matsumoto-Jo is a well-preserved castle located at Hagano Prefecture, in Japan.
Kato Kiyomasa This 19th-century print shows one of Japan's most famous samurai, Kato Kiyomasa, a warrior whose accomplishments included the capture of Seoul during Japan's 16th-century invasions of Korea. on an open plain.
Their cavalry charge was halted by arquebus fire, at which point the Japanese counterattacked.
Catching the Japanese fleet in the harbor at Okpo, the Koreans launched an attack and sank several ships.
They then drew off, but attacked again the next day to inflict further crippling losses on Japanese shipping.
Deploying a type of large armored warship called a ""turtle ship” for the first time, the Korean fleet drew part of the opposing fleet out of harbor by feigning a retreat.
Drawing out the Korean cavalry with a feigned retreat, the Japanese broke their charge with concentrated arquebus fire.
Infantry then dashed out from concealed positions to complete the victory.
Catching another Japanese fleet in harbor, the Koreans launched an attack.
The turtle ship proved impervious to Japanese fire and quickly sank the enemy flagship.
After their armies were beaten in the field, the Koreans fought a guerrilla war against the Japanese invaders.
At Chonju a Korean force defeated a Japanese army, gaining additional support for the guerrillas' cause.
After luring the Japanese fleet out into open water, the Korean force turned and attacked.
As the garrison and citizens of Chinju beat off a Japanese attempt to storm the fortress a large force of Korean guerrillas attacked the besiegers.
Desperately short of supplies, the Japanese launched a hasty, ill-prepared assault up steep slopes with the Koreans' fortified positions above them.
After suffering massive casualties in the disorganized attack, the Japanese withdrew.
Rightly suspecting a trap, Korean admiral Yi refused to act on information obtained about the Japanese fleet's movements.
He was relieved, and his replacement blundered into a massive Japanese fleet, resulting in the only Japanese naval victory of the war.
Despite being reduced to a dozen ships by the disaster at Chilcheollyang, reinstated Korean admiral Yi attacked the Japanese fleet at Myeongyang, destroying the flagship and inflicting serious losses before breaking off the action.
Korean forces, assisted by troops from China, were able to drive the invading Japanese into a number of coastal forces.
At Ulsan, the Japanese withstood siege and repeated assaults until an army arrived to relieve them.
Location Noryang Strait, off Namhae Island, off the south coast of Korea.
When ordered to withdraw from Korea, the Japanese forces were unable to do so because of the Korean naval blockade.
An attempted breakout resulted in the Japanese fleet being overwhelmed by Korean and Chinese cannon fire.
Ishida Mitsunari positioned one of his allies, Kobayakawa Hideaki, on the flank, not realizing that Hideaki had arranged to betray his ally.
Attacked in front by leyasu and on the flank by Hideyaki, Mistunari's force collapsed.
Toyotomi Hideyori's bold plan went awry when part of his army attacked too soon and his flanking force was intercepted before it could attack.
Tokugawa's forces broke through into Osaka Castle, forcing Hideyori into the keep, which they fired on with cannon.
Although clothing and equipment have become increasingly lighter in weight, the burden on the modern soldier has increased.
The Combat Load refers to the total minimum amount of equipment required for a soldier to fight and survive in immediate combat.
The Approach Load can total up to 45 percent of a soldier's body weight.
The samurai's weapons included a sword and, often, a lance or other pole-arm.
Some troopers would carry parts of crew-served weapons as well, such as a Browning .30 caliber machine gun or a 60mm light mortar.
The Crusades 11 th -13 th centuries The papacy and kingdoms of Western Europe and their allies (including Christian Ethiopia); the Byzantine empire; the Seljuk empire; Arabs, Kurds, and other Muslims A legacy of European colonialism in the Levant was established that has cultural and political reverberations into the 21st century; it became a key front in the millennium-long medieval confrontation between militant Christianity and militant Islam.
War of the 1584-89 The Catholic League, under Three Henrys Henry of Guise, Henry of Navarre and the Huguenots, and Henry III, king of France During the so-called French Wars of Religion, after Henry III executed Henry of Guise, the king was himself assassinated, leaving Henry of Navarre the victor; Navarre later renounced his Protestant faith and converted to Catholicism to take the crown of France.
Thirty Years War 1618-48 Roman Catholics and Calvinist protestants in the Holy Roman empire and other nations of Europe Fighting and disease killed off as much as one-third of the population of certain areas of the empire; with the Treaty of Westphalia, Protestants and Catholics were granted rights under law; also, each state had sovereignty over its religious self-determination.
THIRTY YEARS WAR 1618-48 Arising largely out of religious disputes between Catholic and Protestant powers within the Holy Roman empire, the Thirty Years War gradually drew in most of the states of Europe.
Not all the combatants' motives were religious; territorial and political issues also influenced a number of states to take sides, and to make and break alliances.
The war eventually ended with the Treaty of Westphalia in 1648, which also ended the Dutch Revolt.
Location Western Bohemia, 56 miles west of Prague, modern Czech Republic.
The small force of defenders was able to withstand siege and bombardment until November 21, when the walls were breached and the city was stormed.
Weak supply chain Forces depend upon a logistics network, which may become vulnerable as the army advances.
Here, in this scene from the Thirty Years War , soldiers attack an enemy supply column.
Deployed on high ground, the Bohemian army was not expecting a frontal attack.
The center of their line was quickly overrun and the rest of the army disintegrated.
The outnumbered Protestant force deployed on a hill and fought a stubborn defensive battle.
A lucky hit on the Protestant powder store caused an enormous explosion, permitting an assault to take the hill and pursue the Protestant army to destruction.
While attempting to rendezvous with their allies, the Protestant force was brought to action at Hochst on the Main River.
Cornered and outnumbered, the Protestants forced a crossing of the river and linked up with their allies, though at significant cost.
The Protestant force launched a frontal attack that exposed deficiencies in training and became disordered.
Repeated Protestant cavalry charges achieved some success but were eventually driven off.
The Protestant infantry was largely overrun by cavalry while retreating the following day.
Correctly predicting that the Protestant army would cross into Silesia at the Dessau Bridge, the Imperial army laid an ambush by covering the bridge with concealed artillery, which turned it into a death trap for the Protestant forces.
A Protestant advance placed the army deep in hostile territory and without support.
On retreating, it was caught and attempted to fight a defensive battle.
When the cavalry wings were broken, the Protestant infantry attempted to fall back but were overrun.
After advancing to assist Protestant forces defeated at Dessau, the Danish were brought to action at Lutter.
Repeatedly battered by infantry attack, the Danish were eventually forced to abandon their artillery and retreat.
The Protestant stronghold of Magdeburg fell to Imperial forces after artillery breached the walls in two places.
The city was so thoroughly sacked that ""Magdeburg Quarter"" became a slang term for atrocity.
Entrenched in front of Werben, the Swedish army under Gustavus Adolphus drove off an initial assault, with cavalry and artillery proving decisive.
Although the Swedish forces drove off several cavalry attacks, their Saxon allies were overrun.
At this desperate juncture the Swedish reserves attacked the Imperial flank in conjunction with artillery fire and delivered a decisive victory.
Catching the Imperial army marching as two columns, the Swedish fell on one but were then attacked by the other.
The Swedish king, Gustavus Adolphus, was killed leading a cavalry charge to restore the situation.
Crossing the Lech River on a bridge of boats, the Swedish army stormed Catholic positions.
Imperial general Count Tilly was mortally wounded, causing his army to lose heart and fall back.
This saved the Catholics from being trapped by Swedish cavalry sent on a flanking movement.
The Swedish launched repeated attacks on the well-positioned Imperial army, however, rough terrain prevented them from making the best use of their artillery and cavalry.
Unable to break through and desperately short of supplies, the Swedish withdrew their forces to the north.
The Protestant Swedish army planned a coordinated attack against the Spanish, which became disorganized due to the terrain.
As the battle degenerated into a series of isolated engagements the Swedish forces were overwhelmed.
Having set up a fortified position, the Imperial force was flanked by the Swedish and had to make a hurried redeployment.
It was then attacked from another direction by a detached Swedish force and had to abandon its artillery as it retreated.
After an inconclusive action on February 28, the French pulled back to regroup their forces.
The complacent Imperials were caught by surprise when the French attacked on March 3, inflicting a major defeat.
Falling back after a failed attempt to take Vienna, the outnumbered Swedish forces regrouped at Breitenfeld and launched a sudden attack on the unprepared Imperials.
A cavalry charge broke the Imperial left wing before it was properly deployed, permitting the center in turn to be defeated.
The cavalry of each side attacked successfully on their respective right wings.
The French cavalry then charged through the center and chased off the Spanish cavalry, who abandoned their infantry to encirclement.
The Swedish easily overpowered the Imperial infantry in a series of skirmishes in hilly and wooded terrain.
The Imperial cavalry put up more resistance but suffered heavily as a result.
After pursuing the Bavarian army into Wiirttemburg, the French concluded that they were no longer a threat and entered their camp.
The subsequent Bavarian attack caught the French unprepared and shattered their force.
Repeated frontal attacks by the French eventually broke the Imperial positions, though at high cost on both sides.
Strategically the battle was indecisive as the French were unable to follow up.
Badly outnumbered, the Imperial army attempted to fight a rearguard action with cavalry while the infantry and artillery disengaged.
This was successful for a time but the Imperials were eventually forced to seek shelter in Landsberg.
A Swedish independent unit attempted to take Prague but was fought to a standstill before entering the Old Town.
The siege of Breda, a key Dutch border fortress, was carried out using a chain of defended strongpoints rather than trench lines.
A Dutch naval force, sent to intercept the Spanish ""treasure fleets"" bringing silver from the Americas, laid an ambush in Matanzas Bay in the Caribbean.
DUTCH REVOLT, LATER ACTIONS 1607-48 After a period of truce, the Dutch Revolt against Spanish rule flared up again.
Catching the Spanish fleet in Gibraltar Bay, the Dutch force doubled up on their opponents, attacking from both sides at once.
Having smashed the fleet, the Dutch massacred many survivors in the water.
Pequot War Colonial musketeers and swordsmen confront Native American warriors armed with bows and lances, in the Pequot War in New England.
As the Spanish fleet approached Dunkirk in France it was ferociously attacked by the Dutch and driven into neutral English waters.
The Dutch then brought up more vessels and most of the Spanish ships, trapped close to the English coast, were destroyed or captured.
In a battle that was part of the Thirty Years War, the Sedanese, assisted by allied forces from Spain, the Papacy, and the Holy Roman empire, were able to resist a frontal attack by the French.
As part of the Thirty Years War conflict, the Imperials fought a determined defensive battle in an attempt to prevent the French from reducing Imperial fortresses along the Rhine.
An initial Dutch attack on the eastern side of the city went well despite a Spanish counterattack.
The Dutch sent a number of ships to attack Spanish possessions in the Philippines, bringing about a series of small-scale naval actions.
The Spanish inflicted heavy losses on the Dutch, making an invasion of the Philippines impracticable.
While attempting to blockade the Spanish in their port, the Dutch force came under artillery fire from shore batteries.
As a result, the blockade was lifted although the Dutch continued to harass shipping until the end of the war.
Upon becoming leader of the powerful Powhatan Confederacy of Native American tribes.
Chief Opechancanough decided to eliminate Jamestown, a small English settlement in Virginia, which had previously been ignored.
Location Western France on the Bay of Biscay Continued religious conflict in France resulted in the renewed siege of La Rochelle, a city that tolerated Protestantism.
After English troops sent to assist the Huguenot rebels were forced to retreat, the Royalist siege of the city tightened until most of the population starved to death.
After a series of raids and punitive expeditions, the Connecticut Militia with Native American allies from the Narragansett and Mohican tribes attacked the Pequot village of Mystic, massacring the population.
Beginning with attacks on Huron settlements, the Iroquois expanded their campaign to include attacks against French settlers.
Punitive action brought a few years' peace, but fighting flared up again in 1693.
With rebels in control of several provinces and the Ming dynasty under attack by the Manchu from the north, the dynasty fell and the rebels took Beijing unopposed.
BRITISH CIVIL WARS 1642-51 The conflict known as the British Civil Wars can be split into three English civil wars, all of which were fought between supporters of Parliament and those of the king, and Scottish and Irish rebellions.
Royalist forces in the First Civil War, which ran 1642-46 and the Second, 1648-51, were led by King Charles I, who was executed in 1649; his son led the Royalist forces in the Third Civil War, 1649-51.
After Parliamentary victory in 1651, Britain had no king until 1661, when Charles II returned from exile.
The Royaiist force launched a cavalry attack under cover of morning mist, surprising the Parliamentarians and putting much of their cavalry to flight.
The resulting close-quarters action went on for eight hours before Royalist cavalry finally broke the opposition.
ROUNDWAY DOWN JULY 13.1643 A rapid Royalist approach and cavalry attack forced the Parliamentarian force besieging this important garrison to retire into an untenable position.
Outmaneuvered, the Parliamentarian force decided to attack, bringing about a fight for Cheriton Wood.
A disorganized Royalist cavalry attack was beaten off, after which the Royalist force retreated.
The Royalists were caught by surprise when the Parliamentarians attacked very late in the day.
Breaking the Royalist right flank, the Parliamentarian cavalry then attacked the enemy rear and won a decisive victory.
The Royalist cavalry smashed through the Parliamentarian left, but did not return to contribute further to the battle.
The Parliamentarian cavalry broke the opposite flank and then fell on the Royalist center, destroying the king's main army.
In the early stages of the First Civil War, Parliamentary and Royalist cavalry unexpectedly came across each other near Worcester.
The Royalists routed their opponents, establishing a superiority that lasted for some time.
Royaiist forces marching to the relief of troops besieged in Devizes were confronted by a Parliamentarian force on Roundway Down near the town.
The Royalist cavalry swiftly broke the Parliamentarian wings, but their center fought on until it was attacked in the rear by a force coming out of Devizes.
Gradually tightening the siege, the Parliamentarians pushed the defenders back to the medieval walls.
After a failed relief attempt, which resulted in the battle of Marston Moor, the situation became hopeless and the city was surrendered.
Forced to stand and fight, the Royalist infantry won some initial successes, but its cavalry was broken.
The infantry fought a rearguard action as it retired from this, the last major action of the First Civil War.
The first major battle of the First Civil War took place at Edgehill, between poorly trained, recently raised forces that in many cases lacked proper arms and equipment.
As darkness fell, the Parliamentarians broke off the inconclusive encounter.
Learning that the Royalist army was strung out on the march, the Parliamentarians crossed the Cherwell River at Cropredy Bridge and attacked.
After the Royalists fought to gain control of the bridge, the Parliamentarians were pushed back and broke contact that evening.
Unpaid Parliamentarian troops in Wales defected to the Royalist cause and fought against a force sent to deal with them.
The Royalist flank was broken by Parliamentarian cavalry, causing the Royalist ranks to panic and collapse.
In some cases, mutinies have influenced significant changes in the course of history.
The laws of most of the world's navies and armies state that those found to have conspired or taken part in an armed rebellion must be severely punished, and being put to death was a frequent punishment.
In 1842, for example, a midshipman and two sailors aboard the brig USS Somers were hanged in the rigging for plotting to murder their officers and hijack their ship for piracy.
Mutinies in England's New Model Army In the early phase of the Second English Civil War, some soldiers mutinied within Oliver Cromwell's New Model Army.
At Corkbush Field, Hertfordshire in 1647, Cromwell's men tried and convicted nine conspirators, one of whom was shot as an example.
At Bishopsgate, London in April 1649, after the regicide of Charles I, the army quelled another revolt and hanged its leader.
Mutiny aboard HMS Bounty During an expedition to Tahiti, 19 members of HMS Bounty's crew mutinied.
They were led by acting Lieutenant Fletcher Christian, who put Captain William Bligh and 18 loyal crewmen adrift in one of Bounty's open boats.
Bligh's ordeal became one of the great feats of navigation in British naval history, as he captained his small craft 3,618 nautical miles to the Dutch colonial harbor at Timor.
Of the mutineers, many were put ashore in Tahiti and later faced courts martial.
Fletcher Christian and eight other mutineers, along with 17 Tahitian men and women, escaped to settle the Pitcairn Islands, where some of their descendants live today.
The Sepoy mutiny in India In 1857, a series of mutinies in regiments of the British East India Company military service pitted some native Sepoys (from a Persian word for soldier) against their European officers.
The mutinies were primarily caused by native Indian dissatisfaction with British social policies.
When order was restored in 1858, the uprising had effectively ruined the East India Company and marked the beginning of the British Raj, direct imperial rule in India.
The Russian battleship Potemkin The crew of the Black Sea Fleet battleship Potemkin rose against the Russian Imperial Navy's harsh discipline, killed seven of their officers, and used their ship's guns to support a rebellion in the Ukrainian city, Odessa.
The mutiny foreshadowed and became a model for the uprisings of the Russian Revolution in 1917, which overthrew the tsar and laid the foundation for the Soviet Union.
Bangladesh Rifles In February 2009, the Bangladesh Rifles, a police force that guards that nation's borders, rebelled demanding greater pay and more autonomy from the army.
The mutineers murdered many of the army officers appointed to lead them and held others hostage at their headquarters in Dhaka, and at bases in other towns.
The Parliamentarians then began a pursuit of the disorganized Scottish army.
Despite the Royalist defenders' confidence in their defenses, the walls were breached by artillery.
Two assaults on the small breach were repelled, but the third was successful.
Launching a surprise attack across a ravine, the Parliamentarians met with determined resistance until their reserve cavalry drove in the Scottish flank.
Outflanking Scottish forts around Stirling with a landing in Fife, the Parliamentarians beat off an attack on their bridgehead and advanced against the Scots army.
Victory at Inverkeithing tipped the strategic balance in Scotland in favor of the Parliamentarians.
Marston Moor, July 2,1644 Oliver Cromwell and his New Model Army ride to battle at Marston Moor.
The final battle of the Civil War was fought on both banks of the Severn River.
The Parliamentarians were able to shift troops using pontoon bridges, and eventually gained the upper hand.
The Royalist army was almost completely destroyed, but Charles II managed to escape and made his way to France.
Surviving members of the Ming dynasty resisted the Manchu invaders, proclaiming an emperor in Nanjing.
Shivaji Maharaj fought a successful guerrilla campaign against the weakening Mogul empire, increasing his power and influence.
His religious tolerance meant that both Flindus and Muslims were willing to serve in his forces.
Spanish forces, including a contingent of English Royalists, attempted to break the Anglo-French siege of Dunkirk.
He conducted a campaign of raids against the settlers until British troops arrived and gradually wore down his power.
During his reign, England's King Charles II imposed ever tighter controls over religious non-conformists in his kingdom.
This led to open revolt by the Presbyterian Covenanters of southwest Scotland.
Responding to the defeat at Drumclog, a government force attacked and defeated the Covenanters at Bothwell Bridge, which put an end to the Covenanter rising.
Provoked into revolt by religious intolerance and demands for labor, the Pueblo forced the Spanish settlers to seek safety in Santa Fe, which was then besieged.
Siege of Vienna, 1683 Ottoman Grand Vizier Kara-Mustapha Pasha's janissaries dash disastrously with the combined Austrian, Polish, and German armies at the siege of Vienna.
AUSTRO-OTTOMAN CONFLICTS 1683-87 Conflict over the Balkans was unremitting between Austria and the Ottoman empire for many decades.
Austria was supported by various Christian states , acting as a buffer to prevent further Ottoman advances into Europe.
Mogul empire shield Warriors of the Indian Mogul empire carried round shields called dahl, such as this finely etched and gilded steel example, left.
The Ottoman infantry, cut off and unsupported, were then crushed by the Holy League.
The siege made slow progress, relying on mining rather than cannon to breach the walls.
At the eleventh hour a PolishLithuanian force arrived and routed the Ottoman army.
Attempting to halt Christian expansion into the Balkans, the Ottoman army was decisively defeated at Mohacs.
Austria gained control over Hungary and the Ottoman Sultan was deposed.
Seeking to remove foreign settlers from their territory, the Chinese drove the Russians out of Albazin in 1685.
The next year the Russians returned but were once again defeated, establishing a border more to Chinese liking.
II, who hoped to seize the throne, launched a night attack on the camp of government troops sent to suppress the rebels.
EARLY JACOBITE UPRISINGS 1689-90 The initial Jacobite risings were aimed at restoring Catholic James VII of Scotland and II of England to the throne.
Fighting took place in Scotland and Ireland, with Irish troops also sent to assist the Scots.
Defeat at the battle of the Boyne ended any realistic chance of success and the first rising failed.
After a lengthy exchange of musketry, the Jacobites advanced downhill from their defensive position, reaching the enemy line before many government soldiers fixed their plug bayonets.
MILITARY AND NAVAL CODES Type of cryptography Principle Characteristics Substitution cipher Substitution replaces the letters according to a preselected pattern within the words of a message.
The simplest uses a single alphabet, but some very complex systems use a substitution grid of 26 x 26 letters.
One such system dates to the 15th century and was developed by the French diplomat Blaise de Vigenere.
The weakness of substitution systems is that longer messages allow cryptanalysts more opportunities to see patterns in the substitutions.
The American writer Edgar Allen Poe, a talented amateur cryptanalyst, wrote about such a cipher and its unraveling in the story The Cold Bug.
Transposition cipher In its simplest form, transposition involves jumbling the letters of a message according to a mathematical key or algorithm, which only the intended recipient possesses.
Variations of transposition ciphers have often been used in military history.
For example, by the United States Army during the United States Civil War, and by the Imperial German Army during World War 1.
Enigma/Ultra Enigma, developed for the military, naval, and special police forces of the German Third Reich in World War II, used electrical and mechanical means to encrypt text typed into the machine's keyboard.
These intercepts helped the Allies plan and carry out major operations, including the invasion of Normandy in 1944.
JN25 The Imperial Japanese Navy used JN25, which comprised a number of mathematical keys, which had to be selected from a book of key tables, to encode or decipher encrypted text.
Allied naval and military intelligence units broke some versions of JN25 before World War II, but the UN continued to update the code.
A version of this code, which was broken in 1942, helped the Americans anticipate the Japanese attack at Midway Island, where the United States Navy caught the UN in a devastating ambush.
United States National The length of the key or algorithm Security Agency used to decipher a coded message is one measure of its Suite B strength.
NSA Suite B is a published standard for the types of algorithms that are used to secure classified information in United States government computer systems.
Another set of algorithms, not published, is set aside for essential national security systems, possibly including launch communications for strategic nuclear deterrent forces.
Responding to guerrilla raids by Williamite irregulars, a Jacobite force was lured into an ambush and attempted to give battle.
Jacobite forces attempted to storm Dunkeld, which was held by government troops.
After hours of heavy fighting in the streets the Jacobites withdrew when their ammunition ran out.
A depleted Jacobite force on the march encountered a government detachment at Cromdale.
Severely pressed by government cavalry, the Jacobites slipped away in the fog.
Unable to dislodge the Williamite infantry, who had forced a crossing of the Boyne River, the Jacobites were then forced to retire when the opposing cavalry crossed the river.
WAR OF THE GRAND ALLIANCE 1688-97 Expansionism on the part of Louis XIV of France led to the formation of the Grand Alliance, an opposition coalition consisting primarily of England, the Dutch Republic, the Holy Roman empire, and the Duchy of Savoy.
The English fleet sought to prevent French transports from offloading arms destined for Jacobite forces in Ireland.
The resulting action was not conclusive and the transports were able to offload.
During this battle for control of the English Channel, the Dutch squadron closed with their opponents before the English were ready, and were mauled by the French in the subsequent one-sided fight.
The channel temporarily fell into French hands, and the allied fleet fell back in disorder, fleeing to the Thames River.
The French occupied the allies' interest with a frontal infantry attack, then hidden by the terrain, divided their forces to carry out a double envelopment with cavalry.
The battle was a clear tactical success for France but was not followed up to create a strategic benefit.
Pre-empting the rise of the Zhungar tribes as a new power in Mongolia, the Chinese sent large forces across the Gobi desert.
GREAT NORTHERN WAR 1700-21 The Great Northern War was fought over control of the Baltic, though combat took place as far away as the Ukraine.
Sweden fought an alliance of Denmark, Poland, Lithuania, Russia, and Saxony.
A small Swedish force sent to relieve the besieged garrison at Narva attacked the Russian camp under cover of a snowstorm.
After a long hand-to-hand struggle the Russians were finally driven off.
A frontal attack by Savoyard forces was repulsed with heavy casualties.
French troops crossed the Ter River unobserved, catching the Spanish force by surprise.
Namur was the site of one of 90 fortresses designed by the Marquis de Vauban and based on mathematical principles.
Besieged by an army from England, Bavaria, and Brandenburg, Namur held out for three months.
French demands forced Savoy to join the Grand Alliance, which in turn resulted in a punitive campaign by French forces.
In a hard-fought action at Staffarda, the Savoyards with their Spanish allies were defeated and their lands devastated.
A force of Allied cavalry attacked the French rearguard, also composed entirely of cavalry.
The French relied on shock action with the sword rather than firearms, and won a decisive victory despite being heavily outnumbered.
Catching the French by surprise, the Allied force launched an attack on their camp.
After initial success the Allied force The outnumbered Dutch army benefited from better artillery than their opponents and resisted attack for some time.
The French cavalry eventually broke through and the Dutch suffered heavy losses.
Mounted Ottoman warrior From the middle of the 15th century, the threat of Turkish invasion inspired popular themes in central and southern European art.
This Italian dish depicts a mounted Ottoman warrior bordered by Islamic-style designs. became disorganized, enabling the French to form a solid line.
Intercepted en route to the Mediterranean, the Anglo-Dutch convoy scattered when the French approached.
Despite the best efforts of the vastly outnumbered escort, large numbers of Anglo-Dutch merchant ships were lost.
INFANTRY COMBAT RANGES THROUGHOUT HISTORY The assumption is that, as weapon even on today's high-tech battlefields, the technology has improved over time, modern infantryman must often close with combat range has increased.
The many fighting styles developed by Shaolin masters over the centuries may have influenced some other martial arts styles, such as some forms of karate. their Sohei warrior monks, Japan900 Some Buddhist monks in Japan chose to follow both a martial and religious lifestyle, with many devoted to the practice of Zen Buddhism.
Warrior monks had a role in some of the most turbulent periods in Japanese military history, including the Gempei War in the 12th century.
Some Sohei orders grew very powerful, and were able to field armies, especially during the Japanese civil wars of the 16th century.
KHALSA WARRIOR The Knights Templar 1118 The Knights Templar were among the first military monastic orders founded during the crusades in Palestine.
The Templars, having taken their name from the Temple Mount in Jerusalem where they were billeted, swore to protect Christian pilgrims to the Holy Land.
As the order gained favor with the papacy, the Templars gradually grew more powerful, eventually becoming bankers to many of Europe's kingdoms.
In the 1300s, the order's status as moneylenders led to a dispute with the French crown.
In 1314, the French arrested the order's grandmaster, Jacques de Molay, and tried and burned him at the stake for heresy.
Sikh Khalsa, Punjab province, India 1699 The Khalsa began as an elite religious order, with male and female disciples within Sikhism.
Members of the Khalsa were expected to follow a strict code of conduct.
In addition to their religious devotion and adherence to It the principles of the Sikh gurus, the ft Khalsa also trained as warriors to defend their brethren against oppression.
At that time, the Muslim Moguls of India persecuted Sikhs and Hindus who did not convert to Islam.
The Swedish forces made a crossing of the Duna River in boats, surprising the Allied forces on the far bank.
Despite a vigorous counterattack, the Swedish held their bridgehead as additional forces were ferried across to reinforce them.
Although tired from a forced march, the Swedish launched a series of attacks on the Russians.
In the ensuing melee the Swedish outfought their opponents, driving off the Russian cavalry and overrunning the infantry.
Although outnumbered, the Swedish launched an aggressive cavalry attack, achieving some success.
A counterattack was derailed by the fire of a small detachment of Swedish infantry that had stayed concealed until that point, and the Swedish gradually defeated their remaining opponents.
The Allied force took up a defensive position because the Swedish side had more cavalry.
The Allied flanks were defeated by Swedish cavalry, which then fell on the Allied rear.
Combined with a frontal attack by infantry, this caused a disintegration of the Allied line.
Ignoring his advisors, Charles XII of Sweden ordered an assault on Poltava.
Poor reconnaissance and communications resulted in a badly coordinated and ultimately unsuccessful assault.
OSEL may 24, 1719, GRENGAM JULY 27,1720 Forces Osel: 6 Russian warships; Grengam: 61 Russian ships, 4 Swedish frigates, 1 warship.
The Russian navy, established in 1700, won its first major victory in 1719 at Osel.
A year later the Russian fleet lured Swedish warships into shallow water, where they were overwhelmed.
WAR OF THE SPANISH SUCCESSION 1701-14 The death of Charles II of Spain created a situation in which Spain and France might be united under a single monarch.
The resulting dispute expanded into a general war as various states pursued their own agendas, not all of them directly connected with the fate of the Spanish throne.
After several weeks of manoeuvring, the Austrians crossed the Adige river and drove off the French cavalry encountered at Carpi.
Both sides then spent some time concentrating their forces and re-establishing supply lines.
Prince Eugene of Savoy A brilliant commander in the service of the Austrian Habsburgs, Prince Eugene fought in the War of the Spanish Succession in partnership with England's Duke of Malborough.
Early in the war, Anglo-Dutch forces attempted to capture the port of Cadiz in order to obtain a Spanish base and trigger local uprisings.
The expedition failed, largely due to looting by the Anglo-Dutch troops, which reduced the force's ability to fight effectively.
Retiring from the failed expedition at Cadiz, the Anglo-Dutch fleet was able to attack a treasure fleet en route to Spain from the Americas.
Realizing that the French army was overextended, the English set about defeating isolated sections of it.
In some cases still short of ammunition from the capture of Gibraltar, the AngloDutch force confronted a Franco-Spanish fleet off Malaga.
Despite heavy damage and considerable casualties on both sides, the action was inconclusive, benefiting the Anglo-Dutch strategic position.
In a decisive victory for the Allied forces under Eugene of Savoy, the FrancoSpanish siege of Turin was broken, causing the beginning of the withdrawal of French forces from northern Italy.
Catching the French forces overextended and in vulnerable, swampy positions, the Anglo-Dutch army first attacked the flanks.
Despite a tough rearguard action the Anglo-Dutch forces soundly defeated the French army.
The most basic form was a blade that attached to the muzzle of a long-arm , allowing the gun to function as a pike, spear, or similar pole weapon in close-quarters battle.
This innovation allowed the light infantry tactics of the musketeer to be combined with the heavy infantry tactics of the pikeman and grenadier, within the same troop formation.
The European bayonet may have originated in Spain at the end of the 16th century, with the introduction of daggerlike plug bayonets, which fitted into the muzzle.
These enabled a combatant to load and fire the weapon without having to remove the blade.
Despite its antique origin, the bayonet continues to be issued to soldiers of many of the world's most advanced armies.
Era Innovation Description 1580 CE Plug-type bayonet This was the simplest form of bayonet; as its name implies, it fitted into the muzzle and blocked the barrel, so that the gun could be fired only with the bayonet removed.
One form of saber bayonet popular with rifle-armed troops during the 19th century was the yataghan blade.
This had a shallow double curve, which improved the weapon's cutting properties on the muzzle, or as a sidearm.
Socket bayonet This 19th-century bayonet is fitted with a ring latch that locks it securely onto the muzzle of a musket's barrel.
The remainder marched to attack a Hessian army, which was besieging Castiglione delle Stiviere.
Franco-Spanish cavalry counterattacked and broke the Portuguese cavalry, which led to a general collapse.
Considerable Allied forces were able to cross the Schelde River before they were detected.
The Allied forces then executed a flank attack, which routed the French army.
The Allied army sustained heavy casualties in making attacks on the well-positioned French flanks.
A powerful frontal attack resulted in a huge melee, from which the French were able to retire in good order.
Location Zaragoza Province, Aragon, Spain. progress was made until the summer of 1714, after which a series of assaults gradually regained control of the city.
LATER JACOBITE UPRISINGS 1719-46 After an artillery exchange that lasted the entire morning, the Spanish launched a frontal assault, which the Allied force resolutely withstood.
The Allied force then launched a counterattack, shattering the Spanish army.
Five thousand French troops were besieged inside the fortress of Bouchain, with the remainder of the force camped close by.
The Allies drove a force between the two and constructed field fortifications to hold the position.
DENAIN JULY 24,1712 Repeated attempts were made to restore the Stuart dynasty to the thrones of Scotland and England, backed by foreign powers when French troops were sent in 1708 and a Spanish force the following year.
After a failed uprising in 1715, and an aborted French invasion of England in 1744, Charles Edward Stuart (""Bonnie Prince Charlie"") led a doomed uprising of Scottish chieftains in 1745.
A planned large-scale Spanish invasion did not occur, and the small force landed in Scotland was abandoned, along with its Jacobite allies.
Government forces engaged the rebels at Glen Shiel, driving in the flanks and forcing the Spanish to surrender.
Deprived of its English component by an independent peace treaty, the Allied army was attacked by the French, who were initially repulsed.
After Allied counterattacks failed, the French again advanced, breaking the Allied army.
Lack of artillery meant that little Musket drill In the 17th and 18th centuries musketry was the most important part of infantry training.
By 1700 these crude matchlocks had been superseded by more efficient flintlocks.
Battle of Malplaquet, 1709 Prince Eugene of Savoy's imperial troops and the Duke of Marlborough's troops rout the French in one of the main battles of the War of the Spanish Succession.
The Jacobites attacked from an unexpected direction, causing the inexperienced government army to become disordered.
The government troops became surrounded, with most of the force taken prisoner.
Government forces advanced to occupy Inverurie, placing themselves in an exposed position.
The Jacobites attacked from two directions, catching the government force by surprise and driving them out of the town.
The Jacobite force advanced to attack the complacent and unprepared government troops.
The government force was routed, but the Jacobites were scattered and unable to pursue.
Against the advice of the Highland chieftains, the Jacobite army made a head-on attack against the well-trained government force.
The assault was beaten off by intense fire, and the Jacobites were driven from the field.
Nadir Shah of Persia brushed aside Indian resistance at Karnal and entered Delhi unopposed.
After Indians attacked Persian troops on hearing the false rumor that Nadir Shah had been killed, the city was sacked and more than 20,000 citizens massacred in one day.
WAR OF THE AUSTRIAN SUCCESSION 1740-48 Arising out of a dispute over whether Maria Theresa of Austria was, as a woman, eligible to succeed to the throne, the War of the Austrian Succession gave various states an opportunity for expansion and territorial gain.
The conflict drew in most of the major states of Europe, but was largely inconclusive.
The standing army of Prussia was able to make rapid gains in Silesia before Austria could assemble an army to oppose the invasion.
An Austrian attempt to relieve Neisse resulted in a confused action at Mollwitz, which was won by the firepower of the better-drilled Prussians.
Cut off and hemmed in, the Allied force managed to drive off and rout a French attack.
This was the last occasion when a British king commanded directly in battle.
Despite a vigorous defense, the French and their allies were ejected from the town of Pfaffenhofen.
A second position outside the town held for a time but the French were forced to retreat to avoid becoming surrounded.
The French army occupied excellent positions, with many units hidden by undulating terrain.
Despite some successes, the Allied forces were forced to withdraw in the face of fire from these concealed positions.
The Prussians achieved at least partial surprise and were able to overrun the Saxony wing of the enemy force.
The Austrian contingent was more resilient, but was eventually broken by a cavalry charge.
Austrian, British, Dutch, and Hanoverian troops were attempting to prevent the French, who had invaded Flanders, from advancing into the Dutch Republic.
Poor cooperation between different nationalities allowed the French to break the line and drive the Allies into retreat.
As French warships tried to keep shipping lanes open and to protect its merchant ships, the British admiral signaled for a ""general chase,” bringing about a number of successful small actions, rather than a line-of-battle engagement.
Although the British ships were individually less powerful than the French, they were able to overwhelm them by taking on one enemy ship at a time.
Several French warships were lost, and the battle put an end to French naval operations for the rest of the war.
The classic combined-arms doctrine of ""horse, foot, and guns"" quickly came to dominate the battlefields of the world, and was brought to a pinnacle during the Napoleonic Wars, in which European states took the field with unprecedented numbers of men, horses, and guns.
Montcalm's superior numbers and siege train for a week before surrendering.
Montcalm's Indians butchered many of the survivors after the surrender.
Lawrence River, British forces laid siege to the fortress of Louisbourg.
A French naval squadron in the harbor was eliminated by the bombardment and by boarding parties in small boats.
The fall of Louisbourg gave the British a base for an attack on Quebec.
THE FRENCH AND INDIAN WAR 1754-62 The French and Indian War was a series of conflicts in North America.
Britain ultimately took control of Canada from the French, and also captured Guadeloupe in the Caribbean.
Reinforcing British claims to the area, George Washington's party of Virginia militia and Iroquois warriors attacked a French scouting party under Joseph Coulon de Villiers de Jumonville near modern Uniontown, Pennsylvania.
The Iroquois leader Tanacharison killed the captured de Jumonville after the battle.
Captain Louis Coulon de Villiers led a punitive expedition to avenge Jumonville, his brother.
The colonials surrendered, but they were allowed to withdraw into their own territory with their weapons.
River, the British advance guard retreated, colliding with the main British force.
The British fled, with the French and Indians inflicting heavy casualties on them.
Under Baron Ludwig Dieskau, the French ambushed Colonel William Johnson along the road, and drove the colonials back into their semi-fortified camp.
The colonials rallied and drove the French off in disorder, causing heavy French casualties.
British Major General James Abercromby decided to rush the fort, before French reinforcements could arrive.
The British charged into General Montcalm's intricate defenses, but withdrew after severe losses, abandoning a land invasion of Canada.
A decoy British force attempted to draw out the defenders of the fort in order to ambush them.
The defenders were far more numerous than expected and overwhelmed the British.
A British fort on the shores of Lake George withstood General Louis-Joseph The Battle of Quebec The Canadian city of Quebec was captured by the British in 1759, after a battle lasting less than an hour.
This colored engraving is based on a drawing made by Hervey Smyth, one of the British officers.
Brigadier General John Prideaux conducted a formal siege of this isolated French garrison, which blocked the British route to Montreal.
The French surrendered after William Johnson and his Iroquois ambushed and destroyed a relief column at the island of La Belle Famille.
A British effort to land forces for an assault on Quebec was only partially successful.
After attempting to fight uphill against well-fortified French, troops the British force pulled back.
Location Plains of Abraham outside the walls of Quebec City, Quebec, Canada.
Needing to find an alternative to a long siege, the British were able to achieve surprise.
Winning a pitched battle near the city, the British received Quebec's surrender a few days later.
Faced with a French attempt to regain Quebec City by siege, the British garrison elected to come out and offer battle.
A French convoy tried to evade the British blockade by anchoring in the Restigouche River and positioning cannon on the banks.
After the first position was broken the French withdrew upriver, but were forced to scuttle their ships.
Three British and colonial armies converged in overwhelming force, forcing Governor Pierre de Rigaud de Vaudreuil de Cavagnial's surrender.
It is certainly true that without adequate supplies of food, water, clothing, weapons, ammunition, and other equipment, those on the battle front could not hope for victory.
Today, modern transport aircraft and helicopters, as well as specialized naval cargo vessels, are essential to military logistics.
Railroads Developed at the beginning of the 19th century, railroads soon became an important form of military transport.
Generals realized that large tonnages of supplies, horses, artillery, and even whole regiments of infantry and cavalry troops could be moved efficiently by steam locomotive.
In the Crimean War , rail supply was crucial for British troops at the battle of Balaclava.
In the United States Civil War , during the Petersburg campaign in Virginia, the military railroad system supplied tens of thousands of federal troops and their horses with hundreds of tons of food, fodder, ammunition, and other stores.
Some historians have pointed out that by 1914, the military strategies of the European powers had become completely dependent on railroad timetables for the mobilization of their armies.
Building on the rapid development of both airships and load-carrying bombers during World War I, the use of transport planes and airships became commonplace in civilian and military service in the interwar years.
During World War II, Allied and Axis nations used air transport to deliver troops and supplies forward, and retrieve wounded soldiers from the battlefield.
One example was in the battle of Stalingrad in the former Soviet Union , where more than 300,000 soldiers of the German Sixth Army were encircled and defeated, despite heroic but inadequate attempts by the Luftwaffe to resupply the army by air.
Heavy guns in the mud Horses and British artillerymen toil to roll a bronze 9-pounder cannon into firing position during the Napoleonic Wars.
Horsepower From its first appearance in ancient warfare , the horse has been used in service to carry warriors and haul their equipment into battle, despite the fact that horses must be provided with stables and fodder while on campaign, generating a major logistics burden for an army.
During World War II, both Allied and Axis armies used animal power to draw wagonloads of ammunition and supplies when motor fuel rations proved inadequate.
Even in the 21 st century, horses and donkeys have served as transports for special forces soldiers fighting in the remote and rugged highlands of Afghanistan.
Sealift In addition to their use as naval fighting platforms, boats and ships have served as troop transports and supply vessels for thousands of years.
Medieval chroniclers, such as Jean de Joinville , who wrote of the Seventh Crusade, frequently mention the dependence of military expeditions upon naval supply.
Sometimes the difference between warships and noncombatant transports was blurred.
For example, during the Napoleonic Wars , armed merchant vessels belonging to the British East India Company sometimes fought alongside the Royal Navy against French warships and pirates.
Modern armies sent to fight far from their home countries still depend upon the sea for most of their supplies.
Specialized naval cargo vessels, such as the Large Medium Speed Roll-on, Roll-Off ships of the United States Military Sealift Command, can carry enough materiel to supply 20,000 troops of a heavy armored brigade for 15 days.
Flaving bribed some of the Bengali commanders, the outnumbered British beat off a cavalry charge and infantry attacks.
The Bengali artillery was useless due to damp powder, and resistance crumbled before the British counterattack.
Pontiac, an Ottawa chief, led an uprising against the British that began near Detroit and spread to other regions.
Several British forts were captured before superior British numbers forced the Native Americans to negotiate peace terms.
THE SEVEN YEARS WAR IN EUROPE AND INDIA 1756-63 In a complex imperial struggle, Prussia joined Britain and several small German states against France, Spain, Russia, and Austria.
Initial French and Austrian success faded against the brilliance of Prussia's Frederick the Great and the might of Britain's Royal Navy.
The British garrison on the island of Minorca was overrun by the French.
A British naval relief force commanded by Admiral Byng engaged a French fleet, but after an inconclusive naval action the British withdrew.
Byng was later court-martialled and executed for ""failure to do his utmost"" to relieve the garrison.
Parallel innovations in military and civilian firearm technologies continued throughout their development.
During the 17th and 18th centuries, for example, a great variety of long arms were developed for hunting.
Many weapons, such as the French fusil de chasse and the American long rifle, were precisely made and highly prized by the settlers of North America, as well as by the Native Americans.
During the French and Indian War and later conflicts, the use of civilian long rifles by military scouts, sharpshooters, and militia units was crucial.
Today, versions of hunting rifles, such as the Remington model 700, are used by military and police snipers.
Realizing the complex logistical problem of transporting, storing, and distributing food to a large army, Napoleon offered 12,000 francs for the invention of a better way to preserve and store military rations.
In 1809, Nicolas Appert won the prize, using glass bottles and boiling to cook and preserve the contents.
In Britain, another inventor, Peter Durand, proposed a method for preserving food in a variety of containers, including tins.
By 1813, Durand's method was being used to prepare food for the British Army.
The process of ""canning"" quickly became a major industry in many nations.
In the 1930s, several nations and commercial companies were experimenting with rangeand direction-finding devices based on the physics of radio frequency transmission, and reception technology.
Scottish inventor Sir Robert Watson-Watt was among the first to propose using reflected radio waves to detect thunderstorms, as well as aircraft in flight.
Others considered how the technology might be used to detect ships at sea and even direct naval gunfire.
During World War II, military and naval radar developed quickly and proved decisive.
During the battle of Britain, for example, the Luftwaffe used radar to help navigate bombing missions.
Building on the successful Home Chain radar system of the 1930s, the Royal Air Force used a sophisticated network to detect and range incoming enemy planes.
Today, radar systems are essential for safe commercial air and sea travel, space travel, and vehicle law enforcement.
The Internet and the World Wide Web During the 1960s and 1970s, the United States military sought to build a new communications system that would enable a large number of users to share information, and thus be less vulnerable to attack.
The basic concept was of a computer network that exchanged standardized blocks, or ""packets,"" of information.
The process of ""packet switching"" allowed many computers to communicate simultaneously, creating a large network.
Global Positioning System Development of GPS began in the 1960s as a naval timekeeping and navigation system.
Orbiting the Earth every 12 hours, a constellation of 24 satellites emits radio signals that GPS receivers on the surface can interpret.
In war, the system enables some ""smart"" weapons to locate targets with precision; however, civilian users worldwide now far outnumber military users.
Austrian forces marching to the assistance of their Saxon allies were attacked by a Prussian army at Lobositz.
The situation was confused by fog, resulting in reverses for the Prussians before a bayonet charge drove off the Austrians.
Prussian forces advancing on Prague were intercepted by part of the Austrian army.
Additional Austrian forces were too far away from the battle site to take part in the action.
The Prussians pushed their opponents aside, capturing much of their supplies.
Attempting to draw Prussian attention away from Bohemia, a French flank attack drew in the Allies' reserves and permitted the main attack in the center to succeed.
Both sides thought, they had lost the battle; both commanders had actually ordered a withdrawal, before the French reafized that they had won.
Attempting to march one flank around the Prussian left, the Franco-Austrian force was completely unprepared for the ferocity of the Prussian attack.
The Prussian infantry followed up with a devastastating cavalry assault, leading to total victory for Prussia. cavalry and managed to defeat it.
Artillery pushed rapidly forward in support and forced the French to withdraw.
Sharpshooter rifle The .625 caliber Baker rifle was issued to the British Army's elite sharpshooters, the 95th Rifles, and other units.
After a feint attack on the Austrian right, the Prussians rapidly redeployed and attacked on the other flank.
The Austrians could not react quickly enough and were soundly defeated.
A large Prussian-Flanoverian army surprised the French, who were drawn up along a canal near the banks of the Rhine.
Feint attacks against the French center and right allowed a successful flank attack on the French left.
Frederick the Great's Prussian army disintegrated with heavy casualties when he attacked an Austrian-Russian army threatening Berlin.
Frederick was only barely able to regroup while the Austrians faced delays waiting for supplies.
Boldly following the French fleet into Quiberon Bay, the British attacked in bad weather and poor light.
Several French ships escaped into the Vilaine River, where they were penned up for some time.
A Prussian cavalry charge routed part of the Russian army, but the remainder fought on stubbomfy.
By nightfall, it was not clear who had won, but the Russian army later retreated, satisfying the Prussian strategic objective of keeping the Russians and Austrians apart.
The Austrian force achieved surprise by the use of a night march, and attacked the Prussian right flank.
A determined stand by the rearguard enabled the Prussian army to retire in good order.
Acting on a mistaken order, a British infantry brigade attacked the French The Allies sought to stop a detached French corps marching to Hanover.
In the morning, the French counterattacked and drove the Allied forces back.
After an artillery duel, the Prussians attempted to storm Austrian positions on high ground, and were bloodily repulsed.
A renewed assault later in the day took the artillery position, turning the Austrian guns on their own army.
Austrian assaults to retake their positions were beaten off. to avenge losses in the Seven Years War by aiding the Americans in their successful revolt against British rule.
After a brief engagement at Lexington, the British marched on Concord, where the rebels ambushed them.
The British then fell back to Charlestown, fighting constant skirmishes along the way.
The battle of Bunker Hill was actually fought on Breed's Hill, which had been fortified instead by mistake.
The American invasion of Canada fell apart when its leader Richard Montgomery died attacking the walls of the city.
Abandoning captured Montreal, Colonel Benedict Arnold led the surviving Americans back below the St.
Waking up to find the captured cannon of Fort Ticonderoga bearing down on the besieged city, and able to see British ships in the harbor from Dorchester Heights, General John Thomas agreed to evacuate British and loyalist forces from the city.
Fort Sullivan, built of shot-repelling palmetto logs, proved resistant to a British landing party and bombardment by conventional ships, as well as by a bomb ketch.
The British retreated, setting fire to HMS Actaeon, aground near the fort.
The British army, Hessians, and the Royal Navy repeatedly flanked Washington's army as it tried to defend the colonies' largest city.
American resistance finally crumbled, leaving the British in control of Manhattan until 1783.
The British broke contact after American resistance, which gave Washington time to withdraw.
Realizing that their positions had been bypassed by the British using amphibious capability, Washington ordered a retreat to White Plains.
The British captured a strategic hill on the American right, forcing the Americans to retreat further.
Location New Jersey Crossing the Delaware River, American forces seized Trenton.
Using supplies captured there, the rebels then routed another British force at Princeton.
Location Hamm, western Germany On the first day of the battle the French made some gains, but were eventually halted.
Both sides were reinforced during the night, and the French attacked again on the Allied left flank.
The arrival of more Allied reinforcements allowed a successful attack, which forced the French into retreat.
At first the Prussians failed to make much headway against determined Austrian opposition, but a fight for a strategic hill drew in Prussian reserves and weakened the Austrian flank.
A renewed Prussian assault broke the Austrian flanks and forced a retreat.
With states on both sides facing financial ruin, a peace treaty was signed in February 1763.
THE AMERICAN REVOLUTION 1775-83 The British Parliament's reluctance to grant distant colonists the ""Rights of Englishmen"" led to uproar, antagonism, and finally war.
France and Spain moved “Lay down your arms, rebels, or you are all dead men.
SYLVANUS WOOD, MEMBER OF THE LEXINGTON MILITIA, QUOTING A BRITISH OFFICER, 1775 In the largest battle of the Revolution, Washington and the reformed Continental army failed to defend Philadelphia from the British advance, due to British flanking maneuvers.
Here, soldiers of the British 4th and 10th infantry yield the North Bridge, over the Concord River.
Washington sent four converging columns against an isolated part of Howe's British army, achieving surprise.
British resistance, fog, and a lack of ammunition resulted in the Americans' withdrawal.
Loyalists and Iroquois ambushed General Herkimer's column while he was en route to relieve a fort under British attack.
Suffering heavy casualties, the Americans held a perimeter on a nearby hill while skirmishers destroyed the British supply train.
A Hessian column veered off toward New Hampshire in the vanguard of British General Burgoyne's invasion.
The British initially repelled an attack and then counterattacked, suffering heavy losses on both occasions.
When reinforcements failed to arrive the British tried to withdraw and were surrounded, which forced them to surrender.
She was Vice Admiral Lord Horatio Nelson's flagship at the battle of Trafalgar, which took place on October 21,1805.
In need of supplies, British Major General William Howe moved to open the Delaware river to Philadelphia.
The garrisons of the two forts below the city resisted for four weeks, inflicting heavy losses.
While they were en route, the British rear guard was attacked by Washington at Monmouth Court House, which held until relief arrived.
American General ""Mad Anthony"" Wayne suddenly turned the tables on the British advancing up the Hudson River and overwhelmed and captured an entire British garrison.
The Americans bypassed strong British defenses with a night march along the river.
However, they failed to coordinate properly and the attack failed, leaving the British in charge.
American general Benjamin Lincoln defended the city from March to May 1780 before surrendering his entire command, as well as ships and a large number of cannon, to surrounding British forces.
An American force attempting to retreat after the fall of Charleston was caught and brought to action by a combined British and Loyalist column.
Inexperienced troops on the American left flank broke when the British advanced against them, leaving the stouter right exposed to the wellexecuted flanking maneuver that followed.
Despite having no overall commander, the various groups of American Patriots cooperated well, regrouping when repulsed and attacking again.
With casualties mounting and their leader dead, the Loyalists surrendered.
British regulars and a scattering of Loyalists attacked American prepared defenses of militia and Continentals.
The Continental cavalry forestalled British attacks on their flanks and the British were defeated.
Set on destroying an American army commanded by Nathaniel Greene, the British attacked the concentrated American forces and drove them from the battlefield with so many casualties that Greene retreated back into Virginia.
Pressed by the American armies, the British fortified their position and waited in vain for evacuation by sea.
The British surrendered after an American attack forced their outer defensive line.
THE AMERICAN REVOLUTION AT SEA 1775-83 The British navy that had proved so decisive in the Seven Years War found itself challenged by the French who, still smarting from their defeat in the same war, were at their highest level of ship construction and naval expertise.
After the retreat from Canada, Benedict Arnold's American ""motley crew"" of schooners and gunboats sank under overwhelming British firepower.
The battle nonetheless delayed the British invasion down the Hudson River valley.
In the first hostile landing on British shores since 1667, John Paul Jones sent Britain into an uproar by landing, setting a ship on fire, and sabotaging the guns of the harbor fort, before escaping unscathed.
After four days of maneuvering, French Admiral d'Orvilliers forced British Admiral Keppel's squadron back into port, leaving the French free in the Atlantic.
The result was indecisive, but British control of the sea was shaken badly.
A joint US-French fleet attacked two British escort vessels protecting a large merchant convoy sailing from the Baltic.
In a four-hour battle John Paul Jones in Bonhomme Richard took Serapis, and Pallas captured Scarborough.
The convoy escaped, and Jones sailed in Serapis after Bonhomme Richard sank.
French Admiral Bailli de Suffren encountered a British squadron under Commodore George Johnstone en route to seize the Cape of Good Hope from the Dutch.
Isoroku Yamamoto (18841943), Fleet Admiral of the Imperial Japanese Navy ""In the first six to twelve months of a war with the United States and Great Britain 1 will run wild and win victory upon victory.
Officer of the 17th Lancers The British 17th Lancers, known as ""Death or Glory Boys"" because of the insignia on their cap badge, are famous for their participation in the tragic Charge of the Light Brigade in October 1854.
SECOND RUSSO-TURKISH WAR 1787-92 Turkish anger over Catherine the Great's annexation of the Crimea in 1786 boiled up in a war in which the Russian empress executed yet another drive upon the Bosporus.
Fighting Russia and Austria simultaneously, the Turkish were saved onlyby Prussian intervention.
The Russian heavy squadron was commanded by American naval hero John Paul Jones, now in the service of Catherine the Great.
His ships mauled a Turkish squadron in shallow waters as it attempted to resist the Russian advance on Constantinople.
The Turkish brought up their heavier vessels and found John Paul Jones's large warships anchored and ready to receive them.
Meanwhile, the smaller ships of the Russians wrought havoc on the damaged or grounded Turkish vessels.
Russian Prince Grigori Potemkin used artillery and patience to reduce Ochakov, a major Turkish fortress.
The French fleet blocked a British relief fleet as it moved to rescue besieged British forces from Yorktown.
The French Heroic charge This somewhat fanciful illustration shows Napoleon bearing a tri-color flag as he leads a charge across a warships inflicted considerable damage as the British engaged in an uncoordinated fashion and withdrew.
The British fleet's brilliant maneuvering forced the stronger French fleet from its anchorage, but the French forces that had already landed forced the surrender of St.
Calm winds and coppered hulls allowed the British to sail through the line of the French fleet, with devastating results.
Location Strait of Gibraltar, Mediterranean Sea, and neighboring Spain.
Gibraltar's British garrison resisted scurvy, starvation, and floating gun batteries with the help of supply fleets and red-hot shot.
French Admiral Suffren sailed to the Indian Ocean, attacking British shipping and fighting four battles with the British fleet.
The last battle saved the French post at Cuddalore from capture by the British.
DIRECTORY CURIOUS MILITARY AND NAVAL UNIT NICKNAMES Army Unit/regiment/ship Nickname Canadian Forces 48th Highlanders of Canada Ottoman empire.
The great Russian admiral Fyodor Fyodorovich Ushakov encountered a powerful Turkish fleet already in line of battle.
Ushakov maneuvered from three lines into one, keeping the faster Turks from heading him off.
Russian firepower settled the issue, leaving Russia now in control of the Black Sea.
FRENCH REVOLUTIONARY WARS 1792-99 Presuming that the French revolution was a contagion that would spread, the monarchical powers of Europe joined forces to restore the authority of the French monarchy.
Despite dissension and disorganization, the revolutionary French, through their levee en masse (mass mobilization), successfully resisted.
Attempting to dislodge French revolutionary forces from the heights of Valmy, the coalition army tried artillery bombardment, and then began an assault.
Seeing that the French were not going to break, the coalition force withdrew.
After an ineffective artillery barrage, the French launched a series of frontal assaults, which the Austrians drove off.
Eventually the weight of French numbers began to tell, and the Austrians were forced to withdraw.
They were driven out by the enterprise of the young Napoleon Bonaparte, whose force seized high ground from which artillery could command the port.
Although his flanks were both driven back, the French commander used reconnaissance data from a hydrogen balloon to coordinate his response.
The coalition forces pulled back, though the French were not in a position to pursue.
Napoleon's attempts to cross the Alpone River by a bridge at Arcole were repulsed.
Flowever, French flanking movements convinced the Austrians that they were in danger of encirclement, so they withdrew.
Spain had now entered an alliance with France and declared war on Britain.
Intercepting the Spanish fleet on its way to join with French forces, the outnumbered British attacked and split the Spanish line of battle in two, inflicting a serious defeat and reinforcing British naval superiority.
A deterioration in Franco-American relations during the 1790s led the French to seize American shipping.
The dispute erupted into military conflict that included a fight between the Constellation and the Insurgente.
After a short, brutal battle, the American Constellation took the French frigate Insurgente, which had attacked an American flotilla.
THE AMERICANS SUBDUE THE EASTERN TRIBES 1778-1794 As Britain's ban on colonial expansion west of the Appalachians faltered, American settlers crossed the mountains and encountered powerful confederations of native peoples.
For 10 days a Shawnee war party under Chief Blackfish attempted to capture or burn Daniel Boone's settlement at Boonesborough.
French-directed attempts failed in a heavy rain, and the Shawnee were forced to withdraw.
General George Rogers Clark led an American force against Shawnee settlements, including the largest at Old Chillicothe in southwestern Ohio.
The Indians evacuated the town, but retreated after offering battle behind it.
The British had surrendered at Yorktown 10 months earlier ending the Revolutionary War, but a Shawnee war party and British rangers withdrawing from an attack on a settlement ambushed and destroyed a smaller pursuing force of Kentuckians before withdrawing across the Ohio River.
A dawn attack by the Miami tribe on the camp of an American column inflicted the worst defeat ever suffered by the United States in combat against Indians.
General Wayne's ""Legion of the United States"" brought vengeance on the confederated tribes of the Northwest.
Wayne's powerful frontal assault at the battle of Fallen Timbers, flanked by cavalry, crushed Indian resistance and forced a peace settlement that lasted for 15 years.
NAPOLEON'S EGYPTIAN CAMPAIGN 1798-99 Seeking new resources and to sever Britain's link with India, Napoleon turned against the decrepit Ottoman empire and took a fleet and army into the eastern Mediterranean.
Napoleon's prospects in the east withered after Nelson annihilated his fleet, however, and, despite a victory over the Ottomans at Aboukir, Napoleon was forced to abandon his army.
The French formation consisted of squares whose fire interlocked, augmented by artillery positioned at the corners.
The Mameluk cavalry could not penetrate the squares and was eventually driven off.
Location Mediterranean Sea near Alexandria, Egypt Surprising the French fleet in harbor, the British ships anchored alongside their French counterparts and opened fire.
The fighting continued through the night, and only two French ships escaped.
As the French infantry applied pressure, the cavalry delivered a charge that broke the Ottoman force.
SECOND COALITION 1799-1802 While Napoleon was on expedition in Egypt, European powers united for the second time in an attempt to curtail revolutionary France.
Great Britain, Austria, Russia, and Turkey launched attacks on Napoleon, who proved up to the challenge.
Battle for Egypt At the battle of the Pyramids on July 21,1798, Napoleon defeated Murad Bey's Mameluk army and conquered Egypt.
As this image shows, the pyramids were actually barely visible on the horizon.
Although the French commander was killed by skirmisher fire early in the battle, the French army repulsed several Austro-Russian attacks.
Late in the day, the Austro-Russians finally managed to break through and forced the French into retreat.
The Anglo-Russian force launched a confused attack delayed by bad roads and deficiencies in command.
As a result, the Russians found themselves unsupported by the British, and their attack was repulsed with considerable losses.
In the early afternoon French reinforcements arrived, after which the Austrian position began to crumble, causing them to retreat.
Catching the French army dispersed and unready for battle, the Austrians' initial attacks prevailed.
The arrival of detached French forces turned the tide, resulting in a hard-fought victory for Napoleon.
The French force invited an Austrian attack, which became disordered because of the close terrain.
The French were then able to concentrate fire against each of the dispersed Austrian forces in turn, inflicting a decisive defeat.
The Royal Navy was sent to prevent the Danish fleet from enforcing free trade with France.
Negotiating natural hazards while engaging enemy warships, armed hulks, and floating gun batteries, the British fleet was ordered to withdraw at the height of the battle.
Admiral Fforatio Nelson chose not to see the signal and the British prevailed.
The British squadron attempted to attack a French force that was protected by Spanish coastal forts, but failed.
Four days later, reinforced by Spanish ships, the French squadron left port.
The war of the second coalition was ended by the Treaty of Amiens the following March.
French Napoleonic uniform This uniform of a French voltigeur (a member of a French military skirmish unit) of the 21st Regiment of the Line includes a dark blue jacket and white trousers.
Marching to meet a coalition of Maratha princes during the Second AngloMaratha War, the British force met the coalition earlier than anticipated.
Although outnumbered, the British made an immediate attack, capturing the enemy cannon and their defensive position in the village of Assaye.
THIRD COALITION 1803-06 Britain had stood alone against Napoleon since 1803, until Austria, Prussia, Portugal, and Russia resumed hostilities against him in 1805.
The Franco-Spanish force intended to enter the English Channel to invade England and Ireland.
It was successfully intercepted by a British squadron in a chaotic battle fought in poor visibility.
The rapid French advance caught the Austrians unaware, and only 5,500 men out of a much larger force took the field.
As the Austrian army waited at Ulm for its Russian allies to appear, a French army, which had arrived much faster than the Austrians had anticipated, encircled it.
MILITARY MASCOTS Unit/army Mascot Alexander the Great, Macedonian empire Bucephalus, Alexander's beloved warhorse, died after the battle of the Hydaspes River in India.
United States Army General Scott, a mule, is the mascot of the United States Military Academy.
Hans Majestet Kongens Garde , Norway Nils Olav II, a king penguin living at the Edinburgh Zoo, Scotland, currently holds the honorary rank of colonel in chief of the regiment.
Irish Guards, British Army Fergal, an Irish wolfhound, is the latest in a long line of wolfhound mascots of the Irish Guards, dating back to 1902.
Cutting through the Franco-Spanish line of battle at two points, the British fleet, boldly led by Admiral Horatio Nelson, brought on a close-quarters action, where their superior gunnery and seamanship overwhelmed the enemy.
After an attack by French cavalry the Austro-Russian force counterattacked but were defeated by artillery fire.
As French reinforcements came up the allies were slowly pushed out of their positions.
After capturing an important bridge, the French attacked the next evening.
The Russians withdrew, but delayed the French long enough for the Austrian and Russian armies to make a junction at Brunn.
As the Austrians and Russians attacked the deliberately weakened French right, the main French attack advanced through morning fog and took the high ground in the allied center.
A British force landed in support of guerrillas fighting against French rule.
This was the first time the British line and French column met in direct combat.
WAR OF THE FOURTH COALITION 1806-07 As individual members of the Third Coalition made peace with France, the rest of the alliance collapsed.
However, it was replaced by a Fourth Coalition consisting of Prussia, Russia, Sweden, the United Kingdom, and their allies.
As the main French army under Napoleon engaged the Prussians at Jena, a flanking force encountered a larger Prussian formation.
After a defensive battle the French counterattacked at Auerstadt and routed their opponents.
Most Prussian field forces and fortresses surrendered in the panic following the defeat at Jena-Auerstadt.
One that had not was pursued to Liibeck, where it was forced to fight a superior French force.
Having run out of food and ammunition, the Prussian force surrendered the following day.
ADMIRAL HORATIO NELSON AT TRAFALGAR, OCTOBER 21, 1805 Pitched battle Admiral Horatio Nelson observes the cannonade at the battle of Trafalgar from HMS Victory's weather deck.
Retreating Russian forces were brought to action at Golymin by the French, who could not bring their artillery up along the muddy roads.
An inconclusive battle ensued, after which the Russian force continued to pull back.
French attacks met with initial success, but Russian counterattacks restored the situation in most areas.
By the afternoon the French were starting to lose, but were reinforced and renewed the attack.
The action was inconclusive but the Russian force pulled back, some elements joining up with units retiring from Golymin.
Colliding with the Russian army in a snowstorm, the French launched a frontal assault that was repulsed with huge losses.
A huge French cavalry charge restored the situation and French reinforcements prompted a Russian withdrawal.
French forces encircled the city of Danzig and beat off a Russian attempt to reinforce the garrison.
After a period of bombardment and mining, the garrison surrendered on generous terms.
The Russian army crossed the Alle River and attacked what it thought was an isolated French corps.
Additional French forces joined the fighting, inflicting a severe defeat on the Russians.
PENINSULAR WAR 1808-14 The tide turned against Napoleon when he thrust his brother onto the vacant throne of Spain.
During the war, Britain's Arthur Wellesley emerged as an adversary capable of meeting Napoleon on his own terms.
Isolated by a Spanish rising against French rule, a French corps surrendered in return for safe conduct to France.
Instead, many of the prisoners were massacred by Spanish irregulars, and the remainder were mostly confined in prison hulks.
The British took up a position on a ridge between the village of Vimeiro and the sea.
From there, they beat back French infantry columns attacking up the slope.
French attacks overwhelmed the heavily outnumbered SpanishSpanish, but they were able to retreat thanks to a determined stand by their rearguard, which was almost entirely wiped out by repeated cavalry charges.
Blood relic At the battle of Jena, on October 14,1806, a priest at Hassenhausen, Germany, used a church ledger to splint a soldier's injuries.
The book, displayed here with a collection of lead musket balls, isw still stained with blood.
Yaman South China Sea, off Guangdong Province, China More than 1,000 warships of the Song dynasty's navy versus approximately 50 vessels in the service of Kublai Khan's Yuan dynasty Although outnumbered more than 10 to 1, the Mongol force used superior tactics to defeat and destroy the Song's naval power, annihilating the Song dynasty, and securing Yuan dominance in China.
By crossing the French line with his own line, Viscount Nelson effectively cut his opponent's forces in half.
After a couple of hours' fighting, the French and Spanish withdrew, having lost 21 ships and suffering more than 5,000 men killed and wounded.
Although outnumbered, the 16 battleships of the German High Seas Fleet had drawn the British into an epic duel.
The German fleet inflicted heavy casualties on the British battlecruiser squadron, but it was forced to retreat to harbor, where it remained for the rest of World War 1.
Wellington's Anglo-Portuguese force occupied a steep 10-mile long ridge on the heights of Bussaco.
As the French columns advanced, the Allies were able to shift reinforcements along a road built by their engineers right behind British-Portuguese positions.
Several French assaults were defeated by firepower and bayonet counterattacks.
Feinting at the center of their force, the French made a flanking attack on the right, driving the Spanish troops there out of position.
The first British units to respond were overrun, but the arrival of more reinforcements stabilized the situation.
After digging in around the city, the British launched a night assault, which became confused and disjointed.
The British eventually fought their way into the town of Badajoz using scaling ladders.
Siege of Badajoz In one of the bloodiest battles of the Napoleonic Wars, British and Portuguese soldiers commanded by Wellington captured the town of Badajoz in Spain.
Even though the defenses of the city had already been damaged from having to withstand repeated storming in an earlier siege, it held out for several weeks.
After the walls were breached, savage street fighting went on for some time, and the French were forced to lift the siege and withdraw.
After protecting the rest of the British army during its retreat, the rearguard took up defensive positions and beat off French attacks until the force could be evacuated by sea.
The French force marched to the relief of Almeida, which was under siege.
Repeated assaults by the French almost succeeded in breaking through the Anglo-Portguese position.
The British right flank was turned, but close cooperation between cavalry and infantry units permitted the situation to be restored.
Shaka 41 when he was Zulu empire assassinated Shaka united several tribal groups into a Zulu nation of more than 250,000 people who dominated southern Africa.
During his 10-year reign as a warrior king, Shaka presided over a number of military innovations for his people, including the use of new weapons and tactics in warfare.
Historians believe that Shaka introduced methods for drilling and manoeuvering large, regiment-sized formations of troops called ibutho, and smaller, company-sized groups called iviyo.
Shaka also may have been the first to introduce new close-quarters fighting tactics, using the short Zulu spear called an iklwa, or assegai, and the small war shield called umbhumbluzo.
Shaka This English illustration of 1836 depicts the Zulu warrior King Shaka , who founded a powerful military empire in the late 19th century.
David, 1st Earl Beatty 29 when appointed captain in the Royal Navy United Kingdom Rewarded for his gallantry as a member of the naval expedition to China during the Boxer Rebellion , Beatty was the youngest man to be made captain in the Royal Navy at that time.
LudwigFerdinand von Friedeburg 20 when appointed U-boat commander Germany From August to December 1944, 2nd Lieutenant von Friedeburg had command of U-l 55, a Type IXC submarine.
He was one of only four such young men to command U-boats in the Kriegsmarine during World War II Lucius D Clay 42, the youngest man to be made a brigadier general in the United States Army during World War II United States Clay was decorated for combat service in the Normandy campaign of 1944.
Later, in June 1948, he ordered the start of the famous airlift to resupply isolated West Berliners during the Soviet blockade.
Attempting to block a British withdrawal, the French became overextended.
Under Wellington, the British attacked in four columns, turning the French flanks and breaking through the center.
The victors were sidetracked from pursuit by the volume of loot and supplies left behind by the French.
As the Anglo-Spanish army advanced into France, the French Army of Spain ^ made a stand at Toulouse.
Neither i commander was aware that the war was effectively over and that Napoleon had agreed to surrender.
The French were defeated and pulled r baclc from the city, and shortly afterward a local armistice began.
THE FIFTH COALITION 1809 For the fifth time, a coalition rose up to oppose Napoleonic France.
It consisted primarily of the United Kingdom and the Austrian empire, with assistance from Sicily, Sardinia, and Brunswick.
The French concentrated their forces and inflicted a defeat, which broke the Austrian army in two, then pushed the halves apart.
Austrian forces captured Ratisbon on April 20, and their presence in the city protected the Austrian retreat after the defeat at Abensberg.
The French decided to storm Ratisbon, making two failed attempts before Marshal Lannes rallied his troops for a final, successful, attempt.
Retiring from the defeat at Abensberg, part of the Austrian army was cornered by a much larger French force.
Additional French forces under the command of Napoleon himself arrived to ensure a decisive French victory.
Location Bavaria, Germany Even though the Austrian army had been broken in two during the battle of Abensburg, it remained a potent force.
The northern segment launched an attack which was countered by the arrival of French reinforcements.
Location Lobau, 5 miles east of Vienna on the north side of the Danube River.
Seeking to destroy the Austrian army, the French crossed the Danube River using pontoon bridges via the island of Lobau.
After a day of fierce but indecisive fighting the Austrians attacked again, seriously threatening the French left flank.
Once this attack was repelled, the French began to advance, winning a costly victory.
Ffoping to destroy the French fleet at Flushing and create a second front against France, the British landed in the notoriously disease-ridden Walcheren region.
Casualties from disease were higher than those sustained in combat for both.
NAPOLEON'S INVASION OF RUSSIA 1812 Napoleon's greatest desire at the pinnacle of his success and strength was to destroy Russia, the largest of his enemies.
However, half a million French and their allies perished as the Russians used scorched-earth policies, as well as taking advantage of the winter cold, to undermine French military expertise.
Although their initial cavalry attack was successful, the Russians were unable to push their opponents back until the next day.
It was not the Roman army which reduced Gaul, but Caesar.” blocked the French advance for a time.
The French reached the walls of the city, but lacked any scaling apparatus to climb them.
Eventually they breached the walls, but the Russians abandoned the city in order to save their army, giving the French the victory.
Ignoring advice recommending that he make a flanking attack, Napoleon launched a series of costly frontal assaults on well-fortified positions.
Both sides took heavy casualties but, because the Russians withdrew, the French claimed victory.
The French hoped to retreat from Moscow along a different route, avoiding areas they had stripped bare of fodder and supplies during their advance.
The French vanguard was turned aside at Maloyaroslavets and instead had to march west via Smolensk, suffering terribly as a result.
Napoleon had originally intended to retreat across the frozen Berezina River, but he found it thawed.
Trapped between a pursuing Russian army and the icy river, the French fought a defensive action while engineers built two wooden bridges.
The French destroyed these after the remnants of their army had passed over them.
NAPOLEON BONAPARTE, WRITING IN HIS DIARY, 1801 Napoleon, Roman god Exemplary of neoclassical artistic style, this marble bust of Napoleon, by Italian sculptor Antonio Canova , portrays the emperor as a Roman god.
DIRECTORY EPIC FEATS OF LOGISTICS Napoleon's invasion of Russia When Napoleon moved his Grand Armee east, he faced a major challenge provisioning such a large force.
However, Napoleon had developed a sophisticated logistics infrastructure.
This included 17 battalions of 6,000 vehicles each, which would supply his troops for 40 days.
Also, magazine stores were set up in several towns along the march in Poland and Prussia.
In the event, the preparations proved inadequate for the long journey to Moscow.
Battle of the Atlantic At the beginning of World War II, the German navy was able to inflict heavy losses on Allied merchant shipping, almost with impunity.
By the end of the war, this longest battle had cost the lives of 30,248 Allied merchant sailors and 28,000 Kriegsmarine sailors.
In addition, the massive shipbuilding effort in the United States was more than able to replace the vessels lost.
The Berlin Airlift After World War II, the Soviet Union occupied the eastern area of Germany, which included the capital, Berlin.
In June 1948, a dispute arose between the Soviets and the other Allied armies that occupied the western half of Berlin.
The Soviets blockaded the city, effectively isolating it from communication with the Americans and British, and also cutting supplies of food and water.
The 15-month campaign involved 278,228 sorties (individual flights) of American and British transport aircraft, delivering more than 2. million tons of supplies, at a cost of US$224 million.
The Ho Chi Minh Trail Using centuries-old footpaths through the highlands of Indochina, the People's Army of Vietnam developed a vast network of about 10,000 miles of tracks and trails along which the Viet Cong and North Vietnamese moved more than 60 tons of materiel every day to support their war effort.
Because a significant portion of the trail network passed through other nations such as Laos and Cambodia, which American policy initially forbade as targets for fear of widening the war, the Americans and South Vietnamese were unable to halt its traffic decisively.
A tribal confederation threatened the progress of white settlement of the area, by undermining concessions made by other Indian leaders.
The Indian confederation attacked United States troops before dawn, but was repulsed with a series of charges.
WAR OF 1812 1812-15 The three-year ""Second War of Independence"", known as the War of 1812, was the child of the Napoleonic Wars, as both the British and the French seized American ships and cargoes in their struggles.
British support of allied Indians on the frontier and the British navy's forcible recruitment of American seamen pushed the United States to declare war.
After an abortive invasion of Canada, a British force and an Indian force, led by the Shawnee leader Tecumseh, convinced the Americans that they were facing greater numbers and likely Indian atrocities.
The British decisively defeated the uncoordinated and ill-prepared American efforts to cross the Niagara River and invade Canada, even though their commander General Brock was killed in the conflict.
The British took 9,935 American prisoners in the largest battle of the war so far.
British forces intercepted the invading American column, which collapsed after some resistance.
A British force and an Indian force, led by Tecumseh, attacked the largest American post left after the Detroit debacle, only to find the Americans well defended and within range of reinforcements.
ROBERT MCAFEE, United States SOLDIER AND HISTORIAN ON THE BATTLE OF TIPPECANOE, 1811 Shawnee attack In this illustration of the battle of Tippecanoe, fought on November 7,1811, Tecumseh’s warriors launch an unsuccessful attack on American troops in Indiana Territory.
Retreating back into Canada, British and Indian forces made a stand on some high ground near Moraviantown.
A force of mostly French-Canadian militia and Mohawk Indians blocked another American column of inexperienced troops from invading Canada.
The Americans gave up after failing to turn the FrenchCanadian position.
The powerful Creek tribe rose in answer to the urgings of Tecumseh, who had spent much of his life rallying various tribes to defend their lands.
General Andrew Jackson, wanting to clear Alabama for white settlement, crushed the Creeks' defended camp with artillery and the assistance of allied Indian tribes.
Location West bank of the Niagara River, Niagara Falls, Ontario, Canada.
Fort McHenry, Maryland With the star-shaped layout of its walls and redoubts, Fort McHenry is an example of Vauban-style fortification.
American forces took Fort Erie from the British, who counterattacked, only to be bloodily repulsed by American artillery.
A British force moving toward the border of the United States and Canada encountered an American advance force.
A stand by United States sailors and marines allowed most of the American defenders to escape.
British Captain Thomas Hardy informed the citizens that he would destroy Stonington.
The townspeople responded with cannon fire, inflicting many casualties on the British and forcing them to withdraw.
HISTORY'S MOST FAMOUS RETREATS Retreat or military withdrawal, is an orderly, armed maneuver under fire.
Generally speaking, while retreat is necessary for a weaker or damaged force to escape capture or destruction by a stronger one, sometimes retreat is a wise tactical decision, even when on the offensive.
Location, date Description Outcome Fornovo, near Parma, Italy In the opening battle of the Italian Charles Vlll's bloody campaign to conquer Wars, 20,000 soldiers of the League of Venice drove King Charles VIII and his army of 12,000 French troops out of Italy.
Naples failed, and he was forced to retreat from the Italian peninsula.
Russia After some initial successes, Napoleon's massive invasion force was outmatched on several occasions by Russian armies.
During the retreat west, Napoleon endured some of his worst defeats, including at the battle of Berezina, where 50,000 of his men were killed or captured.
Of the approximately 600,000 soldiers of the Grande Armee that began the invasion of Russia in 1812, fewer than 10,000 returned to France.
Most of these terrible losses were caused by the extreme cold weather and critical shortages in supplies of winter clothing, food, and fodder for the army's horses.
Afghanistan During the First Anglo-Afghan War, following an uprising of native Afghans, and a subsequent British punitive expedition that laid waste to many Afghan towns, a force of approximately 11,000 British and Punjabi troops withdrew back to India.
The Duke of Wellington famously said, ""It is easy to get into Afghanistan.
As they retreated, the British and Indian force lost at least 4,500 soldiers as they were harried by Afghan guerrillas along the mountainous route to India.
Galicia and Poland During the Great Russian Retreat, This skillfully conducted retreat prevented Russian Grand Duke Nicholas withdrew his armies to the Pripet Marshes after being outmaneuvered by a numerically superior German force. an encirclement of three Russian armies and gained time for the nation's industry to improve its soldiers' equipment.
Normandy In August, during the Allied invasion, a large German armored and infantry force became encircled by the advancing British, Canadian, and American armies.
Eight panzer divisions and 150,000 infantrymen attempted to break out of the ""Falaise Pocket"" and retreat south across the Seine.
The battle ended Operation Overlord and put the Germans on the defensive until December 1944.
United States strike aircraft attacked the 1,500 vehicles on the highway.
Photographs of the aftermath show many burned-out cars, trucks, and tanks.
Retreat from Russia Napoleon and his beleaguered army retreated from Moscow in mid-November 1812.
DIRECTORY COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGIES THROUGH THE AGES Dispatches Carried by messenger on horseback, on foot, or by ship, handwritten messages were for many centuries an important method of reporting on the outcome of battles and communicating orders.
One long-standing method of carrying written messages over long distances was by carrier pigeon.
In his expedition to Gaul, Julius Caesar used pigeons to deliver messages.
In World War I, messenger pigeons, and dogs, played an important role in battlefield communication.
Radio In the early 20th century, experiments in practical wireless telegraphy helped to revolutionize field communications.
Freed from wires, lines of communication were limited only by line of sight.
Improvements in field radio technology allowed frontline units to penetrate even further behind enemy lines while remaining in contact with their commanders.
Later in the 20th century, satellite radio communications broadened the scale of tactical communication globally.
Telegraph Developed in the 1830s, the electric telegraph was a defining feature of 19th-century battlefield communication.
One of the tasks regularly assigned to an army's engineer corps was the laying and maintenance of telegraph wires to ensure that command posts in the rear could instantly communicate with their soldiers at the front.
Early telegraphy Telegraph receivers, such as the 19th-century model shown above, translated electrical impulses into coded messages, which could then be read by trained operators.
The British attacked with Guerriere immediately upon sighting Constitution.
The Americans used their ship's heavier construction and armament to devastating effect, leaving Guerriere without a mast.
Mistaking United States for a smaller ship, the British ship sought a long-range engagement, in which she was outmaneuvered and outgunned by the Americans' heavier vessel.
Even as the British pressured their Spanish allies to allow them the use of Florida to threaten the southern United States, Andrew Jackson arrived and forced the surrender of Pensacola.
The British blew up Fort Barrancas, which they had been occupying, and evacuated by sea.
While the British assembled their forces, the Americans, led by General Andrew Jackson, fortified their position.
The British had to advance across open terrain and were shot down in large numbers, including their commander.
WAR OF 1812 AT SEA 1812-15 After Trafalgar, Britain's command of the sea found only a few challengers, among them superb American ships specifically developed to outfight what they could not outrun.
British force was overwhelming, yet still suffered defeats on the Great Lakes and in ship-to-ship duels.
The ships opened fire, both hitting, but the British guns on Shannon did more damage, causing crippling casualties on Chesapeake's quarterdeck and mortally wounding the United States commander.
Only 15 minutes after the battle had begun, Chesapeake was under British control.
With the American flagship disabled early in the action, the American commodore transferred under fire to another ship and led a bold attack, forcing a British surrender.
The British enjoyed a great advantage in heavier guns and ships, but their attack on the anchored American fleet disintegrated when the Americans winched their ships around to present fresh broadsides to the enemy.
An American privateer, the General Armstrong, was provisioning in a neutral port when a British fleet carrying troops to New Orleans demanded its surrender.
The Americans resisted for three days, which delayed the British from reaching New Orleans for three weeks.
The damage allowed the British HMS Endymion to overhaul and damage the President further, while British ships Pomone, Majestic, and Tenedos caught up with the battle and received the Americans' surrender.
Constitution, defeated two British ships despite their efforts to fight it in concert.
Stewart took in his sails to rake Cyane twice, bringing her in as a prize.
SIXTH COALITION 1812-14 Napoleon's allies were weakened and disaffected after his disastrous attempt to invade Russia.
Austria, Prussia, Sweden, Britain, Spain, Portugal, and the German states joined forces in the hope of finally destroying him.
Having remodeled their armies along Napoleonic lines, the Allies succeeded in subduing France and sending Napoleon into exile on Elba.
Battle of Quatre-Bras, June 16,1815 In the foreground of this illustration of the battle of Quatre-Bras, the French 2nd Cavalry Division piles into the British lines, which included the 42nd Highlanders, also known as the ""Black Watch"". heavy fighting, which the Allies eventually won.
A segment of the French force arranged to be captured and soon after the remainder of the garrison agreed to surrender.
United States MAJOR GENERAL ANDREW JACKSON, AFTER THE BATTLE OF NEW ORLEANS, 1815 General Andrew Jackson This bronze equestrian statue of the American general and, later, seventh United States President, Andrew Jackson, commemorates the American victory over the British at the battle of New Orleans on January 8, 1815.
A large concentration of artillery was brought to bear on the Allied center, while the Imperial Guard attacked the flank.
The Allied force was able to break off, mainly due to the exhaustion of the French troops.
Detaching a large force to make a flank march, the main French army launched a successful frontal assault.
The flank attack was less well handled, allowing the Allied army to retire in good order.
The French and Allied armies made unexpected contact during a heavy thunderstorm, and a confused battle ensued.
A French flanking attempt failed, and an Allied counterattack in the center forced the French to withdraw.
Believing Dresden to be held by a single corps, the Allies attacked and were halted by the main French army.
On the second day, the French launched an attack on the Allied flank and forced them to retreat.
Vastly outnumbered by a coalition of nations, the French army made a stand at Leipzig.
The French were eventually forced to withdraw, leaving about 15,000 men trapped on the wrong side of the Elster River.
With the allies advancing into France along three separate routes, Napoleon attempted to defeat each force in turn.
Despite some brilliant successes, the weight of numbers inevitably resulted in his defeat.
Despite being considerably outnumbered, the French army inflicted a series of defeats on the Prussians at Champaubert, Montmirail, ChateauThierry, and Vauchamps.
The Prussians took heavy casualties, but this was not enough to derail their advance on Paris.
The Allies gradually reduced French defensive positions, despite a counterattack by elements of the Imperial Guard.
After fewer than 10 months in exile on the island of Elba, Napoleon escaped.
However, seven days before he returned to Paris, Napoleon was declared an outlaw, though the veterans of his Grande Armee had rallied to him.
He was defeated at the battle of Waterloo and Louis XVIII was restored to the throne.
Hoping to defeat the Prussians before they joined up with the British, Napoleon threw his main strength at them.
The Prussians, while defeated, were not crushed and were able to continue the campaign.
French delays in launching their attack allowed reinforcements to reach the weak Dutch force struggling to hold the crossroads at Quatre-Bras.
The defense was successful, and the following day the Anglo-Dutch force withdrew.
The right wing of the French army attempted to prevent the Prussians front regaining contact with their AngloDutch allies via the city of Wavre, which was held by the Prussian rearguard.
Although the Prussians eventually retreated, they held off the French long enough for the majority of the Prussian army to march to Waterloo and contribute to the decisive victory there.
Floping to break the Anglo-Dutch before the Prussians could assist them, the French attacked throughout the day.
The arrival of the Prussians on the French flank made Napoleon's defeat inevitable.
The V Corps of the French Army was deployed against the Austrians, and so was not involved in the Waterloo campaign.
Although the Napoleonic cause was lost by that time, V Corps engaged an Austrian army and inflicted a defeat.
French headgear In the early 19th century, soldiers of many nations wore headgear called shakos, such as this light infantry example.
Note the red feather plume, tricolor cockade, and brass imperial eagle plate.
The last action of the Napoleonic Wars was fought at Issy, close to Paris.
A strong French force, with artillery in support, launched an attack against an inferior Prussian force, but was beaten off.
SOUTH AMERICAN WARS OF INDEPENDENCE 1810-24 A witness to Napoleon's campaigns, Simon Bolivar swore to liberate South America, a task aided by Napoleon's overthrow of Spain's government.
Other rebels such as Jose de San Martin and Antonio Jose de Sucre joined him in the struggle to bring an end to Spanish control.
With a Royalist army advancing on Buenos Aires, Rebel leader General Manuel Belgrano disobeyed orders to retreat and made a stand against greater numbers and artillery.
Simon Bolivar's worst defeat came at the hands of Royalist Jose Tomas Boves, whose llanero light cavalry overwhelmed the Rebel army.
Boves destroyed Bolivar's first Venezuelan Republic by killing all wounded and prisoners, and a great many civilians.
Rebel Jose San Martin hid his elite cavalry in a monastery, erupting out to defeat a detachment of Royalist cavalry.
A Rebel sergeant took a fatal thrust and saved his commander, who had become trapped under his slain horse.
Making a difficult crossing of the Andes, the Rebels were able to surprise the Spanish garrison in Chile.
Initially repelled by cavalry, the Rebels attacked again on the flank, this time successfully.
GENERAL COUNT POZZO Dl BORGO, WITH THE RUSSIAN ARMY AT WATERLOO, IN A LETTER TO PRINCE WOLKONSKY, 1815 Defeat at Boyaca, August 7,1819 After the defeat of the Spanish army at Boyaca, General Simon Bolivar accepted the surrender of General Rodil.
This pivotal battle ended Spanish rule in northern Latin America and made Bolivar a hero.
The British demanded compensation for opium seized by the Qing authorities.
Lord Palmerston demanded compensation for trade losses and ordered British troops and warships to China.
In the ensuing conflict, a numerically superior Chinese naval and military force was defeated, and the Qing emperor was forced to continue the opium trade with Britain and other Western powers.
France, November 1894 Captain Alfred Dreyfus Dreyfus, a French artillery officer of Jewish descent, was falsely convicted of espionage and sentenced to life imprisonment on Devil's Island, Guiana, in 1894.
Two years later, evidence emerged that implicated another man, but the French military command suppressed this.
Newspaper reports of the affair resulted in a public outcry and allegations of anti-Semitism.
Mogadishu, Somalia, March 1993 Soldiers of the Canadian Airborne Regiment; Shidane Arone, a Somali Canadian soldiers captured, tortured, and murdered teenage civilian Arone, caught stealing supplies from the Canadian base.
An inquiry led to the resignation of the Minister of National Defence and two senior generals.
The Airborne Regiment was disbanded due to public revulsion and outcry.
Abu Ghraib Prison, Iraq, 2003 Soldiers of the United States Army's 160th Military Police Battalion; Iraqi prisoners After United States newspapers published evidence that soldiers of the United States army had abused prisoners, the Army filed charges against six soldiers for dereliction of duty and other crimes.
In 2005, the prison's former commanding officer, Brigadier General Janice Karpinsky, was punished with suspension from duty and demotion to the rank of colonel.
A Royalist force under Mariano Osorio moved up into the Chilean Highlands, and was shattered by Jose de San Martin's elite Argentine cavalry and artillery train.
Struck in the flank and by a frontal assault at the same time, the Spanish attempted to make a cavalry attack, which was repelled by the Rebels.
The Royalist force was demoralized and suffering badly from desertion when it met the Rebel army at Carabobo.
The Rebels attacked on the flank with infantry, and frontally with cavalry, winning a destructive victory.
Despite being outnumbered and heavily outgunned by the Royalist forces, the Tndependentist rebels led by Antonio Jose de Sucre launched an attack, spearheaded by a cavalry charge.
The Royalist surrender secured the independence of Peru, and removed the last remaining Spanish force front South America.
After the assassination of the Zulu chief Dingiswayo, Shaka fought for supremacy with the king's assassin, Zwide.
A brutal and innovative leader, Shaka added defeated enemies to his army, slowly gaining control of all of Natal.
At the time of his assassination, Shaka could command more than 50,000 Zulu fighters.
DIRECTORY The Dawn of Mechanized Warfare 1830-1914 By the early decades of the 19th century, small arms were accurate to several hundred yards, and the artillery pieces available were effective at much greater ranges.
These innovations meant that it was no longer practical for combatants to fight in the traditional fashion, with armies arrayed in massed ranks, as they would present an easy target for enemy fire.
It was not until several decades later, however, that the potential of these new technologies were fully realized.
Abd el-Qadir, emir of Mascara, proclaimed a holy war against French rule in Algeria.
His forces were defeated in a brutal campaign that included the destruction of crops and livestock.
Supposedly a vassal of the weak Turkish government, Muhammad Ali effectively ruled an independent Egypt.
In an attempt to occupy Syria, his army easily defeated Turkish forces at Konya, but was unable to fully capitalize on its victory because of European intervention.
PLAINS INDIAN WARS 1832-1890 The expansion of settlers into the west of North America inevitably resulted in conflict with the native population, who were forced from their ancestral lands.
The war, named for the Native American war chief, took the form of many minor skirmishes.
Black Hawk and his followers achieved early victories using ambush tactics and surprise attacks, drawing in the United States troops.
Eventually Black Hawk's band was brought to action and shattered by overwhelming force.
United States attempts to remove the Seminole from Florida resulted in a long and bloody guerrilla war, also known as the Florida War.
It was not until the Seminole leader Osceola had been taken hostage that the Seminole were ejected from their lands.
In the largest-ever raid on white settlements by Native American forces, a large war party raided Victoria and sacked Linville, whose population took refuge on boats in the harbor.
Intervention by Texas Rangers resulted in a running fight as the native force retreated.
After a Navajo attack on Fort Defiance in 1860, United States forces conducted a scorchedearth policy against the Navajo, finally penning them in the Canyon de Chelly.
Trophy scalp A human scalp was removed, complete with hair, as a trophy of prowess in war by Native American warriors.
Scalping was a common wartime practice among many Native American tribes.
When the starving Navajo surrendered, they were marched to Fort Sumner in New Mexico.
Sent to the assistance of a wagon train, a United States column under Captain Fetterman was lured into following an Indian decoy.
Native Americans fought many large engagements and even pitched battles.
They were armed with ex-US Civil War rifles, but nevertheless were ultimately defeated.
Overconfident United States cavalry troops were caught in a surprise attack.
After several hours of fighting, the Native American force broke off and withdrew.
The cavalry also withdrew rather than joining up with Custer's command, a decision that might have altered the outcome at Little Bighorn.
The remaining two columns fought a desperate battle for two days until the arrival of reinforcements forced the Native Americans to retire.
Superior United States firepower and the movement of reserves thwarted Native American attacks before a counterattack forced them to retreat.
After a period of mutual raiding, a band of Nez Perce Indians decided to relocate to Canada.
They were pursued by troops TRIVIAL CAUSES OF CONFLICT The War of the Bucket Claiming booty after their victory over Bologna at the battle of Zappolino in 1325, some Modenan soldiers crept into Bologna's main town square and stole a bucket from the civic well.
Feeling humiliated, the authorities of Bologna began what turned out to be a 12-year conflict that resulted in thousands of deaths.
The War of the Pig In 1859, on San Juan Island, a territory on the disputed British-American boundary between Oregon and Columbia, a pig owned by British settler Charles Griffin of the Hudson Bay Company wandered onto the land of American Lyman Cutler and was shot dead.
British marines were ordered to engage the Americans, but refused to escalate the incident any further.
The War of the Stray Dog In 1925, a Greek soldier on the MacedonianBulgarian border chased after his dog, and in doing so inadvertently crossed over to the Bulgarian side.
There he was shot by an enthusiastic Bulgarian sentry, precipitating a Greek invasion of Bulgaria that resulted in 50 deaths before the League of Nations negotiated a ceasefire.
The Soccer War Political and social hostility between Honduras and El Salvador boiled over in 1969 after a series of acrimonious soccer matches between the two nations as part of the 1970 World Cup qualifiers.
After two disputed matches, a third match in Mexico resulted in a 3-2 win for El Salvador, and the level of feeling that this provoked ran so high that it sparked a four-day war, resulting in more than 2,000 casualties. and cornered just short of the border.
Forced to surrender, they were despatched to a reservation in Oklahoma.
A band of Sioux Indians had left their reservation, but surrendered quietly to United States cavalry.
While they were being disarmed, a scuffle broke out that rapidly turned into a massacre.
Late 19th-century rifle The .45—70-caliber, model 1873, Springfield ""trapdoor"" rifle was a breech-loading firearm used by the United States Army during the Indian Wars of the late 19th century.
This converted muzzle-loader used a metallic unitary cartridge and was faster to load than its predecessors, giving the infantryman more firepower.
This led to further conflict, this time between the USA and Mexico, in the mid-19th century.
French intervention in Mexico followed and, in the second decade of the 20th century, the country was torn apart by revolution.
After initial successes, the ""Texians"" suffered several defeats at the hands of superior Mexican forces.
Having driven a Mexican force from San Antonio, the Texan volunteers ignored advice to pull back and tried to hold on to their gains.
They were overwhelmed by weight of numbers; however for Texans, the Alamo fortress became a symbol of heroic resistance.
After a long retreat, the Texan force turned and inflicted a spectacular defeat on a column of the Mexican army.
Mexican president Santa Anna was captured, and signed a treaty that effectively granted independence to Texas.
Seeking to revitalize a stalled campaign during the US-Mexican War, United States forces attacked Veracruz by sea.
This was accomplished without difficulty, and the drive on Mexico City began, leading to eventual victory and ending the war.
French troops, intervening in a civil war in Mexico, encountered well-prepared positions at Puebla and unwisely launched a frontal assault.
This was driven off, although the city was taken by the French the following year.
Defenders of the Alamo At San Antonio, Texas, a monument features the figures of Davy Crockett and other slain defenders of the Alamo fortress.
THE MEXICAN REVOLUTION 1910-20 Forces Various armies, including government troops, Zapata's peasant guerrillas, and Villa's guerrilla cavalry.
During a bloody decade of political turmoil, in which the United States intervened in 1916-17, the existence of many political factions ensured that any revolutionary leader who successfully assumed power was in turn opposed by a new or existing rebellion.
The rebel leaders, who could count on huge support from the peasant population, included Pancho Villa and Emiliano Zapata.
ZULU-BOER CONFLICT 1830-1840 Migrating towards the northeast, away from the Cape Colony in South Africa, the pioneering Boers (known as Voortrekkers) came into conflict with the powerful Zulus, who claimed possession of the lands that the Boers had entered.
In a confused action, two Voortrekker commandos fought an inconclusive series of skirmishes against a large Zulu force.
Lessons learned at Italeni, such as using ox wagons for shelter, proved useful at Blood River.
Advancing to remove the Voortrekkers from their lands, the Zulu host found their enemies' wagons in a defensive circle, or laager.
After suffering heavy casualties from rifle fire, and under attack by horsemen, the Zulus withdrew.
OPIUM WARS Arising out of a trade dispute between British merchants and the Chinese government, the Opium Wars were fought over the British right to import goods, which included the banned opium, into China.
With little means to counter the gunboats of the British fleet, the Chinese were repeatedly defeated and forced to cease trying to restrict British trade, including the sale of opium.
Arising from the boarding of a Britishflagged ship by Chinese officials, the ""Arrow War"" was a one-sided conflict, in which the Chinese were, once again, unable to match the superior firepower of the European forces.
In the conflict's aftermath, the Europeans extended their trading influence throughout China.
COLONIAL WARS IN INDIA AND AFGHANISTAN 1839-1842 Having taken control of India and the surrounding regions, British troops undertook several major campaigns in order to maintain their supremacy in these territories.
Intending to keep Russian influence out of Afghanistan, British forces annexed the region under the pretext of assisting Shah Shuja in regaining his throne.
Resistance proved to be much more fierce than expected and the British suffered one of the worst setbacks they had known since taking power in the area in the mid-18th century.
After occupying Kandahar, the British advanced on the fortress of Ghazni.
Having driven off a relief attempt, the British stormed the city through a gate that reconnaissance had indicated was lightly held.
They fled to Jellalabad , where they held out for several months and finally counterattacked, driving off the besiegers.
Judging their position in Kabuf to be untenable as a result of the Anglo-Afghan war, British civilians there were forced to make a long march through harsh country back to India.
Despite having been granted safe conduct, they were harassed by Afghan irregulars, and few of the 16,000 individuals in the column survived.
During the retreat from Kabul, the last remnants of the British force were cornered near Gandamak and overrun by a massively superior force.
FIRST ANGLO-SIKH WAR 1845-1846 The Sikh empire was created in the early 1800s and grew to considerable power before internal conflict erupted.
Rebellious elements within the empire began to threaten British interests in India, namely the British East India Company, bringing about conflict between what were, at the time, the two greatest powers in India.
Eventually, a costly British victory at Sobraon forced the Sikhs to accept the Treaty of Lahore, which granted considerable territory to Britain.
This battle at the beginning of the First Sikh War, took place in the evening and through the night.
After repulsing a flank attack by Sikh cavalry, the British advanced, becoming disorganized in the process.
After confused fighting in the darkness, they eventually drove off the Sikh army.
The British attacked a fortified Sikh encampment, bringing about a two-day action that began to turn in the Sikhs' favor.
Misinterpreting a cavalry movement as a flank attack, the Sikhs withdrew, granting a costly victory to the British.
Recognizing the village of Aliwal as the key to the battle, British forces attacked and captured it, triggering a general Sikh retreat that was hindered by the need to cross the river.
The battle has been regarded as the turning point of the First Anglo-Sikh War.
After an ineffective bombardment, the British made a series of attacks that were initially repulsed by counterattacks.
Once the Sikh position was finally penetrated, a general collapse resulted, with heavy casualties as the Sikh army was routed.
SECOND ANGLO-SIKH WAR 1848-49 The Sikhs were displeased by the outcome of the recent war and, in 1848, violence flared up, which led to renewed general conflict.
Despite setbacks in the field, the British won a decisive victory at Chillianwala and, after also defeating the Sikhs at Gujarat, annexed the Punjab.
The British attempted a surprise crossing of the Chenab River, but found the ford to be strongly held.
Sikh cavalry crossed the river and attacked the British force, inflicting a sharp defeat and forcing a retreat.
Sikh morale was lifted, although the Sikhs later withdrew from the banks of the Chenab.
MILITARY USE OF ANIMALS Horses No animal has been used and abused in warfare more than the horse.
Of course, horses were used in combat, racing into hails of arrows, bolts, or shot with cavalrymen on their backs, and suffered accordingly.
But entire armies also depended on horse power to transport food, bulk ammunition, and major weapons to the battlefront.
When Napoleon marched on Moscow in 1812, he took with him some 200,000 horses, almost all of which eventually perished.
During Operation Barbarossa in 1941, the German armies took 750,000 horses to draw the bulk of their supplies, and the United States and British armies used mules and horses to carry loads through difficult terrains in Southeast Asia, North Africa, and Italy.
Camels, elephants, and oxen These have all been pressed into service as four-legged supply trucks.
There was even a United States Army Camel Corps in the mid-19th-century West.
Dogs Attack dogs were used by the ancient Greeks, and remain in service today as guard animals on military bases and installations.
Dogs carried messages in World War I and were used as ""guided weapons"" during World War II, when Russian soldiers strapped explosives to their backs and trained them to run under German tanks.
Elephants War elephants were used as battering rams and as shooting platforms throughout the ancient Hellenistic and Persian world, and across into India.
Pigeons Carrier pigeons have been used for more than 3,000 years to carry messages with unerring accuracy across miles of battlefield.
Bees, pigs, rats, and dolphins In the present day, bees, pigs and rats are used to perform mine detection in countries such as The Congo and Israel.
Dolphins are trained by the United States Navy to perform security duties—sabotage detection and anti-diver patrols—beneath United States warships.
Villa's guerrilla cavalry Guerrilla leader Pancho Villa, who commanded the Division del Norte during the Mexican Revolution, aimed to supply a horse to each of his infantrymen, as well as the cavalrymen, to increase his army's speed.
Loyalties were conflicted on both sides, as all the troops involved were drawn from the army of the Habsburg empire.
The battle was indecisive, but this suited the Hungarian strategic position better than that of Austria, as the Hungarians only had to avoid defeat to remain independent.
The far larger Hungarian force was composed of inexperienced fighters and was less well equipped than the Austrians, leading to an Austrian victory.
WARS OF ITALIAN UNIFICATION 1848-66 Beginning as a series of riots against Austrian rule in northern Italy, this conflict involved the Italian kingdoms and their French allies fighting for independence from Austria, eventually resulting in the unification of Italy.
A disorganized British advance was successful in some areas, although in other parts of the field British troops were routed.
Following a lengthy bombardment, the British delivered an infantry attack that broke the Sikh line and resulted in a decisive victory.
HUNGARIAN UPRISING 1848-49 Beginning as a series of demonstrations in the capital, the Hungarian Uprising became a revolution against Habsburg rule.
An independent Hungary was initially accepted by Austria, but the rising was eventually put down by Austrian and Russian troops.
The Hungarian force launched an attack against the Russian right flank, gradually gaining the upper hand, but the Russians enveloped the Hungarian right flank, forcing a hurried retreat.
Sardinian forces assaulted an Austrian army entrenched around Verona, forcing them from their positions.
The victory was not followed up and thus failed to have a decisive effect on the campaign.
The battle of Solferino The battle, in which the Austrian army was defeated by an alliance between France and Sardinia, resulted in almost 40,000 casualties, inspiring the creation of the International Red Cross in 1863. to await reinforcements.
They then defeated the outnumbered Piedmontese at Custoza and reoccupied Milan.
After being sent to put down a revolt that had deposed the pope, French and Neapolitan troops were repelled by the ill-armed but enthusiastic rebels, who had declared the short-lived Roman republic.
After a month-long siege, the French launched a final assault and took the city.
A force of Sardinian cavalry and French infantry was confronted by a much larger Austrian army, but its subsequent defeat convinced the Austrians that their forces were qualitatively inferior.
Magenta was a ""soldier's battle"" arising from an unplanned encounter in which the French troops fought their way to victory with little help from their commanders.
After accidentally colliding with the Austrian army they were pursuing, the French/Piedmontese force fought a confused but savage action, in which French rifled artillery played an important part in defeating the Austrians.
Italian nationalist Giuseppe Garibaldi and his followers, known as ""Redshirts,"" were able to take Palermo in Sicily before advancing on Naples.
Further victories led to the establishment of the united kingdom of Italy.
In this confused engagement, a spirited attack by Austrian cavalry unnerved the Italians, who fell back in disorder.
The Austrian victories at Custoza and at Lissa a month later were, however, rendered largely irrelevant, as defeat by Prussia in the Seven Weeks War forced Austria to cede Venetia to the Italians.
During this major sea battle the Austrian fleet caught the Italians by surprise and used ramming and short-range gunfire to achieve a decisive result.
For several decades afterward, ramming was considered to be an effective tactic, greatly influencing ship design.
TAIPING REBELLION 1850-64 During this religiously inspired large-scale revolt against the Qing regime in China, the Taiping rebels eventually fielded more than a million soldiers.
Western-trained Chinese forces eventually suppressed it, with enormous bloodshed.
More than 20 million people lost their lives during the conflict, including many civilians.
BRITISH ARMY MAJOR WHITWORTH PORTER AT THE SIEGE OF SEVASTOPOL, 1854 The government Qing army, led by an American general named Frederick Ward, attacked Cixi and won a decisive victory over rebel forces there.
Government forces, some of whom were equipped with bolt-action rifles, then overwhelmed the tired and hungry defenders.
WARS IN SOUTH AMERICA 1852-70 The middle of the 19th century was a time of great upheaval in South America as emergent nations fought over disputed territory and formed powerful coalitions to unseat unpopular dictators.
Facing a coalition of opponents to the rule of Juan Manuel de Rosas, many of the latter's troops surrendered before the fighting began.
The issue was decided by a coalition cavalry charge that smashed Rosas' right flank.
In an ill-advised attempt to expand his rule, Paraguayan dictator Francisco Lopez invaded Brazil and Argentina.
The result was the bloodiest war in the history of Latin America, which almost destroyed Paraguay.
Relatively minor disputes between Britain and Burma expanded into open warfare as a result of heavy-handed diplomacy.
The British then captured Martaban and Rangoon (now Yangon), driving the Burmese army northward.
The British annexed considerable territory and relations gradually normalized, though no treaty was signed to end the war. k .t CRIMEAN WAR 1853-56 Arising mainly out of a dispute between the Turkish Ottoman empire and Russia, the Crimean War drew in British and French forces that were committed to preventing Russian influence from expanding.
Imperial Russian warships attacked a Turkish squadron at Sinope, using shell-firing guns to quickly destroy most of the Turkish force.
Britain and France declared war on Russia largely as a result of this action.
Landing north of Sevastopol, the Allied force found the Russians well dug in on the Alma River.
Despite heavy casualties, the Allies were able to force the Russians from their positions.
The siege of Sevastopol lasted for a year, with the Allies making slow progress against the defenses.
After Russian relief efforts failed, the key strongpoints were stormed and surrender became inevitable.
In the ensuing battle, the British Heavy Brigade won notable successes.
As a result of misinterpreted orders, its famous charge was crushed by Russian artillery—perhaps the most ill-fated event in British military history.
Attempting to dislodge the British from a strategic ridge, the Russians launched a series of determined assaults supported by artillery.
Were it not for the intervention of French troops, heavy casualties would have forced a British retreat.
Russian forces besieged the Turkish fortress of Kars in the hope of drawing Allied troops away from Sevastopol.
Turkish forces sent to its relief became sidetracked elsewhere, and the fortress eventually surrendered.
Hoping to relieve Sevastopol, the Russians launched a determined but disorganized assault that failed to dislodge the Franco-Sardinian army.
Count Leo Tolstoy was sufficiently outraged at the incompetence of the Russian commanders to write a satirical song about the battle.
The Malakoff, a great stone tower, was a key feature of the defenses of Sevastopol.
It was bombarded and assaulted repeatedly during the siege, until September 8 when the fortress was successfully stormed by French troops.
Although not a decisive action, the bombardment of Russian positions at Kinburn established ironclad ships as viable weapons.
Allied vessels were hit repeatedly, but it was the Russian forts that were put out of action.
INDIAN MUTINY 1857-58 Beginning as a mutiny among sepoy in Meerut in May 1857, the conflict spread and became a widespread insurrection against British rule.
Although the situation was largely restored by September 1857, some regions remained under rebel control for much of 1858.
British forces advancing on Delhi encountered a rebel sepoy force dug in on the Delhi road.
After being driven back by rebel artillery, the British made a flanking attack and drove the rebels from their positions.
With this obstacle removed, the British force was able to move on to Delhi and begin siege operations.
Thinking that they faced a small rebel force, the British attacked and were driven back by heavy fire from wellfortified positions.
Many local troops deserted or defected, forcing the British to make a fighting retreat into Lucknow, where they were besieged.
Besieged by rebel sepoy, the small British garrison was forced to abandon part of the city.
After a failed sally against the rebels, the defenders withstood the siege until relief forces arrived.
Restoring the elderly Mogul emperor to power as a figurehead, the rebel forces of the Indian Mutiny occupied Delhi.
They held out under British siege for two months until the city was finally stormed.
After pushing aside a force sent to halt its advance on July 12, the column fought a second successful action at Aong.
Prisoners captured there provided intelligence on the positions of rebel forces in the area.
Attempting to break the siege of Delhi, a force of rebel sepoy broke out with the intention of launching an attack on the British positions outside the city.
The force was intercepted and attacked as it made camp, forcing a retreat back into Delhi.
Thousands of British civilians took shelter from the sepoy mutiny at Agra, where they were besieged in a half-hearted manner.
After the fall of Delhi to the British forces, a large force of rebels gathered near Agra.
The column was able to drive off the attack, and pursued and scattered its opponents.
Using forwarddeployed artillery aggressively, the British routed the rebel sepoy force and pursued it for some distance.
The battle thwarted the rebels' final attempt to regain the cities of Cawnpore and Lucknow and was a turning point in the Indian Mutiny.
The vastly outnumbered British force suddenly charged at the advancing rebel sepoy force, triggering a panic and general rout.
DIRECTORY LONGEST SIEGES IN HISTORY Siege Period Account Azotus 7th century bce According to Herodotus, Azotus in Israel was besieged for 29 years by the forces of Psammetichus I of Egypt.
Nicea 1328-31 ce The Ottoman forces of Osman I put Nicea under a three-year siege; the city fell in 1331, after several failed relief attempts.
Harlech Castle 1461-68 Harlech Castle in Wales endured the longest siege in British history, holding out for seven years against English forces during the Wars of the Roses.
Ishiyama Hongan-ji 1570-80 The fortress of Ishiyima Hongan-ji was besieged by the forces of Oda Nobunaga in Japan's longest siege.
Candia 1648-69 Ottoman forces encircled the city of Candia, now Heraklion in Crete, for 21 years, eventually wresting the fortress from the hands of the Venetians.
Gibraltar 1779-83 Combined French and Spanish fleets blockaded Gibraltar for four years, but the British defenders refused to give in.
Fort Sumter 1863-65 Confederate soldiers held out against massive Union bombardments until the end of the United States Civil War.
The last major action of the Indian Mutiny was fought around the fortress of Gwalior.
Attacked by Mexican forces, the vastly outnumbered Foreign Legion took refuge in a farmstead, from which it made a defensive stand until every one of its personnel was killed or incapacitated.
Raiding by central Asian nomads prompted Russia to subdue the khanates of Bokhara and Khiva.
The Bokharans fended off Russian advances for a time but were eventually forced to accept vassal status.
Although some previous campaigns against Khiva had failed, Russia made advances in the region during 1847-65.
A large-scale expedition overran the area without much of a fight in 1873, and the city of Khiva became a quasi-independent Russian protectorate.
Attempts by the Ashanti kingdom to take control of the coastal region from the British resulted in a punitive expedition.
British forces occupied key points in Afghanistan, leading to a treaty.
Hostilities were resumed when the British resident at Kabul was murdered.
Leningrad 1941-44 The epic German siege never managed to take the city, but it did kill more than one million of the city's inhabitants.
EDWARD TREGEAR, NEW ZEALAND WRITER AND SOLDIER, DESCRIBING THE MAORI WAR CRY, LATE 19TH CENTURY Maori carved wooden club Before battle, fierce Maori warriors would square off in complex, ritual dances called haka.
They demonstrated their prowess in athletic displays, often brandishing weapons, such as this ornately carved wooden club.
At the siege of Gate Pa in 1864, the defenders drew the British into an overconfident assault, which was repulsed with heavy casualties.
Mexican:300; French Foreign Legion: entire force killed, wounded, or captured.
COLONIAL WARS 1858-85 The mid to late 19th century was characterized by colonial conflicts that often involved well-equipped but small European forces facing much greater numbers of local troops or warriors.
Resistance went on for three years, but the modern weapons of the Europeans provided a decisive advantage.
Union: 1 ironclad, 5 other vessels; Confederate: 1 ironclad, 3 other vessels.
This was the most famous naval battle of the United States Civil War, also known as the battle of Monitor and Merrimack.
Although the two ironclads were unable to destroy each other, resulting in an indecisive action, the impotence of wooden ships against ironclads was graphically illustrated, and the effects on worldwide ship construction were thus immense.
An aggressive march up the Shenandoah Valley by the Confederates caught the Union by surprise, but superior Union numbers forced the Confederates to retreat.
Confederate forces deceived the Union into overestimating their numbers to delay a Union attack.
The United States Civil War was fought on the issue of the abolition of slavery President Abraham Lincoln's motivation in launching America's greatest civil conflict was purely based on preserving the Union.
The Pacific was the major Asian battleground of World War II During World War II, China dwarfed the Pacific theatre in terms of casualties and the total numbers of troops involved.
The Second Sino-Japanese War had cost the Japanese 186,000 troops even before they went to war with the US, and they subsequently lost well over half a million troops in China.
China's own death toll from the war was somewhere between 15 and 20 million.
Nelson's last words While dying from a French marksman's bullet at the battle of Trafalgar in 1805, Nelson did not say ""Kiss me, Hardy"" or ""Kismet, Hardy"" (""Kismet"" being an anglicization of an Arabic word for fate) to Sir Thomas Masterman Hardy while lying on the deck of HMS Victory.
In fact, once wounded, he was taken below decks and died three hours later, while Hardy remained on deck.
The Indian Mutiny was caused by British ammunition It is generally believed that the Indian Mutiny was caused by the British having issued musket cartridges that were greased with a mixture of cow and pig fat, making their use taboo to both Hindus and Muslims.
An experimental batch was indeed greased in this way, but the standard issue cartridges actually used a beeswax and sheep-tallow grease.
The original cartridges did create alarm among the Indian population, but the root causes of the Mutiny were more to do with British social legislation in India.
The Spanish conquered the Aztecs and Incas with just a handful of soldiers The Spanish colonization of modern-day Mexico and Peru in the 16th century was indeed conducted by relatively small numbers of Spanish troops, but they were often backed by thousands of Indian allies.
The smallpox disease imported to the Americas by the Spanish also aided the conquest—some three million Aztecs alone were killed by the disease.
Buffalo soldiers Formed in 1869, the 25th Infantry was an all-black regiment of the then-segregated United States Army.
Many such African-American regiments were formed during the United States Civil War.
The ""Buffalo Soldiers"", as they were known, helped to pacify the western frontier.
Indian Mutiny Victory in the siege of Delhi in September 1857 was costly for the British East India Company, but it proved a decisive moment of the Indian Mutiny, which did not end until the fall of the fort at Gwalior in June 1858.
Relief forces marched from Kabul to break the siege, but found that the Afghan army had already retired.
Following a British and French takeover of the government of Egypt, a revolt led by Arabi Pasha erupted.
Reacting to protect its financial interests in Egypt, particularly the Suez Canal, the British defeated the Egyptians at Tel el-Kebir in a 30-minute battle.
Already in possession of Cochin China , the French pressed northward to Tonkin, then under nominal Chinese rule but largely under the control of Vietnamese ""Black Flag"" irregulars.
Despite repeated attempts to drive the French out of Tonkin, the Chinese were eventually forced to cede control of the city to their opponents.
United States CIVIL WAR 1861-65 Pitting the Union army of the north against the Confederate army of the south, the United States Civil War began after 11 southern states seceded from the Union over the issue of slavery.
Huge advantages in numbers and materiel led to a Union victory in a costly war of attrition.
After the Union refused the Confederate demand that the fort be surrendered, the Confederates began a bombardment that forced the tiny garrison to capitulate.
It was this action that began open hostilities between Confederacy and Union.
The inexperienced Union army attempted to take the rail junction at Manassas from the equally raw Confederates.
The result was a confused action in which the Union attack was eventually beaten off.
The garrison attempted a breakout, but only a force of cavalry was actually able to escape.
Union cavalry caught the Confederates by surprise, bringing about a confused action that demonstrated that Union cavalry could at last take on their opposite numbers on equal terms.
Elements of both armies collided in Gettysburg, drawing the rest of the respective armies into a three-day battle.
Although close-run at times, the action was a decisive Union victory, but losses were very heavy on both sides.
Fought in difficult terrain, the action was extremely confused and most of the Union army collapsed after heavy fighting, forcing a retreat into Chattanooga.
A series of confused actions in the dense scrub terrain of the Wilderness resulted in heavy casualties.
The Union army then attacked the Confederates at Spotsylvania but was unable to break through.
Failing to make sufficient reconnaissance of the Confederate positions, the Union army launched a frontal assault that suffered heavy casualties.
Despite the caution of the Union commander, which prevented a decisive use of superior numbers, the Confederates were hard pressed until a successful flank attack allowed them to break contact.
Bold Confederate maneuvering and a well-delivered flank attack derailed the Union battle plan.
But the death of General ""Stonewall"" Jackson as a result of wounds sustained at this battle was a severe blow to the Confederacy.
After several assaults, the Confederate stronghold of Vicksburg finally surrendered.
This opened up the Mississippi to Union navigation and effectively split the Confederacy in two.
T Beauregard was the first prominent Confederacy general of the United States Civil War.
This commemorative statue of him stands in New Orleans, the city in which he was buried in 1893.
Confederate forces launched a series of costly attacks that caused the Union commander, McClellan, to lose his nerve and withdraw.
Confederate forces captured a Union supply depot and beat off counterattacks until their reinforcements arrived.
Confederate forces advancing into Kentucky were halted and driven back on the first day.
The following day a Confederate advance broke the Union line, resulting in large numbers of prisoners being taken.
Confederate flag The short-lived Confederate States of America was extinguished with Lee's surrender at Appomattox, Virginia, in April 1865.
Shown here is one of the national flags of the Confederacy (the so-called ""Stars and Bars"" pattern), folded beneath a drumstick.
Raw Union troops were attacked by a much smaller, but more experienced.
Although the Confederates won a tactical victory they were forced to retreat upon discovering the size of the Union army.
After a bungled river crossing under fire, the Union army battered fruitlessly at Confederate positions.
A flank attack achieved some success but was driven off by a counterattack.
Caught by surprise, the Union army was reduced to a small perimeter, but received reinforcements and fought on to eventual victory.
While mortar boats bombarded the river forts, a Union squadron of steam-powered wooden ships ran past the forts and Confederate vessels that were defending the approaches to New Orleans.
The ill-fated ""Pickett's Charge"" More than 46,000 men were killed or wounded in the three-day battle of Gettysburg in July 1863.
In the disastrous Confederate advance seen here, the division lost more than half of its men. the Union advance on Richmond.
Both armies dug in and a nine-month stalemate began, until increasing Union pressure forced the Confederates to retreat.
After probing heavily fortified Confederate positions, the Union army launched frontal assaults on Kennesaw Mountain, which were repulsed.
After clinging to positions close to the Confederate line for three days, the Union switched to an outflanking movement.
Deprived of naval support, the forts soon surrendered, making the Union blockade complete in the region.
Advancing through Georgia in the face of little resistance, the Union forces inflicted massive destruction, aiming to reduce Confederate fighting capability.
British prime minister Winston Churchill House of Commons, London World War II, June 4, 1940 ""We shall fight on the beaches.
General George Patton Various locations in England World War II, June 1944 ""War is a bloody, killing business.
It is the site of the Garden of Eden, of the Great Flood, and the birth of Abraham.
The Prussians' breech-loading rifles gave them a huge firepower advantage over the Austrians, who relied on bayonet charges.
Surrounded by Prussian forces, the Hanoverian army attacked westward, inflicting a serious defeat on part of the Prussian army.
Superior Prussian numbers remaining in the field forced a retreat which led to a surrender two days later.
Abandoning Petersburg, the Confederate army made an orderly withdrawal but was pursued.
Cornered at Appomattox Court House, General Lee surrendered what remained of his force as Union infantry began to arrive in great numbers.
AUSTRO-PRUSSIAN WAR 1866 The rise of Prussia in the 19th century brought it into conflict with the Austrian empire.
Military action broke out in 1866, and in the ensuing Seven Weeks War Austria was decisively beaten.
Prussian forces advancing into Bohemia were met by Austrian troops, which were pushed aside.
But the subsequent arrival of Austrian reinforcements forced the Prussians into a hasty, disorganized retreat.
Despite early reverses, the Prussians' superior artillery and rifle fire, coupled with their tactic of using small, flexible units against the dense Austrian masses, forced the Austrians to withdraw.
WARS OF MEIJI RESTORATION 1863-77 The eventual restoration of the emperor of Japan after more than a decade of sporadic fighting, most often between Imperialist forces and the ruling Tokugawa shogunate, unified the country under a strong centralized administration.
As Japan began to open up to foreign trade, the Choshu clan, which controlled the Shimonoseki straits, began firing on foreign ships in the straits.
Foreign warships retaliated with a series of bombardments, forcing the Choshu to surrender.
The Satsuma rebellion, 1877 General Saigo Takamori rebelled against Japan's Meiji government.
The uprising ended with the battle of Shiroyama, the final, and most devastating, of many attacks against the new government.
This was refused, so a naval squadron made a show of force in Kagoshima harbor.
Conflict between the shogunate and those wishing to restore the emperor erupted into full-scale war.
The Imperial army advanced steadily eastward, securing oaths of loyalty from local rulers along the way.
Defeated by Imperial forces, the army of the shogunate retired to Hokkaido and set up a rebel republic, the Ezo.
Both sides made use of steam warships and modern weaponry, including Gatling guns.
Angry at the rejection of a proposal to invade Korea, the Satsuma clan rebelled.
The Satsuma samurai were opposed by a modern army with artillery and rifles, and were crushed.
FRAN CO-PRUSSIAN WAR 19 JULY 1870-10 MAY 1871 The Franco-Prussian war saw these two great European powers clash over a Prussian contender for the vacant Spanish throne.
New military technologies— notably breech-loading rifles and early machine guns—were deployed for the first time on a large scale.
The war and ended in defeat for France, which lost the territories of Alsace and Lorraine to a newly unified Germany.
Wissembourg was garrisoned by the French to secure their line of supply for an attack into German territory.
The French garrison was surprised by the Prussian attack and defeated after a stubborn defense.
A somewhat confused German attack suffered heavy casualties due to French Chassepot rifle fire, before reinforcements arrived and forced a French withdrawal.
Clashes between sentries and foraging parties expanded into a general conflict characterized by great confusion.
The Prussians gradually gained the upper hand and pulled back under cover of darkness.
Retiring toward Verdun, the French were blocked by Prussian forces at Mars-la-Tour and became trapped in the vicinity of Metz.
In the biggest battle of the war, the Prussians launched a renewed attack.
The French had a chance to break out but were hampered by indecision at high command level.
After the battle, the French retired into Metz and were besieged there.
Encircled and under bombardment by Prussian guns overlooking their positions, a French force made repeated breakout attempts.
None were successful, however, and to avoid further bloodshed, Napoleon III surrendered to the Prussians.
Defeated in the field at Gravelotte, the French army was besieged in Metz.
Initial attempts to relieve the city were beaten off, and Metz surrendered on October 23.
The force holding Paris was poor, but the defenses around the city were impressive.
Shayuan Some 10,000 Chinese troops commanded by Yuwen Tai beat 200,000 men commanded by Gao Huan.
Kaithal A massive Hindu army of 540,000 troops was overwhelmed by 40,000 Muslim soldiers at Kaithal, India.
Agincourt Just under 6,000 British troops defeated an army of 20,000 of France's best cavalry and infantry.
Cajamarca Francisco Pizarro captured the Inca capital, killing 7,000 with no losses.
Rorke's Drift At this battle from the Anglo-Zulu War, British soldiers of the Royal Engineers and British Army 24th Regiment of Foot successfully fought off an assault by Zulu Prince Dabulamanzi kaMpande.
Assaye At Assaye, Maharashtra, in India, the Duke of Wellington defeated some 75,000 Indian soldiers with just 7,000 men.
BALKAN CRISES AND RUSSO-TURKISH WAR 1875-78 In the Balkans, war broke out between Russia and Turkey as Russia attempted to regain territory it had lost during the Crimean War.
Struggles also took place as Balkan peoples sought to gain independence from Turkish rule.
Risings in Bosnia and Herzegovina, and Bulgaria led to intervention by irregular forces from Serbia and Montenegro.
The Turks also sent irregular forces of their own in an attempt to quell the risings, which resulted in massacres.
The war ended with a ceasefire, but fighting broke out again during the Russo-Turkish War of 1877-78.
Russian forces advanced on Plevna, expecting to find a garrisoned but unfortified town, only to discover that it had been heavily fortified in secret.
A five-month siege resulted, and although the Turks were eventually forced to surrender, Russia's strategic military plans lay in ruins.
IRONCLADS IN THE PACIFIC 1879-83 During the later part of the 19th century, many nations, including Chile and Peru, obtained ironclad warships, by then the most powerful vessels afloat.
Peruvian and Bolivian: 7,000 plus naval assets; Chilean 4,000 plus naval assets.
The war was dominated by sea power as the terrain inland made logistics virtually impossible.
Pacific, off Chilean coast Having taken part in the Peruvian Civil War of 1879, the ironclad Hudscar carried on a campaign of blockade, bombardment, and harassment almost single-handedly against the superior Chilean navy.
The British advance base at Eshowe became cut off after the disaster at Isandhlwana.
A relief column fought through to the position in April and the defenders withdrew.
A British advance encountered unexpectedly large numbers of Zulu warriors, which forced a disorganized retreat to Kambula.
The operation was originally mounted to tempt the Zulus to attack Kambula, however, and so can be viewed as a strategic success.
Location Pacific, off Bolivian coast Brought to action by the entire Chilean navy, Hudscar was eventually pounded into submission.
The British were deployed in a wagon laager reinforced by field fortifications.
Rifle fire, artillery using canister rounds, and bayonet charges broke the attack.
Unwisely dispersing while looking for their Zulu enemies, a British column was attacked in camp at Isandhlwana.
Location Buffalo river crossing, west of Isandhlwana, Natal, South Africa. were never quite so aggressive.
With no prospect of withdrawal, the British detachment at Rorke's Drift fortified their position and defended it against enormous odds.
Charging the enemy at Omdurman The 21 st Lancers won three Victoria Crosses at Omdurman, Sudan, on September 2, 1898.
The lancers mistakenly charged into the main body of the Mahdist army, driving it back despite heavy losses.
ANGLO-ZULU WAR 1879 British forces invaded Zululand and were initially repelled by the highly organized Zulu warriors.
Despite Zulu bravery, superior firepower made an eventual British victory inevitable.
Advancing to the relief of Eshowe, the British column fortified itself in a wagon laager as the Zulus approached.
Although the attack was pressed home, the ferocity of earlier Zulu charges was not evident here and they retreated from the battlefield.
Advancing in a large square, the British force met the Zulu charge with rifle volleys, Gatling guns, and artillery firing canister.
Zulu military power was shattered for good, though odd skirmishes went on for some weeks afterward.
MAHDIST REVOLT 1883-99 Inspired by the religious leader Muhammad Ahmad, known as the Mahdi, the people of the Sudan revolted against colonial governance.
Attempting to capture the Mahdi, who was besieging El Obeid, the Egyptian force became lost and desertions began.
Location Tamai, Sudan Besieged in Khartoum by the army of the Mahdi, a small Anglo-Egyptian garrison held out in the hope of relief.
The city fell just three days before the relief force fought its way through.
As the main relief force for Khartoum advanced up the Nile, another camelborne relief force crossed the desert toward Khartoum.
Attacked near Abu Klea, the British formed a square and repelled the assault.
Although the Mahdists managed to exploit a gap in the British line, they were driven off with heavy casualties.
Some retired in disorder while others defended the village to the death.
Zululand's last king Cetshwayo kaMpande went to war with the British empire when it demanded that his army disband.
Native forces and modern weaponry In colonial wars, small, well-armed European forces were often pitted against much larger native troops equipped with relatively primitive weapons.
However, some native forces were able to arm themselves with modem weapons, such as these artillery pieces captured by the British near Kandahar.
A Mahdist incursion into Egypt was attacked and overwhelmed by Egyptian troops aided by a handful of British cavalry.
After artillery preparations, British and Egyptian forces attacked the Mahdist camp at Atbara, which was quickly overrun.
The Mahdi had chosen the village of Omdurman as his base of operations in 1884.
Although outnumbered, the British force possessed the many advantages of modern technology.
Their Maxim machine guns and artillery broke charges by the Mahdists, and the British cavalry made one of its last charges.
Approaching the Mahdist camp, the British drove off an attack using Maxim guns.
There was little further resistance as remnants of the revolt were eliminated.
In the opening conflict of the Sino-French war , a Chinese fleet was annihilated by French warships.
In the First Italo-Ethiopian War, the Italians unwisely left their defensive positions and advanced into unfamiliar terrain.
FIRST SINO-JAPANESE WAR 1894-95 A failed pro-Japanese coup in Korea prompted Japanese military intervention and war with Korea's powerful ally China.
Rising tensions between Japan and China resulted in an exchange of fire between Japanese cruisers and Chinese vessels.
As the engagement ended, a Chinese transport and its escort arrived and were also attacked.
In the first major land battle of the war, the Japanese advanced on the port of Asan and drove the Chinese forces there toward Pyongyang.
The Chinese were expecting reinforcements, but these were lost in the naval battle of Pungdo a few days earlier.
While a frontal attack occupied the Chinese defenders, a Japanese flanking movement forced the garrison of Pyongyang to surrender.
Although the Chinese fleet was superior in numbers and firepower, it was hesitantly handled.
Poor-quality shells and a tendency of their vessels to catch fire also hampered the Chinese.
The Japanese used a pontoon bridge to make a crossing and launched a night assault that routed the Chinese force.
The Japanese launched a night assault that overran the landward side of the port's defenses.
Pockets of resistance held out for the next day, after which the remaining positions were abandoned.
The Chinese fleet fell back to Weihai after the loss of Lushunkou, and assisted in the defense of this port against a Japanese land attack.
The town fell early in the month, after which the Japanese navy gradually wore down the remaining Chinese naval strength.
Although this was the last battle of the war, numerous skirmishes followed.
As the First Sino-Japanese war drew to a close, Japanese forces stormed the port of Niuzhuang, taking Yinkou unopposed soon after.
The Japanese invasion of the Pescadores Islands was undertaken to provide a base for a campaign into Taiwan.
After determined initial resistance, the Chinese defense of the islands collapsed as quickly as the invaders could advance.
Preparing to fake Port Arthur In support of a Japanese infantry advance, the 1st Regiment of Artillery fired on Qing dynasty troops near Port Arthur in Manchuria (modern Lushunkou, Northeast China), during the First Sino-Japanese War.
WEAPONS BANNED FROM WARFARE Weapon/Banned Description ""Dum-Dum"" bullets 1899 These expanding soft-nosed bullets that ""mushroom"" on impact with the body are so called after their creation by the British at the Dum-Dum arsenal in India in the late-19th century.
At the top of the prohibited list are the Schedule 1 chemicals that have no use—or negligible use—except as weaponized substances.
This does not, however, apply to remotely triggered mines, such as Claymores.
White phosphorus and napalm 1997 The Ottawa Convention also prohibits ""any weapon or munition which is primarily designed to set fire to objects or to cause burn injury to persons through the action of flame, heat, or combination thereof, produced by a chemical reaction of a substance delivered on the target"", particularly the use of such weapons against civilian targets.
White phosphorus and napalm fall under this convention, but it has been circumvented by many nations exploiting legal loopholes.
SPANISH GENERAL ARSENIO LINARES Y SURRENDER OF SANTIAGO, CUBA, JULY Taiwan was ceded to Japan as part of the Chinese surrender.
Occupation of the new territory was opposed by forces of the newly created Republic of Formosa, but the defense was disorganized and feeble.
SPANISH-AMERICAN WAR APRIL-AUGUST 1898 An expansionist United States built on its support for the Cuban independence movement and planned to annex Spain's existing colonies in the Caribbean and Pacific.
After military victories in Cuba and the Philippines, the Treaty of Paris also ceded Puerto Rico and Guam to the United States, ending Spain's role as a colonial power.
Seizing on the probably accidental sinking of USS Maine in Havana harbor in February, the United States intervened in an attempt by the Cuban populace to win independence from Spain.
The Spanish forces were easily defeated and Cuba effectively became a United States protectorate.
Spanish forces occupied two hills protecting the approach to the capital city of Santiago.
These were successfully stormed by American forces, opening the way for an advance into Santiago, which surrendered on July 17.
Having defeated the Spanish squadron based at Manila, the United States occupied the islands.
Sovereignty was transferred to the United States at the end of the Spanish-American war, though local Filipino resistance to American rule went on for some time.
POMBO WRITING ON THE EVE OF THE 13,1898 SECOND BOER WAR 11 OCTOBER 1899-31 MAY 1902 The Second Boer War pitted British regulars against mobile, sharpshooting Boers of southern Africa, who were particularly adept at mounted infantry tactics.
The causes of the war are complex but this was the culmination of two centuries of conflict between the British empire, which had taken possession of the Cape, and the Boers, who had established two independent Boer republics, the South African Republic and the Orange Free State in the interior.
The highly mobile Boer horsemen, equipped with modern rifles and artillery, defeated British forces in the field and besieged them in the cities.
However, the Boers were thinly spread and their success was short-lived.
Kimberley was besieged and bombarded, but there was no serious attempt to assault the town.
The siege was broken by a force of cavalry and mounted infantry, forcing a retreat, which led to the Boer defeat at Paardberg.
The British army in the region initially attempted to fight in the field.
After actions at Talana Hill, Elandslaagte, and Nicholson's Nek, it was driven into Ladysmith, where it was besieged until relieved by a force under Sir Redvers Henry Buller.
A British column advancing to the relief of Kimberley encountered a Boer force equipped with machine guns.
Seeking to retake the rail junction from the Boers, British troops made a night approach that became disorganized.
The attack failed and some British troops were left behind in the subsequent retreat.
Pushing on from the Modder River, the British were heavily defeated just short of Kimberley.
Attempts to relieve Kimberley were postponed as a result of the battle.
Although the British troops had the advantage of numbers, they failed to undertake adequate reconnaissance.
As a result, they ran into Boer forces that were well dug in, and who inflicted serious casualties.
Having attained the heights of Spion Kop, the British found themselves exposed to heavy fire.
Location 23 miles southeast of Kimberley, Orange Free State, South Africa.
After an initial frontal assault failed, the British conducted an eight-day artillery bombardment, which eventually compelled the Boers to surrender.
Location 23 miles east of Bloemfontein, Free State Province, South Africa.
Boer forces mounted a raid to capture a convoy and disrupt the British water supply.
Under siege since the start of the war, the British defenders of Mafeking were in a state of starvation by the time a relief column approached.
The battle at Diamond Hill was one of the last ""formal"" battles between the British and the Boers, who had begun to adopt guerrilla tactics.
With the conventional war lost, the Boers resorted to guerrilla warfare.
They achieved some success but were gradually worn down by the British.
BOXER REBELLION NOVEMBER 1899-SEPTEMBER 1901 The Boxers, more correctly the l-ho-chuan, or ""Righteous and Harmonious Fists,"" attacked Western foreigners around Beijing in reaction against imperialist expansion.
A multinational force was sent to deal with them, eventually capturing Beijing and suppressing the rebellion.
The Boxers attempted to remove all foreign presence from the Chinese capital.
Small numbers of guards from various foreign nations, assisted by civilian vounteeers, defended the ""foreign"" community until relief forces arrived.
The Japanese navy, though newly created, was a thoroughly modern and well-trained force.
The Japanese attack was led by a force of destroyers, which torpedoed Russian battleships and cruisers at anchor.
The next night a follow-up attack caused additional damage to the Russian fleet.
Guerrilla fighters of a Boer commando These soldiers fighting in the Second Boer War are armed with various weapons, including German Mauser bolt-action rifles and a British MkIV caliber .577/450 Martini-Henry rifle.
Japanese forces surrounded the port by sea and land, gradually encroaching on the defenses.
Suffering high casualties, the Japanese captured a hill overlooking the port, forcing the Russians to surrender.
The Russian fleet came out of Port Arthur to engage the blockading Japanese.
A running fight ensued for several hours before contact was lost in darkness.
Several Russian ships were forced to seek safety in neutral harbors and were interned.
Location Mukden, southern Manchuria Using large numbers of machine-guns and forward observers linked to the artillery by telephone, the Russians were able to inflict heavy casualties.
After sailing all the way from the Baltic, the Russian fleet was in poor condition.
It was met by a modern Japanese force, which outgunned and outmaneuvered it to inflict a massive defeat.
The first (October 1912May 1913) pitted Bulgaria, Greece, Montenegro, and Serbia (the Balkan League) against Ottoman forces.
The second was an internal conflict arising from old tensions between the member states of the Balkan League.
An Ottoman attack on the first daymade some gains but was pushed back by Serbian counterattacks.
A second attempt was made the next day, despite significant desertions during the night.
A Serbian counterattack drove in the Ottoman left wing, forcing the Ottomans to withdraw.
The town of Edirne was captured from the Turks by forces from Bulgaria and Serbia in March 1913.
BRITISH DIPLOMAT OBSERVING THE RUSSO-JAPANESE WAR, 1904 COMBAT STRESS REACTION Combat stress reaction , a breakdown in mental health forced by the trauma of war, has affected soldiers on active service throughout all periods of history.
The effects of CSR can endure long after the sufferer has left active service.
Early evidence of CSR Viking chess pieces from as early as the eighth and ninth centuries depict warriors about to go into battle gnawing feverishly on the top edge of their shields.
Yet it would be centuries before combat stress became recognized as a genuine and specific medical condition.
However, it was not until observations of the Russo-Japanese War of 1904-05 that doctors The aftermath of siege Russian prisoners march past the Japanese army after the lengthy siege of Port Arthur during the Russo-Japanese War.
Throughout history, soldiers have suffered psychologically from the effects of battle, but it was only after this war that CSR began to be recognized as a medical condition. began to understand combat stress as a genuine reaction to war.
The two world wars brought an explosion of research into CSR based upon tens of thousands of ""shell-shock"" victims (a label initially applied because it was thought that the detonations of explosives caused the symptoms), and the studies helped refine the methods of prompt battlefield treatment.
Although the postwar world recognized CSR as a medical condition, it remains imperfectly handled, largely because of notions of manhood and resilience.
Rapidly advancing technology refined the art of warfare, while the sheer numbers of military personnel involved, and civilians affected, reached staggering proportions.
Along with the other brutal conflicts of the early 20th century, the tragedy and scale of modern global war in terms of destruction and human suffering can scarcely be comprehended.
Afv A »0 CO UHr ^ WORLD WAR I 1914-18 Arising out of long-standing tensions between the European powers.
World War I was sparked by conflict between Austria-Hungary and Serbia.
The expected war of maneuver became an entrenched stalemate in many areas.
The Belgian army, though smaller and not as well armed as the German army, inflicted significant delays on the advancing Germans, with some elements holding out around Antwerp until October.
Germany carried out a deliberate terror campaign intended to ruthlessly subdue any resistance.
The French plan of war called for an offensive to retake its lost provinces of Alsace and Lorraine.
The German army fell back, thereby drawing the French into a trap, and inflicting massive casualties from artillery and machine-gun attacks.
On August 17, First Corps of the German Eighth Army attacked the advancing Russian First Army at Stalluponen, pursuing them east until halted by Russian artillery fire.
The German attack at Gumbinnen was halted, counterattacked, and driven back.
In line with British plans for cooperation with France, the British Expeditionary Force crossed the Channel and advanced Poster pressure During World War I, many nations used propaganda posters, such as this example from the US, featuring evocative imagery to stir young men to join and fight, or others to contribute money and work for the war effort.
A raid by British forces, intended to draw out the German Fligh Seas Fleet, resulted in a confused action in which the British battlecruisers, assigned at the last minute, proved decisive.
As a result, the German Fligh Seas Fleet was instructed to remain in port and to avoid contact with the Royal Navy.
Austrian machine gun The machine gun changed the way wars were fought on land, in the sea, and in the air.
Learning of imminent Russian marching plans by radio intercepts, the Germans quickly transferred reinforcements from the Western Front and laid a trap.
Japanese forces, as well as a small British contingent, besieged the German-owned port of Tsingtao in China.
The garrison managed to hold out until November in the face of bombardment and night raids.
As the German advance from Belgium into eastern France became overextended and disorganized, the Allies launched a counter-offensive.
Although the fighting was evenly balanced, the German army was ordered to withdraw after suffering severe casualties.
After defeating the Russian Second Army at Tannenberg in East Prussia, German forces attempted to encircle the Russian First Army.
The Russians were able to extricate their army from the trap and withdraw in reasonable order.
Crossing the Aisne River under fire, French and British forces launched a frontal attack on German positions.
As elsewhere along the front, the assault was ineffective, and resulted in the Allies learning how pointless it was to carry out such strategies.
Attempting to outflank fortified German positions in what became known as the ""Race to the Sea,"" French forces attacked near Albert and were subsequently counterattacked for little gain on either side.
In an effort to break through to the Channel ports, the German army attacked a salient in front of the town of Ypres, which was held by the BEF with French support.
Little ground was gained for the attempt, and casualties were appalling on both sides.
Brought to battle at Coronel in November 1914, the German Far East squadron annihilated its opponents, then rounded Cape Horn to raid the coaling station at the Falklands.
Outgunned by the force it encountered there and unable to flee, the squadron fought a gallant but hopeless action.
The only surviving German warship, the light cruiser Dresden, remained at large for three months before surrendering off the Juan Fernandez Islands.
While strategy dictates the goals of an operation and what resources are available to achieve them, it is up to the tactician to use those resources effectively in order to achieve his goals.
Through tactical decision-making, commanders display understanding of their own strengths and exploit them, while seeking to expose an enemy's weaknesses.
Siege A siege is a protracted blockade and armed assault against a city or fortress and may last for days or even years.
Masada Surrounded in their hilltop fortress near the Dead Sea, Jewish rebels, outnumbered ten to one, chose suicide rather than surrender to the Romans.
Encirclement Outflanking When an enemy force is encircled, it is prevented from receiving supplies and reinforcements, and is open to attack from all sides.
A flanking maneuver is an attack against the exposed sides of an enemy force.
Chancellorsville In a classic flank attack, Confederate forces routed Union troops during the American Civil War.
Hesitant and defensive Union tactics allowed the Confederates to redeploy, however, concentrating against the flank of one Union force and inflicting a defeat while keeping the other at bay.
Cannae The army of Carthage under Hannibal formed a deep crescent-shaped defensive line and executed a double envelopment to defeat a numerically superior Roman army, which was destroyed as a fighting force.
Fraustadt During the Great Northern War, the Swedish army closed a classic pincer movement to rout an alliance of Saxony-Poland and Russia.
Fall of France Advancing through the Ardennes forest, in terrain considered by the Allies to be unsuitable for tanks to drive through, German armored forces were able to bypass the Maginot Line and fight a war of maneuver on their own terms.
Tannenberg German attacks collapsed both wings of the Russian Army and resulted in the loss of 140,000 Russian troops in World War 1.
Defense in Depth Layered defenses behind a front line allow an armed force to delay the advance of an enemy and slow their momentum, giving an opportunity to mount counterattacks or await reinforcements.
Trench warfare The opposing trenches of the battlefields of World War I provided supporting lines and fortifications.
The multiple defenses behind the front lines allowed enemy gains to be quickly recaptured by each side, leading to stalemate.
Normandy German defenders held back armored forces from the D-Day invasion beaches and instead fortified the hedgerows in the open countryside.
This was intended to slow the Allies and allow time for reinforcements to arrive.
A clash between battlecruiser forces on the Dogger Bank resulted in the British chasing the Germans for several hours, gradually catching up, and then exchanging fire with them.
The armored cruiser Blucher could not keep up with her consorts and was sunk.
Supported by experimental tear gas shells the German Ninth Army attacked the Russian Second Army.
Russian counterattacks were beaten off and heavy losses were sustained by both sides.
Cloth respirators against deadly gas With the use of poison gas on the battlefield by 1915, European armies began to issue respirators to their soldiers.
The first attempts were merely doth filters, as worn by these French soldiers.
After an attempt to force a passage of the Dardanelles with battleships failed, a land offensive was launched.
Launched to eliminate a German salient near Neuve Chapelle, the attack started well.
Increasing shortages of supplies and a German counterattack on March 12, prevented greater gains being made.
After the failure of a naval attempt to force the Dardanelles, Allied troops landed to remove the Turkish forts commanding the Dardanelles straits.
The landings were successful in some areas, but a resolute Turkish defense prevented major success.
The use of chlorine gas, against which the Allied troops were powerless, created a large hole in the defensive lines.
After artillery preparation, the Allied forces advanced up the Gallipoli Peninsula toward the town of Krithia.
They were met by a stout defense, and their right flank was driven off by a Turkish bayonet charge.
A short preparatory bombardment devastated the poorly trained Russian troops, who were crammed into inadequate trenches.
They broke and fell back, allowing German and AustroHungarian troops to advance rapidly.
This offensive, which marked the British army's first attempt at a night attack, was opened by primarily Indian troops.
The heavy artillery preparation had been ineffective but significant gains were made early on in the attack nonetheless.
Renewed assaults by the Allies succeeded in gaining only a little more ground.
Turkish preparations for a counterattack intended to dislodge the Allied beachheads were observed.
The Turks were forced to advance over open ground against well-prepared defenses and suffered heavily.
After attempting a surprise attack, the Italians launched a major frontal offensive across the Isonzo River.
Despite some minor gains, the assault failed for lack of artillery support.
Using gas to precede the advance, the Allies made good gains on the first day of the offensive, but could not bring up their reserves fast enough to maintain momentum.
After defeating Austro-Hungarian offensives in 1914, Serbia was attacked by the combined forces of the German Eleventh Army, Austria-Hungary, and Bulgaria in the autumn of 1915.
After trying to batter through the Austrian positions twice using massed infantry attacks, the Italians brought much more Charity appeal German charities of World War I supported troops captured while fighting in the trenches.
V BENJAFIELD, AUSTRALIAN ARMY MEDICAL CORPS, GALLIPOLI, 1915 Bersaglieri sharpshooter's crested hat Stalemated trench warfare inspired European armies to raise highly mobile regiments of light infantry, such as the Bersaglieri, who were the sharpshooters of the Italian army. artillery to bear.
This resulted in even greater gains, but at the cost of heavy casualties. 1916 massive loss of life for no territorial gain.
The conflict resulted in more than 250,000 battlefield deaths and at least half a million wounded.
By 1916 it had become clear that the deployment of reserves would dictate the course of the war.
Strategies to draw enemy reserves into or out of critical areas were implemented on all sides.
British forces advancing on Baghdad were driven into Kut-al-Amara and besieged there.
After initially resisting the assault, the British and Indian troops were eventually starved into surrender despite the first ever attempt to supply a besieged garrison by air.
Disguising their evacuation by using ruses, such as leaving self-firing rifles behind in the trenches as personnel were thinned, the entire Allied force was withdrawn from Gallipoli.
The Allies did not gain access to the Dardanelles until Turkey withdrew from the war in 1918.
By attacking Verdun, the Germans' plan was to draw the French reserves in and eliminate them.
German reserves were also drawn in, however, resulting in Launched to draw German reinforcements away from Verdun, the offensive suffered from a lack of supplies and muddy thawing ground.
Initial attacks made little progress and the operation tailed off with no real gains made.
The Austro-Hungarian army launched a surprise offensive as the Italians were preparing for another assault on the Isonzo River.
Slowed by the steep, rugged terrain, and distracted by the Brusilov Offensive, the Austrian offensive was halted by redeployed Italian reserves.
This was the only significant collision between the German High Sea Fleet and the British Grand Fleet in World War I After a battlecruiser action, the two main fleets clashed twice.
The British sustained heavier losses before the German fleet managed to slip away in the dark, but the battle was a strategic victory for Britain, confirming its naval superiority.
Location From the Pripet Marshes, south to Czernowitz Theater Eastern Front.
LANDMARK AMPHIBIOUS OPERATIONS Location/War Date Action Island of Malta Ottoman-Habsburg Wars 1565 In the Great Siege of Malta, 5,500 Spanish marines retook the Mediterranean island from the Ottoman invaders and returned it to the control of the Knights Hospitaller.
Gallipoli World War 1 1915 Commonwealth troops landed on the shores of Ottoman Turkey during World War 1 and became locked in a battle of attrition before withdrawing months later.
Tarawa World War II 1943 United States Marines invaded a Japanese-held Pacific atoll and learned bitter lessons in the art of such operations.
Anzio World War II 1944 In an effort to outflank the German positions along the Winter Line during World War II and capture Rome, Allied forces landed near the Italian resort town and become bogged down in a stalemate.
Normandy World War II 1944 In Operation Overlord, the largest amphibious landing ever executed, Allied troops landed on the coast of northwest France on June 6.
Okinawa World War II 1945 The largest amphibious operation of World War II in the Pacific, the landings were followed by 82 days of fighting before the island was secured by Allied troops.
Inchon Korean War 1950 During the Korean War, United Nations forces landed at Inchon to relieve pressure on the Pusan Perimeter.
San Carlos Water 1982 Elements of the Royal Marines' 3 Commando Brigade and the Falklands War Parachute Regiment of the British Army went ashore during the liberation of the Falkland Islands from Argentine troops.
Gallipoli Campaign, 1915 During the Dardanelles Campaign, Allied forces attempted, unsuccessfully, to conquer a Turkish garrison at Gallipoli and gain control of this strategic peninsula guarding the Black In 1916, Russian General Alexei Brusilov suggested an untried form of assault, which involved attacking at several points instead of just one, and without the normal extensive artillery bombardment beforehand.
Using this method, the Russians achieved total surprise over the Austro-Hungarian forces, who were comfortably dug in to deep trenches.
They launched with a colossal and accurate, though brief, artillery barrage against the Austrians.
The final gains were outweighed by the costs, as German reinforcements arrived from the Western Front.
Arab guerrillas, rebelling against Ottoman rule from Constantinople, tied down large numbers of Turkish troops and carried out joint operations with British forces.
Arab cavalry and camel-mounted troops working alongside British armored cars eventually occupied Damascus.
Lawrence rose to fame as the British liaison officer to the Arabs, coordinating their operations with Allied forces in the region.
DIRECTORY Desperate to draw German artillery and troops away from the battle for Verdun, the Western Allies launched a large-scale offensive on the Somme.
After an eight-day bombardment, the British launched their attack against positions they expected to find shattered by artillery.
To the south of the British sector, French divisions made their own attack.
These suffered fewer casualties due to their use of infiltration tactics and the fact that a French assault was unexpected.
The Allies continued to attack on the Somme throughout July in a frantic bid to draw German reinforcements away from the battle for Verdun.
The first German reserves were pulled from Verdun on July 11, as the Allies gained the first line of German trenches.
Having failed once to gain control of the Suez Canal, the Turks tried again as the British began moving their positions forward.
Initially securing part of Romani, the Turks were driven off by a counterattack, ending the threat to the Suez Canal.
Switching from a strategy of broad offensives to a focus on a single point, the Italian army made significant gains.
The Austrians pulled back to preserve their forces, which were thinly stretched and having to fight on two fronts.
Assisted by a small number of tanks, the Allies made further slow progress against the German lines, relieving the pressure— and permitting the French to go over to the offensive—at Verdun.
The final Allied push on the Somme resulted in further minor gains and assisted the French offensive around Verdun.
J Battling against a sea of mud Mud was the dominant feature of many World War I battlefields, hindering movement and causing sores on the soldiers' wet feet.
Here British stretcher-bearers carry a comrade at Passchendaele in 1917.
The Allies deployed tanks while Germany relied upon highly trained infantry.
Russia suffered political collapse and left the war, depriving the Allies of manpower.
A five-day bombardment warned the German defenders of a coming assault, but the use of tunnels to get close to German positions gave an element of surprise.
Using new tactics and tank support, the French hoped the Nivelle Offensive would provide a breakthrough.
Delays allowed the Germans to prepare, and the assault achieved little.
A WITNESS TO THE BOLSHEVIK UPRISING, MAY 1917 LARGEST CONVENTIONAL COMBAT EXPLOSIONS Location/War Date Incident Siege of Almeida Peninsular War August 26 1810 At Almeida, Portugal, a French shell detonated 75 tons of powder, 4,000 prepared charges, and a million musket rounds.
Battle of the Crater United States Civil War July 30, 1864 During the siege of Petersburg, Union engineers packed tunnels beneath Confederate lines with four tons of gunpowder.
Battle of the Somme World War 1 July 1, 1916 At 7:28am, the British detonated 27 tons of explosives, signaling the beginning of the devastating battle of the Somme.
Messines World War 1 June 7, 1917 Along the Messines-Wytschaete Ridge, 21 mines were placed under German lines.
Daisy Cutter Vietnam War to the present day 1960s-present From the Vietnam era to combat in Iraq and Afghanistan, United States forces have utilized the 7.5-ton Daisy Cutter bomb to clear landing zones.
The detonation of explosives in tunnels under the German positions resulted in a successful assault.
With Russia in turmoil and German armies advancing on Petrograd, Lenin's Red Guards seized control of the capital and set up a revolutionary government.
Using ""bite-and-hold"" tactics to make and hold on to small gains, the Allies initially made good progress until well-prepared reinforced positions halted them.
Bolstered by German troops and officers, the Austrian army managed to break the weary Italian line and force a retreat.
The Russian offensive made good progress at first but rapidly faltered in the face of a German counterattack.
Electrical detonator In World War I, explosives set off by detonators were used to dig fortifications, mine enemy approach lines, and destroy infrastructure.
Making the first massed tank attack, the British achieved great gains on the first day.
However, mechanical breakdowns and lack of preparation robbed the British of the chance to exploit the victory.
There, they were committed to a series of offensives intended to win the war before American manpower reached the battlefields.
Canadian Ross bayonet and pocket knife The stubby Ross bayonet, here shown alongside a standard issue Canadian pocket knife, was designed for the Ross Mk III rifle issued to Canadian troops.
Using infiltration tactics backed by massive artillery bombardment, the Germans smashed a hole in the British line.
Attempting to eliminate U-Boat bases, the Allies planned to scuttle old cruisers as blockships, rendering the canals useless.
Determined resistance prevented the ships from being scuttled in the right place.
Supported by 13 tanks, German forces made a successful attack in the direction of Amiens.
During the fighting, the first ever engagement between tanks took place.
Hoping to win the war before American troops arrived in strength, German High Command launched a surprise offensive.
Initially it made large gains but lack of supplies, fatigue, and Allied counterattacks halted the offensive.
American forces in Europe launched their first offensive, albeit on a small scale, against the village of Cantigny.
Combined with French tank, artillery, and air support the position was taken and held against counterattacks.
American troops suffered heavy casualties attacking across open ground in the face of machine-gun fire.
Advancing in a pincer movement, the Austrians hoped to crush on the Italian army.
But the Italians had recovered from the disaster at Caporetto and, with French and British reinforcements, made a successful counterattack.
Using modern combined-arms tactics with massed machine-guns and heavy tanks.
Pushing across the Marne River, the German offensive was halted by the Allies, who forced them to fall back to the Aisne.
Surprise was achieved, allowing the Allies to make such dramatic gains that August 8 was described as the ""Black Day of the German Army.
With vast numbers of tanks and aircraft in support, the Allies began making substantial gains against the exhausted Germans.
Demoralization and political upheaval ended Germany's ability to resist.
Although the German army was by now on the brink of collapse, the Hindenburg ""Devil dogs"" on the attack In June 1918, at the Battle of Belleau Wood, United States Marines earned their German sobriquet Teufelshunde (""Devil dogs"") for their fierce hand-to-hand fighting in attacks, which helped halt a German offensive.
By using a creeping barrage tactic the Allies made good gains, prompting their decision to undertake further offensives against the weakening German army.
Italian advances met with fierce resistance, which suddenly collapsed after hard fighting.
The Austrian army ceased to exist as a fighting force and an armistice was agreed as the Austro-Hungarian empire began to disintegrate.
RUSSIAN CIVIL WAR The Russian Civil War was not an issue between two sides.
Within the ""Red"" and ""White"" factions there were several groups, many of whom disagreed violently with one another.
Furthermore, several foreign forces, including British, Americans, Japanese, Czechs, and Poles, intervened to protect their national interests.
Threatened by foreign forces, which controlled key ports, nationalist groups in some areas, and by the White armies, the Bolsheviks built an army and won a bloody war for control of Russia.
RUSSO-POLISH WAR Both Poland, which had just been re-established as a nation, and the emerging Soviet Union sought to control regions lying between them, because the frontiers between Poland and Soviet Russia had not been clearly laid out in the Treaty of Versailles.
Foreign interests further muddied the waters, and conflict became inevitable.
The eventual peace treaty of 1921 divided the disputed territory between Poland and the Soviet Union.
Polish attempts to secure their nationhood led to an invasion by Soviet Russia, and by the middle of summer the city of Warsaw seemed fated to fall.
A surprise Polish counter-offensive threatened the Russians with envelopment before they reached Warsaw.
TOP FIGHTER ACES IN HISTORY Perhaps no other military icon so vividly embodies both the idealized romance and risk of warfare than the fighter ace.
The phrase originated during World War I, when French newspapers lionized Adolphe Pegoud for shooting down five German aircraft.
Comparable with the medieval knights of old, fighter aces often engage in single combat, and thus can take individual credit for kills.
B McCudden Britain 57 United States Edward Rickenbacker 26 William Lambert 22 August laccaci 18 Frank Luke, Jr.
Malan South Africa 32 United States Richard Bong 40 Thomas B McGuire 38 David McCampbell 34 Francis Gabreski 28 France Marcel Albert 23 Jean Demozay 21 Pierre LeGloan 20 Edmond Marin la Meslee 20 Japan Hiroyoshi Nishizawa 87 Combat in the skies World War I saw the first widespread use of airplanes in combat.
German air ace Ernst Udet, pictured here with a Fokker DVII, earned 62 confirmed kills in the war.
Tetsuzo Iwamoto 80 Shoichi Sugita 70 Saburo Sakai 64 Soviet Union Ivan N Kozhedub 62 Aleksandr Pokryshkin 59 Grigori Rechkalov 58 Nikolai Gulayev 57 KOREAN WAR United States Joseph McConnell, Jr.
Spanish Civil War Poster This 1937 propaganda poster extols the strength of the ""proletariat"" to resist the ""military bullying"" of the Nationalists , who launched a coup against the government Seeking to break the power of the warlords in northern China and unify the nation, the National Revolutionary Army won several major victories in 1926-27.
Three warlords, once allied with Jiang Jieshi and the Nationalists, broke away and a civil war began.
Chiang Kai-shek's faction benefited from air power, and emerged as the dominant force in China, but the campaign against the Communist Red Army was weakened by this internal conflict.
THE LONG MARCH OCTOBER 1 6 , 1934-OCTOBER 20,1935 Forces 80,000 in initial Communist outbreak from Jiangxi.
Breaking through Nationalist encirclement in Jiangxi, the Communist forces marched north to find a secure base.
Casualties were high from harassing attacks and the hardships of the march, but eventually the survivors reached safety.
Although the speed record of the supersonic MiG-25 interceptor is the fastest military aircraft US-built SR-71 Blackbird spyplane stands unbroken today, the currently deployed.
But relations broke down when a Communist force including many civilians was encircled and all but annihilated by Nationalists.
During one of a series of engagements in central China, Communist forces destroyed a contingent of Japanese soldiers and Nationalist troops previously subservient to the rule of the Japanese occupiers.
Without popular support, weak Nationalist troops, ordered by leader Jiang Jieshi to stand their ground until reinforced, were virtually annihilated by well-organized Communist forces.
SPANISH CIVIL WAR 1936-39 A complex conflict involving many factions, the combatants in this vicious civil war were loosely grouped into two sides the rebel Nationalists, led by General Francisco Franco, and the loyalist Republicans.
The International Brigades of more than 40,000 anti-fascist foreign volunteers from more than 50 countries joined the Republican side.
Assisted by German and Italian air transport forces, the best troops of the Spanish army, garrisoned in Morocco, crossed into Spain to take part in the war on the mainland.
This successful operation was the world's first large-scale military airlift.
Republican forces managed to establish a beachhead on the island of Mallorca.
With the help of overwhelming Italian air power, the Nationalist forces launched a counterattack which drove the Republicans off the island.
Its flawed design made it dangerous to use, and its weak cartridge had considerably less stopping power than comparable Western rounds.
Two Nationalist heavy cruisers were sent to drive off two Republican destroyers threatening the supply route between Morocco and Spain, sinking one and forcing the other to retreat with heavy damage.
The arrival of the first volunteer International Brigades on the Republican side enabled the besieged city of Madrid to hold out under attack by the Nationalists.
Republican reinforcements, led by Soviet T-26 tanks that outgunned those of the Nationalists, arrived in time to drive off the attackers.
The air attack on Guernica, ostensibly against military targets, was ""without regard for the civilian population"", with deliberate attacks on civilians reported.
The city was defended by extensive, labyrinthine fortifications, including bunkers, tunnels, and fortified trenches in several rings, and all protected by artillery fortifications.
Known as the ""Iron Belt"", the elaborate fortifications were incomplete by the time of the battle and were breached.
By then the designer had defected to the Nationalists, along with his plans.
Ultimately the Republicans were forced to withdraw in the face of greater numbers.
Facing certain defeat, the Republicans launched a failed offensive across the Ebro river.
Sp * ■*.» i ms DIRECTORY jiHBHHnBSEBHHHIHHHHHRHHHHIHHHUliHI FAMOUS SPECIAL FORCES UNITS Special Forces or Special Operations units exist within the military establishments of many nations.
Unit Nation Founded In Action Stormtroopers Germany 1915 Italian Front, Western Front Arditi Italy 1917 Italian Front, Balkans Brandenburger Regiment Germany 1939 Low Countries, Eastern Front Long Range Desert Group Great Britain 1940 North African Desert Commandos Great Britain 1940 Western Europe via combined armed forces organization Special Boat Service Great Britain 1940 Mediterranean, China, Burma, India Special Air Service Great Britain 1941 North Africa, Western Europe.
Actions include Desert Storm and Operation Iraqi Freedom Chindits Great Britain 1942 China, Burma, India Popski's Private Army Great Britain 1942 North African Desert Rangers United States 1942 Mediterranean, Western Europe.
The ill-equipped and disorganized Chinese warlords were easily overrun.
Casualties Total at Shanghai:200,000; Chinese at Rape of Nanking:250,000.
Nanking, by contrast, was not ferociously contested but was still sacked by the Japanese.
RUSSO-JAPANESE WAR 1938-39 Having overrun China, Japan now found itself sharing a border with Russia in Manchuria.
Mistrust between the two ran deep, and a dispute over the location of the border developed into a brief war.
Taking Manchuria away from the Chinese, the Japanese army came up against Soviet forces in the region.
Japan claimed that the Soviet Union had tampered with the border demarcation, and so attacked.
This gained the Japanese some ground but they were ultimately dislodged.
As Japanese troops pushed into the Soviet area of influence, the Soviets launched an armored counterattack supported by mechanized infantry.
However, none of the nations that fought in World War II was fully prepared for conflict.
As a result, although the Allies declared war over the German invasion of Poland, they were not in a position to take much direct action.
A ""phoney war"" ensued, which then gave way to conflict on a massive scale.
The speed of the German advance, coupled with the use of tactical air power, weakened the Polish defense.
Attacked by superior forces along a broad front, the outmatched Polish army fought to the best of its ability.
A combination of soldiers and civilian volunteers defeated armored assaults on the city, which then came under siege.
When it became apparent that the Western Allies were not going to assist Poland the defenders surrendered.
The Soviet forces had far more soldiers, aircraft, and tanks than the Finns.
Shown here is a restored Supermarine Spitfire Mk VB. overconfidently advancing into Finland, the Soviets suffered heavy casualties and were fought to a standstill at the Mannerheim Line.
After an effective raiding cruise the pocket battleship CrafSpee was cornered in the Plate River by Allied cruisers.
Duped into thinking that a massive Allied force had arrived, the Graf Spee's captain ordered her scuttled.
Denmark, Norway, and France were quickly overrun, and an invasion of Britain might have taken place if air superiority had been obtained.
Allied landings came too late to prevent the fall of Norway, but resistance continued throughout the war.
Invasion troops ashore were also bombarded before the destroyer force left.
A large Allied force sank several ships at Narvik and attacked shore installations.
An aircraft from the battleship Warspite also sank a U-boat, the first time a submarine had been attacked successfully from the air in the war.
The fort of Eben Emael dominated crucial river crossings with its artillery.
German airborne forces took it, helping secure a route for rapid advance into Belgium.
Advancing through the Ardennes forest, German armored forces broke through the Allied line and headed north for the Channel ports.
In an attempt to interfere with German crossings of the Meuse, Allied light bombers made repeated but ultimately fruitless attacks on the advancing German columns and on the bridges themselves, where engineers detonated charges as the German were crossing.
Casualties were high among the obsolete Fairey Battle aircraft, used for many of the strikes.
Later reports claimed that the attacks delayed the German advance by four days.
The French held well-fortified positions and were receiving reinforcements as the German attack began.
Massive air attacks stunned the defenders and resulted in a rout among some of them.
As the German armored spearhead advanced toward the Channel coast, a small force of Allied tanks and supporting infantry launched a counter-strike that overran elements of the German force.
The attack was eventually driven off but delayed the Axis advance significantly.
German: 1,887 aircraft; British: 1,023 aircraft; Blitz: 43,000 British civilians.
The so-called Battle of Britain was the first major campaign to be fought entirely in the air.
Gradually the German policy shifted from attacking fighter bases to the intense bombing of cities.
This tactic of blitzkrieg , was intended to demoralize the civilian population of Britain.
LANDMARK SPECIAL FORCES ACTIONS Elite special forces have conducted numerous operations during situations.
For example, they have been involved in advance attacks, deploy from land, sea, and air to conduct hazardous missions, suppression of terrorist activities, and the resolution of hostage which live on to become famous in both success and failure.
Force Location Date Action German Stormtroopers Caporetto 1917 Shock troops overwhelmed Italian defenders in surprise attack.
German Brandenburger Regiment Gennep, Netherlands 1940 Special forces seized the bridge across the Meuse river intact.
German Airborne Eben Emael 1940 Elite paratroopers captured Belgian fortress.
British Commandos Beda Littoria 1941 Raid on German General Erwin Rommel's North Africa headquarters failed.
French Foreign Legion Bir Hacheim 1942 Free French and Foreign Legion troops defended the Gazala Line in North Africa.
United States Marine Raiders Makin Atoll 1942 Marines struck Japanese garrison in the Pacific.
First Special Service Force Monte la Difensa 1943 US-Canadian Commando unit captured enemy position.
United States Army Rangers Cisterna 1944 German ambush near Italian town inflicted heavy casualties.
British Paratroopers Normandy 1944 Special forces captured Merville Battery overlooking Sword Beach on D-Day.
United States Army Rangers Normandy 1944 Elite troops scaled heights of Pointe du Hoc on D-Day.
French Airborne and Foreign Legion Dien Bien Phu 1954 Special forces defended outpost against Viet Minh forces.
British, French, Israeli Special Forces Suez 1956 Joint operation to seize control of the Suez Canal.
United States Army Special Forces Son Tay 1970 Attempt to free POWs ended when Vietnam camp is discovered evacuated.
Israeli Commandos Entebbe 1976 Raid freed hostages taken to Uganda in airline hijacking.
GSG9 Mogadishu 1977 German special forces rescued 90 hostages from hijacked aircraft.
SAS Iranian Embassy London 1980 Assault freed 19 hostages and killed five Iranian terrorists.
United States Combined Special Forces Tehran 1980 Attempt to rescue United States hostages held in Iran failed.
British SAS and SBS South Georgia Island 1982 Special forces conducted operations in the Falklands.
United States Army Rangers Mogadishu 1993 ""Blackhawk Down"" raid failed to capture Somali warlord.
W EDNEY, ROYAL NAVY, ON THE SINKING OF A U-BOAT, MARCH 1941 THE WAR AT SEA The convoy routes of the Atlantic Ocean and Mediterranean Sea were severely threatened by German U-boats and surface raiders.
Without the ability to move supplies and troops by sea, the Allied war effort would have ground to a halt.
Caught without her aircraft in the air, the aircraft carrier HMS Glorious was sunk by gunfire from the German battlecruisers.
Her two destroyer escorts met a similar fate, though a torpedo and a number of 4.7-inch shell hits damaged the battlecruiser Scharnhorst, whose withdrawal to Trondheim enabled the Allied evacuation convoys from Norway to pass safely through the area later that day.
The battle of the Atlantic resulted because of a German attempt to blockade Britain using its submarine forces.
The practice of escorting convoys across the Atlantic limited losses somewhat, and gradually the balance tipped in the Allies' favor.
Swordfish aircraft from British carriers attacked the Italian fleet in harbor, torpedoing three battleships but losing Purple Heart Beginning in 1917, the United States armed forces issued a medal, the ""Purple Heart,"" for soldiers, sailors, and airmen wounded or killed in action against an enemy.
Having crippled a cruiser and damaged the battleship Vittorio Veneto by air attack, the British force caught part of the Italian squadron lying stopped at night.
Invaded by Italy in October 1940, Greek forces counterattacked and initially managed drive the Italians back into Albania.
German intervention made defeat inevitable despite a transfer of British troops from North Africa, compromising the Allied position there.
Breaking out into the Atlantic to attack Allied convoys, the Bismarck and her consort Prim Eugen were pursued by massive Allied forces.
Crippled by air attack, the Bismarck fought to the end against overwhelming odds.
Despite taking heavy casualties the German airborne forces managed to gain control of the airfield at Maleme, allowing supplies and reinforcements to be flown in.
Catching the Soviets by surprise, the initial invasion of the Soviet Union went extremely well.
However, Soviet resistance did not collapse as the Germans had predicted and the invasion fell behind schedule.
With some assistance from German forces, Romanian troops besieged the city of Odessa, capturing it on the fourth attempt.
Arriving in North Africa to assist the Italians, German forces pushed the Allies eastward.
Tobruk was left as an isolated outpost under siege, which, in December 1941, Allied forces broke through to lift.
Threatened by the Finns as well as the main Axis advance, Leningrad withstood siege until January 1943.
Axis troops advancing on Moscow had to contend with stiffening resistance and worsening weather that turned the roads to mud.
Freezing conditions restored mobility, but by this time a solid defense was in position.
Deploying the world's largest artillery piece, German forces surrounded and gradually reduced the port of Sevastopol.
A few senior officers escaped by submarine; the remainder of the garrison stayed and fought to the end.
Launched with the objective of relieving the siege of Tobruk, Operation Crusader was the first major Allied victory over Axis forces.
Tank losses on both sides were heavy but the Allies were better able to replace theirs.
Their resources were limited by commitments elsewhere, but Axis forces captured Rostov as part of an operation intended to secure the industrial centers of the Don basin.
The overextended Axis forces were counterattacked and made their first major withdrawal of the war.
The Soviets transferred troops from Siberia and, supported by new T-34 tanks, launched a huge counter-offensive intended to drive German forces out of Russia.
A surprise attack by Japanese air forces caught the United States unprepared and caused serious losses.
United States aircraft carriers, however, were at sea at the time, and survived to become the mainstay of the United States Pacific war.
Red army poster A propaganda poster depicts the Red Army and air force counterattacking against the German invasion in 1941.
HISTORY'S LARGEST WARSHIPS History's largest warships have been primary projectors of their nations' foreign policy and military power.
Naval supremacy has long been a component of empire building, national security, and prestige.
Here it is shown being launched from the Blohm & Voss shipyard, in Hamburg, Germany, in 1939.
LANDMARK WAR MOVIES Name/Year Starring Director Studio Synopsis The Dawn Patrol, 1930 Richard Barthelmess; Douglas Fairbanks, Jr.
All Quiet on the Western Front, 1930 Louis Wolheim; Lew Ayres Lewis Milestone Universal Anti-war film set during World War 1 and based on the novel by Erich Maria Remarque.
The Longest Day, 1962 John Wayne; Henry Fonda; Robert Mitchum; Sean Connery; Richard Burton Darryl F Zanuck 20th Century Fox Hollywood treatment of the D-Day Allied landings and invasion, June 6, 1944, based on the book by Cornelius Ryan.
Zulu, 1964 Stanley Baker; Michael Caine Cy Endfield Diamond Films Outnumbered British soldiers defeat Zulu warriors during the epic battle of Rorke's Drift.
War and Peace, 1968 Sergei Bondarchuk; Vyacheslav Tikhonov; Lyudmila Savelyeva Sergei Bondarchuk Mosfilm Studios Soviet film of the Russian defense against Napoleon based on the classic novel by Leo Tolstoy.
Breaker Morant, 1980 Edward Woodward Bruce Beresford 20th Century Fox Story of an Australian folk hero during the Boer War.
Platoon, 1986 Charlie Sheen; Tom Berenger; Willem Dafoe Oliver Stone Orion Pictures Action in the Vietnam War.
Gettysburg, 1993 Martin Sheen; Tom Berenger; Jeff Daniels Ronald F Maxwell Turner Pictures The high tide of the Confederacy during the United States Civil War.
Schindler's List, 1993 Liam Neeson; Ben Kingsley Steven Spielberg Universal The story of a German businessman saving Jews in Nazi-occupied Poland.
Saving Private Ryan, 1998 Tom Hanks; Matt Damon; Tom Sizemore Steven Spielberg DreamWorks Intense World War II combat during the Normandy campaign.
Downfall, 2004 Bruno Ganz; Alexandra Maria Lara; Juliane Kohler Oliver Hirschbiegel Constantin Film Depiction of the final 12 days of Adolf Hitler in his Berlin bunker. i f The Longest Day The D-Day operations were immortalized in movies.
Ben Vandervoort , commander of second battalion, 505th Parachute Infantry Regiment, in the 1962 film, The Longest Day.
Battle of Midway June 1942 During the battle of Midway, the United States and Japanese navies fought a decisive combat over this strategic atoll in the Pacific Ocean.
Here, the carrier USS Yorktown lists, mortally wounded by Japanese torpedo bombers.
THE WAR IN THE FAR EAST After the bombing of Pearl Harbor, Japanese forces moved south to attack British, Dutch, and American colonies in Asia.
It was conceded that Hong Kong was indefensible, but reinforcements were sent anyway.
The Allies were driven back to Hong Kong island and held it for a time, but were eventually overwhelmed.
Attempting a forward defense on the Malay Peninsula, Allied troops were repeatedly overrun or outflanked by the fast-moving Japanese.
The result was a series of defeats as the Allies were pushed back toward Singapore.
After the loss of major air assets on the ground, American and Filipino defenders were unable to prevent Japanese landings.
Retreating to the Bataan peninsula, United States forces held out for a time before being forced to surrender.
Attempting to interfere with Japanese invasion plans, the Allied vessels came under heavy attack from the air.
The action graphically demonstrated the capabilities of air power at sea.
However, the Axis advance was halted at sea in the Pacific and on land in Europe.
The balance would shift back and forth several times during the year before beginning to tip in favor of the Allies.
Later, the Japanese advanced into India from bases in Burma, but were stopped and ultimately driven back across and out of the country.
Demoralized by defeats in Malaya, the Allies made a stand on Singapore island.
However, they were unable to prevent Japanese forces from crossing the straits from the mainland.
The subsequent loss of Singapore was a severe blow to British morale and prestige in Asia.
In a series of surface actions involving cruisers and destroyers, the last significant Allied naval forces in Southeast Asia were sunk or driven off.
The first air raid by American forces against Japan during World War II, the Doolittle Raid was conducted by bombers launched from an aircraft carrier.
The raid did little material damage but it influenced Japanese strategic thinking and bolstered Allied hopes during a very bleak period.
Aircraft from carriers on both sides inflicted losses, while surface warships acted as floating anti-aircraft batteries.
Attempting to cut the British Eighth Army off from the rear, German armored forces became trapped for a time before a supply line was forced through, enabling the panzers to break through and capture Tobruk.
A Japanese attack on the strategically important United States base at Midway resulted in a decisive clash.
Heavy losses were taken on both sides, but United States carrier aircraft destroyed four Japanese aircraft carriers, decisively altering the balance of naval power in the Pacific.
After breaking through at Gazala, Axis armored forces advanced on Tobruk and attacked.
Lacking adequate anti-tank guns and caught unprepared, the previously formidable defenses around the city were quickly overrun.
Retreating eastward after the defeats at Gazala and Tobruk, the Allies made a stand at El Alamein.
The Axis advance was halted after intense fighting, but the Allies failed to make headway.
Capturing the Japanese airstrip on Guadalcanal, United States forces struggled to retain it against repeated attacks.
Naval victories allowed the United States to cut off Japanese supplies and reinforcements.
The experience gained from the raid, however, was invaluable in planning later amphibious operations including the Normandy landings.
Prayer flag Soldiers and leaders alike have sought spiritual help during crises.
Many Japanese soldiers in World War II carried flags like this one, decorated with Shinto prayers and family names.
WORST FRIENDLY FIRE INCIDENTS Location/War Date Incident Algeciras Bay Napoleonic Wars July 8 and 12, 1801 Near Gibraltar, Spanish warships fired on one another, killing 1,700.
China World War II February 21,1942 Fighter planes of the American Volunteer Group, the Flying Tigers attacked a retreating column of Commonwealth troops, believing them to be Japanese.
Normandy World War II August 8, 1944 The Polish 1st Armored Division and Canadian 3rd Armored Division were bombed by United States aircraft, killing and wounding hundreds during Operation Totalize.
Lubeck, Germany World War II May 3, 1945 Royal Air Force planes attacked ships carrying concentration camp survivors and Red Army prisoners of war, killing more than 7,000.
Hamburger Hill Vietnam War May 11, 1969 Misdirected fire from helicopter gunships killed two United States soldiers and wounded 35.
Persian Gulf Iran-lraq War May 17, 1987 Two Exocet missiles, fired by an Iraqi fighter struck the frigate USS Stark during the Iran-lraq War, killing 37 and wounding 21.
Iraq Provide Comfort April 14, 1994 United States fighters downed two Black Hawk helicopters, mistaking them for enemy aircraft, killing 26.
Battle of Stalingrad 1942-43 In one of modern history's bloodiest battles, the Red Army and the German Sixth Army had to fight for every street and building.
Here, Soviet soldiers break cover during an assault through the city's ruins.
THE TIDE TURNS Although it was not yet readily apparent during the summer months of 1942, the tide of victory was finally beginning to turn in favor of the Allies.
Allied: 1 aircraft carrier and 12 other ships lost; Axis: 2 submarines lost, many aircraft shot down.
Operation Pedestal was the last chance to get desperately needed supplies through to Malta, which had been under siege for many months.
The battle for Stalingrad degenerated into desperate and chaotic street fighting as the Axis forces pushed slowly forward.
The Axis forces were then encircled and trapped in the ruined city, eventually being forced to surrender.
Flying Fortress bombers B-17 Flying Fortress bombers of the Eighth United States Air Force attack Nazi Germany by day.
Joint US-British landings seized ports in Morocco and Algeria, after which the troops advanced eastward into Tunisia.
This led to the action at Kasserine Pass and the eventual removal of Axis forces from North Africa.
Germany was bogged down in a struggle at Stalingrad and the Japanese had been halted in the Pacific at Guadalcanal.
By year end, the Allies had ejected the Axis from North Africa and begun the invasion of Italy.
KASSERINE PASS The British offensive resulted in bloody, confused fighting.
A counter-offensive was repulsed before the British attacked again, driving the Germans back.
Axis forces attacked United States formations holding the Kasserine Pass, inflicting a sharp defeat.
A United States counterattack was repulsed before the Axis force withdrew.
A rearguard action by panzer forces enabled a retreat, but remaining Axis forces fell soon after, ending the war in North Africa.
RAF Lancaster bombers breached the Mohne and Eder dams and damaged two others.
To defeat anti-torpedo defenses they used specially designed ""bouncing bombs"" that skipped across the water.
Soviet reserves turned the battle and by the middle of July the Soviets were able to advance.
Bad weather disrupted the airborne component, yet the amphibious landings went well.
USAAF bombers attacked by day while RAF aircraft made their raids at night.
The combined raid on a ball-bearing factory at Schweinfurt and an aircraft plant at Regensburg was the most costly United States bombing mission in the war to date.
After failing to dislodge the Allies, Axis forces broke off and withdrew.
The RAF undertook a series of large raids on Berlin to break German morale and to lure the Luftwaffe into a decisive battle by launching attacks on the German aircraft industry.
After the Luftwaffe had been severely weakened, the Allied invasion of Europe could proceed.
German 37mm small-caliber gun Although outclassed by the evolution of armored vehicles during the early 1940s, small-caliber anti-tank guns such as this PAK 36 were standard issue for many infantry units.
DIRECTORY INDUSTRIAL OUTPUT OF THE UNITED STATES IN WORLD WAR II During World War II, the United States was a leading producer of arms, military equipment, and raw materials, producing the largest quantities of some materiel in the world and, in others, second only to the Soviet Union.
CONVOYS UNDER THREAT Although Germany possessed few major warships, they were a serious threat to Allied convoys.
Large naval forces had to be deployed, particularly in the north Atlantic, to watch and contain them.
In an attempt to intercept an Allied convoy, the German battle cruiser Scharnhorst encountered a powerful Allied force.
Deprived of her radar and later slowed by shell hits, she was torpedoed repeatedly by destroyers and sunk.
Allied poster Roosevelt and Churchill were idealized as liberators of Europe and Asia.
This poster marks the destruction of one of the last Japanese battleships, Haruna, which Allied aircraft sunk off the Kure naval base in 1945.
The monastery of Monte Cassino resisted repeated assaults by the Allies even when reduced to rubble.
Attempting to outflank Axis defenses, the Allies launched an amphibious landing but caution prevented them front exploiting the landing.
Japanese forces attempted to take the Naga Hills and establish a defensive position.
After a battle of attrition, a lack of supplies caused the Japanese force to collapse.
Attempting to prevent resupply and reinforcement of Allied troops at Imphal, Japanese forces clung to a defensive position until starvation and lack of ammunition forced them to retreat.
The speed of the Soviet advance meant preparations to hold Sevastopol were incomplete.
The Allies sought to cripple German oil production, targeting the Ploesti oilfield.
Bomber losses were heavy, but production was halted by the middle of August.
ADOLPH WARNECKE, United States PARATROOPER, DESCRIBING D-DAY, 1944 The Allies launched a massive crossChannel invasion of Europe, the largest single-day amphibious invasion of all time, and caught the defenders by surprise.
The heaviest Allied losses were at Omaha beach; elsewhere the landings went according to plan.
Air power crippled the movement of German supplies and reserves, allowing the Allies to advance into Normandy.
VENGEANCE WEAPONS CAMPAIGN JUNE 13, 1944-march 29,1945 Forces More than 8000 VI and 3225 V2 weapons launched.
Unmanned flying bombs and ballistic missiles were launched in long-range attacks against the Allies.
The V3 weapon, a giant artillery battery, was incomplete at the end of the war.
Assisted by Estonian forces, German units held off the attempted Soviet reoccupation for several weeks but were forced to retreat when outflanked by offensives in other areas.
As the Soviet army approached Warsaw, the Polish Home Army rose up and took control of most of the city.
A pause in the Soviet advance allowed the Germans to suppress the uprising.
Allied forces landing in southern France encountered little resistance because most of the Axis troops in the region had been transferred north to oppose the D-Day landings.
A northerly defensive line, the Gothic Line was heavily fortified and bitterly contested.
By the time it was breached by the Allies, weather conditions had prevented further offensives in 1944.
Attempting to seize vital bridges in Elolland to enable the Allied forces to advance rapidly northward and into the German lowlands, the Allies landed paratroops ahead of an advancing armored force.
The operation failed after 10 days of bitter fighting; the Rhine bridges at Arnhem remained in German hands.
Ruins of Monte Cassino monastery, 1944 A sign warns of a minefield in the ruins of the monastery of Monte Cassino, Italy.
The Allies eventually dislodged a German force that had moved in and seized the heights after the Allies bombed the abbey.
In an action reminiscent of those of World War I, German forces held the Hiirtgen Forest region against advancing American troops.
During Allied attempts to breach the Siegfried Line, Aachen was taken by the Allies after a week-long battle.
The Japanese ships then came under attack from aircraft and submarines.
Attacking along a broad front the Soviets trapped and destroyed German units, which had been given ""no retreat"" orders by Hitler.
Hitler ordered a counter-offensive that ensured the loss of these forces.
Allied landings in Normandy Soldiers from the United States Army Quartermaster Corps wade ashore at Normandy, France, on June 7,1944, the day after D-Day.
The landings, known as Operation Overlord, began a campaign of reconquest that helped defeat Nazi Germany.
Attempting to contest United States landings in the Philippines, Japanese surface forces were met with massive air attack as well as a gunnery engagement in the Surigao Strait, losing four aircraft carriers and thousands of men.
The battle of Leyte Gulf was the most extensive naval battle of World War fl, and the largest naval battle in history, ft was also the first notable battle in which Japanese aircraft used organized suicidal kamikaze attacks.
Japan had fewer aircraft than the Allied Forces had sea vessels, which illustrates the contrast in power of the two sides at this time of the war.
THE CLOSING MONTHS The last months of the war were marked by increasingly desperate resistance on the part of the Axis.
Japanese troops defended Pacific islands to the death, while German forces were resolute in the defense of their homeland.
Sudden counter-offensives by Axis forces achieved limited success but generally failed for lack of resources.
With the development of the Boeing B-29 Superfortress bomber, United States forces based in China and several Pacific islands could now attack Japan.
Starting in June 1944, conventional bombing raids with incendiary munitions proved highly effective, causing huge firestorms.
Six major Soviet offensives were launched to reduce the pocket, resulting in heavy losses before the surviving Axis troops surrendered at the end of the war.
Launching a surprise attack from the Ardennes, German forces made good gains but were hampered by lack of fuel.
As the Soviets encircled Budapest, Hitler ordered it held at all costs and sent forces to break the siege.
The fall of Berlin ended the war in Europe, while the projected invasion of Japan was expected to be so costly in casualties that nuclear weapons were seen as a viable alternative.
Japan eventually surrendered on September 2, 1945, after the nuclear bombing of Hiroshima and Nagasaki demonstrated the overwhelming firepower that the USA could bring to bear on its cities.
The Soviet offensive made good progress despite armored counterattacks, forcing the defenders into withdrawal.
The offensive halted at the Oder to clear the flanks before the advance on Berlin was resumed.
While part of the Japanese army retreated into the hills, a force fortified Manila and defended it to the death.
Thousands of Filipino civilians were killed in the fighting or massacred by the Japanese.
The bridge at Remargen was captured intact, while other forces crossed elsewhere.
Once bridgeheads were established, the German position on the river was untenable.
As German air defenses began to weaken, the Allies launched a massive attack on the historic and previously untargeted city of Dresden.
By the time the USAAF attacked on the 14th, a firestorm caused by the night bombing had reduced much of the city to ruins.
Correctly expecting the United States to use two Jima as a base for the invasion of the Home Islands, the Japanese heavily fortified the island.
Rather than contesting the beaches, the Japanese created inland defensive positions that were defended to the death.
The Lake Balaton offensive came as a surprise to the Soviets, and the Axis made good gains at first.
A counterattack by the Soviets, launched as the offensive wound down, retook all of the ground that had been lost.
Unable to hold the entire island, Japanese forces contested the southern end, while at sea the invasion fleet was subject to kamikaze suicide attacks.
A series of fortified positions were held almost to the last man, with occasional counterattacks.
During April the Allies mounted the largest bombardment in the Pacific War before renewing the offensive.
The Japanese force was directed to attack Allied ships engaged in the invasion of Okinawa but was shattered by air attack before even getting near the target.
Among the ships sunk was the battleship Yamato, one of the most powerful warships ever built.
Here, supported by a KV-1 heavy tank, Soviet troops reach the Reichstag.
Two Soviet fronts competed for the honor of reaching Berlin first, even fighting each other.
The last major resistance to the Allies took place in Prague, after the surrender of Germany.
German troops holding the city were able to put down a rising by Czech partisans but were soon overwhelmed by massive Soviet forces.
A flotilla of British destroyers attacked the Japanese heavy cruiser Haguro.
A series of torpedo attacks sank the cruiser, while her escorting destroyer escaped with light damage.
This was the last traditional surface action fought with gun and torpedo.
At 8:15am on August 6, 1945, the United States Boeing B-29 Superfortress bomber Enola Gay dropped the uranium atomic bomb, nicknamed ""Little Boy,” on Hiroshima, Japan.
Detonating 1,900 ft above the city, the bomb yielded an explosion equal to 15,000 tons of TNT , levelling or damaging up to 90 percent of Hiroshima buildings.
The total number of deaths from radiation exposure continued to mount years afterward.
The United States Boeing B-29 Superfortress Bockscar dropped the plutonium atomic bomb, nicknamed ""Fat Man,"" above the Japanese city of Nagasaki on August 9, 1945.
Detonating at an altitude of 1,650 ft (503 m), the bomb's yield was estimated at 21 kilotons, significantly greater than the uranium bomb dropped three days earlier on Hiroshima.
It is impossible to establish exactly how many died, either instantly or from long-term radiation effects.
The superpowers have asserted their influence through fighting proxy wars in Greece, Korea, Vietnam, and elsewhere.
Independence movements have erupted into civil war, the states of the Middle East have renewed centuries-old disputes, and terrorism has triggered intervention in Iraq and Afghanistan.
ARTILLERY SHELLS Nationalist Forces won several large battles in Manchuria, but were defeated in a series of small engagements.
The Communists captured large amounts of heavy equipment in this way, notably artillery, before launching a decisive campaign.
One of seven major battles in the Central Jiangsu Campaign, when Communist forces decisively defeated a larger Nationalist army by dividing their enemy into pockets, then surrounding and eliminating each pocket in turn.
CHINESE CIVIL WAR march 1946-april 1950 Nationalist and Communist factions were focused on fighting the Japanese during World War II, but the defeat of this common enemy signalled the renewal of their rivalry for control of China.
A Nationalist offensive to capture Siping City was thwarted by Communist resistance, helped by melting snows which turned the roads into quagmires.
MANCHURIA April 14, 1946-november 1948 Forces Communist:1,000,000; Nationalist:1,000,000.
Communist forces temporarily blocked a Nationalist offensive aiming to occupy the Communist base at Guanzhong.
However, Commemorative badges Enamelled badges, featuring Chairman Mao Zedong, were issued throughout Mao's rule of China . renewed effort by the Nationalist troops eventually forced the heavily outnumbered defenders to retreat.
Although the Nationalists controlled the major cities, these were isolated from one another by Communist-held territory.
Concentrating rapidly against different Nationalist forces in turn, the Communists brought heavy artillery firepower to bear and trounced the enemy.
During the Zhengtai Campaign by the Communists, Nationalist forces defending a mountain pass and outnumbered two to one, left their fortified positions and attempted a disastrous counterattack in response to a Communist flanking manoeuvre.
As the balance of the civil war tipped ever further against them, the Nationalists concentrated at Beijing and Tianjin.
Victorious Communist forces from the Liaoshen campaign joined local armies to achieve overwhelming superiority.
Beijing surrendered and was named capital of the Communist-controlled state.
In a series of engagements near the city of Tianjin, Communist forces converged to assault a Nationalist garrison from all sides.
The Nationalists held out for several hours before surrendering when reinforcements failed to appear.
Communist forces attacked the island of Quemoy as a prelude to invading Taiwan itself.
The level of resistance was underestimated and the attack failed, permitting the Nationalist government to survive on Taiwan.
Defending their position against Nationalist attacks the outnumbered Communists managed to inflict heavy casualties on the Nationalists, eventually forcing their withdrawal.
The Nationalist position was compromised when four divisions defected to the Communists.
The exposed Nationalist wings were then encircled and bombarded into submission by artillery.
Communist forces turned back a larger Nationalist army sent to relieve the city of Kaifeng, ensuring the success of the Eastern Henan Campaign.
During this decisive battle Communist forces employed heavy artillery in a successful attack that drove the Nationalists from the city of Jinzhou and a strategically important road junction.
Nationalist troops failed to take advantage of their superior numbers and arms, employing their troops piecemeal and so dooming their counter-offensive to defeat.
After Xuzhou, the Nationalist forces began to collapse while the Communists continued to gain in strength.
Once Tianjin was taken, Beijing fell almost unopposed and the advance on Shanghai could begin.
A Communist attempt to take control of a small island off the east coast of China resulted in failure and helped to secure the survival of the Nationalist government and its control of Taiwan.
Nationalist troops were forced to withdraw from defensive positions and abandon the city of Jiange, opening up Sichuan Province to Communist attack.
Fired on by Communist guns on the Yangtze river en route to guard the British embassy in Nanjing, HMS Amethyst remained trapped for 14 weeks.
Nanjing, the Nationalist capital, fell without a fight on April 24, 1949 and, in May that year, Shanghai also fell.
Realizing that all was lost, the Nationalists relocated to the island of Taiwan.
FAMOUS SPIES Name Nationality Details Mata Hari born Margaretha Zelle Dutch In October 1917 the French government executed Mata Hari by firing squad for spying for Imperial Germany; she was also alleged to have been a double agent working for the British and their Allies.
After the war, Chinese nationalists tried, convicted, and executed her for treason.
Anthony Blunt British During World War II and after, Blunt shared British intelligence information with the Soviet Union.
Blunt also famously completed a secret mission on behalf of the Royal Family to retrieve personal letters sent to the Third Reich.
Under Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher Blunt's spying was exposed and the Queen subsequently revoked his knighthood.
Vasili Mitrokhin Soviet Mitrokhin, an archivist for the KGB, defected to the West in 1992.
During his career he amassed an exhaustive collection of copied Soviet documents, for which he is best known today.
The so-called ""Mitrokhin Archives"" include detailed information on the global activities of the KGB and other Soviet agencies during the height of the Cold War.
Aldrich Ames American In 1994, the United States government convicted Ames (a former Central Intelligence Agency analyst) of spying for the Soviet Union.
Ames sold the Kremlin the names of American agents and Russian contacts working inside the Soviet Union.
GREEK CIVIL WAR MARCH 1946OCTOBER 1949 Even prior to the defeat of the Nazis, Nationalist and Communist factions were battling for control of Greece.
Location Northern Greece. suppressing an uprising of militant Indonesian students.
SURABAYA October 27-november 20,1945 Greek Communists attempted to seize the city of Konista for use as the capital, but were repulsed by a smaller Nationalist force supported by heavy artillery fire and the city's civilian population.
ISRAELI INDEPENDENCE may 1948-july 1949 As soon as Israel declared independence, Arab armies invaded from several directions.
But the outnumbered Israeli forces benefited from short supply lines and good training, and were able to reverse the Arab advances.
Several Israeli attempts to dislodge Jordanian troops blocking a vital road into Jerusalem were unsuccessful.
During a 60-hour offensive, Israeli forces removed Arab troops from Upper Galilee and the frontier areas of Transjordan.
The United Nations had planned for the area to be part of the Arab state of Palestine.
Following World War II, a Communist insurgency took up arms against the newly independent government of the Philippines.
North Korean forces invaded South Korea in an attempt to reunify the divided peninsula by force.
Hostilities ended with an armistice; however, a formal peace agreement has never been concluded.
This fierce battle resulted in British troops occupying Indonesia's second-largest city.
However, the resolve of the Indonesian fighters helped to increase support for the independence movement.
British troops evacuating foreign nationals were driven back to Semarang by Indonesian forces commanded by General Sudirman, a leading figure in the Indonesian independence movement.
Indonesian national hero I Gusti Ngurah Rai and his small band of guerrilla fighters were wiped out by a much larger Dutch force trying to pacify the island of Bali.
Location Western Macedonia During one of the largest battles of the war.
The following year, with support from United States advisors, the Nationalists won a decisive victory, and the Greek Civil War effectively ended.
The opening phase of the war saw North Korean troops easily defeat a weaker formation of South Koreans, making way for the Communist advance on Seoul.
In the first engagement between the Americans and North Koreans, a United States task force, commanded by Colonel Charles B Smith, delayed the Communist invasion of South Korea by about 12 hours.
In a delaying action, UN forces, mainly from the United States 24th Infantry Division, Amphibious assault United States Marines mount scaling ladders as they come ashore at Inchon, Korea in September 1950, during an amphibious assault.
This was the last major combat landing undertaken by United States forces in the 20th century.
MASS-PRODUCED WEAPONS Samuel Colt and his mid-19th century contemporaries opened the floodgates on mass-produced small arms at the zenith of the Industrial Revolution.
These and other mass-produced weapons, including rocket launchers, tanks, and artillery, have changed the character of modern battlefields and other scenes of violence around the globe.
As North Korean forces invaded South Korea, a UN-backed response prevented the fall of the whole country.
At first forced into a pocket around Pusan, UN forces gradually pushed outward.
An amphibious landing at Inchon involved numerous logistical difficulties.
Nonetheless, the surprise assault was successful, with few casualties among the UN/South Korean forces.
UN forces pushed northwards into North Korea, taking the capital, Pyongyang.
Encircled by Chinese troops and facing harsh winter conditions, UN forces, made up primarily of United States and British battalions, inflicted heavy casualties on the enemy, and conducted a successful withdrawal south to the port of Hungnam.
Under the command of General Matthew Ridgway, UN forces began to advance behind a ""meatgrinder” bombardment by aircraft and artillery.
A major Communist counterattack resulted in large numbers of UN troops being cut off, forcing an order to withdraw.
The United States 23rd Regimental Combat Team and attached units held onto control of territory near the South Korean capital.
The airborne phase of Operation Courageous, designed to trap Communist troops north of Seoul, succeeded in this geographic objective, although enemy troops had already evacuated the area.
For three days the British 29th Brigade held off a Chinese offensive to recapture Seoul.
The Gloucestershire Regiment was surrounded and devastated, but managed to inflict heavy casualties on the Chinese.
Outnumbered UN forces managed to withstand numerous Chinese attacks, helping to halt the Communist spring offensive of 1951.
These early jet fighters are dumping excess fuel prior to landing on the carrier after a sortie over Korea.
As both sides sought to exert their influence on the newly initiated peace talks, UN forces decided to launch an attempt to break the stalemate along their line near the 38th Parallel.
Superior UN firepower forced the North Koreans to withdraw to nearby Heartbreak Ridge.
The UN forces, which included elements of the United States 2nd Division as well as attached French troops, had made repeated attempts to take Heartbreak Ridge, but had failed.
A UN victory was only ensured after their troops introduced tanks, which helped to isolate the high ground and made it possible to fire directly onto the enemy positions.
This offensive action by Australian forces of the UN led to the capture of Hill 317.
However, the area was eventually abandoned to the Communists after the Australian troops were ordered to withdraw.
After a series of largely inconclusive engagements that involved high ground changing hands numerous times, the UN forces finally managed to retain their control of the area.
Two days of air strikes by UN warplanes against hydroelectric facilities in North Korea resulted in the destruction of around 90 percent of the Sui-ho dam's capability to generate electricity.
Five engagements at Hill 266, nicknamed ""Old Baldy"" by United States forces, began when UN forces captured the crest during heavy fighting and were driven off by a strong Chinese counterattack.
A hill along a UN supply route was repeatedly attacked by Chinese forces.
The disputed high ground changed hands 24 times before Communist troops were forced to withdraw from the area.
A series of attempts by United States and South Korean troops to dislodge Chinese forces from positions at Triangle Hill and nearby Sniper Ridge were eventually abandoned due to mounting casualties.
Foreign Legion badges These French Foreign Legion badge caps include the gold Legionnaires' insignia and the silver badge of a qualified paratrooper.
Foreign Legion paratroopers formed much of the relief force defending Dien Bien Phu in 1954, suffering heavy casualties.
During two controversial engagements, UN troops maintained control of Pork Chop Hill, temporarily losing it in March.
In the following weeks renewed Chinese attacks were repelled by reinforcements; however, UN command subsequently abandoned the position.
In four separate battles, UN forces repulsed Chinese attempts to capture high ground.
Any territory gained would have given the Chinese bargaining power during the impending peace negotiations.
UN forces, primarily Greek and American troops, succeeded in defending an outpost in the so-called Iron Triangle north of Seoul, against repeated assaults by Communist infantry.
These tests conducted under water, underground, above and in the atmosphere, generate considerable tensions around the world.
Thermonuclear explosion The characteristic fiery mushroom cloud of a thermonuclear bomb rises above the Marshall Islands in the Pacific Ocean during a test in March 1954.
The 27-ton bomb was flown to an altitude of 34,449 ft aboard a modified Tupolev Tu-95 ""Bar"" bomber.
Slowed by a drogue parachute (one that deploys from a fast-moving object), the weapon fell to an altitude of 13,780 ft before exploding.
The explosion resulted in a fireball 26,400 ft in diameter, and a seismic wave that registered more than magnitude five on the Richter scale.
In an atmospheric test dubbed ""Castle Bravo,"" the United States exploded a hydrogen bomb above the Marshall Islands.
Differing from the frozen fuel of other early fusion bomb designs, Bravo used a so-called ""dry"" lithium-hydrogen fuel, which helped the designers create a smaller, lighter weapon that could more easily be transported and delivered.
A Xian H-6 bomber of the Chinese People's Liberation Army Air Force dropped a 4-mt thermonuclear bomb over the Lop Nor test site in western China.
The bomb was China's largest atmospheric test, as well as its largest nuclear test overall.
The largest of these, codenamed ""Canopus,"" was a 2.6-mt thermonuclear device detonated above the Pacific.
Suspended from a hydrogen balloon, the device exploded 1,800 ft above the ocean.
FIRST INDOCHINA WAR DECEMBER 1946-AUGUST 1954 With the end of World War II, France made a succession of attempts to reassert its control in the various parts of its widespread colonial empire.
In French Indochina, which included Cambodia, Laos, and parts of modern Vietnam, a rebellion was gradually gathering force, driven on by growing Nationalist and Communist sentiment.
This would eventually lead to the complete withdrawal of France from Southeast Asia.
In an effort to deplete the combat capabilities of the Viet Minh, a combined French airborne and ground offensive managed to inflict heavy casualties on the enemy.
However, large numbers of Communist troops were successful in slipping away.
French and Vietnamese troops, including elite paratroopers and members of the Foreign Legion, were almost completely annihilated after being driven into a steep gorge along one of their vital supply routes close to the northeastern border with China.
This offensive by the Viet Minh had been planned as a direct advance on the capital city of Hanoi.
However, the Viet Minh had reached about 30 miles (48 km) south of the city when they were decisively defeated and driven back by the vastly outnumbered French troops.
After this conflict, however, it became clear to the French that the battle for control of Indochina was likely to be much more prolonged than had initially been expected.
Supported by naval gunfire from three destroyers, heavily outnumbered French soldiers managed to successfully hold off a Viet Minh attack on the city of Haiphong and its surrounding area.
Haiphong was crucial to the success of the French campaign, being the main port through which large quantities of their vital reinforcements and supplies flowed.
The French launched an offensive that was designed to lure the enemy into an open, pitched battle.
However, this tactic failed and the French troops were finally forced into taking up a defensive position.
The French were decisively defeated, despite the Viet Minh forces suffering considerably heavier casualties.
Here the French successfully employed ""hedgehog defense""tactics—entrenched positions capable of all-round defense— and used air support for the first time.
The use of similar tactics at the later battle of Dien Bien Phu, proved disastrous.
This was one of the numerous French operations that were designed to draw the Viet Minh guerrillas out into the open, where they would become more vulnerable to the vastly superior air power of the French forces.
The operation was abandoned after it failed to provide any significant results.
This French offensive had been designed with the hope of engaging substantial numbers of Viet Minh soldiers and thereby limiting the enemy troops that would therefore be available to engage in the regular Viet Minh attacks on the French supply line via Route 1.
The operation was eventually seen as a failure and the French troops were ordered to withdraw.
Having been air-dropped into a remote area in the extreme northwest corner of Vietnam, French troops succeeded in their mission to establish an airbase at Dien Bien Phu.
However, just four months later, the Viet Minh forces successfully launched a devastating attack on the French forward base, destroying it completely.
Hoping to draw out the Viet Minh for a decisive battle, the French seized Dien Bien Phu, a village surrounded by hills that needed to be supplied by air.
The village was shelled from positions in the hills, then besieged and eventually overrun by the Viet Minh, crushing French control in Indochina and forcing their imminent withdrawal.
During this final major engagement of the war, Viet Minh guerrillas ambushed and savaged the severely depleted French troops that were attempting to withdraw, following their defeat at Dien Bien Phu.
Three days later, on July 20, 1954, a ceasefire was announced, and on August 1, an armistice was implemented.
DIRECTORY CHEMICAL AND BIOLOGICAL WARFARE AGENTS Mustard gas The use of sulfur mustard compounds as battlefield weapons dates to July 1917, when the German Imperial Army used ""Yellow Cross"" gas at Ypres against the British and French armies.
The chemical has an extreme blistering effect on the skin, and can destroy sensitive mucous membranes in the eyes, mouth, and lungs.
The chemical burn wounds caused by exposure to vesicants, as these blistering chemicals are known, are difficult to heal and may result in septic infections or other serious medical complications.
VX Organophosphates, such as Sarin, the United Kingdom's VX, Russia's VR, and others, are chemicals similar to those found in industrially produced pesticides.
Weapons containing such chemicals distribute toxins that are devastating to humans.
Nerve agents affect the central nervous system, blocking neurotransmitters in the brain.
Among its effects are loss of involuntary muscle control, causing cramping pain, nausea, uncontrollable defecation, and urination, and difficulty with breathing.
These chemicals can cause permanent neurological damage or death through asphyxia, as victims lose consciousness and become unable to breathe.
CS gas CS or tear gas is classed as a non-lethal agent and is used by police forces and military units around the world for riot control and other law enforcement activities.
CS has also been used in military settings, as a teaching tool to demonstrate the effectiveness of chemical warfare protective equipment and procedures during basic training of recruits.
CS has additionally been used to obscure movements and deny the enemy access to areas, as was the case when the United States used it during some search and rescue missions to recover downed pilots during the Vietnam War.
Anthrax Military organizations have experimented with the weapons potential of some biological agents, such as the anthrax bacillus.
The deadliness of anthrax is shown by the deaths of five people and the severe illness of 17 others during a series of terrorist attacks through the United States Postal Service in September and October 2001.
However, as a rule, biological agents have proved to be more difficult to store, handle, move, and deliver than would be militarily useful.
Most developed countries (including the United States and Russia) that formerly amassed stockpiles of biological weapons have isolated and destroyed them under a series of international agreements.
United States Air Force chemical warfare training As part of their basic training, new recruits to the United States Air Force are subjected to a simulated chemical and biological warfare attack.
Eventually, after several peaceful attempts to restore public order, there was an especially savage response from the French forces that were deployed in the country.
Although the Algerian guerrilla movement was eventually broken, there were heavy casualties on both sides, including civilians.
In March 1962, with increasing anti-colonialism and worldwide opinion going against them, the French government finally made the decision to withdraw completely from Algeria, which was then granted independence.
Following the implementation of a general strike and the planting of three bombs at Air France offices by members of the Front de Liberation Nationale or National Liberation Front, the rebels embarked on a campaign of terror in Algiers, which was brutally defeated by the French army.
Civil unrest sparked a revolt against the pro-Soviet Flungarian government.
A new reformist government was installed, which appealed to the United Nations for support.
It declared its intention to withdraw from the Warsaw Pact and set up free elections.
Flowever, in early November 1956, Soviet troops and tanks marched into Hungary and crushed the rebellion.
An Egyptian blockade of the Israeli port of Eilat caused Israel to launch an attack into the Sinai Peninsula.
Egypt decided to nationalize the Suez Canal, to gain almost total control of sea trade in the region.
When talks failed to persuade Egypt to reverse this decision, a combined AngloFrench force attempted to seize control of the canal and gave their support to Israel in Sinai.
UN pressure eventually forced a ceasefire, with more than 3,000 UN troops deployed in the area to keep the peace.
CUBAN REVOLUTION NOVEMBER 1956-JANUARY 1959 Returning from Mexico, where he had been training and organizing his people, Fidel Castro led an effective guerrilla campaign against the rule of Fulgencio Batista in Cuba.
Despite a shaky start, popular support for Castro gradually grew, until he was eventually able to assume power.
JAN KRCMAR, A CZECH JOURNALIST, ON THE SOVIET ARMY OCCUPATION OF PRAGUE, AUGUST 1968 While his brother Raul marched on Santiago, Fidel Castro led his Communist force to victory over a government army that was three times its size.
Under the command of Che Guevara, the revolutionaries' triumph at Santa Clara helped Castro to consolidate his hold on Cuba.
Victory speech En route to the Cuban capital, Havana, in 1959, the Cuban revolutionary leader, Fidel Castro, addresses the crowd from the Palacio Municipal in Santa Clara, after the city had fallen under Communist control.
Within 12 hours of the victory, the former Cuban leader General Fulgencio Batista had fled the country.
First Katanga province broke away from central government, then other areas of the country began to declare their independence.
Mercenaries participated extensively in the prolonged conflict that followed.
An invasion force of Cuban exiles sponsored by the CIA was put ashore at the Bay of Pigs on the south coast of Cuba with the aim of attacking and overthrowing the Communist government, set up and led by Fidel Castro.
However, support for the exiles by the United States government had been severely scaled back and they were easily defeated by Castro's troops.
Spurred on by an Egyptian-backed wave of Arab nationalism, several factions battled with British forces for control of the crown colony of Aden.
However, after four years of fighting, a decision was made to withdraw all British forces from southern Arabia, including Aden, and the People's Republic of South Yemen was established.
However, hardline Communists, fearing they would lose control of the country, demanded that Dubcek hold back on further reforms.
When he refused, they enlisted the help of the Soviet government, which ordered a contingent of Warsaw Pact troops to occupy Czechoslovakia.
The occupying forces met with some opposition, but very quickly took control of Prague, the Czech capital.
Dubcek and his fellow reformers were arrested, civilian resistance was swiftly quelled, and over a period of several months the reforms of ""the Prague Spring"" were gradually eroded.
Ho Chi Minh initially led an effort aimed at uniting North and South Vietnam.
Following the French withdrawal from the region, and fearing the spread of Communism, the United States became increasingly involved, only finally withdrawing after more than a decade of military intervention.
Attacks by Viet Cong guerrillas on the United States air base at Pleiku and in the nearby town of Qui Nonh prompted President Lyndon Johnson to order bombing raids on North Vietnam in retaliation.
These raids were to serve as a pretext for the widening of United States participation in the Vietnam War.
Viet Cong guerrillas were repulsed in their attempt to overrun the South Vietnamese camp at Nam Dong under cover of darkness despite the American and South Vietnamese defenders facing an enemy force more than three times larger than they were.
Having been well supplied by the North Vietnamese Communists, Viet Cong guerrilla forces ambushed and inflicted heavy casualities on an elite troop of South Vietnamese Rangers and Marines that was accompanied by a small contingent of United States advisors.
Operation Rolling Thunder was a three-year aerial bombing campaign that was intended to apply pressure on the North Vietnamese government to cease promoting the war in the South.
The Americans soon learned that low-level raids incurred unacceptable losses of aircraft and crews from antiaircraft fire, and switched to less accurate but deadly high-altitude bombing.
South Vietnamese and United States Special Forces were successful in driving Viet Cong guerrillas, who were occupying the village of Song Be, from the area.
This victory helped to boost the flagging morale of the South Vietnamese troops, who had recently experienced a number of setbacks.
ANONYMOUS United States SOLDIER, VIETNAM FAMOUS WAR PHOTOGRAPHERS Name and dates Nationality Subjects Matthew B Brady 1822-96 United States One of the pioneers of modern photojournalism, Brady was most famous for his photographs of the United States Civil War, especially portraits of commanders, such as Grant, Sherman, Custer, Lee, and Jackson.
James F Hurley 1885-1962 Australia Hurley documented the horrors of World War 1, at Ypres and Passchendaele.
He also photographed the 1914 Imperial Trans-Antarctic Expedition of HMS Endurance under Sir Ernest Shackleton.
Joseph J Rosenthal 1911-2006 United States Rosenthal famously photographed United States Marines and a navy corps man raising an American flag on Mount Suribachi on Iwo Jima in February 1945.
United States Marine Corps photographer, Louis R Lowery , took the first photograph of the flag raising; the event was repeated for Rosenthal's more famous photograph.
George Silk 1916-2004 New Zealand Silk is credited with the first photographs of the Japanese city of Nagasaki after its devastation by an atomic bomb in August 1945.
Yevgeny Khaldei 1917-97 Soviet Union Khaldei famously photographed the moment a Red Army soldier raised his nation's flag above the Reichstag amid the ruins of Berlin in May 1945.
Dickey Chapelle 1918-65 United States Chapelle covered World War II and the Vietnam War.
While on patrol with United States Marines in 1965, she was killed by fragments from an exploding Viet Cong grenade.
French photojournalist Henri Huet famously photographed her last moments.
Eddie Adams 1933-2004 United States Adams' most famous shot captured the moment that South Vietnamese Brigadier-General Nguyen Ngoc Loan executed Viet Cong terrorist Nguyen Van Lem with a revolver.
Nick Ut 1951Republic of Vietnam Ut's photograph of children fleeing a South Vietnamese napalm strike in 1972 earned him the Pulitzer Prize for Spot News Photography.
In the firing line War photographers during the Vietnam War faced immense dangers in their quest to capture the full horror of modern warfare.
Homemade weapon This crudely made knife with a wooden handle is typical of the small weaponry carried by Communist troops in Vietnam.
During the first major battle between United States forces and the North Vietnamese Army , United States airborne troops fought successfully to protect their landing zones, and at the same time managed to effectively thwart a planned Communist offensive into South Vietnam.
Despite being heavily outnumbered, the garrison of the Special Forces base at A Shau fought for hours, sometimes hand-to-hand, with the Communists before being ordered to evacute.
The vicinity later became a staging area for North Vietnamese operations.
A joint United States and South Vietnamese offensive was successful in inflicting heavy casualties on the North Vietnamese.
This action prevented the capture of Quang Tri province by the Communists.
The North Vietnamese forces quickly withdrew across the Demilitarized Zone.
Operation Cedar Falls involved placing a United States cordon around the so-called Iron Triangle area north of Saigon.
Helicopter borne forces then secured and searched the area within the cordon for signs of enemy bases and tunnel complexes.
United States and South Vietnamese troops attempted to clear Viet Cong fighters from a stronghold in Tay Ninh Province near Saigon.
Large numbers of the Viet Cong evacuated the area while the operation was taking place, but then returned when it was over.
Communist forces failed in their effort to destroy a large United States troop formation, but succeeded in drawing many enemy units away from South Vietnam's cities, leaving them under-defended.
This was in preparation for the Tet Offensive that took place two months later.
Rooting out insurgents in Saigon During the Tet Offensive in March 1968, United States Army and South Vietnamese troops, in Ml 13 armored personnel carriers battle Communist insurgents in downtown Saigon.
The isolated United States firebase (camp providing artillery support) at Khe Sanh and nearby positions endured a 77-day siege initiated in conjunction with the Tet Offensive.
The outpost at Lang Vei fell to the Communists, although air and ground operations by United States and South Vietnamese troops relieved the besieged United States Marines' base at Khe Sanh.
This massive campaign was planned to coincide with the two-day Vietnamese Tet holiday, when many South Vietnamese soldiers would be on leave.
Viet Cong guerrillas and North Vietnamese Army forces seized and took control of a number of urban areas in South Vietnam.
Most of these captured areas were retaken by the Americans and their South Vietnamese allies within days.
IMPORTANT ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS Military and naval forces around the world use abbreviations and acronyms as shorthand for describing common concepts, actions, or equipment.
The table below lists some of the abbreviations and acronyms developed for use by multinational NATO units operating in the field.
American and South Vietnamese: 2,500; North Vietnamese and Viet Cong: 10,000.
During the Tet Offensive the Communists occupied large portions of the provincial capital of Hue, where they massacred many civilians.
United States soldiers entered the South Vietnamese villages of My Lai and My Khe, where they proceeded to massacre civilians.
Although 26 United States soldiers faced charges for their part in the massacre, only Lieutenant William Calley was ever convicted for the atrocity, which drew worldwide condemnation.
A series of heavy attacks by a much larger Communist force eventually compelled the United States and South Vietnamese defenders of the Special Forces camp at Kham Due to abandon their position.
However, there was no further infiltration of the Viet Cong guerrillas south into the Central Highlands.
During 26 days of fighting, Australian troops backed by United States forces played a major role in disrupting an offensive against the South Vietnamese capital, Saigon, successfully holding on to their operational area and the fire-support bases, from which artillery supported the infantry.
This United States operation was intended to subdue Communist interference with United States stabilization and pacification efforts in the area around the Mekong Delta, and to disrupt enemy communications.
It was seen as controversial because attacks were mainly at night and many civilians were killed.
United States troops involved were later accused of carrying out atrocities.
Officially designated Hill 937, Hamburger Hill was fortified by the North Vietnamese.
In a series of direct assaults, United States and South Vietnamese forces captured the higher ground.
The battle remains controversial due to the hill's negligible strategic value.
A series of Communist counterattacks inflicted heavy losses on the United States and South Vietnamese forces and succeeded in recapturing the Laotian town of Ban Dong, overrunning two fire-support bases in the process.
Changing their mode of operation from mainly guerrilla tactics to the use of open warfare, the North Vietnamese Army launched this major offensive against South Vietnamese forces.
Intervention by United States air power helped to bring the offensive to a standstill.
During their Easterside Offensive, Communist forces initiated a series of heavy attacks on the smalt town of Loc Ninh close to the border with Cambodia, causing many casualties.
The defenders were eventually forced to abandon their positions and retreat.
Subsequent airstrikes were ordered by the United States command to destroy what remained of the fortifications, in order to prevent them from from falling into the hands of the Communists.
Heroes of the revolution This colorful political poster celebrates the key figures involved in Cuba's socialist revolution, including Fidel Castro and Che Guevara.
The latter would meet his end during his less successful campaign to overthrow the Bolivian government in 1966-67.
The strong Communist thrust toward Saigon during the Eastertide Offensive was blunted at An Loc by a single South Vietnamese division supported by massive United States air power and a scattering of United States advisors and combat troops.
The North Vietnamese forces besieged the city for 66 days, before being forced to retreat.
In response to the North Vietnamese Eastertide Offensive, United States air power successfuliy disrupted enemy resupply efforts and bombed tactical targets inside North Vietnam, thereby halting the Communist operation.
Popularly known as the Christmas bombing, United States air power made a massive assault on the North Vietnamese capital and its major harbor.
This action forced the diplomats back to the negotiating table after peace talks that had been held during the autumn of 1972 had faltered.
This major airlift operation evacuated more than 5,000 United States and Vietnamese personnel to safety as Communist forces overwhelmed and took control of the South Vietnamese capital, Saigon.
Fighting over the administration of the disputed state of Kashmir and with each side claiming provocation by the other, India and Pakistan declared war on each other.
It resulted in thousands of casualties on both sides, and ended with a UN-mandated ceasefire.
However, lacking the support of the local people, his band of guerrillas was pursued and eventually destroyed by the Bolivian army.
An Israeli incursion into Jordanian territory, prompted by repeated attacks from terrorist groups linked to the Palestine Liberation Organization , was countered by units of the Jordanian Army.
SOUTH AFRICAN BORDER WAR august 26, 1966-august30, 1988 Lengthy wars for Angolan independence from Portugal and the controversial South African influence in Namibia became intertwined, and involved United Nations supervision and military contingents from other African countries and Cuba.
SIX-DAY WAR JUNE 5-10, 1967 Facing external threats from several directions, Israel launched a devastating preemptive strike.
As well as smashing the Egyptian air force and driving through as far as the Suez Canal, Israeli forces also advanced into Syria.
During the Israelis' offensive into the Sinai Peninsula, their anti-tank weapons destroyed 40 Egyptian tanks, while they only lost half that number themselves.
The Israeli victory facilitated a further advance into the Sinai Desert.
Israeli paratroopers launched an attack on the Jordanian troops that were occupying reinforced bunkers near the Police Academy in Jerusalem.
But by underestimating the strength of the opposing force, the Israelis suffered a considerable number of casualties in re-establishing their control of the western section of the city.
At the height of the Six-Day War Israeli aircraft and torpedo boats launched a surprise combined air and sea attack on the neutral United States Navy technical research vessel, USS Liberty.
The Israelis subsequently claimed that their action had been taken after mistaking the United States vessel for an Egyptian cargo ship.
However, some sources still claim that the action was premeditated, and the incident is considered to be controversial to this day.
Desperate to escape from Vietnam A UH-1 ""Huey"" helicopter is pushed over the side of a United States Navy ship to allow more to land during the evacuation of Saigon in April 1975, known as Operation Frequent Wind.
In approximately 27 hours of combat, Israeli forces took control of this strategic high ground from which Syrian artillery had repeatedly bombarded kibbutz settlements along the border and had threatened an invasion of northern Israel.
It influenced not only the outcome of the South African Border War, but also that of the Angolan Civil War.
Seeking independence from Nigeria, the newly declared Republic of Biafra received support from France and Rhodesia.
With the assistance of Soviet-supplied weaponry and a naval blockade, however, Nigeria eventually forced the besieged Biafrans to surrender.
POSTWAR GENOCIDES Location and date Event Casualties Croup or individuals responsible Cambodia 1975-79 Mass killings of political dissidents, Muslims, Buddhist monks, and ethnic minorities Possibly 1,700,000 The Khmer Rouge under the regime of Pol Pot and TaMok.
Most key figures died before they could be brought to justice but a former leader of the Khmer Rouge, Nuon Chea, is still expected to stand trial.
Rwanda April 1994 Massacre of Rwanda's Tutsi minority by members of the Hutu ethnic group 800,000 killed Interahamwe and Impuzamugambi Hutu militias.
The International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda has convicted 25 of the perpetrators, with several others not yet arrested.
Bosnia-Herzegovina 1992-95 Removal and killing of members of the Bosnian Muslim population by members of the Serb ethnic group, including the Srebrenica massacre in 1995 200,000 killed Republika Srpska troops and other Serbian military and police units.
The International Criminal tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia has indicted former Serbian commanders, Slobodan Milosevic, Radovan Karadzic, and Ratko Mladic.
Darfur, Sudan 2003Isolation and killing of black African tribal groups by other ethnic groups that claim Arab identity; a large civilian population is also caught up in the war between factions in Sudan and neighboring Chad Possibly 500,000 killed; 2,500,000 displaced Various militias, including the African-Arab Janjaweed.
In March 2008, the International Criminal Court indicted Sudan's president, Omar al-Bashir, for genocide, crimes against humanity, and murder.
The Easter skirmishes with British Army and Northern Ireland police units across Ireland helped lead to independence for three provinces of Ireland, except Ulster in the North.
The Provisional IRA attacked British interests in the north for 28 years in a conflict that killed more than 1,700 people in the United Kingdom, Europe, and elsewhere.
Today, a group calling itself the ""Real IRA"" continues to carry out attacks in Northern Ireland.
IRA militants have helped train operatives from other terrorist organizations, including Colombia's FARC, and nationalist and Islamic groups in North Africa.
Strong public condemnation of ETA's tactics, especially in the wake of the 2004 bombings at Madrid's Atocha station , have somewhat lowered the organization's profile.
Fuerzas Colombia Armadas 1964 Revolucionarias de Colombia Marxist regime change in Colombia (although the FARC's activities have tended to focus on criminal enterprise, such as narcotics trafficking and kidnapping) The FARC began as the military arm of Colombia's Communist revolutionary insurgency.
Today, the FARC fields 9,000-12,000 fighters in the remote border area between Colombia and Venezuela.
The organization is responsible for a number of criminal activities, including murder, drugs trafficking, and extortion.
Liberation Sri Lanka Tigers of 1976 Tamil Eelam Establish an independent The Tamil Tigers are one of the most violent groups in the world.
Their Black Tigers unit Tamil state in the north of became infamous for its suicide bombing tactics.
The LTTE developed such an extensive Sri Lanka fundraising network overseas that it was able to field a limited number of ""attack"" aircraft, becoming the only terrorist group in history to have its own air force.
Following the breakdown of peace talks in 2006, the LTTE was in retreat before dramatic advances made by government forces.
Saudi Arabia, Afghanistan 1988 al-Qaeda (""The Base""; or ""The Movement"") Expel all non-Muslims from Muslim nations; establish a worldwide, pan-lslamic caliphate In addition to having taken responsibility for the 9/11 attacks against the United States, al-Qaeda and its network of linked or affiliated groups has carried out many other attacks in Afghanistan, Indonesia, Iraq, Kenya, Kuwait, Morocco, Pakistan, Saudi Arabia, Spain, Tanzania, Turkey, the United Kingdom, the United States, and Yemen.
Osama bin Laden (the network's ideological leader) has urged Muslims that their duty is to kill United States citizens and their friends and allies anywhere in the world.
Rebel militants stand their ground Tamil Tiger soldiers at the funeral of an assassinated leader at Thandiyady, Batticaloa, Sri Lanka in February 2005.
These men are armed with either Russianor Chineseand American-made weapons.
North Korean forces seized the crew of a United States intelligence vessel operating in international waters and held them for 11 months, before their negotiated release.
Location Sino-Soviet frontier and Zhenbao Island, Ussuri river on the border.
During the spring and summer of 1969, animosity between the two Communist powers erupted in a series of border clashes and a dispute over an island that both nations claimed.
Religious and political friction in Northern Ireland led to a complex conflict involving several paramilitary forces.
Government troops and police operated against the paramilitaries until a peace agreement was reached in 1998.
INDO-PAKISTANI WAR DECEMBER3-16, 1971 Internal troubles in Pakistan led to war with India.
East Pakistan was quickly overrun and became independent as Bangladesh.
In the opening act of the war, the Pakistani Air Force, inspired by Israeli success in the Six-Day War, launched preemptive air strikes against targets in India.
YOM KIPPUR WAR October 6-24,1973 Launching a surprise attack against Israel, Egyptian forces made good use of guided anti-tank and surface-to-air missiles.
However, after a desperate period, Israel had begun to make gains by the time the UN established a ceasefire.
Syrian troops assaulted an Israeli command post during the opening phase of the war, capturing Mount Ffermon and holding it against a determined Israeli counterattack two days later.
Angolan guerrillas on patrol Heavily armed fighters of the Uniao National para a Independentia Total de Angola patrol at Nova Lisboa, Angola in September 1975.
Guerrilla groups battled for dominance during Angola's struggle for independence.
In this four-day battle in an isolated valley, strong Syrian forces attacked an Israeli armored battalion, pushing the Israelis to breaking point.
They had lost a substantial number of tanks but still had an overwhelming advantage.
Utilizing the cover of surface-to-air missiles, Egyptian troops overwhelmed the small Israeli garrison of the Bar-Lev Line and steadily advanced.
However, Israeli forces recovered and encircled the Egyptian Third Army.
Employing surface-to-surface missiles, Israeli naval vessels wiped out an entire Syrian squadron.
Israeli vessels on routine patrol discovered an Egyptian seaborne commando force intent on striking at Israeli positions in the Sinai.
The Egyptians were driven off with significant losses and several vessels sunk.
A renewed Egyptian offensive to relieve pressure on Syrian forces to the north was repelled by entrenched Israeli infantry and armor, causing Egyptian forces to retreat to positions along the Suez Canal.
In an attempt to isolate a large number of Egyptian troops in the Sinai Peninsula, Israeli forces successfully placed a bridgehead across the Suez Canal, but paid dearly for their victory.
Determined to retake Mount Hermon, reinforced Israeli troops assaulted the Heights from the east and, despite heavy casualties compelled the Syrians to retreat from positions they had captured two weeks earlier.
In the final battle of the Yom Kippur War, Israeli forces attemped to capture the town of Suez.
However, they were repulsed by Egyptian troops and militia, who suffered heavy losses during several days of intense urban combat.
In response to a Greek-sponsored coup on the island of Cyprus, Turkish forces invaded and took control of 37 percent of the country.
Independence from Portugal left Angola with three rival groups fighting for power.
The Popular Movement for the Liberation of Angola gained control of most of the country, but conflict went on for many years.
Jewish passengers from a hijacked Air France airliner were held in the terminal at Entebbe.
Israeli Defense Forces landed and stormed the terminal, killing the terrorists and some Ugandan troops.
In concert with the Egyptian offensive in the Sinai, Syrian forces attacked Israeli positions along the Golan Heights.
Eventually, the Syrians were halted and the Israelis advanced into Syrian territory.
Guarding the Golan Heights Israeli soldiers, riding aboard an Ml 13 armored personnel carrier, backed by a tank, patrol the territory around the Golan Heights in Syria during the Yom Kippur War of October 1973.
Following the Vietnamese invasion of neighboring Cambodia and Vietnam's occupation of the long-disputed Spratly Islands in the South China Sea, the Chinese government decided to counter these measures by launching a series of army incursions into Vietnamese territory, in order to reassert China's authority in the region.
After some bloody clashes on the border, the campaign eventually ended with both China and Vietnam claiming victory.
CORPORAL HARRY SIDDAL, FALKLANDS, 1982 SOVIETS IN AFGHANISTAN DECEMBER 25, 1979-FEBRUARY 1989 Responding to United States support for rebels fighting the Communist-led government, the Soviet Union sent in 85,000 troops.
Although the Soviet army was able to take and keep control of urban centers, a successful insurgency by the mujahideen took place in the Afghani countryside.
Eventually, the Soviets decided to cut their losses and ordered their troops to withdraw from Afghanistan.
Soviet special forces and other troops assaulted the Tajberg Palace in Kabul, taking control of the city and assassinating Afghan President Hafizullah Amin, along with a number of his bodyguards.
Soviet special forces suffered heavy losses during operations to elminate guerrilla activity in the villages of Sangam and Daridam.
The guerrillas employed hit-and-run tactics and Soviet casualties were nearly 75 percent.
An Afghan army offensive against a mujahideen supply base was initially successful.
However, guerrilla resistance held out, in spite of Soviet air strikes, and the Afghans withdrew after suffering heavy casualties.
Following heavy fighting, mujahideen guerrillas eventually abandoned their base at Zhawar.
During their withdrawal from Afghanistan, Soviet forces successfully assisted an Afghan army operation to relieve the besieged garrison at Ali Sher.
As Soviet forces set their plans for withdrawal from Afghanistan in motion, this operation succeeded in temporarily opening the Satukandav Pass and relieving the embattled city of Khost, which had been surrounded by mujahideen.
A single company of Soviet paratroopers held high ground against mujahideen guerrillas, who outnumbered them 10 to one.
Exhausting their ammunition supply, the Soviets repelled at least a dozen assaults by the mujahideen.
Mujahideen guerrillas launched a successful operation to take control of the KabulJalalabad Highway, capturing large quantities of weapons and ammunition before withdrawing according to their plan.
Afghan army forces supported by air strikes and Soviet missile batteries inflicted heavy casualties on mujahideen attempting to capture the city of Jalalabad.
The crash and other factors influenced President Carter's decision to cancel the mission.
The failure was due to a number of factors, including the poor mechanical readiness of several of the helicopters; poor tactical communications; and poor training coordination.
Afterward, the government established the United States Special Operations Command as an independently-budgeted organization within the Department of Defense.
SOCOM's mandate was to coordinate the manning, training, equipment, and combat readiness for all the United States military services' special operations units.
Alerted to their approach, the Panamanian guards Manuel Noriega's Panama at the airfield assumed defensive positions and hit the Americans with personal aircraft automatic weapons fire before they could reach the hangar.
Pinned down, the SEALs were unable to call in supporting fire from an AC-130U gunship due to poor communications.
The SEAL platoon did destroy Noriega's jet with an AT-4 anti-tank rocket, but four SEALs were killed in the firefight.
Nord-Ost siege, to Moscow, Prior to an assault on the theater, the Russian forces deployed a chemical overpower Chechen Russia agent, most likely an anaesthetic gas, to disable the hostage-takers.
The gas separatists holding also disabled many of the hostages, as well as two members of the FSB hostages at a city assault team.
However, after some initial Iraqi gains, the war degenerated into a bloody stalemate.
In the spring of 1982, the Iranian army launched an offensive to recapture territory that had been taken by the Iraqis, including Khuzestan Province.
The Iranians briefly besieged the port city of Khorramshahr, which fell, following two days of heavy fighting.
Employing their superior manpower in costly ""human-wave"" attacks, the Iranians succeeded in recapturing the city of Bostan and severing a major Iraqi supply line.
In what is considered the turning point of the Iran-Iraq War, the Iranians again made successful use of ""human-wave"" attacks to wrest the Dazful-Shush region from Iraqi control.
Iranian troops then went on to press their advantage into enemy territory.
Iranian troops launched a surprise attack on a force of Iraqi conscripts in an attempt to capture the vital Al-Faw Peninsula on the Persian Gulf.
However, it was Operation Dawn 8, a later Iranian campaign, that resulted in the capture of the peninsula.
The territory was subsequently retaken by the Iraqis near the end of the war, aided by the massive use of chemical weapons.
MOST MINED COUNTRIES Country Estimated number of landmines in the field Afghanistan 10,000,000 Iraq 10,000,000 Angola 9,000,000 Cambodia 7,000,000 Somalia 1,000,000 FALKLANDS WAR MARCH 1 9— JUNE 14, 1982 Hostilities began when Argentine troops invaded and occupied the long disputed British Overseas Territories of the Falkland Islands and neighboring South Georgia.
At sea, British forces suffered serious losses from air attack, especially from Exocet missiles.
On land, the British advanced steadily across the islands, eventually liberating the Falkland Islands' capital.
British troops, primarily of 2 Para, sometimes fighting at night, captured Argentine strongpoints at Goose Green and nearby Darwin, which could have posed a threat to the British landing area at San Carlos.
In one of a series of three assaults on high ground surrounding the capital of the Falklands, Port Stanley, British troops of 3 Commando, supported by naval artillery, defeated Argentine forces that were occupying the high ground.
In order to make sure that their advance on Port Stanley was not going to be threatened from the rear, British troops of 45 Commando attempted to seize the heights of Two Sisters during a daring nocturnal assault.
They were successful, despite coming under heavy fire from the Argentine forces.
Coordinated with the attacks on Mount Harriet and Two Sisters, British troops of 3 Para captured Mount Longdon, which commanded the approaches to Port Stanley.
Elements from the 2nd Scots Guards, 42 Commando, and Gurkha Rifles, were assisted by tanks of the Blues and Royals and naval gunfire in their capture of high ground, 4 miles from Stanley.
Armor of the Blues and Royals and artillery of 29 Commando supported the airlifted 2 Para in its assault on Wireless Ridge, which guarded the approach to Port Stanley.
After invading Lebanon to deny the region to Palestinian guerrillas and to counteract Syrian influence, Israel then withdrew most of its forces.
With Operation Urgent Fury, United States and allied forces ended the influence of Cuba and other Marxist nations in Grenada.
They also helped to topple a military government, which had imposed strict martial law on the island's population.
American support for the ""Contras"" continued until the Sandinistas were voted out of power in elections held in 1990.
The United States government launched Operation Just Cause, sending troops into the central American state of Panama in response to the alarming abuses of that country’s leadership.
United States forces successfully launched attacks on a range of both military and civilian targets, instigating measures to stabilize the nation's government and taking the Panamanian military dictator.
Noriega was transported to the United States to stand trial on a variety of charges, including election rigging and human rights violations.
GULF WAR august 2, 1990-march 3,1991 In response to Iraq's occupation and annexation of neighboring Kuwait in August 1990, a UN coalition force was sent in to liberate the country.
After an air campaign lasting 6 weeks, coalition forces launched a ground offensive that succeeded in driving the Iraqis out of Kuwait.
High-technology weapons played a key role in helping the coalition to triumph over an Iraqi army that was largely made up of inexperienced conscripts.
During the first substantial ground combat of the Gulf War, Iraqi forces crossed the border into Saudi Arabia and occupied the town of Khafji.
Fighting continued for two days before the Iraqis were forced to retreat.
War in the desert An American soldier stands on top of a destroyed Iraqi tank in the Kuwaiti desert in 1991.
A line of oil wells, set alight by the retreating troops of Saddam Hussein, blaze away in the distance.
The spearheads of the coalition advance, consisting mainly of the United States 1st and 3rd Armored Divisions, an infantry division, and the 2nd Armored Cavalry Regiment, were unable to break through prepared Iraqi lines of entrenched infantry defenses and tanks placed in dug-in positions.
American casualties were not heavy, but among them were a number of victims of ""friendly fire"" incidents.
With the approach of the coalition forces—largely the 2nd Brigade, United States 1st Armored Division—Iraqi troops surrendered in great numbers.
Coalition forces, primarily United States and British, demolished the bulk of the Iraqi Republican Guard Tawakalna Division.
The United States 2nd Armored Cavalry Regiment bore the brunt of the fighting, destroying numerous Iraqi tanks and armored personnel carriers.
F/A-18 HORNET PILOT STEVE POMEROY ON ANTI-AIRCRAFT FIRE, GULF WAR, 1991 Defending Russian rule A Russian special forces soldier mans a 7.62x54mm PK machine gun, defending a landing zone near the border with Dagestan during the ongoing fight against rebels battling for independence in the Chechen Republic.
The fighting at Norfolk decimated the remnants of the Tawakalna Division of the Iraqi Republican Guard, which had fought at 73 Basting hours earlier.
WARS IN THE FORMER YUGOSLAVIA JUNE 1991-NOVEMBER 2001 The breakup of Yugoslavia resulted in a series of complex and bloody conflicts between factions divided along political, ethnic, and religious lines.
Civilian casualties were very high, partially as a result of deliberate polices of genocide and ethnic cleansing on the part of some factions.
The conflict eventually drew in an international response, with NATO troops and air forces operating in both a peacekeeping role and directly against some factions.
Serbian forces surrounded the Bosnian capital of Sarajevo, bringing about the longest siege in modern history.
After initial attempts to assault the city failed, Sarajevo was shelled and subjected to sniper attacks.
Casualties Serbs:3,200 plus 5,000 prisoners; Croatians and Bosnians:1,500.
Croatian and Bosnian troops attacked the parts of Croatia controlled by separatist Serbs.
The offensive was a complete success, resulting in the reintegration of the Serb-held areas, although economic damage was extensive.
Undertaken in response to threats to UN-designated safe areas in Bosnia, Operation Deliberate Force was a NATO bombing campaign carried out from land bases and aircraft carriers.
In the first battle of the Chechen War, an advancing Russian convoy was attacked by Chechen rebels.
The Russians immediately retaliated with attack helicopters and airstrikes on the Chechen positions.
Battle raged for two weeks, with the Chechens managing to hold out against Russian fire.
Russian forces won a costly victory in their attempt to capture the Chechen capital, Grozny, during the opening months of the war.
The morale of the Russian conscripts suffered and the Chechen civilian population rallied around the rebels.
A major guerrilla raid by Chechen rebels into the Russian Federation resulted in a succession of battles with Russian troops.
The Chechens were forced to withdraw, taking with them a number of hostages, including captured Russian servicemen.
However, a fierce battle erupted as the retreating Chechens passed through Russian siege lines at Pervomayskoye, completely destroying the village.
An ambush by Chechen fighters virtually annihilated a large Russian troop convoy, with only a handful of soldiers escaping what had been a perfectly laid ambush.
Chechen separatists made a rapid advance into the capital, Grozny, managing to break up the Russian defenders into dozens of small contained pockets of resistance.
After the Chechens had repelled several ill-conceived and badly executed Russian attempts to regain control of the city, a ceasefire was called.
Russian forces laid siege to and eventually occupied the Chechen capital, inflicting heavy casualties on the rebels and raising many charges of atrocities.
A considerable number of rebels chose to flee rather than stay and fight a pitched battle against the superior Russian force.
Serbia's continuing refusal to accept a settlement was finally reversed after an intensive and prolonged campaign of bombing by NATO forces.
Several prominent KLA fighters and a number of civilians were killed as police dispersed a hostile crowd in the town of Prekaz.
An incursion by Kosovo Liberation Army units resulted in a stalemate, following weeks of fighting along the Yugoslav frontier.
Four airliners were hijacked and used for suicide attacks on buildings important to American financial, military, and political power.
AFGHANISTAN 7 OCTOBER 2001 -PRESENT Accusing the Taliban government in Afghanistan of harbouring terrorists, the United States and Britain invaded.
Much of the country was pacified, but the Taliban leadership remained at large.
Northern Alliance forces, assisted by United States troops, mounted an offensive aimed at the occupation of the Taliban stronghold of Mazari Sharif.
Surprisingly rapid, the advance caused the Taliban to evacuate thousands of its fighters in order for them to avoid capture.
Northern Alliance, Iranian, and United States Special Forces orchestrated a civil uprising against Taliban rule in Flerat and liberated the city without a fight.
Taliban forces withdrew and the local population welcomed the Northern Alliance troops.
In an effort to eliminate terrorist resistance, a coalition force, assisted by anti-Taliban tribesmen, rooted enemy fighters from caves, inflicting serious casualties.
In a joint coalition and Afghan government operation against an insurgent stronghold in the Shahi Kot Valley, early deployment difficulties at Takur Ghar were overcome and enemy fighters were eventually dislodged from the area.
Canadian troops led a coalition, including Afghan forces, in conducting this two-phase operation to flush out and eliminate pockets of Taliban resistance in the rugged countryside of Kandahar Province, utilizing heavy artillery and air support to meet resistance.
NATO forces, primarily British Royal Marines, engaged in a series of small but sharp battles with Taliban insurgents in an attempt to clear areas of southern Afghanistan from Taliban control.
A number of key insurgents were killed, although there were civilian casualties.
WORST TERRORIST ATROCITIES While conventional military operations are mainly targeted at destroying an enemy's means to wage war, terrorism instead attacks the will of the target to continue the struggle.
In the modern age the terrorist has a powerful weapon in the form of mass media, which allows the ""message"" to reach vast numbers of people.
Some attacks are designed to cause economic damage, but the main goal is to provoke fear in as many people as possible, sending a message to the people of the target nation that any of them could be the next victim.
Thus terrorist organizations seek to influence the world's great powers by terrorising their populations rather than by fighting their armed forces.
This table does not include massacres committed by governments or quasi-governmental organizations, as these may be classified with other violations of international law, such as war crimes and genocides.
Carnage in Madrid Spanish emergency services work amid the wreckage of the bombing of Atocha Station on 11 March 2004.
Terrorists claimed that they acted in retaliation to Spain's support of the US-led wars in Iraq and Afghanistan.
On the third day of the siege, Russian police and military counter-terrorism units stormed the school.
In a related attack, a bomb exploded at Tokyo's Narita airport's baggage terminal.
The attacks led to a three-day siege between the terrorists and Indian security forces.
An offensive operation launched by Taliban insurgents to inflict casualties on the Afghan army and coalition troops succeeded in detonating a number of car bombs and ambushing several army patrols, before the Taliban survivors managed to slip away.
During the first battle of the war in which Afghan army soldiers took a prominent role, Taliban insurgents who had been occupying the town of Musa Qala, were eventually compelled to retreat by coalition forces following three days of particularly intensive fighting.
MODERN MILITARY SPENDING Nation Military spending In US$, 2008 data from the Center for Arms Control and non-Proliferation People's Republic $ 121,900,000,000 of China Russia $70,000,000,000 United Kingdom $55,400,000,000 France $54,000,000,000 Japan $41,100,000,000 Germany $37,800,000,000 $30,600,000,000 United States FUTURE FORCE WARRIOR Umm Qasr in order to facilitate the arrival of humanitarian aid.
Although the port was secured quickly, fighting persisted in the older parts of the city.
United States Special Forces and Peshmerga fighters cut across Highway 2, facilitating further movement into the oil fields of Kirkuk.
During the battle, javelin anti-tank missiles destroyed numerous Iraqi armoured vehicles.
Responding to mortar and small arms attacks in Baghdad by Iraqi insurgents, United States troops launched a massive sweep through the city and captured several large weapon caches, although the insurgency did not wane appreciably.
United States forces captured bridges across the Euphrates river during heavy fighting early in the invasion of Iraq.
Known as Operation Phantom Fury, this resulted in the liberation of the city of Fallujah, previously a hotbed of al-Qaeda activity.
The fighting included some of the most intense urban warfare experienced by United States troops since Vietnam.
In what was to be their largest offensive during 2007, Taliban forces attempted to assert their control over Oruzgan Province in central Afghanistan and were successful in making some initial gains.
However, the superior firepower of the coalition forces eventually gained the upper hand, managing to recover their lost strongholds and drive the Taliban back.
In a series of coordinated raids, the coalition troops, making significant use of armoured vehicles, uncovered and disrupted a number of Taliban bombmaking facilities, and inflicted heavy casualties on the insurgents, causing them to disperse.
A large cache of Taliban arms and ammunition was also seized by the coalition forces during this operation.
British troops captured the secondlargest city in Iraq after two weeks of fighting that included a large clash of armoured vehicles.
United States forces carried out probing attacks to test the defences of Baghdad and entered the Iraqi capital three days after gaining control of its airport.
Iraqi leader, Saddam Hussein fled and managed to elude capture for several months.
Authorized reproduction by the Instituto Nacional de Antropologia e Historia.
Alamy Images: Mary Evans Picture Library fclb; Corbis: epa crb; The Gallery Collection fcla; Stapleton Collection fera; Getty Images: era, ferb; Purestock clb; Nick Medrano: www.ww2incolor.com cb.
David J Colbran ; Front Endpapers: The Trustees of the British Museum; Back Endpapers: The Trustees of the British Museum.
Duncan Turner All other images © Dorling Kindersley For further information see: www.dkimages.com DK would like to thank the following museums and staff for their kind assistance on the book: Arme Museum, Stockholm; Firepower, The Royal Artillery Museum, Woolwich; Royal Armouries, Leeds; Royal Museum of the Armed Forces of Military History, Brussels; and The Army Medical Services, Aldershot.
DK would also like to thank Helen Peters for the index; Caroline Hunt for proofreading; Betty Jarvis, Les Kerswill, Lloyd Roseblade, and Paul Schulz for providing objects and information for the Aspects of War features; Martin Copeland, Karen Van Ross, and Jenny Baskaya for picture research assistance; and Anna Hall and Todd Webb for design assistance.
