In October 1962, The United States looked down ""the gun barrel of nuclear war,"" according to Kennedy speechwriter Theodore Sorenson.
In the aftermath of the Cold War, the declassification of top secret records introduced new interpretations.
Since 1987, scholars and archivists have used the Freedom of Information Act , to obtain, consolidate, and archive documents across the spectrum of Federal agencies about the Cuban missile crisis, events that led up to it, and its aftermath.
Newly available records also let historians study the Cuban missile crisis from the point of view of the Soviet Union and Cuba as well as the United States.
The following resources filter only a few among the many available materials to provide an overview of the issues and main actors.
This simple interactive site from the National Endowment for the Humanities summarizes the situation from the point of view of the Presidential cabinet.
Visitors examine the choices Kennedy and his advisors faced and get a brief analysis of the consequences of each, the opinions of key members of President Kennedy's advisory committee, and an introduction to primary sources—particularly the National Intelligence Estimate, a key briefing document for the advisory committee.
It's a helpful site for summarizing the complexities from the viewpoint of the Cabinet.
Resources include primary source materials, a detailed timeline, and documents and audio files, from both the United States and the Soviet Union charting causes and events of the Crisis.
Analytical essays from historians sift through the historiography and recent evidence, discussing how this new evidence has rearranged assumptions and conclusions about the missile crisis.
American accounts always left Cuba out of the story; and the film Thirteen Days ignores the Soviet Union as well.
The United States State Department offers an activity idea, suggesting watching Thirteen Days and comparing the story told by historic documents with the version relayed by Hollywood using the Motion Picture Analysis Worksheet from the National Archives.
The PBS American Experience series The Presidents also provides well-selected primary source documents incorporating correspondence circulating among Kennedy, Khrushchev, and Fidel Castro on the Cuban missile crisis.
Explore using Wordle to help your students wend their ways through some of the more complex vocabulary, documents, and issues of the Cuban missile crisis.
Historian » Digital Historian » Master Teacher » Quick Links Elementary School Teachers » Middle School Teachers » High School Teachers » About Teachinghistory.org Teachinghistory.org is designed to help K–12 history teachers access resources and materials to improve United States history education in the classroom.
With funding from the United States Department of Education, the Center for History and New Media has created Teachinghistory.org with the goal of making history content, teaching strategies, resources, and research accessible.
