Recently opened Irish Wles, however, provide some insight into how that crisis enveloped Dublin’s authorities.
Fortunately, one can Wnd documented in these Wles the environment Irish policy-makers faced during that crisis.
For that reason, what may have appeared unneutral at Wrst glance is at least understandable.
The latter claims that Ireland had never had a real tradition of neutrality.
He supported that claim by Wrst establishing his deWnition of neutrality and then measuring the Irish experience against that deWnition.
The object in this study is to put the decisions in this crisis into the context that supported them.
IRELAND, THE CUBAN MISSILE CRISIS, AND CIVIL AVIATION 67 In fact, that knowledge permits one to argue that speciWc Irish decisions were the most neutral open to them at that moment.
The Irish policy of neutrality, in other words, is understandable only when placed into the context of its application—in this case, the events of October, 1962.
The idea of a policy of neutrality for Ireland appeared in the aftermath of the Easter Rebellion in 1916.
For centuries the British had believed the defense of England required the control of Ireland and the Irish after 1916 tried to satisfy that British need by suggesting that an independent Ireland would adhere to a policy of perpetual neutrality.
In other words, a free Ireland would in no way threaten the United Kingdom, but the British totally rejected that concept in the negotiations that led to the Anglo-Irish Treaty of 1921 and the Irish had to accept conditions in that agreement which the British assumed would deny any possibility of Ireland being neutral in a British war.
Winston Churchill, the British wartime prime minister, actually oVered such a deal in the summer of 1940, but Eamon de Valéra, the Irish leader, refused on the ground that the British would have been unable to deliver on such a promise.
The Irish, thus, remained neutral throughout World War II and that policy has remained a central pillar of Irish foreign policy ever since.
From the beginning the Irish deWnition of neutrality involved the avoidance of war as the above debates reXect.
Salmon agreed that that was what the Irish wanted and that they succeeded to do that in World War II, but he also claimed that the mere avoidance of war was not neutrality.
They rejected that invitation on the ground that they could not join in the defense of Europe against the threat from Stalin’s Soviet Union as long as Great Britain continued to occupy a portion of Irish territory, Northern Ireland.
They may have expected the United States to accept that logic and force London to end its support of the Belfast government in exchange for access to the strategic position the Irish thought they could provide the Americans in a confrontation with the Soviet Union, but that did not happen.
The Irish never did join NATO and maintained the image of a neutral nation through the demise of the Cold War in 1990, the Soviet Union in 1991, and Communism in Russia in 1992.
During both World War II and the Cold War, however, the Irish were able to remove the world of civil aviation from their policy of neutrality.
That was possible during World War II because of the limited range of aircraft design, because during the late 1930s both land and seaplane bases were built in Newfoundland and on the River Shannon in Ireland, and because the distance between those two points was the shortest route from North America to Europe.
The United States and Great Britain continued to use the Shannon facilities during the entire war under the guise that those Xights were civilian, not military.
Both found that civil aviation cover quite helpful to their joint war eVort and the Irish actually attempted to trade their use of Shannon for civilian and even military equipment.
IRELAND, THE CUBAN MISSILE CRISIS, AND CIVIL AVIATION 69 scope of their neutrality policy was enhanced when the Irish received an invitation to the Chicago International Conference on Civil Aviation that opened on November 1, 1944, with the purpose of planning the use of the sky after the war in the context of a multilateral agreement.
Unfortunately, that meeting quickly degenerated into a dispute between the British and the Americans and the conference ended with only limited success.
That caused the United States to seek a number of bilateral agreements that would give American airlines access to strategically signiWcant airports.
In that process the Americans approached the Irish during the Chicago Conference and on February 3, 1945, the two states signed a bilateral agreement that gave the United States full access to Shannon Airport.
The British saw that agreement as a direct attempt to extend American control over the North Atlantic before the British were ready to compete.
That, of course, was all accomplished while Ireland continued to proclaim its neutrality in World War II.8 In the months that followed that war, growing animosity between Washington and Moscow eventually ended in the Cold War, while the Irish did all in their power to enter into as many bilateral civil aviation agreements as possible to insure that as many airlines as possible would use Shannon on the North Atlantic run.
In that eVort they signed such an agreement with Czechoslovakia on January 29, 1947, but in February, 1948, that country was suddenly absorbed into the Soviet Union’s satellite state system in Central Europe.
The suddenness and brutality of that act forced the Western European nations to sign a defensive alliance, from which eventually emerged the North Atlantic Treaty Organization that Ireland refused to join.
IRELAND, THE CUBAN MISSILE CRISIS, AND CIVIL AVIATION 70 decided not to join NATO, they appeared to be willing to do what the United States and Great Britain wanted—to limit the use of Shannon— but they had signed a bilateral agreement with Czechoslovakia two years earlier by which the Czechs had received rights that the Irish could not simply erase.
The Czechs did nothing to exercise the rights they had received in 1947 until they suddenly asked the Irish on February 29, 1960, for permission to Xy a route through Shannon to Montreal.
Before that could be arranged, the Czechs in October, 1960, asked for full commercial rights on a new route from Prague to Havana, via Brussels, Shannon, and Gander, Newfoundland.
That startled the Irish and presented them with a serious problem, mainly because Cuban-American relations had deteriorated seriously since Fidel Castro had gained control of Cuba in 1959.11 The Irish delayed telling the Americans and the British what the Czechs wanted until February 27, 1961.
The British “had no comment to make,”12 and, after reviewing the issue, Seán Lemass, the taoiseach, indicated that Shannon should be used to the maximum.
There is no explanation of why there was the three-month delay in this Wle.
When neither Washington nor London responded, the Irish Wnally told the Czechs in September that they had permission to Xy to Montreal by way of Shannon.
Why the Irish delayed is hard to say, but it could have been the American elections that were then underway.
That American-planned invasion, unfortunately, failed and that failure inXuenced the framing of a note the Americans sent to Dublin on April 26 on the Czech request.
The United States was concerned about the increased Xights of Soviet Bloc aircraft over territory of friendly countries and wanted assurances . . . that Ireland was taking all feasible means to prevent such transit [and that] if such aircraft did land on Irish territory, every precaution would be taken against a violation of the provisions of the Chicago Convention concerning transport of munitions.
In those changed circumstances, Frank Aiken, the Irish minister for external aVairs, wanted to continue to stall on “the Czech request” and Lemass oVered no objection to that approach.
The picture became somewhat more complex on October 3, 1961, when Cubana Airlines sought technical stop rights at Shannon on a proposed Havana-Gander-Shannon-Prague service.
Edward Prince was in charge of the American Embassy because Eisenhower’s appointee as ambassador had left and Kennedy’s nominee, Grant Stockdale, would not arrive until May.
Cremin sent that reaction of the American Chargé to Lemass’ oYce with the suggestion that he would wait “until the week after next” before telling the Czechs.
That would give the Americans time to make whatever comments they wished in light of the conversation he had had with Prince.
IRELAND, THE CUBAN MISSILE CRISIS, AND CIVIL AVIATION 72 about the delay in the granting of their request on the same route.
The Irish knew that both Cuba and Czechoslovakia had signed the International Civil Aviation Organization Transit Agreement and, thus, they were automatically obligated to grant both nontraYc rights to Xy over Irish air space and to stop for technical reasons.
Those complaints and that information led to a meeting with the Czechs on November 15, 1961.
There the Irish learned that the Czechs wanted only technical stop rights.
That meeting was followed by the news that the British had granted the CSA technical rights to Prestwick and Manchester.
Consequently, the Irish had to act to save the Prague traYc for Shannon.
On December 20 the Irish told the Czechs they could overXy Ireland and land for technical reasons.
In the next month the Canadians granted both Cubana and CSA permission to make regular nontraYc stops at Gander with a weather alternate at Halifax.
That permitted the Cubans to Xy and they landed at Shannon, which ICAO rules automatically permitted them to do.
The Irish, in eVect, without any formal exchange of notes permitted Cubana Airlines to use Shannon, again to insure its use rather than some other airport in Britain or on the continent.
By avoiding any formal exchange of notes the Irish also were able to avoid any direct negotiations with Havana and any adverse American reaction to such negotiations.
Thus ended a Wfteenmonth eVort to stall a Xight from Prague to Havana, essentially because the Irish did not want to antagonize the Americans who were preoccupied with Castro’s Cuba.
Unfortunately, the Czechs raised their demands upon the Irish on April 25, 1962, when they asked for full traYc rights at Shannon on the Havana route.
That triggered another review of the whole situation and by July 13 Cremin summarized the problem.
Because the principle of using Shannon as much as possible still had validity, as the Americans had recognized on April 26, 1961, the Irish Department of Transport and Power wanted to give the Czechs what they wanted, and also because of the interline proposal.
IRELAND, THE CUBAN MISSILE CRISIS, AND CIVIL AVIATION 73 reaction to a favorable Irish decision and the potential impact such a decision would have upon the Irish application for admission into the European Economic Community .20 The latter problem had been brewing since at least the announcement on June 6, 1947 by Secretary of State George Marshall that the United States would consider funding a comprehensive plan to rebuild Europe economically.
That speech was followed by the formation of the Organization for European Economic Co-operation and the Marshall Plan, both of which attracted Irish participation.
Those initiatives eventually led to the European Economic Community in 1956, and to the question of whether the Irish should join it.
Eventually, on July 31, 1961, Lemass sent a letter to the EEC, announcing Ireland’s desire to do just that.
Unfortunately, the Irish had not heard that their application would be accepted prior to Cremin’s memo of July 13, 1962.
The British and Danes applied after the Irish and were invited to open negotiations on their applications on November 8, 1961 and November 30 respectively.
The Course of Ireland’s Entry into the EEC (Dublin: Institute of Public Administration, 1986), 136.
IRELAND, THE CUBAN MISSILE CRISIS, AND CIVIL AVIATION 74 inate behind the Iron Curtain.
That last point, however, troubled Cremin, especially when he considered the Czech oVer of an interline agreement. . . . the matter would take on an entirely diVerent complexion if there were any possibility of these rights being exploited in such a way as to mean that the service to Havana would more or less originate in Shannon and be Wlled up by feeder service from Prague. . . . could possibly result in some kind of shuttle-service between Shannon and Prague with the possibility of Shannon’s appearing to be linked up in some way with the Iron-Curtain network of airports.
In summation Cremin argued that, if the Irish concluded they should grant the Czech request, they should tell the United States and “try to ascertain whether such a decision would be taken badly.
Indeed, I am not sure that there might not remain in the American mind, even behind a relatively neutral reaction, an element of dissatisfaction, and possibly a feeling that it should not really be necessary for us to permit the full use of Shannon for a service linking with its ‘friends’ in Eastern Europe a country—Cuba—about which wide sectors of American opinion, oYcial and other, still cherish an active discontent.
IRELAND, THE CUBAN MISSILE CRISIS, AND CIVIL AVIATION 75 that some other country would not give the Czechs what they wanted.
They had hoped that the Irish would have granted nothing more than transit and overXight rights.
When the United States signed the Civil Aviation Agreement with Ireland on February 3, 1945, American airlines got access only to Shannon and not to Dublin.
That rankled the American airlines and, as early as 1946, they started to pressure the United States government to force the Irish to give them permission to land in Dublin.
Full-scale talks were held in Washington in January, 1948, and in Dublin in September, 1949;29 the American ambassador in Dublin tried again in 26 Note, 20 July 1962, ibid.
See also “Statement of United States IRELAND, THE CUBAN MISSILE CRISIS, AND CIVIL AVIATION 76 1950 and again in 1952;30 Dwight D Eisenhower’s administration reopened the issue on July 23, 1958, and made one more attempt in April, 1960.31 In all of those talks, the Irish never once deviated from their position that an American presence in Dublin would lead to requests from every other airline for the same right.
That would redirect air traYc to Dublin and away from Shannon, which would have disastrous results for the West of Ireland.
No Irish government could withstand the explosion of electoral resentment that would follow such a concession.
If the Irish felt that the arrival of John F Kennedy in the White House would change anything, they were wrong.
On July 28, 1961, Kennedy’s Wrst ambassador to Ireland asked for new negotiations on the issue and those opened on November 27.
The Americans quickly learned that the Irish would not permit American planes entry into Dublin and the controversy continued into the spring of 1962, both in the public press and in the private correspondence between the Irish government and the American Embassy, with the latter arguing that the talks “were only suspended” and could be reopened at any time.
In the midst of that six-month debate the Irish had stalled the original Czech request for landing rights on the Havana Xight until they learned the British had given them such rights.
One can only assume that they did so to placate the Americans on that issue, while they denied the Americans access to Dublin.
There obviously was more than America’s attitude toward Cuba at play in that Irish decision to stall the 1961 Czech request.
With all that previous debate in mind, Lemass had to decide what to do with the April, 1962, Czech request.
This chronology was declassiWed on April 4, 1988, and remains the property of the Department of State.
IRELAND, THE CUBAN MISSILE CRISIS, AND CIVIL AVIATION 77 just-arrived American Ambassador Matthew B McCloskey.
Aiken used the words “at present” to denote that the issue would remain open and that the Irish expected that the Americans would inform them, if they learned that any other nation was about to grant such rights to the Czechs.
In attempting to build the best case he could for Ireland’s continued cooperation with the United States on the issue of the Czech request to use Shannon, Aiken referred to the earlier American request to postpone the granting of technical stop rights on the route to Cuba, which the Irish did, only to hear that the British were considering granting them.
Moreover, Aiken did not see much point in the American stand that the granting of Wve freedom rights would “help the Warsaw bloc’s espionage,” since there were other ways to get to Cuba and Latin America, including an Iberian Airline service from Madrid to the Azores and one to Cuba and a Cuba-Bermuda-Madrid return.
When he explained that the return trip used Kinsley AirWeld in Bermuda, McCloskey was surprised, as it was under American control and a military Weld as well.
In addition, Aiken added that Pan American operated a daily Xight from Miami to Cuba and Cubana Airlines operated to Mexico City.
After returning to the “vital importance of the Shannon to the Irish economy” and the possibility that the Czech service could add thousands of passengers through Shannon each year on their way to Prague, Aiken again raised the Irish expectation that the United States would tell them if any other country were about to grant such rights to the Czechs.
When he had Wnished his presentations, McCloskey did what Aiken had feared.
Aiken immediately responded that the issue had been discussed at a long conference “a few months ago and that it would be economically impossible for us to accede” to that request.
Aiken recognized that reporters had asked McCloskey, upon his arrival in Dublin, 34 MacAogáin note, 1 August 1962, ibid.
IRELAND, THE CUBAN MISSILE CRISIS, AND CIVIL AVIATION 78 whether he had decided to support Pan American’s request, and agreed that McCloskey would have to support that request in his capacity as the American Ambassador, but the Irish could not change their position.
There that conversation ended, as McCloskey fortunately agreed that he saw nothing that the Americans could oVer the Irish by way of additional facilities to compensate them for the damage to their economy that opening Dublin would mean, and Aiken hoped that the Americans would very soon drop their objection to the granting of rights to Shannon to the Czechs.
Unfortunately, Aiken’s conversation with McCloskey in August was followed by Fidel Castro’s decision to put the Wnal touches to the new draft agreement between Cuba and the Soviet Union on military cooperation and military defenses, which continued a massive arms build-up.
At the same time, the director of the Central Intelligence Agency, John McCone, dictated a memorandum for President Kennedy, expressing his belief that the Soviets had decided to send ballistic missiles to Cuba.
As the crisis deepened in mid-October, Kennedy’s advisors concluded that they would have to take some steps to prepare America’s allies and even neutral, but friendly, states for that speech.
To do that he had ordered special brieWng teams to London, Paris, and Bonn, and another to Ottawa.
For the others, including Ireland, he ordered the preparation of special letters to be delivered prior to the speech and on October 22 at 10:55m.
IRELAND, THE CUBAN MISSILE CRISIS, AND CIVIL AVIATION 79 a special message was sent to embassies around the world to deliver those letters.
Dublin time and immediately delivered Kennedy’s letter to the Irish government.
Tanaiste Seán MacEntee, received it for the government, since Lemass at that moment was in Bonn.
From October 7 through 14 Lemass had met with the leaders of Belgium, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, Italy and France, as well as the President of the EEC Commission to discuss Ireland’s application.
On the very day of Kennedy’s speech, October 22, he had arrived in Bonn for an oYcial state visit to the Federal Republic of Germany and was in conference with Konrad Adenauer, when the German leader Wrst learned what was about to happen in Washington.
Kennedy’s letter to Lemass explained the situation of the missiles in Cuba, but also included the draft resolution on the issue that Ambassador Adlai Stevenson was going to submit to the United Nations on the next day.
Stevenson and speak forthrightly in support” of that resolution, but that was all he asked of Dublin.
At the end of the session, Diefenbaker immediately asked his subordinates to insure that Canadian airspace and air transport facilities be denied to the Soviets.
A half hour later the American ambassadors in London and Bonn started to brief the British and German leaders respectively.
While those special brieWngs took place in London, Paris, Bonn and Ottawa the Under Secretary of State George W Ball met with forty-six pro-Western and neutral ambassadors to Washington to give them an advance brieWng as well.
IRELAND, THE CUBAN MISSILE CRISIS, AND CIVIL AVIATION 80 Because Kennedy’s speech had been delivered at midnight Dublin time, its news did not reach the majority of the Irish people until the next morning.
They had not, but that afternoon news arrived that Ambassador McCloskey, without instructions from Washington, felt that he should advise the State Department about the amount of traYc going through Shannon to and from Cuba.
Meanwhile, the Canadians literally closed their air space to the Soviets on October 23 and the Irish learned that on October 24.
They were able to do so since the Soviets had never joined the International Civil Aviation Organization , nor signed the 1944 Chicago Convention agreements.
When the Canadians had granted the Soviets use of their airspace and facilities, therefore, they had done so only as a courtesy and were free to stop that courtesy at any time for any reason.
Thus, the Canadians would continue to permit the Cubans and Czechs to land, refuel, and overXy, but they would subject all Xights to a search for arms, which the Canadians claimed were allowed by both ICAO rules and Canadian law.
The reporter added that such support “must have gone some way towards correcting Dr.
As that happened in Bonn on October 24, Cremin told the British that the Irish had, as of that day, not received any request to deny transit facilities to the Czechs or Cubans; but he did explain that the American ambassador had asked for data on the amount of Czech and Cuban traYc going through Shannon and that the Irish intended to provide that information.
He also reported that in the afternoon the Canadian ambassador called to see if the Irish were contemplating any action similar to the Canadian decision to search Czech and Cuban planes on the Prague-Shannon1962, Five Volumes , Vol.
We do not wish in the conXict between the free democracies and the communist empires to be thought of as neutral.
IRELAND, THE CUBAN MISSILE CRISIS, AND CIVIL AVIATION 82 Gander-Havana route.
The Canadians later sent an aide-mémoire that justiWed their search for arms under Section 35 of the ICAO convention and a speciWc section in Canada’s Air Regulations.
The Irish, however, made no decision to follow that policy because the Americans had not asked them to do so.
The Soviets replied with their own resolution which condemned the quarantine, but also asked for negotiations to end the impasse.
At the time, Ireland had a seat on the Security Council and, thus, Aiken could speak directly to the crisis.
His speech on October 24, however, contained neither a rousing condemnation of the Soviet Union, nor a resounding call for support for America.
On the contrary, Aiken opened with a sympathetic description of how the Castro revolution came to clash with the United States and the vast majority of Latin American states.
IRELAND, THE CUBAN MISSILE CRISIS, AND CIVIL AVIATION 83 the Cuban interest in defending their security, but he felt that the Soviet military build-up went far beyond a defensive position to give the Soviets power to strike the United States and Cuba’s other neighbors with modern weapons.
Aiken later explained that as I was due to speak, the two Xeets were getting very close together in the middle of the Atlantic . . . so our suggestion was that, as the two resolutions after making their demands wound up by suggesting negotiation, we should take the last part of the two resolutions Wrst, which called for negotiations and start negotiations.
Meanwhile, as the Soviets and Americans tried to deal with the crisis over the next four days through a variety of negotiating channels, the Irish collected the information concerning Xights through and over Irish territory by Czech and Cuban planes.
The Americans, however, on April 26, 52 Ireland at the United Nations, 1962 , 84.
Salmon accepted the public perception of 1962 that Aiken supported the United States during the crisis.
He may not have read the speech, however, since it was much more evenhanded, or neutral, than he implied.
See Salmon, Unneutral Ireland, 203, and United Nations, Yearbook, 1962, 106.
In that same interview Aiken claimed that he had met Chester Bowles in late 1960 and also had spoken to Stevenson about the Cuban problem and the Cubans fear of an American invasion.
I found no evidence of conversations on that subject with either man in the Stevenson papers, but I did Wnd a letter that Aiken sent to Bowles on January 25, 1961 on “armaments control,” which Bowles sent to Stevenson on February 6, 1961.
IRELAND, THE CUBAN MISSILE CRISIS, AND CIVIL AVIATION 84 1961, had sought assurances that the Irish would see to it that Soviet bloc aircraft landing in Ireland did not carry munitions in violation of the provisions of international aviation agreements.
The Americans had never received an answer to that request, but the staV in the American embassy had understood at the time that the Irish were prepared to take the steps necessary to ensure that condition.
They also wanted assurance that no cargo could be put on those planes at Shannon.
By then, however, the crisis over the missiles had dramatically changed.
On the previous day, October 28, 1962, Nikita Khrushchev had capitulated.
The Executive Committee of the National Security Council met at 11m., and framed a response to Khruschev’s decision to dismantle the missiles.
The Cuban Missile crisis was over, but the Cuban problem in Soviet-American relations remained.
In that setting the Irish Wnally, two days later, made their decision to search Cuban and Czech aircraft at Shannon to ensure that they were not carrying arms and justiWed that by arguing that such a practice would violate the ICAO convention.
In addition, they would continue to provide information on the number of passengers, cargo, etc. of those Xights and similar data for past periods.
The reporter was surprised to hear that, as the quarantine had been lifted on November 21.
The Canadians got good coverage for their actions in The Times , October 25, 27, 29; but that paper did not even carry the Irish press release of November 6, 1962.
That may have been the result of the lateness of the release, as the issue was history by then.
See text of cable from Department, Received via Permanent Mission to the U.N., IRELAND, THE CUBAN MISSILE CRISIS, AND CIVIL AVIATION 85 eVect, the Irish had delayed that decision until after the crisis had eVectively ended, when there was little chance of Wnding any arms on the planes searched.
Still, the Irish had submitted to an American wish, which had never been oYcially expressed, other than prior to the crisis.
The Irish government decided to agree, “generally speaking and in principle,” to cooperate with the American and British civil aviation policy toward the Soviet Union and its satellites on March 25, 1949; to delay granting even technical stopping rights at Shannon on the Prague-Havana route from October, 1960, to December 20, 1961; and to reverse, under direct American pressure as expressed in a July 25, 1962, aide-mémoire, their decision of July 19, 1962, giving the Czechs full commercial rights at Shannon on the Prague-Havana run.
While such decisions might not be viewed as those of a truly neutral state, they were taken by a small nation that professed to adhere to a policy of neutrality.
The easy answer is that these decisions indicate that Ireland was not neutral, but the Irish would not accept that, because it simply was not true.
They had a policy of neutrality, but it was limited to the avoidance of war and, particularly, a British war.
Any other policy would only invite invasion and the Irish believed they did not have, nor ever would have, the ability to repel such an invasion.
Flights through Shannon of Czech and Cuban Aeroplanes bound for Cuba, 29 November 1962, ibid.
Although Salmon does not speciWcally state that Aiken’s speech was an example of what he called Ireland’s “unneutral and ambivalent” policy, in the context of his study one can assume that he would label it and these other decisions as examples of that policy.
IRELAND, THE CUBAN MISSILE CRISIS, AND CIVIL AVIATION 86 permit their neutrality to deny the state an economic advantage, and in regard to civil aviation, that meant that the Irish had to follow a policy that would insure the maximum use of Shannon airport.
They did the same in the Cold War and, obviously, their policy of neutrality had attracted the attention of the Czechs.
Any use of Shannon by Communist states, however, would have to be subject to American sensitivities for fear that any grant of rights to the Czechs would lead to American demands to Xy into Dublin.
If that happened, the eVect upon Shannon would have been the opposite of what the Irish wanted from a grant to Czechoslovakia.
The use of Shannon would also have to be subject to the sensitivities of the members of the EEC, which the Irish had sought to join on July 31, 1961, and had received no response, prior to October 22.60 Any quick granting of rights to the Czechs would have reinforced doubts about the Irish application that already existed in some member governments.
The Irish decisions were, therefore, the result of having to satisfy the Americans, the Europeans and the Communists, but within the context of the Irish policy of neutrality.
Thus, in 1949, the Irish agreed to limiting civil aviation rights to the Soviet Union and its satellites “generally speaking in principle,” but not specifically speaking in a particular case.
In other words, they had agreed to nothing; they closed no door; they told the Americans and the British what both wanted to hear; they had, in other words, made an Irish decision—which is a decision not to make a decision.
The Lemass government’s delay in giving the Czechs rights to Shannon on the Havana run from October, 1960, to December, 1961 may be attributed to fear of an American reaction, especially during the negotiations on American access to Dublin that took place from July to early December 1961.
Only after those talks were suspended and upon hearing that the British—a competitor who had sold the Czechs and the Cubans the airplanes they were Xying—had granted them such rights, did the Irish give the same rights to Prague.
The desire to maximize the use of Shannon in a competitive atmosphere—an economic need—forced that decision.
In fact, the EEC Council met that day, October 22, to grant the Irish the right to open negotiations on their application.
This paper reported that the Cubans were Xying the British-made Britannia, but not that they had been ordered before Castro came to power.
IRELAND, THE CUBAN MISSILE CRISIS, AND CIVIL AVIATION 87 They did agree to reverse their decision to give the Czechs full commercial rights at Shannon on the Havana run under direct American pressure in July, 1962, again for fear that rejecting the American position would mean the renewal of demands for Americans to land in Dublin.
The Irish did not see that decision as any violation of their neutrality, however.
They were willing to placate the Americans only in return for knowledge that others would not grant such rights.
The Irish government obviously feared that the British and the Canadians, founding members of NATO, would grant such rights to the Czechs.
The Irish also agreed to support the United States resolution in the Security Council of the United Nations, but Aiken’s speech oVered no resounding support for either side.
At the time, it was seen as support for the American argument that the Soviets had introduced oVensive weapons to Cuba, but that was quite obvious to anyone who looked at the pictures the U-2 had taken.
If anything, Aiken placed Ireland only on the side of that dispute that the world had taken and did so in a way as to be least oVensive to the Communist countries.
When he asked both sides to negotiate, he did not oVend the Cubans and Soviets, but he did please Washington, and he reduced the fears of the Europeans about Ireland’s commitment to European unity.
And Aiken never did vote for the American resolution, as it never reached that point.
If it had, he would have voted for it, but one would have been hard pressed at the time to use that vote in those circumstances to prove that the Irish were not neutral.
The decision to deliver raw intelligence to the United States was the closest the Irish came to violating even their own deWnition of neutrality, but even that is explainable.
The Czechs acquired them later on lease from the Cubans and put them into service on the Prague to Havana run in early 1962.
The British were also actively seeking increased trade with the Czechs and sent a trade delegation to Prague in July 1962.
The Irish had ample reason to fear the British would deal with the Czechs, if the Irish would not.
IRELAND, THE CUBAN MISSILE CRISIS, AND CIVIL AVIATION 88 impact upon the Irish decision; and in all probability it was information the Americans already had.
At any rate it was better to do that than to wait for the United States to request the Irish to refuse all transit rights to the Cubans and Czechs.
Moreover, the Irish government had to have been quite concerned that such a request would possibly arrive, since the Americans had asked the British to refuse Czech and Cuban transit rights, and they may have known that the Americans had also asked the Canadians to do so.
Finally, the Irish decision to search for munitions clearly came after the Soviet capitulation, when one could assume, in all probability that no such attempt to transport such materials would be made, and such searches were, moreover, well within Irish international rights.
Furthermore, the Irish government waited until November 6 to make that announcement, when everyone knew the missile crisis had ended.
The decision to search, however, was clearly made to placate the Americans, who had not asked for it, by duplicating the Canadian action.
At the same time, the decision would not alienate the Czechs or Cubans to the degree that they would stop using Shannon.
That may not have been necessary, since Shannon was still the most neutral stop on the way to Havana, but the Irish could not take any chances.
Similar decisions were made by other nations that professed neutrality during the Cold War and, even, during the world wars of the twentieth century.
If such decisions made Ireland unneutral, then one would have to conclude similar decisions by other states would have made them unneutral also.
