August 29, 2018 at 12:00m.July 27: Cuban President Fidel Castro announces that Cuba has moved to make any direct United States attack on Cuba the equivalent of a world war.
CIA Director John McCone sends memo to Kennedy expressing belief that Soviet medium-range ballistic missiles will be deployed in Cuba Aug.: Sen.
Soviet Foreign Minister Andrei Gromyko warns in a United Nations speech that a United States attack on Cuba could mean war with the Soviet Union.
Two days after U-2 photos taken and analyzed, Kennedy calls assembles a group to become known as EX-COMM to discuss possible diplomatic and military courses of action.
Kennedy flies to Connecticut to campaign for congressional candidate Abe Ribicoff.
Attorney General Robert Kennedy and Theodore Sorensen later update Kennedy at airport that the Joint Chiefs of Staff strongly argues for air strike against Cuba.
After a second U-2 flight, military discovers intermediate range SS-5 nuclear missiles.
Kennedy attends scheduled campaign speeches in Cleveland and the West Coast.
Kennedy meets with his advisors and orders a defensive quarantine instituted as soon as possible.
Maxwell Taylor tells president that an air strike could not guarantee to destroy all Soviet missiles in Cuba; Kennedy decides on a quarantine of Cuba for the time being.
U-2 flight that day reveals bombers and Soviet fighter planes being rapidly assembled and cruise missile sites being built on Cuba”s northern shore.
Congressional leaders meet with Kennedy at White House and shown photographic evidence of Soviet missile installations.
Kennedy sends Robert Kennedy to Soviet embassy to talk with Ambassador Dobrynin.
Soviet ships en route to Cuba with questionable cargo either slow down or reverse course except for one.
Military forces go to DEFCON 2 the highest ever in United States history.
Kennedy sends letter to Khrushchev laying responsibility for the crisis on the Soviet Union.
EX-COMM discusses proposal to withdraw United States missiles from Turkey in exchange for withdrawal of Soviet missiles in Cuba.
Kennedy tells EX-COMM he believes the quarantine alone can not force the Soviets to remove missiles.
CIA report states there was no halt in progress in development of missile sites.
Khrushchev sends new letter to Kennedy proposing removing missiles if Kennedy publicly announces he won”t ever invade Cuba.
New letter from Khrushchev proposes public trade of Soviet missiles in Cuba for United States missiles in Turkey.
American U-2 is shot down over Cuba killing the pilot, Major Rudolf Anderson.
U-2 strays into Soviet airspace near Alaska, nearly intercepted by Soviet fighters.
Dobrynin and Robert Kennedy meet and discuss price of removing missiles from Cuba.
Kennedy writes Khrushchev that he will state that the United States will not invade Cuba if Khrushchev removes the missiles from Cuba.
Trending Nationally Customer Angry Over Duck Sauce Sought In Killing Of Chinese Food DeliverymanWoman Executed By United States For First Time Since 19539 Fla.
Putin Faces Cancer Surgery; His Temporary Fill In Won’t ‘do Anything Rash’Country Singer Naomi Judd Died By Suicide: Report Vallejo Times-Herald Join the ConversationWe invite you to use our commenting platform to engage in insightful conversations about issues in our community.
