VENEZUELA 02:22, July 31, 2010 Contents 1 Failed Negotiations 2 War Breaks Out 2.
Negotiations between the United States and the Soviet Union collapse after Khrushchev, fearing loss of support in the Soviet Union, turns down Kennedy's demand for removal of Soviet missiles from Cuba and American missiles from Turkey.
President Kennedy, his entire Cabinet, Congress, the Senate and the Joint Chiefs are evacuated from the Greater D.C area in order to preserve government in case of a nuclear attack.War Breaks Out October 30 October 30 11:14-11:47 AM: Cuban radar mistake U.S aircraft moving south from Florida and U.S naval movements as a prelude to an attack to take out Cuba's retaliatory strike capabilities.
President Kennedy is alerted that the Cubans have launched a Soviet nuclear missile at the United States He immediately orders two missiles to be launched on his command.
The Cuban missile explodes in just short of Washington D.C with the force double that of the Hiroshima bomb, instantly obliterating more than half of the city including the Pentagon, the National Guard and heavily damaging the Capitol Building and killing 78,000 people within 30 seconds.
Two minutes later, President Kennedy is alerted and orders the launching of both missiles immediately.
Khrushchev is informed of what has happened and immediately orders Soviet and Warsaw Pact forces to capture West Berlin.
He also orders Soviet bombers to begin commencing air raids on U.S cities and orders the Soviet navy out to sea.
One minute later one of the American missiles explodes in Havana killing thousands, including Raul and Fidel Castro.
Six minutes after that the second missile explodes squarely in Moscow reducing the entire city to ruins.
With a war raging across the world and the survival of his nation at stake President Kennedy fails to make contact with Khrushchev.
Meanwhile in Berlin house to house conflict erupts between NATO and Warsaw Pact forces.
Soviet Bombers begin reaching their targets in the continental United States.
Nuclear-armed bombers drop their payloads all over the continental United States and Canada.Seattle, Minneapolis, Anchorage, and Detroit, are all annihilated, as well as the Canadian cities of Toronto, Ottawa, and Montreal.
Tens of thousands of civilians are killed or wounded.% of Soviet bombers are shot down as they enter or leave American airspace.
Similar events occur in Europe,the Middle East, East Asia, the Soviet Union, Central America and Australia.
At 3:15 PM a Soviet 2 megaton bomb reaches its target at Strategic Air Command in Omaha, Nebraska.
Soviet Missiles strike Communist China in a preemptive strike to stop a possible Chinese invasion of the Soviet homeland.
Six American missiles are launched from their bases in Turkey at targets in the Soviet Union.October 30 5:07 PM: All but one missiles reach their targets and effectively destroy several key Soviet command centers and air bases.October 30 5:37 PM: A Soviet missile heading for NATO headquarters in Belgium detonates destroying its target completely.October 30 6:26 PM: Ground fighting breaks out between PLA and Red Army forces on the Soviet-Chinese border.
The remaining Soviet Command and Control Authority orders the launching of 6 additional missiles at Key Chinese military sites.
Chairman Mao is killed when a Soviet missile destroys his bunker, and 3 more missiles hit their targets.October 30 7:13 PM: U.S special forces and regular army units begin securing vital oil supplies throughout Saudi Arabia.October 30 7:30-8:30 PM: Seeing global chaos as their opportunity to strike, Egypt, Syria and Jordan begin invading Israel.
Farther East, India and Pakistan begin engaging in armed heavy conflict.
In the United States President Kennedy declares martial law while in Europe full scale war breaks out as Warsaw Pact forces begin invading Western Europe.
Several airfields in Western Europe begin launching nuclear armed bombers towards the Soviet Union, and other Warsaw Pact nations.October 30 9:17-9:32 PM: Soviet paratroopers begin landing in Alaska.
Combat in Alaska escalates to full battles heavy combat occurs outside Anchorage.
In the Middle East Israeli aircraft successfully destroy hundreds of their Egyptian and Syrian counter parts.
Attempts by Chinese aircraft to destroy the U.S base at Okinawa disastrously fail.
Soviet and Warsaw Pact armored forces supported by aircraft begin blitzing West Germany and Finland.
Aircraft from the U.S.S Enterprise intercept Soviet aircraft attempting to destroy the U.S base at Pearl Harbor.October 31 3:00-3:36 AM: Nuclear armed Soviet bombers successfully destroy several air bases in Western Europe using tactical nuclear weapons.
Upon hearing of this British, French and American leaders send more missiles towards the Soviet Union's advancing armies.
In the Middle East Egyptian, Jordanian and Syrian armies are thwarted, but more re-inforcements arrive.
In Alaska Soviet paratroopers begin to suffer huge losses after additional American forces show up.
The missiles launched by NATO detonate at medium altitude above the advancing forces of the Warsaw Pact.
Though the blasts cause only light casualties they seriously damage communications among the advancing battle groups and disorganize their forces.
Despite being at war, a power struggle breaks out between rival Chinese leaders to determine the next chairman of the Communist party.October 31 4:32-5:31 AM: British troops begin engaging Soviet forces in West Germany by attacking at the best opportunity.
Soviet forces suffer great casualties and lose valuable equipment, though sheer numbers settle it into a stalemate.
As NATO forces run they are miraculously saved by Italian, French, British and Dutch aircraft that cause enough Soviet casualties to stop the advance.
Soviet commanders, believing that their enemies must not be allowed to escape order tactical nuclear strikes across a large area.
When the weapons are dropped they detonate and inaccurately destroy huge swaths of land killing thousands of both NATO and Warsaw Pact forces as well as civilians.
American paratroopers begin landing in Cuba and meet fierce resistance from the Cuban military.
Soviet forces in Alaska refuse to surrender and begin a second round of fighting.
Meanwhile in Saudi Arabia several key oil reserves are destroyed by both Soviet and American forces.
The war between Israel and it's neighbors meets a turning point as Israel captures the Golan Heights and West Bank and beats back the Jordanian army and Egyptian tank units.
In China the war with the Soviet Union spreads into Mongolia with Chinese forces moving against the capital city of Ulan Bator.
American troops begin sailing into Cuba, and the country begins to lose strength though still furiously fighting against American troops.
Massive Egyptian forces begin to attack Israel, and set up trenches far into Israeli land.
Cuban and American troops slaughter each other at the battle of Matanzas.
American ships begin to be torpedoed, but they are slightly winning the ground battle.
Britain comes in from the North and attacks large cities such as Bremen and Hamburg.
The Germans are granted permission from NATO countries to begin building their own Anti-Soviet army.
Soviets are ambushed from the back of their offensive and when another fire bomb is launched, they are forced to submit.
President Kennedy meets with the Joint Chiefs at a top secret location to discuss the war.
With U.S forces beginning to gain the advantage Kennedy and his generals debate whether to negotiate peace with the Soviets or to continue to fight.
In Cuba, U.S troops continue moving inland and take several key strongholds after suffering heavy casualties.
In Europe NATO forces continue to push Soviet forces back hundreds of miles.
At 4:01 PM a spat of nuclear exchanges occur after the Red Army uses nuclear weapons in China and via submarine on the U.S cities of Los Angeles, Charlotte, and Atlanta.
Upon hearing of this Kennedy orders the launching of a missile at Smolensk in the Soviet Union.
After the detonation of the missiles, China sends its own missile directly toward Samara.
In the Middle East, the United States suffers heavy losses against the Soviet Union in Saudi Arabia.
In Israel the Egyptians once again are pushed back by Greek re-inforcements.
In Pakistan, Indian forces break through and begin capturing huge tracks of land in Kashmir.
In Alaska the Soviet drive continues and thousands more U.S re-inforcements arrive to try to quell the Red Army.
In South Africa black uprisings occur which are met with violent response by the government.
Finland and Sweden officially join the war on the side of NATO and begin to invade the North Western Soviet Union.
The Red Army in Alaska becomes completely surrounded by U.S forces and once again begins experiencing heavy losses.
After attempts to break through American lines fail, the starving and outnumbered Soviet forces surrender.
The attacks mostly fail and produce high casualties for both Pakistan and Bangladesh, though are successful in destroying six of them.
American troops begin entering the major cities of Cuba though resistance is fierce American troops make progress.
Uprisings against the Shah in Iran turn into all out war when troops are deployed to the streets.
Within twenty minutes Britain and Portugal have requested American and French support, which comes quickly.
The U.S military tells China to pull back from Hong Kong and Macau or face nuclear retaliation.
When China refuses an American submarine destroys Beijing with a nuclear missile.
A British missile heads toward Shanghai, and Macau's invaders are forced to submit under heavy French and Portuguese offensives.
After the British missile obliterates Shanghai, a Chinese air strike flies over Hawaii and bombs it heavily, but are beaten back before much damage is done.
Brazil stations troops in the Lesser Antilles and sends supplies and re-inforcements to American troops in Cuba, because the resistance is now slightly more powerful than the American troops.
Greek and Turkish troops fail to arrive in time at Bulgaria, which had just been invaded by Soviet Forces.
A massive Japanese air offensive heads stealthily towards Novosibirsk, while China prepares another strike.
Bulgaria tries to invade Greece, but is only successful in provoking more Greeks to fight them.
Italy sends troops to help the Greeks, but Bulgaria manages to hold up after fresh Soviet troops come to help.
An official ceasefire is signed between Israel, Egypt, Jordan and Syria.
The four countries would eventually accept each other and form an alliance.
Japanese bombers reach Novosibirsk, and only one of the group of fourteen are shot down and captured.
This would be an asset for the Japanese, since the Soviet Union was dealing with America.
German, Scandinavian, and French troops push harshly against Soviet Resistance.
Cuban revolutionary hero, Che Guevara is killed during combat with U.S forces.
As time passes the Cubans, begin to lose more and more men and material and are pounded on all sides by the U.S military.
German aircraft heavily bomb Yekaterinburg, but many bombers are shot down after successfully completing the bombing run.
After suffering unprecedented losses and destruction, Chinese leaders sign a ceasefire with NATO and the Warsaw Pact.
Khrushchev meets with many of his top advisers to discuss a plan for the dire situation of the war.
Iraq, seizing its chance invades Iran and makes rapid progress and faces little resistance as Iranian troops are busy putting down a rebellion.
The great Soviet offensive begins with the remaining Soviet troops moving east and south to strike the advancing NATO armies.
Within hours NATO forces are pounded on all European fronts by the advancing Warsaw pact.
The Soviet attack is relentless as they use numbers rather than tactics to to strike at NATO's lines.
The Soviet advance is drastically slowed as NATO aircraft begin to penetrate the Warsaw Pact's weak air cover and begin inflicting vast casualties on the Pact's forces.
By 10:30 PM the remnants of the Red air force arrive to provide relief to their armies.
At 11:00 PM President Kennedy orders a massive retaliatory air strike on the Soviet and Warsaw Pact armed forces.
As NATO aircraft begin a massive air raid against the remaining Warsaw Pact air bases and munitions supplies across Eastern Europe.
The raid destroys huge portions of the Soviet military industrial complex.
As the war begins to cool down, Kennedy manages after much difficulty to contact Khrushchev.
The Iranians eventually succeed in pushing out the Iraqi invaders.In South Africa, the Apartheid regime is taken down and a regime based on liberal democracy and equality is set up, although mild racial tensions will linger for quite a while.The USSR and Continental Europe have sustained the greatest damage.
Massive use of tactical nuclear weaponry leaves the interior of Europe decimated.Heavy radiation leaves much farmland unarable.
In Eastern Europe, people begin to rebel against Soviet domination, feeling that the Soviets are responsible for their plight.
Taiwan, taking advantage of the chaos, makes small territorial gains on the southern Chinese coast.64 The Federation of Rhodesia and Nyasaland is dissolved.
Poland invaded and annexed its territory lost after WWII, which had been seized by the Soviet Union Finland invades the inhospitable Karelia regions of the Soviet Union and annexed them, and also the areas nearby having a large Finnish population Baltic Republics secede Ethnic and religious problems begin at the entire Caucasus Romania annexed Bessarabia.
In Spain, the dictator Francisco Franco is overthrown by the European Crisis and the Third Republic is proclaimed Spanish.
As the USA is recovering from its own crisis unable to help a Europe that is now in chaos and anarchy, many Europeans migrate to Latin America.
First Strike Timelines Community content is available under CC-BY-SA unless otherwise noted.
