No attempt was made to list all press queries, only those of significance.
EVENTS October 15, 1962 Monday Between 8 and 10 information regarding aerial photOB taken 14 October is relayed to Secretary McNamara, Deputy Secretary Gilpatric, Secretary State Rusk, Under Secretary Bail, Deputy Secretary Johnson, McGeorge Bundy, CIA Director McCone, Deputy CIA Director Cline, Assistant Secretary State Martin.
Secretary Rusk, Secretary McNamara, Attcurney General, General Taylor, Messrs.
Gilpatric, Ball, Martin, McGeorge Bundy, Sorenson, Dillon, Bahlen, O'Donnell.
October 17, 1962 Wednesday Aerial reconnaissance shows indications of 28 launching pads and other significant indication of mobile launches with missiles.
Nc announcements made and no queries answered regarding Cuba. \ &m*&r October IS, 1962 Thursday Aerial reconnaissance continues.
CINCONAD commences movement of forces to augment air defense of Southeast United States.
A Last March USAF announced it would activate an F-105 wing at George AFB and would move an F-100 wing from George to Homestead AFB to make room.
The Air Force also announced last January it would buy some McDonnell F4H fighters.
In March it announced it would set up two wings in Florida at McDill AFB and have the people in place and readyto receive the new aircraft.
The Air Force has placed no aircraft in Florida in recent months and has no announced plans to ""beef up"" against MIG's in Cuba.
Why were they sent there V A Support personnel and equipment for aviation units engaged in the Carribbean exercise.
Pentagon spokesman denied tonight that any alert has been ordered or that any emergency military measures have been set in motion against Communist-ruled Cuba.
Further, the ipokesman said the Pentagon has no information indicating the presence of offensive weapons in Cuba.
A The ENTERPRISE loaded more than 80 planes yesterday for sailing to meet any hurricane eventuality and to conduct certain engineering testa at sea.
Q UPI San Diego asks why Marines are being loaded on planes at El Toro.
AP has reports of movement of Marines yesterday from Pendleton to El Toro.
A They are taking part in the final phase of PHIBRIGLEX-62, an Atlantic Fleet exercise £n the Caribbean which began October 15 and is scheduled to end in coming week with an amphibious sequence.
QUERIES PUBLIC AFFAIRS ACTIONS October 20, 1962 Saturday A ""We know of no encampment of Army troops there and would assume they are forces headed for participation In PHIBRIGLEX -62.
A Routine local exercise was carried out at Jacksonville today by the Navy and it ended at noon.
Q Report that 476th TFS at George AFB, California had sent eight or nine planes'of support equipment and personnel to Cuba early this week.
N October 21, 196Z Sunday Aerial reconnaissance definitively indicated buildup of offensive weapons in Cuba.
JCS directed CINCLANT to be prepared to evacuate dependents from Gtnio.
QUERIES PUBLIC AFFAIRS ACTIONS October 21, 1962 Sunday Q Report from Langley that KB -50 tanker planes have taken off and unable to find out their mission.
A Some KB-50's have taken off as reported but it is a part of a normal mobility training activity.
Authorieed TAC to implement 1/8 airborne alert and execute force dispersal plan.
Objective of quarantine is to prevent entry into Cuba of offensive weapons and to attain the withdrawal of the weapons now in Cuba.
Force will be used if necessary to accomplish the mission, Announced redeployment of air defense units, reinforcement of Guantanamo, evacuation of dependents in Guantanamo, increased alert status of forces world-wide.
Described the type missiles now in Cuba and pointed out missile installations on photographs.
Announced the presence of IL-28 bombers in Cuba and gave a general description of the capabilities of that aircraft.
Q When will correspondents be permitted on board ships in quarantine operations and go to Gtmo.
A These Marines will be retained in the area for further training and then returned to Camp Pendleton.
EVENTS October 23, 1962 Tuesday Executive Committee NSC meet* twice, 10:00m. and 6:00m. 7:00m.
President signs Proclamation of Interdiction and Executive Order authorizing SECDEF to call up Reserves and retain personnel on active duty.
Released seven pictures of Marine reinforcements arriving at Guantanamo. 2:10m.
Announcement of appointment of Admiral George Anderson as the Executive Agent for Operation of the Quarantine, Admiral Dennison, CINCLANT, as responsible Unified Commander for overall operation.
Announcement that President signed Executive Order authorizing Secretary of Defense to call up Reserves and retain personnel on active duty.
Declined to predict when first intercept would occur and declined to comment on position of Soviet ships.
PUBLIC AFFAIRS ACTIONS October 24, 1962 Wednesday 1:00 Four picture* of aerial reconnaia sauce released.
There will be no release of any such information including pictures or film without the approval of the designated office.
Mr Sylvester refused to comment on whether or noi any intercepts had been or were being made.
He said he expected that the media and the people would be informed after an interception and boarding had occurred.
PUBLIC AFFAIRS ACTION October 24, 1962 Wednesday News Release Dates, times and location of the arrival of ships carrying dependents from the United States Naval Base at Guantanamo. 4:30m.
Informed Services, JCS and Unified and Specified Commands of twelve types of information considered vital to our national security and not releasable by Department of Defense. 5:45m.
From time to time as the situation develops, specific information may be judged nc longer necessary to be with held and can then be released.
President issues instructions for the interdiction and inspection of non-Bloc ships.
USNS UPSHUR, USS DUXBURY BAY, USS DESOTO COUNTY arrived Norfolk, Virginia in the afternoon with 2146 dependents from Naval Base, Gtmo.
Soviet oiler, BUCHAREST, SUIACO, UK from Southampton to Kingston, and Polish ship to New Orleans cleared through quarantine.
PUBLIC AFFAIRS ACTION October 25, 1962 Thursday 1 1:5C Mr Sylvester announced that at least a dozen Soviet vessels have turned back because apparently they were carrying offensive weapons.
Announced that Navy had intercepted a Soviet tanker proceeding towards Cuba and that it was permitted to proceed without boarding.
Navy reports ship heavily loaded; satisfied that it is an ordinary oil tanker.
Mr Sylvester reports that there were ships still enroute Cuba but refused to elaborate.
Requests to expand on Mr Sylvester's statement regarding the Soviet tanker were denied.
USS PERRY intercepts Swedish ship COLLANGATTA^ bound from Leningiad to Havana.
Pictures of Commanding Officer and Executive Officer of USS PIERCE and USS KENNEDY furnished to media. 3:15m.
Have report according to Havana radio that Soviet ship VINITZA arrived this morning at 4:30 in Havana with a large reception.
S jets have not buzzed Cuban airfields today as a demonstration of what we can do.
A Cannot answer this question under provisions of the guidance put out on 24 October.
Mr Sylvester at a press briefing on 25 October said, ""There has been constant surveillance. "" 4:50m.
CINCLANTFLT directs interception of Lebanese ship PELLA; not to be boarded unless advised to do so. 8:35m.
Mr McNamara reports that two low-level reconnaissance planes flying over Cuba had been fired upon by light anti-aircraft and small arms.
President approves call-up of 24 troop carrier squadrons of the Air Force Reserve.
Public Affair* hold meeting with executives and representatives of various media to discuss on-the-spot coverage at Guantanamo and with the quarantine forces.
Mr McNamara announces that our unarmed reconnaissance aircraft had been fired on.
Announces that he had instructed the Secretary of the Air Force to order to active duty 24 Troop Carrier Squadrons of the Air Force Reserve with their associated support units.
Announced that a military reconnaissance aircraft conducting surveillance over Cuba was missing and presumed lost.
Executive Committee Meeting. 5th Marine Expeditionary Brigade embarked at West Coast ports, enroute Atlantic.
Announced the designations of the units of the Air Force Reserve which were called up.
Released 10 pictures of chronology of build up of Cuban fire missile bases.
PUBLIC AFFAIRS ACTION October 29, 1962 Monday 12:00 Noon Announced that quarantine would remain in effect and ships remain on station until arrangements could be made by United Nations for effective inspection and that aerial reconnaissance was presumed to be continuing.
A The tanker and the freighter are the only two ships we can comment on.
A Told that Mr Sylvester is due to hold news briefing after 5:00 5:34 Announced that surveillance flights over Cuba were made today and that all aircraft had returned safely. •""ft/iittiiiiilm October 30, 1962 Tuesday 3:40 a, P3V from Bermuda ordered to locate and photograph MIR and KARL MARX at first light. *mm* PUBLIC AFFAIRS ACTION October 30, 1962 Tuesday 11:30 Mr Sylvester announced that evaluation of the results of our surveillance of Cuba was continuing and that more time was needed to arrive at conclusive evidence.
He also announced that surveillance was not being carried out at the request of SECGEN U Thant.
In. answer to query refused to identify the type of aircraft missing over Cuba.
Joint Chiefs of Staff reinstitute quarantine operations beginning at daybreak 1 November.
No boarding or visit and search or use of force authorized except in self-defense or as directed by higher authority. ^cW$N^ PUBLIC AFFAIRS ACTION October 31, 1962 Wednesday 4:05m.
A You will recall that the original announcements were to the effect that the blockade would be suspended for two days.
A The report by Secretary General U Thant that the Cuban Goverment has agreed to return the remains of Major Rudolf Anderson, Jr. is the first word that the Department of Defense has had that Major Anderson was shot down over Cuba.
PUBLIC AFFAIRS ACTION November 2, 1962 Friday 9:25 The Secretary of Defense announced that preliminary analysis of aerial photographs collected on 1 November reconnaissance mission over Cuba provided clear indications that work was proceeding on the dismantling of the missile sites.
A spokesman said that launch erectors had been removed, much of the associated equipment removed, cable conduits between control points and the launch pads broken up, concrete pads at the launch erectors appeared to have been broken and that certain areas of the sites had been plowed and bulldozed. 4:30m.
November 3, 1962 Saturday 2:30 Two Dominican Republic Frigates report to COMSOLANT for operational control.
Argentine SA-16's placed under operational control of Commander Air Rescue Service, McDill.
A We have no available information on any of the three queries. •ill November 5, 1962 Monday 11:16 a, CINCLANT directs 4 flights photo reconnaissance. 11:55m.
AP states that "" United States authorities"" say there is no evidence that the Russians are packing up their atomic capable bomber aircraft in Cuba.
Pointed out that <DOD would not comment on any movement or fighting equipment.
EVENTS November 6, 1962 Tuesday 4:25 CINCLANT reports that movement of Soviet personnel and equipment in Cuba towards sea ports suggests hurried disassembly of equipment for overseas shipment.
Topics extensively covered in the documentation include the faded U.S.-led invasion at the Bay of Pigs, renewed attempts to overthrow Castro through Operation Mongoose and Operation Northwoods, United States military contingency planning for conflict with Cuba, naval warfare, Soviet and Cuban decision making and communications during the crisis, and the repercussions for U.S.-Soviet relations, and Soviet-Cuban relations in its aftermath.
Announced that two Argentine Destroyers were to join the Quarantine Force on 8 November.
PERRY assigned to intercept, trail and establish contact at first light 9 November.
Flyover quarantine force by 10 media representatives. 26 media representatives flown to Guantanamo.
November 11, 1962 Sunda y Reinspection of several ships conducted uring the day. -v PUBLIC AFFAIRS ACTION November 10, 1962 Saturday Flyover quarantine force by 1Z media representatives.
November 11, 1962 Sunday 4:30 Released four pictures of uncovered missiles aboard Soviet ships outbound from Cuba.
PUBLIC AFFAIRS ACTION November 13, 1962 Tuesday 9:20 Both Admiral Anderson and Admiral O'Donnell have referred to Soviet submarines operating in Caribbean and Atlantic.
A The Argentine destroyers ARA ROSALES and ARA ESPORA are now on their assigned stations. 6:20m.
A British, Spanish, Swedish, Norwegian, Lebanese, Greek, German, Czech, Polish, and Soviet.
PUBLIC AFFAIRS ACTION November 14, 1962 Wednesday 11:05 In answer to queries regarding the TV interview of Mr Gilpatric, a Defense spokesman stated that despite the fact that the show had been taped on Saturday, 10 November, the missile count was not verified until just before air time on Sunday, 1 1 November, DOD released number of missiles counted one half hour before air time.
In answer to queries, stated that nine ships, which were believed to be carrying missiles were Inspected alongside. 18 media representatives flown to Guantanamo.
What are the names of the ships that cleared through quarantine' A Names not available. 11:10m.
Defense spokesman, in answer to queries, stated that the Defense Department was satisfied that 42 missiles had been removed from Cuba.
Until we have so-called on-site inspection of the island of Cuba we can never be sure that 42 is the maximum number that the Soviets brought into Cuba.
A We have had hundreds of photographs taken from the air and from shipboard of the destroyers that took part in the alongside procedure in which nine Soviet vessels were given visual and photographic inspection by the United States destroyers.
The photographs taken, as well as eyeball reports by naval observers are now being analyzed at all levels of the intelligence community.
PUBLIC AFFAIRS ACTION November 15, 1962 Thursday Pending that assessment, responsible officials in the Defense Department and in the Government are satisfied, on the basis of evidence to date, that the objects described as missiles aboard the Russian vessels were indeed Soviet missiles.
Defense spokesman, in answer to queries, refused to comment on whether any reconnaissance planes had been shot at in the last two weeks.
A We have nothing to say on Cuba at this time. 15 media representatives flown to Guantanamo € SUMMARY OF PUBLIC AFFAIRS ACTIONS AFTER 16 NOVEMBER 1962 A 21 November 1962 Announced that as of 6:45m., 20 November, that the quarantine forces had been ordered to discontinue operations and return to normal operations.
The Combined Quarantine Force, the Inter -American Force, ordered to discontinue operations.
Announced that outbound Soviet ships would be located and photographed by aircraft of the Anti -Submarine Warfare Forces of the Atlantic Fleet if directed. 12-point security guidelines cancelled.
The Secretary of Defense authorised Secretaries of the Navy and the Air Force to terminate the extension of tours of duty and to release those Reservists called to active duty in connection with the Cuban crisis.
E Between 17 November and 19 December 33 news media representatives were flown to Guantanamo.
C 27 November 1962 Phase redeployment of forces in Southeastern United States was announced.
D On 7 December 1962, 18 news media representatives were flown over Soviet ships outbound from Cuba with 1L-28 aircraft aboard.
