CDATA[ DailyKos.setSwitchFrontPageMenu; //]]> DailyKos.Whoami.ready; Log In Sign Up DailyKos.Whoami.ready; Create a free account Log in All Recent Stories Staff Community Trending Elections Liberation League Prism From Markos' Desk Comics Community Groups Community Spotlight Actions Civiqs Quick Links Help Desk Jobs Work With Us Advertising Overview Daily Kos moves in solidarity with the Black community.
Site content may be used for any purpose without explicit permission unless otherwise specified.
Recommend 2 Recommend 2 Unrecommend 2 Share Tweet 10 Comments DK.Https.upgradeToHttps( document.getElementById ); Add to Blog RSS Update Edit Administration Un-Rescue Rescue PUBLISHED TO TAGS JFKCubanMissile { DailyKos.Story.Tags.markFollowedTags }) Edit Tags Tag History × Tag History No history yet.
My hope is that this revisionism will percolate upwards and that even Obama might get to read it after an aide to an aide sends it up the chain.
Faux images of the past produce reckless adventures in the present and future.
Think of JFK as a drunk driver who deliberately heads towards a crowd trying to assert their right to cross the street.
A wise person in the crowd sees what's going on and amazingly gets JFK's attention and he puts on the brakes.
His passengers want him to keep going, but he says no, as his head is now clear.
By Benjamin Schwarz On October 16, 1962, John F Kennedy and his advisers were stunned to learn that the Soviet Union was, without provocation, installing nuclear-armed mediumand intermediate-range ballistic missiles in Cuba.
The Jupiter missiles were an exceptionally vexing component of the United States nuclear arsenal.
Remarkably, given the alarmed and confrontational posture that Washington adopted during the missile crisis, the tapes of the ExComm deliberations, which Stern has minutely assessed, reveal that Kennedy and his advisers understood the nuclear situation in much the same way Khrushchev did.
If so, the missiles paradoxically could have enhanced deterrence between the superpowers, and thereby reduced the risk of nuclear war.
Yet, although the missiles’ military significance was negligible, the Kennedy administration advanced on a perilous course to force their removal.
It put—and still puts—America in the curious position of having to go to war to uphold the very credibility that is supposed to obviate war in the first place.
The administration, however, did not make such an overture to the Soviets.
Instead, by publicly demanding a unilateral Soviet withdrawal and imposing a blockade on Cuba, it precipitated what remains to this day the most dangerous nuclear crisis in history.
In the midst of that crisis, the sanest and most sensible observers—among them diplomats at the United Nations and in Europe, the editorial writers for the Manchester Guardian, Walter Lippmann, and Adlai Stevenson—saw a missile trade as a fairly simple solution.
In an effort to resolve the impasse, Khrushchev himself openly made this proposal on October 27.
According to the version of events propagated by the Kennedy administration , Washington unequivocally rebuffed Moscow’s offer and instead, thanks to Kennedy’s resolve, forced a unilateral Soviet withdrawal.
Beginning in the late 1980s, however, the opening of previously classified archives and the decision by a number of participants to finally tell the truth revealed that the crisis was indeed resolved by an explicit but concealed deal to remove both the Jupiter and the Cuban missiles.
He did so for the same reasons that had largely engendered the crisis in the first place—domestic politics and the maintenance of America’s image as the indispensable nation.
Only a handful of administration officials knew about the trade; most members of the ExComm, including Vice President Lyndon Johnson, did not.
And in their effort to maintain the cover-up, a number of those who did, including McNamara and Rusk, lied to Congress.
JFK and others tacitly encouraged the character assassination of Stevenson, allowing him to be portrayed as an appeaser who “wanted a Munich” for suggesting the trade—a deal that they vociferously maintained the administration would never have permitted.
The patient spadework of Stern and other scholars has since led to further revelations.
Stern demonstrates that Robert Kennedy hardly inhabited the conciliatory and statesmanlike role during the crisis that his allies described in their hagiographic chronicles and memoirs and that he himself advanced in his posthumously published book, Thirteen Days.
Although Stern and other scholars have upended the panegyrical version of events advanced by Schlesinger and other Kennedy acolytes, the revised chronicle shows that JFK’s actions in resolving the crisis—again, a crisis he had largely created—were reasonable, responsible, and courageous.
Plainly shaken by the apocalyptic potentialities of the situation, Kennedy advocated, in the face of the bellicose and near-unanimous opposition of his pseudo-tough-guy advisers, accepting the missile swap that Khrushchev had proposed.
He clearly understood that history and world opinion would condemn him and his country for going to war—a war almost certain to escalate to a nuclear exchange—after the U.S.S.R. had publicly offered such a reasonable quid pro quo.
Although Kennedy in fact agreed to the missile swap and, with Khrushchev, helped settle the confrontation maturely, the legacy of that confrontation was nonetheless pernicious.
By successfully hiding the deal from the vice president, from a generation of foreign-policy makers and strategists, and from the American public, Kennedy and his team reinforced the dangerous notion that firmness in the face of what the United States construes as aggression, and the graduated escalation of military threats and action in countering that aggression, makes for a successful national-security strategy—really, all but defines it.
The president and his advisers also reinforced the concomitant view that America should define a threat not merely as circumstances and forces that directly jeopardize the safety of the country, but as circumstances and forces that might indirectly compel potential allies or enemies to question America’s resolve.
He explained that “if our courage and our commitments are ever to be trusted again by either friend or foe,” then the United States could not tolerate such conduct by the Soviets—even though, again, he had privately acknowledged that the deployment of the missiles did not change the nuclear balance.
This notion that standing up to aggression will deter future aggression fails to weather historical scrutiny.
After all, America’s invasion and occupation of Iraq didn’t deter Muammar Qaddafi; America’s war against Yugoslavia didn’t deter Saddam Hussein in 2003; America’s liberation of Kuwait did not deter Slobodan Milošević; America’s intervention in Panama did not deter Saddam Hussein in 1991; America’s intervention in Grenada did not deter Manuel Noriega; America’s war against North Vietnam did not deter Grenada’s strongman, Hudson Austin; and JFK’s confrontation with Khrushchev over missiles in Cuba certainly did not deter Ho Chi Minh.
Moreover, the idea that a foreign power’s effort to counter the overwhelming strategic supremacy of the United States—a country that spends nearly as much on defense as does the rest of the world combined—ipso facto imperils America’s security is profoundly misguided.
Just as Kennedy and his advisers perceived a threat in Soviet efforts to offset what was in fact a destabilizing United States nuclear hegemony, so today, both liberals and conservatives oxymoronically assert that the safety of the United States demands that the country must “balance” China by maintaining its strategically dominant position in East Asia and the eastern Pacific—that is, in China’s backyard.
This means that Washington views as a hazard Beijing’s attempts to remedy the weakness of its own position, even though policy makers acknowledge that the United States has a crushing superiority right up to the edge of the Asian mainland.
America’s posture, however, reveals more about its own ambitions than it does about China’s.
Imagine that the situation were reversed, and China’s air and naval forces were a dominant and potentially menacing presence on the coastal shelf of North America.
In a vast part of the globe, stretching from the Canadian Arctic to Tierra del Fuego and from Greenland to Guam, the United States will not tolerate another great power’s interference.
Certainly America’s security wouldn’t be jeopardized if other great powers enjoy their own spheres of influence.
This esoteric strategizing—this misplaced obsession with credibility, this dangerously expansive concept of what constitutes security—which has afflicted both Democratic and Republican administrations, and both liberals and conservatives, is the antithesis of statecraft, which requires discernment based on power, interest, and circumstance.
It is a stance toward the world that can easily doom the United States to military commitments and interventions in strategically insignificant places over intrinsically trivial issues.
It is a stance that can engender a foreign policy approximating paranoia in an obdurately chaotic world abounding in states, personalities, and ideologies that are unsavory and uncongenial—but not necessarily mortally hazardous.
Benjamin Schwarz is The Atlantic’s literary editor and national editor.
DK.Https.upgradeToHttps( document.getElementById ); DailyKos.Story.postRender; This content was created by a Daily Kos Community member.
