The Library Connection online newsletter provides the public with information about upcoming events, major programs and other news of the City of San Diego Public Library.
OCTOBER 2004 VOLUME 2 October Means Time for the “Scary Library” A s Halloween approaches, children and adults are invited to celebrate the spooky time of year and be tricked with haunted themes and Halloween related stories.
Classics such as “Dracula,” “Frankenstein,” “The Legend of Sleepy Hollow” and others beckon you from the shelves to and treated with a variety of “Scary be read.
Andrew McDermott, Author of “The Tiger Chase,” to Speak at Central Library on Oct.
McDermott describes himself as just a story teller and is a member of the new breed of writers who refuse to be shackled to a single genre.
He proves this with his knowledge and presentation of a diverse range of topics.
His latest novel is “The Tiger Chase,” which brings to light the plight of the South China tiger and tells a wonderfully suspenseful story besides.
McDermott gives many detailed facts about the misuse of the animal and the quest Author Andrew McDermott, right, has a new novel, “The Tiger Chase,” that revolves around the plight of the South China tiger. of many to possess its power.
Mixed with ancient Chinese legends, “The Tiger Chase” is packed with humor, action, mystery and hope for a species that is at the very top of the Free Tours of Central Library Continue endangered list.
Free tours of the Central Library are held the first and McDermott grew up in Nottingham, England.
Begun this year to moved with his wife and two children to Queensland, celebrate the Central Library’s 50th anniversary, the Australia, where they now live in the Gold Coast hinterland. tours take participants to the two basement levels not Copies of Mr McDermott’s book will be available for normally open to the public.
Each month the Library presents a variety of films, many of which are independent or foreign films that are not widely New Serra Mesa/Kearny Mesa Library distributed.
In Korean with English subtitles. munity officials will attend and the event is open to the Central Library, 6:30m. public.
These will be inviting landscaped outdoor See story, page 5. areas with views and sunshine.
The interior of the building will lost in a haunted house on the spookiest night of the year. carry the architectural elements inside in an inviting colorful San Carlos, 10m. way.
Mission Valley, 7m. build or improve 24 libraries throughout San Diego.
The San Ysidro Branch Library will celebrate its 80th Central Library, 2m. anniversary on Oct. from 2 to 8m.
The event will include Fall Concert Series Continues at Central Library entertainment, food, games and other fun activities.
The The Library’s Fall Concert Series will continue with three public is invited to join in the festivities.
On Oct., from 2 to 4m., the public is invited to Wong will perform works by Scarlatti, Schubert, celebrate the “Thirty Something” birthday open house in Mendelssohn and Granados.
Using his personal memories of covering Public Library and the City the conflict, and gathering evidence from recent records and Club of San Diego.
The book portrays an embattled young American presiThe cost is $25 for City dent not jaunty and callow as widely believed, but increasClub members, and $35 for ingly calm and statesman like and a Russian ruler who was non-members, and lunch is included.
Here, too, are forgotten cityclubofsandiego@prodigy.net. heroes like John McCone, the conservative Republican CIA head whose intuition made him a crucial figure in White House debates.
In detailing the disastrous miscalculations of Public Invited to Classical Music Programs the two superpowers (the United States thought the Soviets would The San Diego Public Library will present three classical never deploy missiles to Cuba; the Soviets thought the United States music programs in October associated with three different would have to acquiesce) and how Kennedy and branch libraries.
Khrushchev beat back hotheads in their own councils, this Flutist Sarah Tuck and pianist Bryan Verhogel will fascinating book re-creates the whole story of the scariest perform classical music on Oct. at 7m. at the Pacific encounter of the Cold War, as told by a master reporter.
He served as executive editor of The Pia Soriano, a classically trained vocalist from San Diego, will perform in the gardens of a grand home in Mission Hills on Oct.
The pre-concert garden tour and champagne/wine tasting will occur at 2m.
The program is sponsored by the Friends of A special exhibit of a unique form of artwork by decoratthe Mission Hills Branch Library.
Fore-edge painting is an Music Series, harpist Amy Lynn Kanner will perform ancient and little-known way of decorating books.
The music from the English, Spanish and French Renaissance on designs can only be seen when the book is laid flat and the Oct. at 2:30m.
The San Diego Public Library has one of the Miramar Ranch Branch Library, 10301 Scripps Lake Drive. largest collections of fore-edge painted books in the United Reception to follow in the courtyard.
This event is free to the public. book was published by The construction of the new San Diego Padres ballpark the San Diego Horticulin downtown San Diego and the gentrification of the area tural Society in collaboraare changing the face of downtown San Diego.
The “In the tion with the San Diego Shadow of Petco Park” project collects stories of people Natural History Museum. affected by these changes.
Whether you’ve just moved to The Environmental one of the downtown neighborhoods or your family has been Library is not normally open on weekends so the event here for generations, San Diegans with roots in downtown provides an opportunity for many people to visit the facility are invited to join the writing collective as we consider the who might not normally be able to do so.
The library changing cityscape and urban dreams of the area. provides resources relevant to environmental services, The writing workshops will focus on each participant programs, and issues. producing a personal history and perspective that will form a For more information about the booksigning, call the community response to urban development.
Calligraphy Demonstration at Balboa Library The City Heights-Weingart Branch, which serves the A demonstration workshop in calligraphy will be held largest juvenile population in the City, will be the first stop on Saturday, Oct. from 10m. to noon at the Balboa Branch a six-library tour of artist’s book exhibitions.
My understanding is that the representative will p.m. on both Oct. and 20.
Visitors to the library during that write patrons’ names on individual bookmarks using calligratime will be able to construct their own accordion-style book phy.
I assume that we will also have a truck with calligraphy about verbs, titled “Flip It.” books out, but I have not confirmed this with the branch The City Heights Branch is located at 3795 Fairmount manager.
The student artist’s book exhibit will also be at are challenging this concept.
The event is free and open to the San Ysidro Branch, however the dates have not yet the public.
San Diegans can better understand their history and changes to • Saturday, Oct., 3 to 5m. their communities.
African Religions in the With more than 40 events, “Stories of Faith: Religion and Americas – A panel presentation on the enduring impact of Diversity in San Diego” will enable San Diego residents to African religions in the Americas.
The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints Open • Sunday, Oct. at 2m.
