In this issue of Nuclear Notebook, the authors analyze the order of battle of nuclear forces that were available to military and civilian officials in both the United States and the Soviet Union in October and November of 1962.
Once these nuclear forces are defined, the authors write, the true nature of the crisis was even more serious and dangerous than previously thought.
Depending on their range, yield, location, and delivery mode, the types of later, volumes have been written about nuclear weapons varied.
Even so, in the tens of thouon the crisis, however, describe certain sands of pages that interpret and analyze weapon types and leave others out.
The this conflict, there are essential details tally, therefore, remains incomplete. missingÑspecifically, a comprehensive To accurately assess how close the nuclear order of battle.
That is to say that, as the use initiated in or around Cuba would crisis unfolded, there was a distinct poshave involved the Soviet Union using sibility that weapons could be launched tactical nuclear weapons to attack and by mistake, miscalculation, or misjudgrepel American forces during an invament.
If American soldiers were how a war might have started, however, killed, as they surely would have been, involves the Soviet use of one or several the United States would have had to nuclear weapons to attack American retaliateÑand, more than likely, the armed forces invading Cuba.
The most prolific and dangerous of the nuclear weapons available Although there has been some debate over whether the local commanders were given were the 80 warheads for two regiments launch authority in advance by the Soviet govof land-attack cruise missiles, the FKR-1 ernment, recent documents released in Russia Meteor.
Had there been a United States invasion, make it clear that Moscow informed the comthese missiles would have been mander of the Group of Forces in Cuba that the nuclear warheads on the FKR, Luna tactical launched against the United States Naval Base at rockets, and IL-28 jet bombers were not to be Guantanamo and at amphibious forces employed without specific authorization from storming the Cuban beaches. the Kremlin.
They were either the short-range FROG missile deployed to fight had the United States Norris and Kristensen 89 invaded Cuba, and United States intelligence at the time SIOP, as it was known, which coordiwas not aware of them. nated the nuclear-targeting plans of all commands to avoid duplicative attacks.
For the United States, there would not It is instructive, nevertheless, to estihave been a situation more dire than if mate EuropeÕs possible role in the crisis. the Soviets had directed SS-4s on US cities.
According to Soviet major general Igor Statsenko, commander of the Soviet United States and NATO weapons facing east.
In missile troops in Cuba, there were only 1962, the United States had approxisix to eight missiles operational on mately 4,375 nuclear weapons deployed October 28, when the dismantlement in Europe.
Still, 50 weaponsÑ155-millimeter and 203years later, it is unknown how ready millimeter artillery shells, Nike they were or whether they were specifHercules surface-to-air missiles, land ically targeted at United States cities.
Places along mines, and short-range misthe eastern seaboard, as far north as silesÑintended for the nuclear battleWashington, DC, were within the misfield.
The United States and NATO fighter bombers had a supply of nuclear bombs deployed at Regional forces bases in Germany, Italy, Greece, Turkey, For both the United States and the Soviet the United Kingdom, and the Union, their respective nuclear weapon Netherlands, as well as aboard US systems were available in and around Sixth Fleet aircraft carriers.
Europe and could have been employed if escalation had occurred; specifically, medium-range and intermediate-range Soviet weapons facing west.
Many were likely aimed at nuclear exchange had been confined to European targets, with a portion pointed Europe and the western part of the at United States bases and United States allies in the Pacific Soviet Union, the numbers of weapons region.
Soviet fighter bombers based would have been approximately equalÑ near the western border of the Soviet but such geographic convenience was an Union may have had missions to hit tarunlikely scenario at the time since gets in Western Europe.
In the words of President sideÕs forces were still relatively immaKennedy in his October 22 address to ture.
And such measures United States had, at its disposal for a would simply have been responsive large-scale attack on the Soviet Union, actionsÑand, under the conditions, over 3,500 Òfully generatedÓ nuclear seen as logical, prudent, and weapons, with a combined yield of conservative. approximately 6,300 megatons.
The full presentation can be obtained by writing to Robert S Norris at siles, 2,952 total nuclear weapons, and rnorris@fas.org. 1,003 refueling tankers.
British and French weapons are excluded. siles, and BOMARC (Boeing Michigan 2.
The term ÒcouplingÓ was used by Paul States, Soviet Union/Russia, Britain, France, Bracken and is discussed in his book, The China, India, Pakistan, Israel.
He has co-authored References the Nuclear Notebook column since May 1987.
Edition Q researching and writing about the status of Zaloga S The KremlinÕs Nuclear Sword. nuclear weapons and the policies that direct Washington, DC: Smithsonian Institution Press. them.
Kristensen is a co-author to the world nuclear forces overview in the SIPRI Yearbook and a freAuthor biographies quent adviser to the news media on nuclear weapons policy and operations.
Inquiries Robert S Norris is a senior fellow with the should be directed to Federation of American Federation of American Scientists in Scientists, 1725 DeSales St.
