If launched from Cuba, a Soviet client state only 90 miles off the Florida coast, those missiles could easily hit the United States mainland.
In response to the spy photos, President John Kennedy established a special executive committee ExComm to help him weigh his options, which included an air attack on the launch facilities, an invasion of Cuba, a United States nuclear strike or a blockade of the island, which is the option Kennedy chose.
On Oct., Kennedy went on television to tell the American people that he was ordering a naval blockade and quarantine on all Soviet ships attempting to dock in Cuban ports.
His aim was to prevent additional military hardware from reaching Cuba while he and ExComm explored possible courses of action.
For two weeks, the world held its breath as the Kennedy administration negotiated with Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev and the Politburo in a frantic attempt to resolve the crisis and avert a nuclear war.
The crisis was heightened by the downing of an American U-2 spy plane over Cuba, and Kennedy ordered that all American forces be placed on DefCon (Defense Condition) Two, the alert level just short of wartime footing.
First, Khrushchev wrote Kennedy that he would remove the missiles in return for Kennedy's pledge that America would not invade Cuba to which Kennedy agreed.
Second, in secret negotiations, the president's brother, Attorney General Robert Kennedy, told the Soviet ambassador to the United States, Anatoly Dobrynin, that in return for Soviet removal of its missiles, America would remove the intermediate-range Jupiter missiles targeted at the Soviets that it had installed in Turkey, provided their removal was kept secret from the public.
On Oct., the Soviets accepted the deal, and the Cuban Missile crisis was resolved.
Ever since, it has been considered a victory for the United States because the Soviets ""blinked"" by removing their missiles.
But viewed objectively, the Soviets came out of the crisis with their primary objective a United States pledge not to invade Cuba achieved.
And, they even got a bonus they hadn't expected the removal of the Jupiters that were aimed at them from Turkey.
He was attached to a communications outfit stationed in Panama and was within hours of being shipped to Cuba to take part in an invasion by United States forces.
During 13 days in October, from Oct.-28, 1962, the United States, Soviet Union and the Cubans were on the brink of nuclear war.
It started when an American U-2 spy plane photographed Russian medium range SS-4 missiles being installed in Cuba.
A year earlier, President John F Kennedy cooked up the ill-fated Bay of Pigs invasion of Cuba by dissidents backed by the Central Intelligence Agency.
The invaders were to overthrow Fidel Castro, the Cuban strongman, who had just run Rafael Batista, the Cuban dictator, out of the country.
Halfway through the invasion, Kennedy pulled the plug and the landing became a disaster for the Cubans involved who were captured by Castro’s Communist troops.
As a result of the Bay of Pigs debacle, Castro convinced Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev to provide economic support for the island nation.
In addition to economic goods for Cuba, Khrushchev also snuck several shiploads of Russian missiles into Cuba.
They were eventually aimed at the United States mainland when discovered by the American spy plane.
Initially, the Soviets denied the United States charge that it had nuclear missiles pointed at the United States Tension between Kennedy and Khrushchev almost reached the breaking point when Adlai Stevenson, the U.S. ambassador to the United Nations, produced aerial photographs of the offending missiles in Cuba.
He sent a secret letter to Kennedy telling him he would remove the Soviet missiles in Cuba if the United States would remove its nuclear missiles in Poland pointed at Russia.
While all these international discussions between the two world leaders were going on, Pfc.
Cheney, a member of the 3rd Signal Corps Platoon in the Panama Canal Zone, was awaiting orders to march into Cuba.
We thought we were about to be shipped to Cuba as part of the assault troops.
We were right there at the Canal Zone watching at least 30 American war ships sail through headed for Cuba.
Despite the lack of official communication word got around to us about what was happening with the Cuban crisis.
Some months before the Cuban problem erupted, “A hurricane wiped out British Honduras.
Eight or nine of us from our company were sent to Honduras to help provide communications for the rescue and recovery operation,” he recalled.
When Cheney returned to Panama he was transferred to a new unit—the 134th Ordinance Battalion.
It was a Hawk Missile outfit that maintained and fired the air-to-ground missile.
He had been asking for a transfer out of his old unit because of lack of promotion.
He was still a private first class after a couple of years in the service.
He wrapped up his three years with the missile outfit and was shipped back to the States for discharge.
Right after Christmas 1963 he was discharged from the Army at Fort Jackson, South Carolina.
He flipped hamburgers to begin with, but after 18 years with the company he was director of operations for a McDonald’s franchise in the Enfield, Connecticut, area.
He bought his own mom-and-pop restaurant in Westfield, Massachusetts, that he ran for a few years, sold it then signed on with a doughnut franchise and opened 24 stores for the chain before becoming a food service consultant in 1990.
He spent the last 13 years owning another restaurant in Enfield, Conneticut.
He and his partner, Sheryl, moved to their North Port home two years ago.
And he reports a very different perspective on the missile crisis from the Cuban point of view, then and now.
Cuban authorities say they're convinced that in 1962, the United States was preparing to invade Cuba again, just as it had tried to do a year earlier.
According to official accounts here, Fidel Castro, his brother Raul, and their fellow revolutionary Ernesto Che Guevara wanted their Soviet allies to sign a mutual defense agreement under which the Soviets would treat an attack on Cuba as an attack on the Soviet Union itself.
Instead, Cuban officials have reported, the Soviets came up with the idea of deploying their nuclear missiles on the island to deter a United States attack.
Looking back on the episode later, Cuban officials concluded the Soviets had not been seriously committed to defending Cuba, missiles or no missiles.
Mysey Sabb , a former managing editor of ""Prints a la Pena"" the Cuban news agency, has studied the missile crisis closely from the Cuban perspective.
The crisis was a consequence, more to my opinion, to my understanding, was more a consequence of bigger things than the possibility of an invasion to Cuba itself.
Sabb says Cuban officials he has interviewed told him the Soviet military leadership wanted the missiles deployed in Cuba because it would help them offset the military disadvantage they had at the time with the United States.
Sabb himself was 16 years old in October, 1962, and interested mainly in American music, he says.
He recalls that public lighting was dimmed during the most critical nights in Havana.
Other than that, he says there were few clues that the country was facing a crisis.
You didn't have this level of information to get a real notion of what might happen.
But you didn't feel on your head at the same as in the states the possibility of a new confrontation and what that might represent for the country.
But he explained the situation after the withdrawal of the Soviet missiles.
Sabb says Cuban leaders came to believe later that Nikita Khrushchev had been bluffing with the nuclear missiles in Cuba.
Whether Fidel Castro and other Cuban leaders were themselves ready to start a nuclear war in order to stop a United States invasion, he says, is irrelevant.
Cubans were not allowed to decide what to do or not to do with the missiles.
So I think that the risk of the Cuba, the Cuban leader deciding to launch the missiles was out of the question.
Similarly, Sabb says, the move to withdraw the missiles from Cuba was strictly a Soviet decision.
Cuban leaders, he says, had their own demands to make of the Americans, an end to the trade embargo, for example.
But he says they didn't even know the Soviets and the Americans were negotiating.
Had they knew in advance with enough time, at least they would have argued.
And they would have asked some sort of participation in these talks for the withdrawal of the missiles.
We are to remember that it was not until 19 -the end of 1970 that again the relationship between Russia and Cuba became normal.
Some reports have said the United States promised never to invade Cuba in exchange for the Soviet agreement to withdraw their nuclear missiles from Cuba.
They argue instead it was the deepening United States involvement in Vietnam that kept the Kennedy Administration from attempting a second intervention in Cuba.
While the facts we knew in Washington in 1962 are pretty well established, impressions about the whys and wherefores of the crisis are remembered differently by different participants.
The thrust of the Soviet argument at the meeting in Moscow is that Nikita Khrushchev feared an American invasion of Cuba and made this extraordinary strategic move to defend his protege, Fidel Castro.
I regret that American participants seemed for the most part to accept this reasoning.
In fact I have grave reservations about a good bit of the interpretation and some of the evidence tabled by Soviet speakers.
I alerted McGeorge Bundy and President Kennedy to the definitive evidence of the secret missile deployment and on behalf of CIA Director John McCone briefed the president on the developing story on many occasions in the summer and through to the bitter end of the 13 days in October.
The Soviet Union has never invited me to participate in any of these historical exercises, but I wish it had.
I clearly remember what we knew and thought in Washington at the time, and I seriously doubt the spin on the story Moscow is presenting.
Many of the Americans reacting to these reminiscences in company with Soviet speakers seem rather to like the romantic idea that the two superpowers were at the very brink of war, and they tend to accept that Khrushchev may have acted defensively.
Without going into much detail, I think it is clear that both sides were scrupulous in avoiding any remote chance of an actual nuclear exchange for the simple reason that, as we all assured the president, the United States had at least a 4-to-1 advantage in ICBMs and perhaps an 8-to-1 superiority in nuclearweapons capability if our powerful bomber aircraft force of that era were entered into the equation.
While it is exciting to speculate on how brilliantly we escaped the nuclear holocaust, none of the informed officials I talked with at the time thought the chances were more than 1 in 1,000.
Otherwise the direct threat of nuclear retaliation, which I helped others to draft for the president's Oct. warning, would have been argued at length and probably would have been hedged.
Castro might have been tempted, as was suggested in the 1989 Moscow conference, but Khrushchev kept him on a tight rein, as Khrushchev's son indicated at the meeting.
Another piece of suspect evidence presented at this conference was the suggestion that the Cuban missiles were armed with nuclear warheads, thus heightening the danger of war.
A military historian said he ''reviewed archive material on the subject'' but did not present confirming evidence of his deduction that 20 warheads were in place.
My own recollection is clear, because this exact subject was what Kennedy repeatedly asked me about.
The CIA's view, concurred on by the Defense Intelligence Agency as far as I ever heard, was based on two firm pieces of evidence.
Our photo reconnaissance never revealed any evidence of warheads being shipped in or being present, and there was firm evidence that structural elements that we knew were designed for nuclear-weapons bunkers did arrive and were never assembled.
Since our discovery of the first missile site on Oct. revealed a surprisingly leisurely assembly of the weapons and a stretched-out timetable for operational readiness, the probability is high that the blockade did stop the delivery of the warheads.
That may be Kennedy's greatest achievement, accounting for Khrushchev's strategic retreat.
It is conceivable the warheads arrived secretly and were hidden at a distance from the sites, but certainly bunkers would have been needed for safe storage, and none was constructed.
Finally, while protecting Castro's forward base for Moscow's penetration of the Caribbean was a serious motivation for the whole maneuver, in my view it was not the main one.
Many of us thought at the time that there was evidence of Soviet preparation for a new Berlin crisis, and that the end game would have been to threaten war with greater credibility because of the missiles in Cuba, thus forcing the United States to abandon Berlin.
That was the way Khrushchev's mind worked, and it was more complex than the interpretation advanced in Moscow last month.
But the questions remains, Hill said, whether the United States is bluffing, and if it is prepared to follow through.
What people do know, however, is that the Trump administration is taking the matter of North Korea seriously, he continued, as President Donald Trump ""doesn't want to go before the American people in 2020 and say 'well, we looked at it and gave it a try.
There are 20 million South Koreans within conventional weapons range of North Korea, Hill pointed out, saying it's important that if there is talk of preemptive strikes and other moves to be ""very clear"" with South Korea about the plans. "" have some agreement on that, otherwise we create a historic problem with an ally that we really must protect and strengthen,"" Hill said.
The former ambassador also noted that there must be an understanding with China, and at the same time speaking with South Korea about any plans.
Co pyrig ht 20 17 Ne ws max.co m, All rig hts re s e rve Cit at ion Sandy Fitzgerald, 'Amb.
Kennedy, which have been held hostage to a long-running ownership dispute between RFK's family and the National Archives.
Bobby Kennedy served as his brother Jack's closest adviser and alter ego during the crisis, which brought the world the closest we have ever come to nuclear destruction.
His contemporaneous notes will be examined closely by historians as a unique window into the thinking of the late president as he sought to avoid nuclear war and negotiate a diplomatic solution with his Soviet opposition, Nikita Khrushchev.
JFK Library officials in Boston put hundreds of previously withheld documents online yesterday, prior to a conference of missile crisis experts that the library is hosting on Sunday.
The new documents include memos between the two brothers written during the so-called ""Thirteen Days"" that marked the peak of the crisis between Oct. and Oct., 1962, when Khrushchev finally agreed to withdraw his missiles.
A source who saw the documents in advance said they include several versions of a note written by Bobby Kennedy on the night of Oct., following his meeting with Soviet ambassador Anatoly Dobrynin.
Acting on JFK's orders, Bobby Kennedy made a secret promise to withdraw United States missiles from Turkey as a concession to Khrushchev.
The episode remained secret from other members of the ExComm, including Vice President Lyndon Johnson, who had been urging the president to take a tougher line with Khrushchev.
The newly released records, which amount to 2,700 pages, also include memos dictated by Bobby Kennedy on Operation Mongoose, a sabotage campaign designed to overthrow Fidel Castro by October 1962.
Although the bungled sabotage effort had little chance of succeeding, it was one of the factors that provoked Khrushchev into sending nuclear weapons to Cuba.
The release of the documents follows protracted negotiations between the National Archives and the family of Bobby Kennedy, who served as attorney general in the Kennedy administration.
The Kennedy family has been pushing the JFK Library for a special building to house the RFK records, and has also explored the possibility of selling the papers.
The agreement between the Kennedy family and the National Archives to release the Cuban missile crisis records sidesteps the question of ownership.
Richard S Heyser of the Strategic Air Command flew over western Cuba in a high-altitude U-2 aircraft on a mission code-named Victor.
The 5,000 feet of film he brought back from his reconnaissance flight was rushed to a nondescript CIA building at Fifth and K streets Northwest, in the heart of Washington's inner city.
There, analysts of the CIA's little-known National Photographic Interpretation Center pored over the photographs.
What they found changed history and brought the world to the brink of nuclear war.
In the semi-darkened room, Vince DiRenzo, a 32-year-old ex-Marine who had joined the CIA right out of graduate school, spotted 62-foot-long canvascovered objects near a town called Los Palacios.
Arthur C Lundahl, the chief and founding father of the CIA's photointerpretation center, was immediately summoned and gravely verified the young analyst's conclusion.
The next morning the photos were on the desk of President Kennedy, and the Cuban missile crisis was under way.
Now Dino A Brugioni, one of the CIA photo interpreters present that day, has been permitted by the intelligence agency to write his own detailed account of that frightening period.
It is an exciting, at times riveting, story, even though we know how it turned out -or we would not be around to read it.
Brugioni's is the first CIA insider's account of those tension-filled days in October, and it is rich in anecdotal detail about the policy makers at the top of the government, as well as a primer on the art of aerial photography, photo interpretation and the use of overhead reconnaissance as an essential tool of modern intelligence.
Here is the unforgettably crude Curtis E LeMay, the cigar-chomping Air Force chief of staff and a character out of Dr.
A middlelevel CIA technician, his account at times inevitably reflects the view that everything would have been better if only the political leaders had left things to the professionals.
Despite its flaws, Brugioni's book, although perhaps twice as long as necessary, is an invaluable contribution to the history of our times.
For the first time in a quarter-century, Soviet officials publicly explained why their country instigated the Cuban missile crisis, and then why the Soviets agreed 13 days later to a United States demand that the missiles be sent back to the Soviet Union.
Students of the crisis have long been mystified by why the Soviets risked a nuclear showdown for the sake of missiles in Cuba -a showdown that, in the view of most, brought the world closer to nuclear war than at any other time in history.
In an extraordinary news conference, two Soviets gave fresh answers to some old questions.
In the latest example of the Soviet Union's new policy of greater openness, or ""glasnost,"" they admitted that misjudgments and accidents on the Soviet side contributed to the crisis.
Defense Secretary Robert S McNamara, national security adviser McGeorge Bundy and presidential speech writer Theodore Sorensen.
Sergei Mikoyan, whose father was a top adviser to Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev during the crisis, said he only started to believe this week that the United States was not planning an invasion of Cuba in 1962.
The other Soviet at the table said Khrushchev had another motivation -he saw the missiles as a step toward nuclear parity with the United States, which had overwhelming superiority in that area.
Fedor Burlatsky, then Khrushchev's speech writer, said Khrushchev also underestimated his adversary, President Kennedy.
Five days later, the situation worsened when an American U-2 was shot down over Cuba by a Soviet surface-to-air missile.
Mikoyan said the downing of the U-2, which brought the two countries to the brink of nuclear war, was an accident.
He said he knows the identity of the officer who shot down the plane, but he refused to identify him by name or nationality.
The crisis ended when Khrushchev agreed to pull the missiles out in exchange for a United States pledge never to invade the island and to withdraw old missiles from Turkey and Italy.
Khrushchev thought that if he rejected United States conditions, the United States would attack the island.
If he accepted them, Khrushchev could claim a victory in a United States promise not to invade Cuba, the Soviets said.
Thirty-two years later, they are returning to bid the aircraft carrier farewell when it is retired Saturday after 38 years of triumph and tragedy.
The Super Sara and its sailors have seen duty at hot spots around the world, including the Vietnam War, the 1967 Six-Day War in the Middle East and the Persian Gulf War.
One of carrier's early tests was the Cuban missile crisis, when it enforced a naval blockade of the island as Americans held their collective breath.
Haakenson, 53, and Senter, 50, said there was constant tension until the crisis was resolved when the Soviets removed the missiles from Cuba.
Haakenson, of Anacortes, Wash., served on the Saratoga from 1961-63; Senter, of Texas City, Texas, was there from 1961-64.
Mike Boorda, the Navy's chief of operations, speaks at the ceremony removing the warship from active duty.
The carrier originally was headed for the scrap heap, but Navy Secretary John H Dalton has given his preliminary blessing to turn it into a floating museum in downtown Jacksonville.
The carrier returned on June 24 from its 22nd and final deployment to the Mediterranean, where it supported the operations of NATO and the United Nations in Bosnia-Herzegovina.
Haakenson and Harvey Hirsch Jr. boarded the Saratoga in Bermuda for its final cruise into Mayport.
The Saratoga was the second aircraft carrier built after World War II and the sixth United States vessel to bear the name.
The 1,039-foot ship still appears much as it did in the 1950s, aside from upgrades in wea-pon-ry and electronics.
The large guns it had in the early 1960s have been replaced by missiles and a Gatling gun.
Castricone remembers a collision with a German freighter and a bad shipboard fire that burned for two or three days.
A ferry returning Saratoga sailors from leave in Haifa, Israel, capsized in rough seas, killing 21.
United States jets were preparing to bomb Cuban antiaircraft bases when President Kennedy canceled the mission.
Had the ships sailed on another hour, the United States Navy would have sunk them.
Had Kennedy known, he likely would have ordered an air strike within hours of discovering the missiles.
The Kennedy administration, stung by the Bay of Pigs fiasco in 1961, had discarded the idea.
But the Soviets felt the United States would try again and this time, they'd do it right.
Scholars were stunned by the openness of their Soviet counterparts, says James Blight, a Harvard scholar who attended.
Former Kennedy officials attending included Robert McNamara , McGeorge Bundy , and Gen.
The book contains edited transcripts of the Harvard meeting, analysis, and interviews with American officials.
More insights are likely at a second meeting of Soviet and American participants in Moscow at the end of the month.
Cuban officials briefed by Fidel Castro will be there, as will the former senior KGB officer in North America.
The map -along with civil-rights documents -is at the center of a legal tussle between a Web-based memorabilia collector and the federal government, which claims the documents were improperly removed by Kennedy's personal secretary.
United States District Judge Robert Ward has temporarily blocked the sale of the map until a hearing next week.
In its lawsuit, the government said, Evelyn Lincoln -the personal secretary who worked for the White House on Kennedy's papers until July 1964 -also compiled annotated and handwritten notes for the President Kennedy Library Corp. until at least 1972.
The map and civil rights documents were donated to the United States in February 1965 for deposit in the John F Kennedy Presidential Library, the government said.
The government did not suggest that Lincoln, who died in 1995, had done anything criminally wrong.
He was the first black student admitted into the school, sparking rioting in which two people were killed.
The change of heart meant that U.S.-Soviet understandings that resolved the 1962 crisis never were made permanent.
But, while both countries took some steps, including Soviet removal of offensive missiles from Cuba, attempts to reach a formal agreement ended in failure.
The disclosure sent the two superpowers closer to nuclear war than at any time in their four-decade Cold War rivalry.
The tradeoff that ensured a peaceful outcome involved a Soviet promise to remove the missiles in exchange for an end to a United States quarantine of Cuba, coupled with a United States no-invasion pledge.
In the decades since the crisis, successive United States administrations were vague about whether the Kennedy-Khrushchev agreement was legally binding.
The documents strongly suggest it was not, because there was no formal settlement.
In a Nov., 1962, telephone conversation with George Ball, the State Department's third-ranking official, Kennedy said he was worried about how a no-invasion pledge would affect the United States ability to respond if Cuba undertook a major arms buildup; shot down United States planes; or attacked another Latin American country.
In response to the latter scenario, Ball said the United States had a right to take action under the Rio Pact, the common defense treaty of the Western Hemisphere.
Not surprisingly, the Soviets strongly objected to Kennedy's attempt to renege on his pledge and invoke the Rio Pact.
Mr Khrushchev's speech writer during the confrontation, Mr Feodor Burlatsky, said another reason was to help Moscow catch up with Washington in the nuclear arms race.
At the time of the crisis in October 1962, the United States had about 5,000 intercontinental warheads.
Mr Burlatsky said Mr Khrushchev miscalculated, believing on the basis of a 1961 summit meeting in Vienna that President Kennedy would not react vigorously to the move.
But President Kennedy reacted forcefully after United States spy planes discovered that missiles were being deployed.
Some Kennedy advisers feared war was imminent but after days of mounting tension, Mr Khrushchev agreed to remove the missiles in exchange for a United States pledge not to invade Cuba and a secret US commitment to remove some aging nuclear rockets from Turkey.
Investigative reporter Mr Seymour Hersh reported this week that the crisis had been more dangerous than it seemed because Castro's forces controlled anti-aircraft weapons and would not necessarily obey Moscow's orders.
Co pyrig ht © 19 8 7 Jo hn Fairfax P ublicatio ns P ty Limite www.s mh.coau.
