Horelick and M Rush, Strategic Power which does not bear a relationship to the title and Soviet Foreign Policy, 1965; E Abel, The of the chapter except at one or two points.
Khrushchev, Khrushchev tackling problems which are of importance, but Remembers, 1970, inter alia), the focus of this fall outside their scope; or by presenting historreview will be primarily on the three concepical accounts of important events, only some of tual models. which relate to the main theme of the chapter.
North, ""Meamore accurately than would an aseptic and ovsuring Affect and Action in the International erorganized analysis.
Empirical Materials from in the book is determined, at least in part, by the 1962 Cuban Crisis,"" Journal of Peace Recertain key figures whose unique styles, histosearch, Vol.
I, ) in a rather disarming ries and positions have had much to do with fashion.
This opaqueness is one very imthe main proposition set forth in Allison's study portant characteristic of the position of Latin is that; ""Professional analysts of foreign affairs American Catholicism think about probtion), and the author brings it out, both intenlems of foreign and military policy in terms of tionally and unintentionally, through his failure largely implicit conceptual models that have to organize his material sufficiently.
Model I, The Rational Actor; Model II, and/ or rational behavior, since neither rationalThe Organizational Process; and Model III, ity nor rational behavior can be proved a Governmental Politics.
The determination of whether or not a chapters on these models are interspersed with decision/policy/program is rational is largely three substantive chapters on the details of the made ex post facto in relation to the objeccrisis itself, and may be read separately for the tive^) it was supposed to achieve or the sake of historical continuity.
However, even taining internal bureaucratic consensus on ends such a definition of rationality in terms of some and means in order to achieve the desired outpreviously stated objective is insufficient and incomes.
This point), then it might well be asked whether the seems only logical since different conceptual decision/policy/program was rational in terms frameworks elucidate particular aspects of a of the costs involved.
On moral grounds, it is question, problem or issue, which can then be interesting to note that Robert Kennedy had insynthesized to explain so complex a phenometended to write about the ""basic ethical quesnon as the Cuban crisis.
Dougherty and Robert L Pfaltzgraff, ContendThe greatest value of the Allison study seems ing Theories of International Relations, 1971), to be in the explication and development of two upon which the researcher can draw to help analternate models.
The substance and style of alyze, evaluate, and interpret the various phethe study in dealing with these two models is nomena of international relations, crisis manfar more detailed, thorough and convincing agement, and conflict resolution.
These analytic rigor exercised by Allison were also chapters raise these two approaches or models utilized in applying some of these other apto a new level of sophistication and analysis approaches to the Cuban crisis and other internaplicable to questions of foreign policy and national phenomena, we would add greatly to our tional security.
The first of these two models is insight into such phenomena and to our underwhat Allison terms the ""Organizational Prostanding of the validity of the various methodcess"" model.
Chinese to substitute collaboration for war to While this observation may not be entirely acenable their peoples to stand together against curate (Henry A Kissinger, American Foreign communism and Western imperialism.
